=== CASE 9740687 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:21.039083+00 ===

*343FINE, J.
(dissenting). The jury found that Deloitte & Touche was not guilty of either intentional or negligent misrepresentation. Despite the unusual procedural posture of this case, the basic issue on appeal is whether there is sufficient evidence to support these determinations. Our standard of review is clear. Neither the trial court nor we may overturn a jury's verdict "if there is any credible evidence" in the record to support it. Fehring v. Republic Ins. Co., 118 Wis. 2d 299, 305, 347 N.W.2d 595, 598 (1984). Since I believe that there is credible evidence that Deloitte & Touche did not breach any legal duty to Chevron, I must dissent.
The torts of intentional and negligent misrepresentation share three common elements: "(1) The representation must be of a fact and made by the defendant; (2) the representation of fact must be untrue; and (3) the plaintiff must believe such representation to be true and rely thereon to his damage." Whipp v. Iverson, 43 Wis. 2d 166, 169, 168 N.W.2d 201, 203 (1969). The tort of intentional misrepresentation requires two additional elements: (1) "the defendant must either know the representation is untrue or the representation was made recklessly without caring whether it was true or false"; and (2) the defendant must have made the representation "with intent to deceive and induce the plaintiff to act upon it to the plaintiffs pecuniary damage." Ibid. Negligent misrepresentation, on the other hand, adds the following to the three core elements of "misrepresentation": (1) the defendant must have had either a legally-imposed "duty of care or a voluntary assumption of a duty"; and (2) the defendant must have failed "to exercise ordinary care" either in making the representation or in ascertaining the underlying fact. Id., 43 Wis. 2d at 170, 168 N.W.2d at 204. Silence, in the face of a duty to *344disclose, can be as much a misrepresentation as an assertion:
One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he knows may justifiably induce the other to act or refrain from acting in a business transaction is subject to the same liability to the other as though he had represented the nonexistence of the matter that he has failed to disclose, if, but only if, he is under a duty to the other to exercise reasonable care to disclose the matter in question.
Restatement (Second) of Torts §551(1) (emphasis added); see also Ollerman v. O'Rourke Co., 94 Wis. 2d 17, 26, 288 N.W.2d 95, 99-100 (1980). The crux of this case is thus whether Deloitte & Touche had a duty to disclose to Chevron the problems with American Fuel & Supply Company's 1985 financial statements. This issue is a question of law that we determine de novo. See id., 94 Wis. 2d at 27, 288 N.W.2d at 100.
In Wisconsin, "duty" is an element of negligence. A.E. Inv. Corp. v. Link Builders, Inc., 62 Wis. 2d 479, 484, 214 N.W.2d 764, 767 (1974). Under ordinary tort law "[a] defendant's duty is established when it can be said that it was foreseeable that his act or omission to act may cause harm to someone," and, if negligent, a defendant is "liable for unforeseeable consequences" and to "unforeseeable plaintiffs." Id., 62 Wis. 2d at 484, 214 N.W.2d at 766. Here, however, we are concerned with professional malpractice, a species of tort law where this state has long recognized that the parameters of duty, the breach of which is negligence and can subject the professional to civil liability, are best set by the particular profession.1 The majority ignores this long-standing *345principle.
Absent some compelling interest that the majority opinion does not articulate, and absent legislative action, accountants, like the other professions, should be permitted to determine the appropriate standards of care applicable to their profession; as with the other professions, they are best able to appreciate the ramifications of any legal principle that has the potential to impose on them civil liability.
The Accounting Examining Board has adopted the following rule:
The prohibition against disclosure of confidential information obtained in the course of a professional engagement does not apply to disclosure of such *346information when required to properly discharge the certified public accountant's or public accountant's responsibility according to the profession's standards. The prohibition would not apply, for example, to disclosure, as required by section 561 of Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1, of subsequent discovery of facts existing at the date of the auditor's report which would have affected the auditor's report had he been aware of such facts.
Wis. Admin. Code sec. Accy 1.301(4)(a) (emphasis added).
Section 561 of Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1 makes a distinction between an accountant's responsibility under two different scenarios: first, where the client co-operates; second, where the client does not co-operate. Where the client co-operates, the correction should be issued to all those persons whom the accountant knows are either "currently relying or who are likely to rely” on the inaccurate statements. Section 561.06 (emphasis added). Where the client will not co-operate, the correction should be issued "to each person known to the auditor to be relying on the [inaccurate] financial statements." Section 561.08(c) (emphasis added). If the client does not cooperate, section 561.08 specifically notes: "The steps that can appropriately be taken will depend upon the degree of certainty of the auditor's knowledge that there are persons who are currently relying or who will rely on the [inaccurate] financial statements." Mere "foreseeability," however, is not enough.2
*347The majority opinion rejects section 561's sensitive balance in favor of naked "foreseeability" as the universal test to determine whether a client's confidential information must be disclosed over the client’s objection.3 As a practical result, the majority's decision, by imposing a duty to disclose if any harm is "foreseeable," will henceforth require the disclosure of confidential financial data over the client's objection to all persons (perhaps even the world at large) who are, in fact, not relying on an earlier financial statement, and who will not be harmed by any failure to disclose.4 Unfortunately, the majority advances no rationale for this extreme result other than its own ipse dixit, and I perceive none. All section 561 requires is that the accountant take reasonable steps to ascertain the identity of persons who are, in fact, relying on the now-incorrect or misleading *348financial statements, or who will, at some later time, rely on those statements, and notify those persons; the threat of civil liability should not require more. The majority's decision goes too far.
Although there is evidence in the record that would have supported a jury's finding that Deloitte & Touche knew that Chevron was relying on the inaccurate financial statements, there is also evidence to the contrary. Additionally, there is no evidence that would support a finding that Deloitte & Touche had the "intent to deceive" Chevron, and "induce" Chevron to act upon the inaccurate 1985 financial statements to Chevron's "pecuniary damage,” all of which is a prerequisite to imposition of liability for intentional misrepresentation. See Whipp, 43 Wis. 2d at 169, 68 N.W.2d at 203. Accordingly, under our standard of review, we must reverse.
See Helmbrecht v. St. Paul Ins. Co., 122 Wis. 2d 94, 111-112, 362 N.W.2d 118, 128 (1985) (An attorney has a duty to *345" 'use a reasonable degree of care and skill, and to possess to a reasonable extent the knowledge requisite to a proper performance of the duties of his profession . . .' [and to do what] a reasonable or prudent attorney [would] have done in the same circumstance.") (quoting Malone v. Gerth, 100 Wis. 166, 173, 75 N.W. 972, 974 (1898)); A.E. Inv. Corp., 62 Wis. 2d at 489, 214 N.W.2d at 769 ("An architect has the duty of using the standard of care ordinarily exercised by the members of that profession."); Shier v. Freedman, 58 Wis. 2d 269, 283-284, 206 N.W.2d 166, 174 (1973), modified, 58 Wis. 2d 285, 208 N.W.2d 328 (1973) (Physician has duty to "exercise that degree of care and skill which is exercised by the average practitioner in the class to which he belongs, acting in the same or similar circumstances."); Barnes v. Lozoff, 20 Wis. 2d 644, 650, 123 N.W.2d 543, 546 (1963) ("An engineer is not required by the standards of his profession to conduct a title search on property which his client represents to be his own."). Cf. sec. 227.21(2)(a), Stats. (Administrative agencies may "adopt standards established by technical societies and organizations of recognized national standing....") (Agency rules may, "with the consent of the revisor and the attorney general" incorporate those standards in agency rules by reference. Section 227.21(2)(a), Stats.).
The trial court specifically rejected Deloitte & Touche's requested jury instruction patterned on section 561.08(c). Nevertheless, the trial court did instruct the jury that: "A person in a particular business or profession owes a duty to exercise the care that is usually exercised by persons of ordinary intelligence and prudence engaged in a like kind of business or profession."
Citizens State Bank v. Timm, Schmidt & Co., 113 Wis. 2d 376, 335 N.W.2d 361 (1983), concerned the liability of negligent accountants to those with whom they were not in privity. The court decreed: "Liability will be imposed on these accountants for the foreseeable injuries resulting from their negligent acts unless, under the facts of this particular case, as a matter of policy to be decided by the court, recovery is denied on the grounds of public policy." Id., 113 Wis. 2d at 386, 335 N.W.2d at 366. Thus, "foreseeability," as that term is used in Timm, Schmidt, refers to the causation prong of a tort claim rather than, as it is used here, the negligence prong. Stated another way, the majority here uses "foreseeability" to impose a "duty" upon accountants to disclose confidential client information over the client's objection, and holds that a breach of that duty is negligence. In Timm, Schmidt, on the other hand, negligence by the accountants was assumed. Ibid.
Here, for example, there is evidence in the record that Chevron relied, at least to some degree, on security provided by the personal guarantee executed by American Fuel & Supply Company's sole shareholder.

=== CASE 2224529 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.104063+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 1326 (1994)
266 Ill.App.3d 544
203 Ill. Dec. 507
Albert C. HANNA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
AMERICAN NATIONAL BANK AND TRUST COMPANY OF CHICAGO, as Trustee under Trust Agreement dated October 22, 1987, and known as Trust No. 30378, and John A. Brown, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 1-92-0175.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
August 29, 1994.
*1327 John A. Brown, pro se.
David T. Wallach and Michelle C. Pisut, Chicago, for appellants.
Jolivette & Templer, P.C., Chicago (Lawrence M. Templer, of counsel), for appellee.
Presiding Justice CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
On May 11, 1987, plaintiff, Albert C. Hanna, brought an action to enjoin defendants, American National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, as Trustee under Trust Agreement dated October 22, 1987, and known as Trust No. 30378, and John A. Brown, from constructing two four-story, masonry towers on defendants' property, in violation of a 50-foot building setback line which plaintiff alleged was applicable to defendants' property. The towers were to extend flush to the sidewalk, with no setback remaining. In lieu of an answer, defendants filed a motion for summary judgment. The trial court granted defendants' motion for summary judgment and plaintiff appealed. On appeal, this court held that material issues of fact existed pertaining to the existence and enforceability of the setback line, and as to defendants' theory of abandonment and waiver, and reversed and remanded this cause to the trial court for a trial. Hanna v. American National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago (1988), 176 Ill.App.3d 938, 126 Ill. Dec. 334, 531 N.E.2d 961 ("Hanna I").
On remand, following a bench trial, the trial court granted plaintiff's requested relief, and permanently enjoined defendants from constructing the proposed building over the 50-foot building line. Defendants now appeal *1328 the judgment of the trial court, contending that: (1) the trial court erred in failing to rule on defendants' affirmative defense of acquiescence; (2) the trial court's ruling that the 50 foot building line was not abandoned was against the manifest weight of the evidence; (3) the trial court erred in ruling that the 50 foot building line had not been judicially abolished; and (4) the trial court erred in ruling that there had not been a material change in the character of the neighborhood so as to render the building line void. For the following reasons, we affirm.
The record reveals the following relevant facts. Plaintiff filed a motion in limine requesting that defendants bear the burden of proof and of proceeding at trial. Plaintiff argued that the fact that a 50-foot setback line was created by the 1860 plot of subdivision is not in dispute, but rather, defendants have raised the affirmative defenses of abolishment and abandonment.
Defendants filed a response to plaintiff's motion, outlining seven defenses as follows: (1) that the 1860 setback line of 50 feet was abolished by an 1889 Superior Court case; (2) that the setback line was abandoned because of prior numerous, substantial violations of the line; (3) that plaintiff and plaintiff's predecessors in title have waived the right to enforce the setback line; (4) that there has been a change in the character of the neighborhood which makes enforcement of the setback line unreasonable; (5) that the setback line is not enforceable because defendants' property is zoned for commercial use; (6) that the setback line is not enforceable because the object of the restriction can no longer be accomplished; and (7) that defendants did not have legal notice of the restriction. On September 12, 1990, the trial court ordered that the defendants proceed bearing the burden of proof at trial, and allowed defendants to raise at trial the defenses as set forth in their response to plaintiff's motion in limine.
The record indicates that defendants made certain admissions prior to trial including: (1) that they are the legal owners of 2508-2518 North Clark Street, a/k/a 501-519 W. Deming Place, the property located at the southwest corner of Clark Street and Deming Place; (2) that Plaintiff is the owner of a three-story building located at 541 West Deming Place, Chicago, and that the properties located on the south side of Deming Place running west from Clark Street to Orchard Street including plaintiff's and defendants' properties are located in outlot "C" and were subject to a 50-foot setback line when created by a plat of subdivision recorded on November 27, 1860; (3) that defendants' title insurance policy issued upon the purchase of its property contained a restriction reserving the "north fifty feet * * * solely for courtyards and are not to be built upon"; (4) that the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Tract Book 560-B outlot "C", pages 4 and 5, contains entries pertaining to defendants' property; and (5) that the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Tract Book 560-C outlot "D", pages 122 through 126, contains entries pertaining to Wrightwood Avenue property located one block north of Deming Place.
The following relevant facts were adduced at trial. Plaintiff's property and defendants' property are separated by three separate four story, multi-unit, brick apartment buildings and a 20 foot alley. Defendants' property is the only property on the south side of Deming Place, west of Clark Street, which is zoned for commercial use.
Deming Place is a one way street, extending for only two blocks, west from Clark Street to Orchard Street. The only point of vehicular entry onto Deming Place, aside from an alley, is from Clark Street, as Geneva Terrace, the street intersecting Deming between Orchard Street and Clark Street, is a one-way street running south.
In support of their contention that the 50-foot setback line on Deming Place was abolished, defendants introduced into evidence defendants' exhibit 3, page 74 of the Official City of Chicago Map, which displays the south side of Deming Place, extending west from Clark Street to Geneva Terrace. Contained on the map is Note "E" which appears in the left-hand margin of the map as follows: "Superior Court Case No. 125303, abolishes Bldg. lines on Business Streets." Note "E" is shown on the map as being applicable to the setback line existing on the south side of *1329 Deming Place, from Clark Street west to Geneva Terrace. Note "E" is also shown on the map as applying to several setback lines along Clark Street. The north side of Deming Place is not shown on the map.
A survey dated May 17, 1989, prepared at plaintiff's request, and admitted as plaintiff's exhibit 14, shows that defendants' building is set back from the sidewalk in excess of 50 feet. The survey further shows that every building on the south side of Deming between defendants' property and Geneva Terrace violates the 50 foot setback line from 5.61 feet to 6.78 feet. The plaintiff's survey notes that the City of Chicago map indicates that Superior Court Case No. 125303 abolished the 50 foot building line.
The remains of the court file in the Superior Court case referred to in Note "E" of the map revealed only that the case was entitled Gould v. Turner and Delaney, and that the case was dismissed by stipulation for want of equity on February 28, 1890. The court file does not contain the stipulation between the parties, nor does it contain any pleadings or any other information regarding the nature of the case.
Plaintiffs submitted into evidence certified copies of pages from the official tractbooks maintained the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, regarding both defendants' property, and property located one block north at the northwest corner of Clark Street and Wrightwood Avenue. The tractbook pages contain no entries referring to Superior Court Case No. 125303, and do not indicate that the parties Gould, Turner or Delaney ever had title to the property. However, the tractbook pages pertaining to the Wrightwood Avenue property contain several entries reflecting ownership by Frank D. Turner and M.A. Delaney during the period 1889-1890, and an entry dated December 20, 1889 recording the number "125303 s," along with the name of the case, "Elwyn B. Gould v. Same [Frank D. Turner], et. al.," on the title to such property.
The title policy obtained by plaintiff upon the purchase of his property in 1965 does not refer to the 50-foot setback on Deming Place, but rather provides for a "Building line of 44 feet along Northerly line of Parcel 2, fronting on Deming Court." The record shows that on February 13, 1926, plaintiff's predecessor in title to the property located at 541 W. Deming entered into an agreement with the other owners of property on the south side of Deming, between defendants' property on the east and Geneva Terrace on the west. In the agreement, the owners recognized: the existence of the 50-foot setback line; the fact that the line had been inadvertently and unknowingly violated by approximately six feet by prior construction; and the desire of the owners to prevent the line from further encroachment. The agreement provided that in order to preserve the uniformity of the buildings on the street and to maintain the setback line restriction, the existing forty-four foot setback would be maintained by all owners. Defendants' predecessors in title were not parties to the 1926 agreement.
At trial, John Blaul, Assistant Superintendent of the City of Chicago Bureau of Maps and Plats, (Bureau) examined defendants' exhibit 3, Map number 74, a "counter page" or "80-acre sheet" showing the south side of Deming Place extending west to Geneva Terrace. Blaul explained that the notes on the left-hand side show the subdivisions or other documentation recorded in the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. Blaul agreed that maps are possibly 95% accurate.
Blaul examined Note "E" on the map. Blaul had no idea when Note "E" might have been put on the map, because the position of the notes have nothing to do with the date of their entry. He stated that sometimes draftsmen put the notes in the wrong order. Blaul stated that it is the practice of the Bureau to maintain a file with supporting documentation for any note contained on any map, but that his check of the Bureau file revealed no supporting documentation providing the basis for Note "E" being placed on Map 74.
Blaul examined plaintiff's exhibit 11, Map number 73, also an official record of the Bureau, displaying a separate 80-acre portion of the City, and including both the north and south sides of Deming Place, as well as Wrightwood Avenue, west of Clark Street. *1330 Blaul indicated that Note "E" did not appear on Map 73, and that the 50 foot setback line did appear on the map as applying to the south side of Deming Place. Blaul had no explanation for the difference in the two maps.
Plaintiff testified as an adverse witness. Plaintiff has resided at 541 W. Deming Place since December 1965. He stated that all of Deming Place is residential, and that the 50-foot setback line was created in 1860. Plaintiff acknowledged the 1926 agreement, and stated that at that time, his property extended 6 feet beyond the 50-foot setback line, having been built in 1890 in violation of the setback line. Plaintiff further acknowledged that there are other properties on Deming Place that run over the 50-foot setback line.
Plaintiff stated that the purposes of setbacks are to create a uniform street, to create light and air, and to provide an openness to the extent designed by either the setback agreement or by zoning regulations.
Plaintiff stated that he can see a portion of defendants' property from all three floors of his house, looking out of his east and middle bay windows.
Defendant, John A. Brown, a real estate developer, testified on his own behalf. Brown stated that 2508-2518 N. Clark Street is a three-story brick building consisting of commercial spaces fronting along Clark Street and residential apartments.
Brown admitted that light and air are considerations in building residential units, and that it is most desirable for a building to have windows on all four sides. Brown admitted that the nature and character of Deming Place in the 1920s was residential. Brown further admitted that the title policy for the 2508-2518 N. Clark Street property shows that the northern 50-feet are restricted from being built upon.
Brown stated that his proposed new construction would contain 147,000 cubic feet volume of construction in the 50-foot setback area. Brown agreed that two, fifty-foot towers would have some impact on the air and light conditions of several buildings west of his property.
Philip Farley, a real estate developer, testified as an expert witness on defendants' behalf. Farley stated that if a setback is violated it would affect the light or air for adjoining structures. Farley previously lived at 526 W. Deming Place, and stated that the street contains apartment buildings and single family residences.
Farley stated that plaintiff's bay window protrudes 5.75 and 5.60 feet past the face of the house, and that it is 45.5 feet from the front lot line. Farley stated that this and other setback violations on Deming are material and substantial. Farley admitted that some types of buildings on Deming would decrease in value if defendants' buildings were constructed. Farley further admitted that if every property on Deming was built out to the street line, the property values would be substantially reduced.
Lee Wigod, a commodity trader and analyst, testified in plaintiff's case. Wigod reviewed 21 map books at the Bureau in August and September 1987, for notations regarding Superior Court Case No. 125303, or any notations regarding the abolishment of building lines on business streets. Wigod found no references to Superior Court Case No. 125303 in any map book.
Leslie S. Pollack testified as an expert witness on plaintiff's behalf. Pollack has a masters degree in city planning, and is a city planning consultant and adjunct lecturer in planning at the University of Illinois, Chicago. Pollack performed an analysis of Deming Place, to assess the impact of the 50-foot setback line on the character of Deming. Pollack reviewed the zoning ordinance, the official survey, case materials pertinent to building lines, and the disposition of setbacks. Pollack also reviewed setbacks on neighboring Orchard Street, Arlington Place, Wrightwood Avenue, and Burling Avenue.
Pollack observed that Deming consists of residential buildings that generally conform to a continuous building line, having a uniformity of appearance. He stated that Deming is an open and airy street. Pollack stated that in his opinion, the building line and the general adherence of the building line fulfills the three functions of a building line. He stated that the organization of the buildings *1331 along Deming is such that light and air are emitted to all buildings. Pollack stated that the building line provides uniformity, the degree to which clearly establishes a character along Deming which is unique to Deming as compared to adjacent neighborhoods. He stated that the fact that certain buildings extend to some degree into the 50-foot setback area does not impact his opinion because the issues of building line maintenance are issues of general conformance.
Pollack also reviewed defendants' plans for proposed construction. In Pollack's opinion, the proposed construction would violate the intent of the building line, in that the additions would cut off light and air, and remove the degree of uniformity, effectively changing the character of Deming Place.
Pollack stated that in his opinion, the character along the south side of Deming Place is predominantly mixed-residential, composed of single family and multi-family dwellings.
At the close of the evidence, the trial court granted leave to defendants to file an answer to plaintiff's complaint. Defendants' answer included three affirmative defenses.
On August 9, 1991, the trial court issued a memorandum of opinion, including findings of fact and conclusions of law. The trial court found that Deming Place is residential in character, half of its buildings being of dated unique stone or brick construction similar to the architecture existing at the turn of the century. The trial court found that no building on the south side of Deming Place is built more than approximately seven feet beyond the 50-foot setback line, nor closer than forty-three feet from the northerly lot line adjoining the public sidewalks. As a result, Deming Place enjoys a generous amount of air, light and vegetation. The trial court noted that the testimony of defendant, John Brown, and defendants' witness, Philip Farley did not contest the foregoing.
The trial court concluded that the 50-foot setback line on the south side of Deming Place was not abolished by Superior Court Case No. 125303. The trial court noted that defendants admitted that Case No. 125303 dealt with property on Wrightwood Avenue. In addition, the trial court found that the conflict between the two official city maps, defendants' exhibit 3, map 74 showing Note "E", and plaintiff's exhibit 11, map 73, with no reference to Note "E" indicated a map maker's error as to the case abolishing building lines on business streets. The trial court found this fact supported by pages from the Cook County Recorder of Deeds tract book, showing no entry concerning Case No. 125303 as pertaining to any property on Deming, but pertaining to property on Wrightwood. The trial court further found that the 1926 agreement between property owners on Deming Place not to violate a 44-foot setback line evidenced that the line had not been abolished in 1889.
The trial court further found that the evidence showed that the encroachments on the setback line existing in the present case do not result in abandonment of the setback line because such encroachments are not material and substantial. The trial court noted that no building on the south side of Deming Place encroaches into the fifty foot building line greater than approximately 12% of the setback line.
The trial court also found that defendants failed to prove a change in the residential character of Deming Place such that the restriction could not be enforced. The trial court noted that while Clark Street is primarily commercial in character, the characteristics of Deming Place as a residential street are so unique so as not to be affected by change in circumstances on Clark Street. The trial court further found that defendants had constructive notice of the setback line, entered a declaratory judgment that the setback line remains valid and enforceable, and permanently enjoined defendants' from building on the property. A final order was entered on August 12, 1991, in addition awarding costs to the plaintiff, to be determined by the trial court.
On October 11, 1991, defendants filed a motion for reconsideration. Defendants argued that in entering judgment in favor of plaintiff, the court overlooked defendants' third affirmative defense that plaintiff's predecessor in title waived the right for himself and all his assigns to enforce the 50-foot setback through the establishment of a new *1332 building line of 44 feet in 1926. Plaintiff responded inter alia that this court has found the relevance of the 1926 agreement "unclear where neither defendants nor their predecessor in title were parties to the agreement." (Hanna I, 176 Ill.App.3d at 945-46, 126 Ill. Dec. 334, 531 N.E.2d 961.)
The trial court denied defendants' motion for reconsideration on December 10, 1991. Defendants' timely appeal followed.
Initially, defendants contend that the trial court erred in failing to rule on their affirmative defense of acquiescence. Defendants argue that their third affirmative defense was "that the plaintiff's predecessor in title acquiesced when he expressly permitted the owner of the lot immediately to the east to encroach upon the 50 foot building line."
The record does not reflect that defendants raised "acquiescence" as a distinct affirmative defense. The record in fact reveals defendants' third affirmative defense as follows:
"That all of the property owners on the south side of West Deming Place from North Geneva Terrace to the alley west of Clark Street have entered into a certain agreement on the 13th day of February, 1926, which changed the set back line from being 50 feet to being a set back line of 44 feet. That this agreement did not include the predecessor in title of your Defendant and as a consequence thereof the Plaintiff, who was a party to the said agreement, is estopped from asserting the existence of a 50 foot set back line upon your Defendant."
In their motion for reconsideration, defendants argued that the trial court failed to rule on this third affirmative defense as quoted above, while recognizing that the trial court ruled on their first two affirmative defenses of (1) abolishment of the setback line by Superior Court Case No. 125303; and (2) abandonment of the setback line by reason of other property owners having "violated the alleged 50 foot set back line in a material and substantial manner and that by their acts they have further acquiesced in the violation of the subject set back line." (Emphasis supplied).
Defendants' argument is without merit. Our courts describe acquiescence as an element in consideration of the defense of abandonment, e.g.:
"The doctrine of acquiescence which will make unenforceable an otherwise valid plan of restriction is * * * [based] upon the proposition that tolerated violations of the restriction will, over the course of time, defeat the object of the restriction." (Wallace v. Hoffman (1949), 336 Ill.App. 545, 555, 84 N.E.2d 654.) and:
"A restriction can be shown to have been waived where there has been a general abandonment of it by others, in which plaintiffs have acquiesced." Punzak v. De Lano (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 117, 142 N.E.2d 64.
Defendants' reliance on O'Neill v. Wolf (1930), 338 Ill. 508, 170 N.E. 669, for the contention that it sets forth separate defenses of abandonment and acquiescence is misplaced. There, the court clearly frames the appellant's issue as follows:
"Appellant further contends that appellee's suit is barred because there has been a general abandonment and violation of the building line restriction by others, in which appellee has acquiesced." O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 522, 170 N.E. 669.
In the present case, the record shows that defendants raised an affirmative defense of abandonment, of which acquiescence is a consideration, and upon which the defendants acknowledge the trial court issued a ruling. The record indicates that defendants never set forth in a separate heading or paragraph, or argued separately, any defense of acquiescence, but rather joined together this theory along with other defenses, and employed the same standard of proof. In fact, in their motion for reconsideration, defendants argued as follows:
"Clearly Mr. Hanna could not invoke equity to enforce the 50 foot set back line against any of the other lots affected by the 1926 agreement. However, as owner of a lot included in the 1926 agreement, Mr. Hanna can enforce the 44 foot line against the other affected lots (citations omitted). The fact that the buildings on his lot were built to the 44 foot line does *1333 not indicate acquiescence in violation of the 50 foot line." (Emphasis supplied).
Other than to cite to statements made by counsel in closing argument, wherein counsel stated, "Acquiescence, big important issue in this case, [sic]" and continued to explain his theory of abandonment, defendants have failed to cite any reference in the record wherein they specifically requested that the trial court rule on a separate issue of acquiescence. In addition, we find that the ruling of the trial court is broad enough to embrace and include the issue of acquiescence, even had defendants requested a specific ruling on acquiescence; the results of the present case would not have been different.
Next, defendants contend that the trial court's finding that the 50-foot building line was not abandoned is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Defendants first argue that the trial court failed to take into consideration that a building located at 633 W. Deming extends almost 12 feet into the setback area, according to plaintiff's survey. Defendants argue that this is a 25% encroachment into the building line and is therefore substantial. Defendants further argue that several buildings across the street, on the north side of Deming Place, violate the setback restriction in excess of 7 feet, as depicted on plaintiff's survey. The record indicates that the trial court found that no building on the south side of Deming Place violated the restriction by more than 7 feet, or more than approximately 12% into the setback area. Defendants argue that the trial court's determination that a 7 foot violation into the 50-foot setback restriction is not material and substantial is not supported by case law.
As we stated in Hanna I, setback line restrictions will not be deemed unenforceable by reason of encroachments by a plaintiff or others unless such encroachments are so material and substantial as to undermine the purposes of the restriction and prevent the plan thereby created from being carried out. (Hanna I, 176 Ill.App.3d at 945, 126 Ill. Dec. at 338, 531 N.E.2d at 965 (citing O'Neill, Punzak).) The purpose of a setback line restriction is to create an easement of unobstructed air, light and vision for the benefit of the public owners of the property covered by the restriction and to insure a degree of uniformity in appearance. (Hanna I, 176 Ill.App.3d at 945, 126 Ill. Dec. at 338, 531 N.E.2d at 965 (citing O'Neill; Freehling v. Development Management Group, Inc. (1979), 75 Ill.App.3d 243, 393 N.E.2d 646).) It is the defendant's burden to establish that the encroachments are so substantial and material as to have undermined the purposes for which the restriction was created. (Hanna, 176 Ill.App.3d at 945, 126 Ill. Dec. 334, 531 N.E.2d 961.) The question whether an abandonment has occurred depends on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. Punzak v. DeLano (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 117, 120, 142 N.E.2d 64.
Defendants mischaracterize the facts and the law of cases upon which they rely. Defendants argue that the trial court's reliance upon O'Neill is misplaced, because in that case no violation of the 50-foot setback restriction was in excess of 1½ feet. However, the defendant in O'Neill argued that the plaintiff could not protest a proposed violation because her own property in fact violated the setback by over four feet. (O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 513, 170 N.E. 669.) The defendant in O'Neill argued that the restriction had been abandoned by violations in the form of bay windows and porches extending from several inches to six to seven feet over the setback line. (O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 511-12, 170 N.E. 669.) The O'Neill court held that the encroachments on the 50-foot setback were not so material and substantial to have effectively abandoned the restriction. O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 522, 170 N.E. 669.
A partial disregard of a building line restriction will not necessarily operate as an abandonment of it altogether, where a material and beneficial part remains. (O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 520, 170 N.E. 669.) The record indicates that the extension in the middle of 633 W. Deming is an enclosed bay, which extends from the ground to the roof for four stories. The trial court found that none of the encroachments on the south side of Deming operated to abandon the setback restriction.
In addition, this court is not concerned with the setback restriction on the north side *1334 of Deming Place, as the record shows that the north side is contained in a different subdivision, Outlot "D". The record indicates that the parties agreed that the north side of Deming Place is not relevant to the determination of abandonment.
Defendants further argue that McGovern v. Brown (1925), 317 Ill. 73, 147 N.E. 664, supports the fact that a 7 foot encroachment into the 50-foot setback line is material and substantial. There, five complainants filed an action to enjoin violation of a 30-foot building line by the construction of sun porch additions to an apartment building that would extend 10 or 12 feet beyond the front of the building, and that much over the building line. The court held that the 30-foot building line had been abandoned, noting that every landowner who had built a home in the south half of the block, with notice of the restriction, including 3 of the 5 plaintiffs, had violated the restriction as much as 8 or 9 feet, and that all had acquiesced in these substantial violations.
McGovern, is inapposite. In O'Neill, where a 50-foot setback restriction was also at issue, the court examined McGovern and found that:
"the space reserved between building line and the street was less than in the present case, and the violations set up by way of estoppel were proportionately much greater in actual distance, to say nothing of being substantially greater in various other significant respects. In the McGovern case the violation of the restriction had been not only substantial but universal as well." (O'Neill, 338 Ill. at 519, 170 N.E. 669.)
Indeed, the violations in McGovern amounted to 33% encroachments into the 30-foot building line. No such substantial universal encroachment is apparent in the present case.
Defendants further contend that the 1926 agreement establishing a 44 foot setback restriction proves abandonment of the 50 foot restriction. The record indicates that defendants' predecessor in title was not a party to this agreement.
We have previously found that the 1926 agreement was not intended to constitute an abandonment of the setback line, but rather that the setback line remain in existence subject to minor encroachments. Hanna I, 176 Ill.App.3d at 946, 126 Ill. Dec. 334, 531 N.E.2d 961.
Next, defendants contend that the trial court's determination that the 50-foot building line was not abolished by the 1889 Superior Court Case No. 125303 was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Defendants argue that the evidence presented at trial, defendants' exhibit 3, Official City of Chicago Map 74, clearly shows through Note "E" that the 50-foot setback line was abolished on Deming Place. The trial court found that Note "E" as it applied to Deming Place on map 74 was "an obvious map maker's error." The trial court's conclusion is supported by the manifest weight of the evidence.
The record reveals that the remains of the court file in the Superior Court case referred to in Note "E" of the map contains only the title of the case, Gould v. Turner and Delaney, and its disposition: that the case was dismissed by stipulation for want of equity on February 28, 1890. The court file does not contain the stipulation between the parties, nor does it contain any pleadings or any other information regarding the nature of the case.
In Hanna I, we noted that while as an official record, the map is admissible to prove the matters contained therein, the accuracy and reliability of the Note "E" legend was questionable in light of the other evidence presented in the trial court. (Hanna I, 176 Ill.App.3d at 944, 126 Ill. Dec. 334, 531 N.E.2d 961.) In the present case, the other evidence presented at trial continues to dissuade this court from relying upon the accuracy of Note "E" contained in map 73.
Finally, defendants contend that the trial court erred in finding that a change in the neighborhood had not occurred. Defendants argue that the multiple family residences on Deming Place, along with defendants' property being zoned for business use constitutes a material change in the character of the neighborhood such that the 50-foot setback restriction has been abandoned.
*1335 A change in a neighborhood such as will prevent enforcement of a restrictive covenant must be so radical and complete as to destroy the purposes for which the restriction was imposed and to render the restriction unreasonable, confiscatory and discriminatory. The burden of proving such a change in the neighborhood is on the party attacking the restrictive covenant. Moore v. McDaniel (1977), 48 Ill.App.3d 152, 5 Ill. Dec. 911, 362 N.E.2d 382.
The record reveals that in 134 years since the plat of subdivision for Deming Place was created, the street has remained residential, and that while Clark Street is primarily commercial in character, the characteristics of Deming Place as a residential street are so unique so as not to be affected by change in circumstances on Clark Street.
Defendants' further contention that the business zoning of his property constitutes a change in the character of the neighborhood is without merit. The mere fact that a change has occurred in the neighborhood, i.e., one lot zoned for business use, does not, alone, warrant a court of equity in relieving set-back restrictions. Punzak, 11 Ill.2d at 121, 142 N.E.2d 64.
For the reasons set forth above, we therefore affirm the judgment of the trial court, and remand this matter to the trial court for a determination of costs to be awarded to the plaintiff.
Affirmed.
BUCKLEY and O'CONNOR, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740790 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:41:49.451992+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court; In March 2000, plaintiff, Dennis K. Johnson, filed a complaint for declaratory judgement and breach of contract against defendant, State Farm Fire and Casualty Company. Johnson alleged that State Farm breached its contract to provide him coverage under a personal liability umbrella policy for a prior judgment against him in favor of a third party, Safeco Insurance Company of America, which arose out of an indemnity contract between Johnson and Safeco. In October 2000, State Farm filed a motion for summary judgment, asserting that the umbrella policy did not cover Johnson’s contractual liability to Safeco. In October 2001, Johnson filed a motion for summary judgment, asserting that (1) facts alleged in an underlying complaint and counterclaim from which his liability to Safeco arose triggered his right to coverage under the umbrella policy, and (2) State Farm was estopped from asserting noncoverage. Following a November 2001 hearing, the trial court granted Johnson’s summary judgment motion and denied State Farm’s motion for summary judgment. The court later awarded Johnson $43,975.92 in damages, plus costs. State Farm appeals, arguing that (1) it was not estopped from asserting its claim that no duty to indemnify existed under the umbrella policy when it provided Johnson’s defense in the underlying lawsuit; (2) it had no duty to indemnify Johnson for the prior judgment in Safeco’s favor, where that judgment arose out of Johnson’s breach of his contractual indemnity agreement with Safeco; and (3) because the underlying complaint and counterclaim did not allege any event that would qualify as an “accident,” they failed to trigger the umbrella policy and State Farm’s duty to defend Johnson. Because we agree ■with State Farm’s first and second arguments, we reverse the grant of summary judgment to Johnson. I. BACKGROUND In January 1988, the trial court appointed Johnson and Douglas White as coexecutors of the estate of Adella Vallerius. White was Vallerius’s grandson. In June 1988, Johnson and White filed a bond with the court that jointly and severally bonded them as principals to faithfully discharge their duties. Safeco was the corporate surety on the bond. In consideration of Safeco’s suretyship, Johnson agreed to indemnify Safeco (hereinafter the indemnity agreement). In September 1988, White was arrested for murdering Vallerius. In January 1989, the court removed Johnson and White as coexecutors and appointed the Alton Bank and Trust Company as successor administrator of Vallerius’s estate. During his term as a coexecutor, White misappropriated funds from the estate and damaged Vallerius’s residence and vehicle. In January 1990, Alton Bank filed a complaint against Johnson, White, and Safeco (as surety), alleging that Johnson and White breached their fiduciary duty to Vallerius’s estate. In March 1990, Safeco filed a counterclaim against Johnson, seeking recovery under the indemnity agreement. Johnson had both a homeowner’s policy and an umbrella policy issued by State Farm. In August 1990, Johnson filed a claim under his homeowner’s policy regarding the then-pending lawsuit. State Farm provided Johnson’s defense under a reservation of rights, allowed Johnson to select his own attorney, and paid the attorney fees. In October 1994, the trial court approved a settlement agreement between Alton Bank and Safeco, in which Alton Bank assigned Safeco its claims against Johnson and White. In January 1997, the trial court found in Safeco’s favor on its counterclaim against Johnson and awarded Safeco $43,975.92, plus costs. The court’s judgment was based, in pertinent part, on Johnson and Safeco’s indemnity agreement. Johnson appealed that judgment, and in April 1998, the Fifth District affirmed. Alton Banking & Trust Co. v. White, No. 5—97—0235 (April 17, 1998) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). In September 1999, State Farm informed Johnson that he had no right to indemnification of the January 1997 judgment against him and denied coverage under both the homeowner’s policy and the umbrella policy. In March 2000, Johnson filed a complaint for declaratory judgment and breach of contract against State Farm. Johnson sought a declaration that State Farm had a duty to indemnify him under his umbrella policy and alleged that by denying him such coverage, State Farm breached its contract with him. (Johnson does not dispute State Farm’s denial of coverage under his underlying homeowner’s policy.) In October 2000, State Farm filed a motion for summary judgment, asserting, in pertinent part, that (1) it did not have a duty to defend Johnson in the underlying lawsuit; and (2) it did not have a duty to indemnify Johnson for the January 1997 judgment. In October 2001, Johnson filed a motion for summary judgment, asserting that (1) the facts alleged in the underlying complaint and counterclaim showed that the umbrella policy provided coverage for his liability; and (2) State Farm was estopped from asserting noncoverage. In January 2001, following a hearing, the trial court granted Johnson’s summary judgment motion and denied State Farm’s summary judgment motion. This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS State Farm argues that the trial court erred by granting summary judgment in Johnson’s favor. Specifically, it contends that (1) State Farm was not estopped from asserting its claim that no duty to indemnify existed under the umbrella policy when it provided Johnson’s defense in the underlying lawsuit; (2) it had no duty to indemnify Johnson for the prior judgment in Safeco’s favor, where that judgment arose out of Johnson’s breach of his contractual indemnity agreement with Safeco; and (3) because the underlying complaint and counterclaim did not allege any event that would qualify as an “accident,” they failed to trigger the umbrella policy and State Farm’s duty to defend Johnson. Because we agree with State Farm’s first and second contentions, we reverse the grant of summary judgment to Johnson. A. Standard of Review  In appeals from summary judgment rulings, we conduct de novo review. The reviewing court must construe all evidence strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the nonmoving party. Where the pleadings, depositions, and affidavits show no genuine issue of material fact, the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1005(c) (West 2000). If reasonable persons could draw different inferences from undisputed facts, summary judgment should be denied. Atlantic Mutual Insurance Co. v. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 315 Ill. App. 3d 552, 559, 734 N.E.2d 50, 56 (2000). B. Estoppel State Farm first contends that it was not estopped from asserting its claim that it had no duty to indemnify Johnson under the umbrella policy. We agree.  When an insurer’s position is that a complaint potentially alleging coverage is not covered under a policy that includes a duty to defend, the insurer may not simply refuse to defend the insured. Instead, the insurer must either (1) defend the lawsuit under a reservation of rights or (2) seek a declaratory judgment that no coverage exists. An insurer is estopped from raising a policy defense to coverage only if it fails to take either of these two actions. Employers Insurance of Wausau v. Ehlco Liquidating Trust, 186 Ill. 2d 127, 150-51, 708 N.E.2d 1122, 1134-35 (1999).  In this case, after receiving notice of Johnson’s claim under his homeowner’s policy, State Farm provided a defense in the underlying lawsuit under a reservation of rights. Further, a separate duty to defend does not arise under the umbrella policy if State Farm provided a defense to the insured under a separate State Farm policy, such as Johnson’s homeowner’s policy. Under these circumstances, we conclude that State Farm was not estopped from asserting that it had no duty to indemnify Johnson under the umbrella policy. C. Duty To Indemnify State Farm next contends that it had no duty to indemnify Johnson for the prior judgment in Safeco’s favor. We agree. The umbrella policy provided in pertinent part, as follows: “COVERAGES 1. Coverage L: — Personal Liability. If you are legally obligated to pay damages for a loss, we will pay your net loss minus the retained limit ***. 2. Defense and Settlement c. When the claim or suit is covered by this policy, but not covered by another policy available to you: a. we will defend that suit against you[.] DEFINITIONS 6. ‘[L]oss’ means an accident that results in personal injury or property damage during the policy period. This includes injurious exposure to conditions.”  A duty to indemnify is not as broad as a duty to defend. The duty to indemnify arises only when the insured becomes legally obligated to pay damages in the underlying action that gives rise to a claim under the policy. Travelers Insurance Co. v. Eljer Manufacturing, Inc., 197 Ill. 2d 278, 293, 757 N.E.2d 481, 491 (2001). Once an insured has incurred liability as a result of the underlying claim, an insurer’s duty to indemnify arises only if “the insured’s activity and the resulting loss or damage actually fall within the *** policy’s coverage.” (Emphasis in original.) Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 128, 607 N.E.2d 1204, 1221 (1992).  The supreme court has provided guidance on how to construe an insurance policy: “In construing an insurance policy, the primary function of the court is to ascertain and enforce the intentions of the parties as expressed in the agreement. [Citation.] To ascertain the intent of the parties and the meaning of the words used in the insurance policy, the court must construe the policy as a whole, taking into account the type of insurance for which the parties have contracted, the risks undertaken and purchased, the subject matter that is insured and the purposes of the entire contract. [Citation.] If the words in the policy are plain and unambiguous, the court will afford them their plain, ordinary meaning and will apply them as written.” Crum & Forster Managers Corp. v. Resolution Trust Corp., 156 Ill. 2d 384, 391, 620 N.E.2d 1073, 1078 (1993). The umbrella policy defines the term “loss” as “an accident that results in personal injury or property damage during the polity period” (emphasis added). Because the policy does not expressly define the term “accident,” “we must interpret this term by affording it its plain, ordinary, and popular meaning.” (Emphasis in original.) Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill. 2d at 115, 607 N.E.2d at 1215. “Accident” is defined as “an unforseen and unplanned event or circumstance” or “an unfortunate event resulting esp. from carelessness or ignorance.” Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 7 (10th ed. 2000).  In this case, the underlying allegation was that Johnson is liable to Vallerius’s estate because he and White breached their fiduciary duties as coexecutors when White misappropriated estate funds and damaged Vallerius’s residence and vehicle. Affording the word “accident” its plain, ordinary, and popular meaning, we conclude that it does not encompass the events described above. Although an accident is an “unfortunate event,” not all unfortunate events are “accidents.” Johnson may have been a victim of White’s misdeeds; however, that does not render the character of those misdeeds “accidental.” Moreover, if we view the underlying judgment as arising out of Johnson’s contractual indemnity agreement with Safeco, we reach the same result. Johnson signed an agreement indemnifying Safeco for “any loss and expense” for which Safeco “shall become liable by reason of such suretyship.” Johnson’s complaint alleges that his liability rose out of this contractual obligation. Such liability, by its very nature, is not an “accident.” We thus conclude that State Farm had no duty to indemnify Johnson for his liability to Safeco. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s granting of Johnson’s summary judgment motion and remand for further proceedings. III. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated, we reverse the trial court’s judgment and remand for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. APPLETON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740690 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:22.486468+00 ===

Grant, J.,
concurring.
I concur fully in the majority opinion. Since at least 1893, defendants in this state appealing convictions under a municipal ordinance have known, or should have known, that if a defendant is to effectively appeal such a conviction, it is necessary to include a copy of the ordinance allegedly violated in the record presented to a reviewing court. Defendants generally know whether there is to be an appeal, and they bear the duty to present a record that may be reviewed properly in the area defendant wants reviewed.
In Perry v. State, 37 Neb. 623, 625, 56 N.W. 315, 316 (1893), we said:
It is true that before the plaintiffs in error could have been lawfully convicted there must have been introduced in *649evidence facts proving that they were inmates of a house of ill-fame, and there must have also been introduced a valid ordinance of the city of Columbus forbidding persons from being inmates of such houses. As a matter of fact none of these things may have been done, but every reasonable presumption will be indulged by this court in favor of the correctness of the judgment of the court below.
Ninety-nine years later, defendants still profess to be astonished and nonplussed by the application of the rule.
To change the rule now and require prosecutors in the numerous ordinance violation cases in this state to introduce in evidence the ordinance allegedly violated would probably give us 99 years of dismissal on appeal of practically all ordinance violation cases. Prosecutors would probably be concerned with encumbering the record in every noncontested ordinance violation case by introducing the pertinent ordinance on the chance that a conviction might possibly be appealed or the prosecutors would forget to do so.
If the procedure is now judicially changed, I assume that would even the score for 198 years — from one allegedly outrageous application of the law to one diametrically opposed.
It does not appear to me to be too much to require lawyers to follow a 99-year-old established procedural rule and to treat this appellate problem as having been settled under the doctrine of stare decisis et non quieta movere.
Boslaugh, J., joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9740691 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:22.489914+00 ===

Caporale, J.,
dissenting.
I am not prepared to adopt a rule which would ultimately require that an appellate court determine which of various competing versions of an ordinance should be judicially noticed. The place to make a proper trial record is in the trial court; if the record does not contain the ordinance in question, an appellate court should not judicially notice it.
Nonetheless, notwithstanding our recent reaffirmations, I agree with Judge Shanahan’s suggestion that the time has come to reexamine the continuing validity of our present rule. That is, an appellate court will not take judicial notice of an ordinance *650not in the record but presumes, or perhaps more correctly assumes, that a valid ordinance creating the offense charged exists, that the evidence sustains the findings of the trial court, and that the sentence is within the limits set by the ordinance. State v. King, 239 Neb. 853, 479 N.W.2d 125 (1992).
The language from Perry v. State, 37 Neb. 623, 56 N.W. 315 (1893), which Judge Grant quotes in his concurrence was expanded upon in Foley v. State, 42 Neb. 233, 60 N.W. 574 (1894). That expansion makes clear that the assumptions we presently make are outgrowths of the requirements that a municipal court take judicial notice of its own municipality’s ordinances and that upon subsequent de novo review by the district court, the district court take judicial notice of whatever the municipal court could have judicially noticed. The Foley court explained:
Courts will not, as a rule, take notice of municipal ordinances, unless required to do so by special charter or general law; but to that rule there are recognized exceptions, among which is that courts of a municipal corporation will take notice, without allegations or proof, of its own ordinances. The ground of the exception noted is that such courts stand in the same relation toward the municipal laws of the city, or other corporation, as do courts of general jurisdiction toward the public laws of the state; and on appeal from a judgment of conviction before a police magistrate of a city for the violation of an ordinance thereof the court will, upon a trial de novo, take notice of such ordinance. In short, the district court, or court of like general jurisdiction, will, on appeal from a municipal court, take notice of whatever facts the latter could have noticed judicially before the removal of the cause therefrom. The court exercising appellate jurisdiction in such cases is... for the time being regarded as a substitute for the police magistrate. [Citations omitted.] Cases are not wanting which sustain a different rule and holding in effect that in every prosecution under a city ordinance it is essential to set out, or in unmistakable terms refer to, the section or provision thereof relied upon for a conviction. In fact, the weight of authority, judged *651by the number of cases, may be said to sustain that view; but the question being an open one in this state, notwithstanding the dictum in Perry v. State, 37 Neb. [623, 56 N.W. 315 (1893),] we feel at liberty to adopt the rule most in harmony with the spirit of our liberal practice, and most promotive of a prompt and efficient enforcement of municipal laws. The reason for the strict rule of the common law which required every by-law, ordinance, or private statute to be specially pleaded cannot be said to exist under our system. At common law, prosecutions under statutes imposing a penalty against the offender, as distinguished from the body of the criminal law, were upon information and generally by a common informer, who claimed a part of the fine or penalty. [Citation omitted.] Such prosecutions were by leave of court and differed from indictments in one respect only, viz., that whereas the latter were upon the oath of twelve men, the former was upon the oath of the prosecutor alone. In such cases the same certainty was required as in prosecutions by indictment. [Citation omitted.] It seems neither necessary nor advisable to require in complaints for the violation of mere municipal regulations the same strictness as in prosecutions under the provisions of the Criminal Code. According to the better doctrine such offenses, although frequently prosecuted in the name of the state, are criminal in form merely, while in substance and effect they are civil proceedings, and, therefore, not within the provision of the constitution which declares that the right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.
42 Neb. at 235-36, 60 N.W. at 574.
However, in Steiner v. State, 78 Neb. 147, 150, 110 N.W. 723, 724 (1907), this court made clear that it would not take judicial notice of municipal ordinances not in the record, declaring:
But a different rule will prevail with respect to this court, where such matters are not triable de novo. This court cannot undertake to notice the ordinances of all the municipalities within its jurisdiction, nor to search the records for evidence of their passage, amendment or repeal. A party relying upon such matters must make *652them a part of the bill of exceptions, or in some manner present them as a part of the record.
Having encouraged the creation of inadequate trial records, this court decided in Wells v. State, 152 Neb. 668, 42 N.W.2d 363 (1950), to fill in one of the inevitably resulting gaps by declaring that, as a judgment of the district court had come to the Supreme Court with the usual presumptions of regularity, it would be presumed in the absence of a showing to the contrary that the facts before the district court, including those of which it was required to take judicial notice, established that the facts charged in the complaint were a violation of the ordinance described or referred to therein. The Wells court did not undertake to explain how in the absence of the ordinance from the record one could show to the contrary.
In State v. Cottingham, 226 Neb. 270, 410 N.W.2d 498 (1987), we decided to plug yet another hole by presuming that sentences imposed under an ordinance not in the record were within the limits set in the ordinance.
Even if I leave aside the questionable wisdom of the rule as first announced, much has changed since 1894. Not the least significant of these changes is that we no longer have municipal courts. They have been merged into the county courts, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 24-515 (Reissue 1989), which have broader territorial jurisdiction than a single municipality, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 24-503 (Reissue 1989). Neither do district courts review county court decisions involving municipal ordinances de novo; the review of such cases is for error appearing on the record made in the county court. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2733 (Reissue 1989). In such instances, the district courts serve as intermediate courts of appeal, State v. Douglass, 239 Neb. 891, 479 N.W.2d 457 (1992), and are not free to go beyond the record made in the county court. Indeed, we ruled in State v. Lynch, 223 Neb. 849, 394 N.W.2d 651 (1986), that a municipal ordinance not offered in evidence in the county court could not on appeal be received in evidence in the district court. Nor can it any longer be said, if it ever could, that all actions arising under municipal ordinances are civil in nature. See, for example, State v. Metzger, 211 Neb. 593, 319 N.W.2d 459 (1982) (city ordinance making it unlawful to commit indecent, immodest, *653or filthy act said to be criminal in nature).
These changes compel me, on more mature reflection, to conclude, that the party prosecuting under an ordinance ought to be required to properly make it a part of the trial records As Judge Shanahan’s concurrence demonstrates, other states so require. The failure to fulfill that obligation should result in a dismissal of the prosecution.
I recognize that given the number of ordinance cases prosecuted in the county courts, our present rule is the more convenient one for prosecutors and court personnel. However, governmental convenience is not a legitimate basis for requiring an aggrieved defendant to establish the municipal law under which he was prosecuted and convicted.
Since the record in this case fails to contain the ordinance under which the subject proceedings were held, I would reverse the judgment of the district court and remand the cause with the direction that the district court reverse the county court’s judgment and direct that the complaint be dismissed.

=== CASE 2224533 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.187576+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 88 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 642
BERRYMAN
v.
K MART CORPORATION
Docket No. 127823.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 18, 1992, at 9:05 A.M.
Sachs, Nunn, Kates, Kadushin, O'Hare, Helveston & Waldman, P.C. (by Gregory M. Janks and Barbara M. Robinson), for the plaintiffs.
Kevin F. Robbins, for the defendant.
Before: MURPHY, P.J., and CAVANAGH and CONNOR, JJ.
CONNOR, J.
Plaintiffs Darlene and Robert Berryman appeal from the trial court's grant of defendant's motion for a directed verdict. We reverse.
On March 8, 1985, plaintiff Darlene Berryman slipped and fell in defendant's Garden City store. After she fell, she noticed that the floor was wet and that the "wet streaky marks on the floor" were consistent with freshly mopped floors she had seen in the past. Two women, who had seen her fall, offered assistance. Mrs. Berryman failed to get the names of these women, and they had left by the time defendant's employees investigated the fall. As a result, the women did not testify at trial.
*90 According to Mrs. Berryman, the women told her that they had seen someone mopping the floor where she had fallen immediately before the accident. However, at trial defendant successfully objected to Mrs. Berryman's testimony regarding the statements of the women who had come to her assistance, arguing that the statements constituted hearsay not falling within any exception. Defendant, in its answers to plaintiffs' interrogatories, which were introduced as exhibits at trial, admitted that its premises were maintained solely by its employees.
After regaining her composure, Mrs. Berryman sought out an employee of defendant to report her fall. According to Mrs. Berryman's testimony at trial, the employee told her that defendant's floors were mopped at various times during the day. The employee also told her that it was "likely" that the floor had been mopped before her fall, but that the employee did not know for certain. This employee did not testify at trial.
After three telephone calls, which took approximately one-half hour, a supervisor appeared and listened to Mrs. Berryman's account of the accident. When the two subsequently returned to the spot where she had fallen, the floor was dry.
In their suit, plaintiffs alleged that Mrs. Berryman suffered lumbar spine and cervical spine injuries as a direct and proximate result of defendant's negligence. Mr. Berryman claimed loss of consortium arising out of his wife's injuries.
At the conclusion of plaintiffs' proofs, the trial court granted defendant's motion for a directed verdict. First, the trial court ruled that defendant was entitled to a favorable verdict with regard to Mr. Berryman's claim for loss of consortium because insufficient evidence of damages was introduced as a result of his failure to testify. Second, *91 the trial court ruled that defendant was also entitled to a directed verdict with regard to Mrs. Berryman's claim of negligence because plaintiffs failed to establish that defendant had breached any duty. Plaintiffs appeal as of right, raising a number of issues.
Plaintiffs first contend that the trial court erred in granting defendant's motion for a directed verdict with regard to Mrs. Berryman's claim of negligence. We begin by noting that "[d]irected verdicts, particularly in negligence cases, are viewed with disfavor." Vsetula v Whitmyer, 187 Mich. App. 675, 679; 468 NW2d 53 (1991).
When ruling on a motion for a directed verdict, a trial court must consider the evidence presented at trial and all legitimate inferences that may be drawn from the evidence in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party to determine if a prima facie case was established. Bercel Garages, Inc v Macomb Co Rd Comm, 190 Mich. App. 73, 89; 475 NW2d 840 (1991); Reisman v Regents of Wayne State University, 188 Mich. App. 526, 538; 470 NW2d 678 (1991). Where the evidence is such that reasonable jurors could honestly have reached different conclusions, the trial court may not substitute its judgment for that of the jury and the motion must be denied. Bercel Garages, supra at 89; Mourad v Automobile Club Ins Ass'n, 186 Mich. App. 715, 721; 465 NW2d 395 (1991). In reviewing the decision of the trial court, this Court uses an identical standard to determine if the trial court erred. Reisman, supra at 538.
To establish a prima facie case of negligence, a plaintiff must introduce evidence sufficient to prove that (1) the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, (2) the defendant breached that duty, (3) the defendant's breach of its duty was a proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries, and (4) the plaintiff *92 suffered damages. Johnson v Bobbie's Party Store, 189 Mich. App. 652, 659; 473 NW2d 796 (1991); Nolan v Bronson, 185 Mich. App. 163, 169; 460 NW2d 284 (1990). A prima facie case of negligence may be established by use of legitimate inferences, as long as sufficient evidence is introduced to take the inferences "out of the realm of conjecture." Ritter v Meijer, Inc, 128 Mich. App. 783, 786; 341 NW2d 220 (1983).
A storekeeper's liability for injuries caused on its premises is well established in this state.
"It is the duty of a storekeeper to provide reasonably safe aisles for customers and he is liable for injury resulting from an unsafe condition either caused by the active negligence of himself and his employees or, if otherwise caused, where known to the storekeeper or is of such a character or has existed a sufficient length of time that he should have had knowledge of it." [Serinto v Borman Food Stores, 380 Mich. 637, 640-641; 158 NW2d 485 (1968), quoting Carpenter v Herpolsheimer's Co, 278 Mich. 697; 271 N.W. 575 (1937); emphasis deleted.]
See also Andrews v K mart Corp, 181 Mich. App. 666, 670-671; 450 NW2d 27 (1989); McCune v Meijer, Inc, 156 Mich. App. 561, 562; 402 NW2d 6 (1986). Neither party questions that defendant owed plaintiffs a duty to provide reasonably safe aisles under the strictures of Serinto. The dispute centers on whether the evidence introduced at trial was sufficient to establish a prima facie case of negligence, specifically whether defendant breached its duty to plaintiffs.
Whitmore v Sears, Roebuck & Co, 89 Mich. App. 3, 5; 279 NW2d 318 (1979), the case relied upon by defendant in the trial court and the trial court in its decision to grant defendant's motion for a *93 directed verdict, involved an oil spill in the parking lot of the defendant's store. The Court of Appeals found that the evidence presented by the plaintiff, which "established that there was an oily substance on Sears' parking lot at the spot where she fell," was insufficient to support an inference that the defendant's employees had caused the spot to be there or that the defendant had actual or constructive notice of the spot. Id. at 10. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals concluded that the trial court had erred in denying the defendant's motion for a directed verdict. Id. at 9-10.
The evidence in this case supporting an inference that defendant caused the condition that led to Mrs. Berryman's fall is much stronger. Mrs. Berryman testified that she had fallen on a wet spot on the floor within defendant's store. She also testified that she observed the floor after her fall and noted it was streaky, like floors she had mopped in the past, and that there were no signs or warnings that the floor was wet. Mrs. Berryman further testified that she later saw an employee of the defendant, near the rear of the store, with a mop and bucket. Finally, defendant admitted that its premises were maintained solely by its employees. A logical inference to be drawn from this testimony is that defendant's employees had mopped the floor on which Mrs. Berryman had fallen and that they had failed to post adequate warning signs.
Because the evidence leads to an inference that defendant created the condition that caused Mrs. Berryman's fall, proof of notice is unnecessary and the parties' arguments regarding that issue will not be addressed. Williams v Borman's Foods, Inc, 191 Mich. App. 320, 321; 477 NW2d 425 (1991).
Mrs. Berryman established that defendant owed her a duty, that defendant breached that duty by *94 creating a condition that was dangerous, that the condition created caused her injury, and that she suffered damages. Because the evidence was sufficient to enable reasonable jurors to reach different conclusions, we conclude that the trial court erred in substituting its judgment for that of the jury and in granting defendant's motion. Accordingly, we reverse.
We also agree that the trial court erred in directing a verdict for defendant with regard to Mr. Berryman's claim for loss of consortium. The trial court granted defendant's motion for a directed verdict with regard to that claim after ruling that, because of Mr. Berryman's failure to testify, there was insufficient evidence to support his claim.
Loss of consortium includes loss of conjugal fellowship, companionship, services, and all other incidents of the marriage relationship. Oldani v Lieberman, 144 Mich. App. 642, 645; 375 NW2d 778 (1985). A claim of loss of consortium is derivative and recovery is contingent upon the injured spouse's recovery of damages for the injury. Moss v Pacquing, 183 Mich. App. 574, 583; 455 NW2d 339 (1990), consideration of certified conflict declined 435 Mich. 1204 (1990); Oldani, supra at 645. A party claiming damages arising from loss of consortium must prove those damages by a preponderance of the evidence. Washington v Jones, 386 Mich. 466, 472; 192 NW2d 234 (1971). Although there are no cases in Michigan addressing the issue whether the spouse must testify to support a claim of loss of consortium, decisions from other jurisdictions do not impose such a requirement.
Proceeding from an earlier decision that held that a plaintiff need not appear in court or testify to support his cause of action, the Florida District Court of Appeals concluded that a wife's testimony *95 that "related at length, not only the extent of her own injuries, but, only for example, their adverse effect upon her temperament, her ability to work both outside and inside the home, and the couple's sexual relations was more than sufficient to demonstrate that her husband had sustained recoverable damages." Wills v Snapper Creek Nursing Home, Inc, 465 So 2d 562, 563-564 (Fla App, 1985), petition for review den 476 So 2d 675 (Fla, 1985). See also Alter v Finesmith, 214 So 2d 732, 737 (Fla App, 1968), cert den 225 So 2d 538 (Fla, 1969). Wills was cited with approval in two later decisions of the Florida courts. See Figueredo v Keller Industries, Inc, 583 So 2d 432 (Fla App, 1991) (holding that the trial court erred in affirming a zero verdict on a wife's claim of loss of consortium where, although she did not testify, "there was undisputed evidence that at least some damages ... were sustained"); Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc v Rosania, 546 So 2d 736, 738 (Fla App, 1989) ("We also find no error in the failure of the husband to personally testify on the derivative action. There was other evidence that was sufficient to support this claim.").
Another recent decision is that of the Pennsylvania Superior Court in Burns v Pepsi-Cola Metropolitan Bottling Co, 353 Pa Super 571, 577-579; 510 A2d 810 (1986). The court concluded that there was "no requirement that the spouse seeking to recover for loss of consortium must testify to support such a claim if it is otherwise borne out by substantial evidence from other sources ...." Id. at 579. In an earlier decision referred to by the Burns court, the court had affirmed an award of $150,000 for loss of consortium to a woman whose husband had presented "compelling testimony as to the severe negative effects the accident" had caused and both the husband and the couple's *96 daughter testified regarding the "significant disruption" of the couple's marriage. Thompson v Anthony Crane Rental, Inc, 325 Pa Super 386, 400; 473 A2d 120 (1984).
Similarly, the Oklahoma Supreme Court has held that "the simple failure of a plaintiff in a loss or [sic] consortium action to testify is not, in and of itself, fatal to such action." Middlebrook v Imler, Tenny & Kugler, M.D.'s, Inc, 713 P2d 572, 586 (Okla, 1985). Because the court found "evidence of her loss of the services of her husband, which range from the impairment of conjugal fellowship to loss of the physical services of a husband and domestic handyman," it affirmed a jury verdict in the amount of $175,000 for the wife's loss of consortium. Id.
The Alaska Supreme Court, in Rutherford v State, 605 P2d 16, 25 (Alas, 1979), held that it was not "determinative" that the wife did not testify at trial. The court reasoned: "We see no reason why the competent testimony of the injured spouse or a third party cannot be used to support a consortium claim, though undoubtedly a claimant's direct testimony would be both more definitive and more persuasive." Id.
Finally, the Tennessee Court of Appeals held the defendants' claim that the plaintiff wife's failure to testify precluded her recovery on a claim of loss of consortium to be meritless, relying on the "proof as to the injuries and disabilities of her husband...." Swiney v Malone Freight Lines, 545 S.W.2d 112, 117 (Tenn App, 1976).
Given the apparent absence of any authority to the contrary, see anno: Excessiveness or adequacy of damages awarded for noneconomic loss caused by personal injury or death of spouse, 61 ALR4th 309, 317 (accepting Burns, supra, as authority for *97 its conclusion that failure to testify "does not appear to be significant" for a claim of loss of consortium), we find the rationale underlying the decisions of the foreign courts to be equally persuasive in Michigan. Because a party does not have to appear to prosecute or defend a civil action, MCL 600.1430; MSA 27A.1430, we conclude that there is similarly no requirement that a party testify to establish his right to recovery. Accordingly, we find that a claim of loss of consortium may be maintained, even if the claimant does not appear or testify at trial, as long as there exists sufficient evidence on the record to support the claim.
Reviewing the record in this matter in a light most favorable to Mr. Berryman, there was sufficient evidence to establish that Mrs. Berryman's injuries had caused him to lose his wife's conjugal fellowship, companionship in activities both had formerly enjoyed, and his wife's assistance in caring for their home and children. Reasonable jurors could have found that sufficient proof had been presented to establish Mr. Berryman's claim of loss of consortium. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court also erred in granting defendant's motion for a directed verdict with respect to this claim.
Given the necessity of remanding this matter for a new trial, we will also address some of the other issues that may again be contested.
First, plaintiffs argue that the trial court's refusal to allow their expert, Dr. Robert Pachella, to testify at trial constitutes an abuse of discretion. The trial court gave three reasons for not allowing Pachella to testify as an expert: Pachella had never examined a situation similar to the one before the trial court, he had never been previously admitted to testify as an expert before a *98 court, and he had not examined the scene of Mrs. Berryman's fall.
Under MRE 702, which governs the admissibility of expert testimony, the critical inquiry is whether expert testimony will aid the trier of fact in reaching its ultimate decision. Bercel Garages, supra at 83. Admission of expert testimony requires that (1) the witness be qualified as an expert, (2) the expert's proposed testimony "must serve to give the trier of fact a better understanding of the evidence or assist in determining a fact in issue," and (3) the witness' testimony "must be from a recognized discipline." People v Beckley, 434 Mich. 691, 711; 456 NW2d 391 (1990) (opinion of BRICKLEY, J.), reh den sub nom People v Badour, 435 Mich. 1243 (1990).
The decision to admit or exclude expert testimony is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be reversed on appeal absent a clear abuse of discretion. Jack Loeks Theatres, Inc v City of Kentwood, 189 Mich. App. 603, 611; 474 NW2d 140 (1991). In evidentiary rulings, an abuse of discretion will be found "only if an unprejudiced person, considering the facts on which the trial court acted, would say that there was no justification or excuse for the ruling made." Gore v Rains & Block, 189 Mich. App. 729, 737; 473 NW2d 813 (1991).
Dr. Pachella, plaintiff's proposed expert, held a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University in experimental psychology and noted his research and publication were in the fields of cognitive psychology, human-factors engineering, and human perception. His research involved normal human abilities in the context of performing routine tasks and the environments in which people lived and worked. Pachella had been engaged in the study of these areas for twenty-five years at the time of *99 trial. At trial, Pachella testified that he had served as an expert in "a number of cases" that involved people who had fallen, but could not recall a case that involved "this kind of store," meaning one of defendant's stores. However, Pachella testified that he had "looked at a number of other common circumstances that involve retail kinds of stores; of various kinds." Pachella also testified that, in preparation for trial, he had reviewed the depositions of Mrs. Berryman and two of defendant's employees.
On the basis of our review of the record, we conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to allow Pachella to testify as an expert for the reasons stated. The trial court's conclusions that Pachella "never had a situation" similar to the one in this matter and that he had never been admitted as an expert by another court were clearly erroneous. Pachella testified that he had examined cases involving retail stores and had testified in court, although not in regard to one of defendant's stores. Nor is Pachella's failure to view the scene of the accident sufficient to bar his testimony as an expert. Pursuant to MRE 703, an expert's testimony may be based on facts "perceived by or made known to him at or before the hearing." Pachella, in preparing for his testimony, had reviewed the depositions of Mrs. Berryman and two of defendant's employees to assist in his analysis of plaintiff's fall. There is no requirement that the expert actually examine the scene of the accident.
Plaintiffs raise two additional issues that we will discuss briefly. However, given the limitations of the record before us, we decline to resolve either issue definitively.
Plaintiffs contend on appeal that the trial court abused its discretion in finding that the statements *100 of the two women who came to her assistance were hearsay not within any exception. Plaintiffs argue that the statements are admissible as either present-sense impressions, under MRE 803(1), or excited utterances, under MRE 803(2). Plaintiffs' failure to move for the admission of the statements under MRE 803(1) would normally preclude this Court from addressing that argument on appeal, Lowman v Karp, 190 Mich. App. 448, 454; 476 NW2d 428 (1991). However, because the trial court will be confronted with the issue on remand, we will briefly address both claims for the benefit of the parties and the court below.
MRE 803(1) allows the admission of presentsense impressions, which are defined by that rule as statements "describing or explaining an event or condition made while the declarant was perceiving the event or condition, or immediately thereafter." Whether a statement occurs "immediately" after the event or condition described is necessarily a factual determination. Johnson v White, 430 Mich. 47, 56-57; 420 NW2d 87 (1988); Duke v American Olean Tile Co, 155 Mich. App. 555, 570; 400 NW2d 677 (1986) ("the phrase `immediately thereafter' is not synonymous with `instantly thereafter'"). On the record before us, we are unwilling to determine whether the statements of the women described an event or condition that had occurred within the time frame required to render their statements sufficiently trustworthy to qualify as a hearsay exception.
MRE 803(2) allows the admission of statements that relate to a startling event and that were uttered while the declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the startling event. To be admissible under MRE 803(2), the statement must arise out of an occasion sufficiently startling to produce nervous excitement and render the statement *101 spontaneous and unreflecting; it must be made while the declarant is still under the influence of the nervous excitement, before there is any time to contrive or misrepresent; and it must relate to the circumstances of the startling occasion that the declarant appears to have had an opportunity to observe. People v Ellis, 174 Mich. App. 139, 143; 436 NW2d 383 (1988); Hewitt v Grand Trunk W R Co, 123 Mich. App. 309, 319; 333 NW2d 264 (1983). Again, on the record before us, we are unwilling to determine whether the statements relate sufficiently to the circumstances of Mrs. Berryman's fall and whether they were spontaneous and uncontrived.
However, we note our disagreement with defendant's argument that the requirements of People v Burton, 433 Mich. 268, 294; 445 NW2d 133 (1989), which held that admission of a statement as an excited utterance requires "independent proof of the startling events" that led to the statement, precludes plaintiffs from using the women's statements. Independent proof of Mrs. Berryman's fall and its alleged cause, a freshly mopped floor, was introduced through the testimony of Mrs. Berryman herself. Accordingly, Burton would not bar introduction of the statements as excited utterances.
Finally, plaintiffs assert that an adverse inference must be drawn against defendant regarding its failure to identify or produce the two women who came to Mrs. Berryman's aid and the employee to whom she first reported her fall. "[U]nder Michigan law, an adverse inference may be drawn against a party who fails to produce evidence within its control." Grossheim v Associated Truck Lines, Inc, 181 Mich. App. 712, 715; 450 NW2d 40 (1989). See also SJI2d 6.01. Regarding the two women, defendant did not exercise control *102 over them, because they were simply customers shopping in its store. Although we agree that an adverse inference could possibly be drawn against defendant because of its failure to produce its employee or to provide a reasonable excuse for its failure to do so, given the record before us, we decline to resolve the issue definitively.
We reverse the trial court's grant of defendant's motion for a directed verdict with respect to both Darlene Berryman's negligence claim and Robert Berryman's claim of loss of consortium and remand this matter for a new trial. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9740692 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:23.741459+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
SULLIVAN, Justice.
Jeri Mullin lived in South Bend with her two children, Shawn and Kathleen. At 5:27 a.m. on November 5, 1985, a neighbor reported a fire at the Mullin household to the 911 Emergency Dispatch of the South Bend Police Department. When the dispatcher asked if anyone was inside the house, the neighbor responded "I think so." Fire trucks but no ambulances were dispatched to the seene. Once there, one of the fire units requested an ambulance, the first of which arrived at 5:44 a.m. Shawn died; Kathleen was injured. Mullin filed suit against the City of South Bend, alleging that the City was negligent for the dispatcher's failure to send an ambulance to the seene immediately.
The following notice had been posted in the dispatchers' break-room at the police department in June, 1984;
On Friday 6/21/84 the Communications Supervisors and the Fire Dept. Chiefs met to discuss the Status of the Fire Dispatch. This meeting was very productive and out of it came several suggestions that we need to impliment [sic] in order that we can better searve[sic) the public interest and insure that we are doing what is desired in the area of Fire Dispatch; Following are the changes and or additions effective with this Memo.... MEDICS will be dispatched to all calls involving HIGH RISES, NURSING HOMES, RIVER RUNS, SHOPPING MALLS upon reiept [sic] of a Fire Call or Fire Alarm. In addition the MEDIC will be dispatched to ALL FIRE CALLS WERE [sic] SOMEONE IS THOUGHT TO BE INSIDE. IF UNKNOWN] THEN DO NOT SEND THE MEDICS.
The City moved for summary judgment arguing that it was immune from liability under the Tort Claims Act, Indiana Code § 34-4-16.5-8(6) & (7) (1993), and that it breached no private duty owed to the plaintiffs. The trial court granted the motion finding as a matter of law that the City owed no private duty to Mullin or her children. The trial court did not decide whether the City is immune under the Indiana Tort Claims Act. Mullin appealed; the Court of Appeals affirmed the entry of summary judgment on the same grounds. Mullin v. Municipal City of South Bend (1993), Ind.App., 618 N.E.2d 42.
Mullin now seeks transfer, and asks that we hold that the City is not immune and recognize that the City was under a common law duty to send an ambulance to her home once the dispatcher knew or reasonably should have known that the Mullin house was on fire and occupied. We address the immunity and duty questions in turn.
Standard of Review
This case was resolved by summary judgment. Our standard of review is well-established. The reviewing court faces the same issues that were before the trial court and follows the same process. Greathouse v. Armstrong (1993), Ind., 616 N.E.2d 364, 366. Although the party appealing from the grant *281of summary judgment has the burden of persuading the court that the grant of summary judgment was erroneous, the reviewing court carefully scrutinizes the trial court's decision to assure that the party against whom summary judgment was entered was not improperly prevented from having its day in court. Id.
Summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and evidence sanctioned by Indiana Trial Rule 56(C) show "there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and ... the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Even if the facts are undisputed, summary judgment is not proper if those undisputed facts "give rise to conflicting inferences which would alter the outcome." Bochnowski v. Peoples Federal Sav. & Loan Ass'n (1991), Ind., 571 N.E.2d 282, 285. The burden is on the moving party to prove the non-existence of a genuine issue of material fact. Oelling v. Rao (1992), Ind., 593 N.E.2d 189, 190. If the movant sustains this burden, the opponent may not rest upon the pleadings, but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. TR. 56(BE). If there is any doubt, the motion should be resolved in favor of the party opposing the motion. Oelling, 593 N.E.2d at 190.
Immunity
Because immunity, if applicable, renders moot the issue of duty in this negligence claim, we address it first. Peavler v. Monroe County Bd. of Comm'rs. (1988), Ind., 528 N.E.2d 40, 46-47.
The immunity asserted by the City is regulated by the Tort Claims Act, Indiana Code §§ 34-4-16.5-1 through 34-4-16.5-22 (1993). Governmental entities, such as cities, are subject to liability for the torts committed by their employees unless one of the exceptions in the Act applies. Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 42. Because the Act is in derogation of the common law, we construe it narrowly against the grant of immunity. Hinshaw v. Board of Comm'rs. of Jay County (1993), Ind., 611 N.E.2d 637, 639. The party seeking immunity bears the burden of establishing its conduct comes within the Act. Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 46.
Indiana Code $ 34-4-16.5-3 provides in pertinent part:
A governmental entity or an employee acting within the seope of the employee's employment is not liable if a loss results from:
[[Image here]]
(6) the performance of a discretionary function.
[or]
(7) the adoption and enforeement of or failure to adopt or enforce a law (including rules and regulations) unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest or false imprisonment.
Immunity for discretionary functions encompasses the notion that certain types of decisions made by the executive and legislative branches of government should not be subject to judicial review because of the separation of powers doctrine, because litigation might have a "chilling effect" on the government's resolution of difficult policy issues, or because certain governmental decisions cannot be adequately reviewed using a traditional tort standard of negligence. Peavier, 528 N.E.2d at 44. Whether a particular governmental activity is a discretionary function is a question for the court, not the factfinder. Id. at 46.
Indiana applies the "planning/operation" test for determining whether governmental acts are "discretionary." Id. The test is not a bright-line one, but instead is a function of the particular cireamstances of each case. As a general statement, immune planning activities include the formulation of basic policy on matters such as the allocation of resources. Id. at 45.1 Thus, for example, *282under this test, placement of traffic signs might be a discretionary function, Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 48, but is not necessarily so. Board of Comm'rs. of Adams County v. Price (1992), Ind.App., 587 N.E.2d 1326, 1331, trans. denied. See also Gerbers, Ltd. v. Wells County Drainage Bd. (1993), Ind.App., 608 N.E.2d 997, 1000, trans. denied (county drain board's approval of filling drain was discretionary); Cromer v. City of Indianapolis (1989), Ind.App., 540 N.E.2d 663, 666 (decision of city council not to redesign road fell under discretionary immunity); City of Seymour v. Onyx Paving Co. (1989), Ind.App., 541 N.E.2d 951, 954, reh'g denied, trans. denied (city's issuance of a stop work order was discretionary function); and Boyle v. Anderson Fire Fighters Ass'n Local 1262, AFL-CIO (1986), Ind.App., 497 N.E.2d 1073, 1078, trans. denied (city's decision concerning alternative means to fight fire after fire fighters went on strike is exercise of discretion}.
Most instructive is Greathouse v. Armstrong (1993), Ind., 616 N.E.2d 364. In that case, a motorcyclist was killed when he collided with a bull that had wandered onto the highway. Two hours before the collision, the sheriffs office was notified that cattle were loose. A dispatcher began attempts to identify and contact the owner of the cattle, but without success. Plaintiff alleged that the sheriff's department was negligent in its attempts to do so. Seeking immunity under Indiana Code § 34-4-16.5-3(6), the sheriff contended that because the dispatcher had had to prioritize competing demands, the dispatcher had engaged in policy formulation. This Court rejected that characterization of the dispatcher's activities. Instead, the ree-ord showed that the dispatcher was merely following a pre-determined policy for locating the owners of stray livestock. Thus, the decisions made by the dispatcher about whom to contact and when were merely operational. Greathouse, 616 N.E.2d at 367. As Justice DeBruler wrote for the Court, "If policy formulation included every act which involves any element of choice, judgment or ability to make responsible decisions, every act would then fall within the discretionary function exception." Id. at 368.
As Greathouse and Peqvier suggest, the City's decision to adopt a policy limiting the cireumstances that ambulances would be sent to fires might well be a discretionary activity of city government. However, the outcome of this case does not depend upon whether the City is negligent for having adopted such a policy, but rather whether the City was subject to liability because the policy was not followed.
The City argues that dispatchers were required to exercise judgment when deciding whether to send an ambulance and that this judgment constituted the type of policy decisions covered by the Act. As such, its argument is the same one rejected in Greathouse. The dispatcher may have exercised judgment in deciding whether to send an ambulance to the fire, but such judgment was exercised only in the context of following a pre-deter-mined policy.
The City's claim of immunity under Indiana Code § $4-4-16.5-3(7) is also misplaced. That section provides immunity for "the adoption and enforcement of or failure to adopt or enforce a law (including rules and regulations) unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest or false imprisonment." The City reasons that the policy of not sending ambulances to unoccupied house fires is a "rule or regulation" within the meaning of Section 3(7); if the dispatcher failed to follow that policy, that was a failure to enforce a rule or regulation, thus, the City is immune under Section 3(7). In essence, *283the City argues that the failure of a government employee to follow a governmental policy can never give rise to governmental liability for negligence.
But following governmental policy is not the same as enforcing it, at least in the context of the Tort Claims Act. A lengthy discussion of the meaning of "enforcement" as used in Section 3(7) is found in Quakenbush v. Lackey (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 1284, 1287 n. 3, reh'g denied. While the scope of enforcement extends well beyond "traditional law enforcement activities such as the arrest or pursuit of suspects by police," id., the cases cited in Quakenbush make clear that the seope of "enforcement" is limited to those activities in which a governmental entity or its employees compel or attempt to compel the obedience of another to laws, rules or regulations, or sanction or attempt to sancetion a violation thereof.
Here, the City was neither compelling or attempting to compel obedience of another to its rule or regulation nor sanctioning or attempting to sanction a violation thereof and so was not engaged in enforcement within the meaning of Section 3(7).
The acts of the dispatcher do not fall within the scope of immunity provided by the Tort Claims Act. Accordingly, the City is not immune.
Duty
The absence of immunity does not necessarily result in a legally cognizable claim of negligence. To succeed in a negli-genee action, the plaintiff must establish: (1) a duty on the part of the defendant to conform his conduct to a standard of care arising from his relationship with the plaintiff; (2) a failure of the defendant to conform his conduct to that standard; and (8) an injury proximately caused by the breach of duty. Webb v. Jarvis (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 992, 995, reh'g denied.
Summary judgment was granted to the City because of the absence of a duty. Mullin asserts that the City owed her a duty to dispatch an ambulance to her house onee the City knew or reasonably should have known that the Mullin house was both occupied and on fire. The City responds that the duty to respond, if any, was a duty owed to the public, not to a private individual.
The existence of a duty is a question of law for the court. Gariup Constr. Co. v. Foster (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1224, 1227. In determining whether a duty exists, the court balances three factors: (1) the relationship between the parties; (2) the reasonable foreseeability of harm to the person injured; and (8) public policy concerns. Webb v. Jarvis, 575 N.E.2d at 995. When the government's duty is one owed to the public at large, there is no governmental liability for negligence. Instead, where a plaintiff seeks recovery against a governmental entity, the relationship between the parties must be one that gives rise to a private duty owed to a particular individual. Greathouse, 616 N.E.2d at 368. Other states also apply this distinction between public and private duties. See generally John H. Derrick, Annotation, Modern Status of Rule Excusing Governmental Unit from Tort Liability on Theory That Only General, Not Particular, Duty Was Owed under Circumstances, 38 A.L.R.Ath 1194 (1985).
Mullin acknowledges this distinction between a duty owed to the public and a duty owed to a particular individual and that, standing alone, a city's dispatch of emergency services does not create a private duty. She points out, however, that Indiana courts have not articulated a test to determine when such a private duty exists, and urges us to find a private duty if (1) the identity of the plaintiff is reasonably foreseeable so as to distinguish the plaintiff from the general public; and (2) the injuries suffered by the plaintiff are reasonably foreseeable. Application of this test to her case, she argues, would establish that the City owed a private duty to dispatch an ambulance immediately.
Mullin's proffered test focuses solely on the element of foreseeability. Although we agree that foreseeability is one factor in the duty equation, Webb teaches that it is not the only consideration. A foreseeable plaintiff with a foreseeable injury is not, standing alone, sufficient to establish a private duty of a governmental entity.
*284The City urges us to adopt a different test set out in Cuffy v. City of New York, 69 N.Y.2d 255, 513 N.Y.S.2d 372, 505 N.E.2d 937 (1987). This test provides that a private duty to dispatch an ambulance exists only where (1) the city assumes a duty, either by promise or action; (2) the city knows that inaction could lead to harm; (8) there is some direct contact between the city and the injured party; and (4) the injured party justifiably relies on the city's promise. Id., 513 N.Y.S.2d at 375, 505 N.E.2d at 940.
In contrast to Mullin's foreseeability model, the Cuffy test addresses the relationship between the parties and public policy concerns as Webb requires. As the Cuffy court stated:
[Thhe injured party's reliance is as critical in establishing the existence of a special relationship as is the municipality's voluntary affirmative undertaking of a duty to act. That element provides the essential causative link between the "special duty" assumed by the municipality and the alleged injury. Indeed, at the heart of most of these "special duty" cases is the unfairness that the courts have perceived in precluding recovery when a municipality's voluntary undertaking has lulled the injured party into a false sense of security and has thereby induced him either to relax his own vigilance or to forego other available avenues of protection. On the other hand, when the reliance element is either not present at all or, if present, is not causally related to the ultimate harm, this underlying concern is inapplicable, and the invocation of the "special duty" exception is then no longer justified.
Id. at 375, 505 N.E.2d at 940 (citations omitted).
After review of applicable authorities and consideration of the policy issues at stake, we find the better analysis was expressed in City of Rome v. Jordan, 263Ga. 26, 426 S.E.2d 861, 863 (1993), where the court required the following elements for imposition of a private duty on governmental defendants:
(1) an explicit assurance by the municipality, through promises or actions, that it would act on behalf of the injured party;
(2) knowledge on the part of the municipality that inaction could lead to harm; and
(3) justifiable and detrimental reliance by the injured party on the municipality's affirmative undertaking.
This test is identical to that expressed in Cuffy, except that it does not require any direct contact. The Georgia court deleted the direct contact requirement for two reasons. First, because there might be many instances in which the injured party was unable to contact the municipality's agents directly, for example, because of physical limitations, yet meets the other requirements of the test. The court reasoned that to free the municipality from a duty solely because of such limitations would be unfair. City of Rome, 426 S.E.2d at 863. Second, the Georgia court observed that the states requiring direct contact did so on the theory that there could be no reliance on the city's promise without such contact, but concluded that this concern was addressed by the requirement of detrimental reliance. Id.
We are persuaded that the City of Rome test is the better one for identifying the existence of a private duty because this test takes into account each of the three factors Webb requires that we balance. Not only must the harm to the injured party be foreseeable, the relationship between the governmental entity and the injured person must be such that the governmental entity has induced the injured person justifiably to rely on its taking action for the benefit of that particular person to his detriment. The test also accommodates existing law reflecting a public policy that the mere existence of rescue services does not, standing alone, impose upon the governmental entity a duty to use them for the benefit of a particular individual. See Simpson's Food Fair, Inc. v. City of Evansville (1971), 149 Ind.App. 387, 394-95, 272 N.E.2d 871, 876 ("We will not impose upon the government the obligation to guarantee and assure the health, wealth and happiness of every living person. The law must encourage and protect those subjective values, goals and ideals where possible but it cannot guarantee them." (Emphasis in the original)). However, where the governmen*285tal entity is aware of the plight of a particular individual and leads that person to believe that governmental rescue services will be used, and the individual detrimentally relies on that promise, it would be unfair to leave that individual worse off than if the individual had not sought assistance from the government at all.
This test is consistent with previously decided Indiana cases. For example, in Great-house, although the dispatcher was aware of the loose cattle and knew or should have known that it posed a risk to the general public, there was no assurance by the governmental entity that it would act on behalf of the motorcyclist and no reliance on governmental activity by the motorcyclist. See 616 N.E.2d at 369. See also Lewis v. City of Indianapolis (1990), Ind.App., 554 N.E.2d 13, 15, trans. denied (no private duty for lack of emergency response because there was neither the assurance of help from the city nor reliance by the plaintiff); City of Hammond v. Cataldi (1983), Ind.App., 449 N.E.2d 1184, 1187, trans. denied (city gave no assurance that firemen would respond in a particular way).
A review of the evidence most favorable to Mullin reveals no assurance by the City that an ambulance would be dispatched to the fire immediately. Rather, the dispatcher advised the neighbor that the fire department was on its way, and indeed fire trucks were dispatched to the scene. In addition, there is no evidence of any detrimental reliance. In fact, there is no evidence that Mullin was aware of any City policy governing the dispatch of ambulances. Under these cireum-stances, Mullin has failed to establish the existence of a private duty. The trial court properly entered summary judgment for the City.
Conclusion
Accordingly, we now grant transfer and affirm the grant of summary judgment in favor of the City of South Bend. Ind.Appellate Rule 11(B)(8).
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER, J., concur.
GIVAN, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
DICKSON, J., concurs and dissents with separate opinion.
. Peavier set out the factors to be considered in making the determination:
1. The nature of the conduct-
a) Whether the conduct has a regulatory objective;
b) Whether the conduct involved the balancing of factors without reliance on a readily ascertainable rule or standard;
c) Whether the conduct requires a judgment based on policy decisions;
*282d) Whether the decision involved adopting general principles or only applying them;
e) Whether -the conduct involved establishment of plans, specifications and schedule; and
£) Whether the decision involved assessing priorities, weighing of budgetary considerations or allocation of resources.
2. The effect on governmental operations
a) Whether the decision affects the feasibility or practicability of a government program; and
b) Whether liability will affect the effective administration of the function in question.
3. The capacity of the court to evaluate the propriety of the government's action-Whether tort standards offer an insufficient evaluation of the plaintiff's claim.
Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 46.

=== CASE 9740694 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:23.74906+00 ===

DICKSON, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur with the majority opinion with respect to immunity and standard of review. However, I dissent from its discussion and conclusion as to the issue of duty. The legal determination of whether a duty exists in a particular case is not necessarily resolved by recourse to the three factors found useful by this Court in Webb v. Jarvis (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 992. These should not constitute the exclusive tests for duty. Within two months of Webb, this Court contemporaneously recognized the nebulous nature of the concept of duty and the fact that no universal test for it has been formulated. Cowe v. Forum Group, Inc. (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 630.
No better general statement can be made than that the courts will find a duty where, in general, reasonable persons would recognize it and agree that it exists.
Id., citing Gariup Constr. Co., Inc. v. Foster (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1224, 1227 (quoting W. Prosser & W. Keeton, The Law of Torts *286§ 53, at 359 (5th Ed.1984)). The majority opinion presents an unnecessary and unwise construct. It is better that the common law avoid such artificial and rigid formulations.
I also disagree with the majority's conclusion that the plaintiffs failed to establish the existence of a private duty. To the contrary, the factual averments in this case convince me that reasonable persons would recognize and agree that there exists a duty on the part of the City to exercise reasonable care in the answering of emergency calls from its citizens and in the dispatching of ambulances. I believe that summary judgment should be reversed and the cause remanded for trial.

=== CASE 2224538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.318371+00 ===

168 Wis. 2d 75 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 231
Nunzio DIPASQUALE, Individually and as Special Administrator of the Estate of Bette Dipasquale, Plaintiff-Respondent,[]
v.
AMERICAN FAMILY INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 91-2023.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs January 22, 1992.
Decided February 11, 1992.
*77 On behalf of the defendants-appellants, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Susan Schleif Gherty of Gherty and Gherty, S.C. of Hudson.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Delton J. Thorson of Augusta.
Before Cane, P.J., LaRocque and Myse, JJ.
CANE, P.J.
American Family Insurance Company appeals a summary judgment in favor of the insured, Nunzio Dipasquale, for medical expenses that he incurred for his wife's treatment. American Family contends that the costs incurred for the treatment of alcoholic cirrhosis and its related conditions are excluded from coverage under its health insurance policy exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof." We agree. The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to enter judgment in favor of American Family.
American Family issued a health insurance policy to Dipasquale and his wife. The policy provided coverage for medical expenses, but specifically excluded charges for "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof."
The facts are undisputed. Dipasquale's wife had long been diagnosed as an alcoholic. In June 1989, she was admitted to Indianhead Medical Center and diagnosed with upper gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to esophageal and gastric varices, alcoholic cirrhosis and probable congestive heart failure secondary to the gastrointestinal bleeding. She was later transferred to *78 Abbott-Northwestern Hospital where a doctor believed that the gastrointestinal bleeding was related to portal hypertension, most likely caused by alcoholic cirrhosis. Dipasquale's wife underwent portal shunt surgery to reduce the portal hypertensionthe increased blood pressure in the portal vein that serves the liver. The surgeons linked this treatment to her alcoholic cirrhosis. Dipasquale's wife died the day after the surgery.
Dipasquale submitted the hospital bills incurred for his wife's treatment to American Family. However, American Family denied coverage under its exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof." Dipasquale sued American Family claiming that the exclusion did not apply. Both parties filed motions for summary judgment. The trial court concluded that the phrase "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof" was ambiguous. It construed the policy against American Family and concluded that American Family was liable to Dipasquale for the medical expenses incurred for his wife's treatment, plus statutory costs.
[1]
We review a summary judgment de novo. Grosskopf Oil v. Winter, 156 Wis. 2d 575, 581, 457 N.W.2d 514, 517 (Ct. App. 1990). The methodology for reviewing a summary judgment has been described many times, and it need not be repeated here. See Grams v. Boss, 97 Wis. 2d 332, 338, 294 N.W.2d 473, 476 (1980).
[2]
The issue on appeal is whether the exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof" is ambiguous and whether it excludes coverage for the charges Dipasquale incurred for his wife's treatment of alcoholic cirrhosis and its related conditions. The interpretation of words or clauses in an insurance contract is a question of law that we review without *79 deference to the trial court. Just v. Land Reclamation, 155 Wis. 2d 737, 744, 456 N.W.2d 570, 572 (1990).
[3-6]
When interpreting an exclusionary clause in an insurance policy, we must first determine whether the language is ambiguous. Id. at 744, 456 N.W.2d at 572-73. Exclusionary clauses are tested by what a reasonable person in the position of an insured would have understood the words to mean. Parks v. Waffle, 138 Wis. 2d 70, 75, 405 N.W.2d 690, 692 (Ct. App. 1987). An ambiguity exists when an exclusionary clause is reasonably susceptible to more than one construction from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the position of the insured. Schroeder v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 153 Wis. 2d 165, 174, 450 N.W.2d 470, 473 (Ct. App. 1989). Where an exclusionary clause is unambiguous, we will simply apply the exclusion without engaging in construction. Leverence v. USF&G, 158 Wis. 2d 64, 73, 462 N.W.2d 218, 222 (Ct. App. 1990).
[7]
The parties agree that coverage in this case depends upon the interpretation of the word "complications." American Family argues that a "complication" is a second disease or condition occurring during the course of a primary disease and may result from the primary disease or from independent causes. Dipasquale contends that a "complication" is a concurrent disease or condition that aggravates the original disease. Dipasquale and American Family cite dictionary definitions to support their respective positions. However, under the facts in this case, we need not look to the dictionary definitions of "complication." The test is whether a reasonable person would understand the term "complication," in the context of an exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof," to include alcoholic cirrhosis *80 and its related conditions. See Parks, 138 Wis. 2d at 75, 405 N.W.2d at 692.
[8]
We conclude that a reasonable person in the position of the insured, reading the policy colloquially, would understand the term "complications," as used in the exclusion for charges relating to the complications of alcoholism, to include alcoholic cirrhosis and its related conditions. A reasonable person would understand the term "complication" to mean, at a minimum, a disease or unfavorable condition that relates to or results from the alcoholism and that causes a worsening of the individual's condition. In other circumstances, dealing with a condition other than alcoholic cirrhosis or gastrointestinal bleeding related to alcoholic cirrhosis, the term "complication" as used in the exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof" may be ambiguous. However, the term "complication" as used in this context and as applied to these facts is unambiguous.
Dipasquale does not dispute that his wife's gastrointestinal bleeding and alcoholic cirrhosis were conditions that related to or resulted from her alcoholism and made her physical condition worse. Instead, he merely argues that the gastrointestinal bleeding and the alcoholic cirrhosis were not complications of alcoholism because they did not aggravate his wife's alcoholism, which he defines as her addiction to alcoholic beverages. Therefore, as Dipasquale reads the exclusion, only conditions that make his wife's addiction to alcohol more severe or her desire to drink alcohol more intense are complications excluded by the policy. However, we reject his definition of "complications" because it is inconsistent with what a reasonable person in the position of the insured would understand the term to mean. A reasonable person in the *81 position of the insured would understand the term "complication," as used in the exclusion for complications of alcoholism, to include alcoholic cirrhosis and its related conditions.
[9]
The undisputed facts indicate that Dipasquale's wife's gastrointestinal bleeding related to portal hypertension, most likely caused by her alcoholic cirrhosis. Alcoholic cirrhosis is a liver disease caused by excessive consumption of alcohol. The surgery was performed in an effort to reduce the portal hypertension and was also linked to the alcoholic cirrhosis. There is no question that Dipasquale's wife's gastrointestinal bleeding and alcoholic cirrhosis were conditions that related to or resulted from her alcoholism and that made her physical condition worse. Thus, we conclude that the charges incurred by Dipasquale for his wife's treatment were charges relating to the complications of alcoholism and, as such, are excluded under American Family's medical insurance policy.
Dipasquale alleges that even if the charges fall within the exclusion, they should be covered because American Family waived the exclusion by covering charges for complications of his wife's alcoholism in the past. We disagree. Dipasquale cites no Wisconsin law or authority to support his waiver argument. Furthermore, the facts indicate that since 1981, when American Family had medical proof that Dipasquale's wife's medical problems were linked to her alcoholism, it denied claims relating to her treatment. One decision to deny coverage in 1983 was reversed when Dipasquale submitted medical evidence to support his position that his wife's treatment was not a complication of her alcoholism. Thus, Dipasquale's argument that American Family waived its *82 exclusion for charges relating to his wife's complications of her alcoholism lacks merit.
The term "complications," as used in the context of an exclusion for charges relating to "alcoholism . . . or complications thereof," and as understood by a reasonable person in the position of the insured unambiguously includes alcoholic cirrhosis and its related conditions. Thus, we conclude that the charges Dipasquale incurred for his wife's treatment are excluded. The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to enter judgment in favor of American Family.
By the Court.Judgment reversed and cause remanded with directions.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.

=== CASE 9740695 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:28.030986+00 ===

JUSTICE CERDA delivered the opinion of the court: Respondents, La Salle National Bank, Dusan Zivkovic, Milan M. Rakic, and Milorad Cupic, appeal from an order of the circuit court of Cook County entering judgment against them based upon the imposition of a judicial lien on funds realized in a lawsuit brought against respondents by judgment debtors of plaintiff, Anka Podvinec. Plaintiff cross-appeals from the failure of the trial court to award post-judgment interest. We reverse the judgment against respondents. The issue in this case is whether a lien can be created by court order in the absence of either an agreement between the parties or any statute. On February 26, 1987, plaintiff, Anka Podvinec sued defendants, Predrag Popov and Jovanka Popov, in the law division of the circuit court of Cook County (case number 87 L 4357) based on a $55,000 instrument executed by defendants. On April 28, 1987, a memorandum of judgment in favor of plaintiff against defendants in the amount of $57,955 was entered. On March 18, 1988, a citation to discover the assets of Predrag Popov was issued by the clerk of the circuit court. Alias citations to discover Predrag Popov’s assets were issued on April 13,1988, and on May 20, 1988. A citation to discover the assets of respondents La Salle National Bank, Dusan Zivkovic, Milan M. Rakic, and Milo-rad Cupic was issued on November 28, 1988. La Salle was served with the citation on December 16, 1988, but there is no indication in the record that the other respondents were ever served with the citation. On October 17, 1988, Predrag Popov brought suit in the chancery division of the county department of the circuit court of Cook County (case number 88 CH 9370) to foreclose a mechanic’s lien against Citicorp Savings of Illinois, "unknown owners,” and respondents. On December 22, 1988, the trial court in the Podvinec law division case ordered the following: "That the court hereby imposes a judicial lien upon any funds realized in the case of P. Popov v. La Salle National Bank, et al. 88 CH 9370 in the amount of $57,955.00 plus costs (effective upon notice to proper parties).” On January 31, 1989, the trial court in the Popov chancery division case "spread of record” the judicial lien in favor of plaintiff. On April 18,1991, the Popov chancery division case was dismissed due to the settlement of the case. On June 27, 1991, Podvinec filed a petition in the law division case for enforcement of the judicial lien against respondents, alleging the following. Some or all of respondents had paid or accepted funds in settlement of the Popov chancery division case without paying to Podvinec the sums subject to the judicial lien. On November 19, 1991, plaintiff’s petition for enforcement of judicial lien was granted, and judgment was entered against respondents. The court issued a memorandum decision and judgment in which it stated the following. The trial court had subject matter jurisdiction to spread the lien of record pursuant to section 2 — 1402(d)(2) of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (the Code) (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(d)(2) (Michie 1993)). Pursuant to section 2 — 1402(b)(1) of the Code (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(b)(1) (Michie 1993)), a party had a duty to honor the lien that was spread of record. Respondents argue on appeal that plaintiff failed to follow proper procedures to enforce his judgment. Specifically, respondents argue that: (1) a citation to discover assets could only lien assets within the possession or control of the judgment debtor, and the property of the judgment debtor in the hands of third parties is not within the possession or control of the judgment debtor; and (2) the only methods to reach the judgment debtor’s assets in the hands of third parties were to commence either supplementary or garnishment proceedings against the third parties. Plaintiff argued the following in response, among other arguments. The trial court properly imposed a judicial lien because: (1) the trial court had the inherent authority to enforce its judgment and to fashion remedies for enforcement; (2) the circuit court of Cook County had jurisdiction over the parties and the subject matter in both the law division and the chancery division cases; (3) service of the citation to discover assets on the judgment debtor conferred a general lien in favor of the judgment creditor in the property of the judgment debtor; and (4) the enforcement of a judgment by imposition of a judicial lien was authorized by sections 2 — 1402(b) and 2 — 1402(d)(2) (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(b), (d)(2) (Michie 1993)). The relevant sections of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure are as follows. Section 2 — 1402(a) provides in part: "A judgment creditor *** is entitled to prosecute supplementary proceedings for the purposes of examining the judgment debtor or any other person to discover assets or income of the debtor *** and of compelling the application of non-exempt assets or income discovered toward the payment of the amount due under the judgment. A supplementary proceeding shall be commenced by the service of a citation issued by the clerk.” (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2— 1402(a) (Michie 1993).) Section 2 — 1402(b)(3) provides that a supplemental proceeding court can: "[c]ompel any person cited, other than the judgment debtor, to deliver up any assets so discovered, to be applied in satisfaction of the judgment, in whole or in part, when those assets are held under such circumstances that in an action by the judgment debtor he or she could recover them.” (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2— 1402(b)(3) (Michie 1993).) Section 2 — 1402(b)(5) provides that the court also may: . "[c]ompel any person cited to execute an assignment of any chose in action *** in the same manner and to the same extent as a court could do in any proceeding by a judgment creditor to enforce payment of a judgment or in aid of the enforcement of a judgment.” (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(b)(5) (Michie 1993).) Section 2 — 1402(b)(6) provides that the court also may: "[a]uthorize the judgment creditor to maintain an action against any person or corporation that, *** is indebted to the judgment debtor, for the recovery of the debt [and] forbid the transfer or other disposition of the debt until an action can be commenced and prosecuted to judgment.” (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(b)(6) (Michie 1993).) Section 2 — 1402(d)(2) provides in part that the court also may: "enjoin any person, whether or not a party to the supplementary proceeding, from making or allowing any transfer or other . disposition of, or interference with, the property of the judgment debtor, or the property or debt concerning which any person is required to attend and be examined until further direction in the premises.” 735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(d)(2) (Michie 1993). Section 2 — 1402(d)(1) further provides in part that the citation to discover assets: "may prohibit the party to whom it is directed from making or allowing any transfer or other disposition of, or interfering with, any property not exempt from the enforcement of a judgment *** belonging to the judgment debtor or to which he or she may be entitled or which may thereafter be acquired by or become due to him or her, and from paying over or otherwise disposing of any moneys not so exempt which are due or to become due to the judgment debtor, until the further order of the court or the termination of the proceeding, whichever occurs first.” 735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(d)(1) (Michie 1993).  Plaintiff primarily relies on People v. Valdez (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 74, 402 N.E.2d 187, in his argument that the judicial lien was proper. In Valdez, the trial court entered an order requiring the Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities (Department) to establish a treatment plan for defendant, who was acquitted by reason of insanity, to include at least two sessions per week with a psychiatrist. A statute provided that the trial court could order the discharge of a defendant under conditions that reasonably assured defendant’s satisfactory progress. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 2—4(i).) The Department argued that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to order the implementation of a specific court-designed treatment plan for defendant. The Department argued that the trial court was authorized to choose among only those dispositions expressly authorized in the statute and that the power of the courts over insane persons was derived only through legislative enactments. The Valdez court referred to the 1970 Illinois Constitution’s provision that the trial courts had original jurisdiction of all justiciable matters. Therefore, the rationale that the courts did not have jurisdiction over insane persons in the absence of statutory enactment was no longer applicable. (Valdez, 79 Ill. 2d at 85.) The court rejected the argument that the trial court was without authority either by reason of its lack of statutory authority or by reason of the doctrine of separation of powers to direct the Department as to the manner in which it was to perform its duties. Valdez, 79 Ill. 2d at 86. Section 2 — 1402(d)(2) gave the trial court here the power to enjoin disposition of property. (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(d)(2) (Michie 1993).) The trial court did not use this statutory tool for enforcement but instead imposed a lien that was unauthorized by statute. Liens are created either by agreement or by statute. (Streams Sports Club, Ltd. v. Richmond (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 689, 692, 440 N.E.2d 1264, aff’d (1983), 99 Ill. 2d 182, 457 N.E.2d 1226.) Although the trial court had the general power to enforce its judgments (Cities Service Oil Co. v. Village of Oak Brook (1980), 84 Ill. App. 3d 381, 384, 405 N.E.2d 379), it did not have the power to create a lien. Calling the lien "judicial” did not give the trial court the power to create a lien. In Freer v. Hysan Corp. (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 421, 484 N.E.2d 1076, the trial court imposed a lien that required plaintiff employee of a village to repay to the village workmen’s compensation payments it made to him with the repayment to be made upon plaintiff’s settlement of a personal injury lawsuit arising out of the accident in which he was injured. A statute gave the employer the right to reimbursement of the compensation paid to an employee who settled such a lawsuit. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 48, par. 138.5(b).) The court held that the trial court’s lien was improper because a lien cannot be created by a court without an agreement between parties or some fixed rule of law usually found in a statute. (Freer, 108 Ill. 2d at 427.) The lien created by the court was unenforceable. Freer, 108 Ill. 2d at 427. Freer (108 Ill. 2d 421, 484 N.E.2d 1076) is determinative of the issue of the propriety of the judicial lien imposed here. Valdez (79 Ill. 2d 74, 402 N.E.2d 187) is distinguishable because the trial court there did not create a remedy unauthorized by statute or agreement.  Plaintiff also argues that the judicial lien was proper because, under section 2 — 1402(d)(1), the service of the citation on Predrag Popov as the judgment debtor conferred a general lien on the judgment debtor’s property. Section 2 — 1402(d)(1) states that the citation to discover assets may prohibit the party to whom it is directed from disposing of any nonexempt money which is due or to become due to the judgment debtor. (735 ILCS Ann. 5/2 — 1402(d)(1) (Michie 1993).) Despite the restraining language of the statute, it has been held not to constitute an injunction but to constitute simply a notice to a third party of the penalties for transferring or disposing of assets belonging to the judgment debtor. (Bank of Aspen v. Fox Cartage, Inc. (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 307, 314-16, 533 N.E.2d 1080.) A lien is a hold or a claim that one person has upon the property of another for a debt and is not property in the thing itself but a charge upon the property. (Sissman v. Chicago Title & Trust Co. (1940), 303 Ill. App. 620, 624-25, 25 N.E.2d 599, aff'd (1941), 375 Ill. 514, 32 N.E.2d 132.) Section 2 — 1402(d)(1) does not create a lien in the judgment debtor’s property because the statute does not give the judgment creditor a charge on the judgment debtor’s property. None of the other cited sections of the statute created a lien. We do not reach Podvinec’s cross-appeal concerning post-judgment interest because we reverse the judgment against respondents. The judgment of the trial court against respondents is reversed. Reversed. TULLY, P.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:28.035705+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN, dissenting: The majority relies exclusively upon what it assumes to be the language of section 2 — 1402 (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402 (West Supp. 1993)) and cases considering the section prior to the extensive amendments to section 2 — 1402 in 1993. However, the facts of this case, although occurring long before the adoption of the amendment, must be read in light of the amendment because section 2 — 1402(1) expressly provides: "This Amendatory Act of 1993 is a declaration of existing law.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(1) (West Supp. 1993). To briefly restate the facts, in a Cook County law division case, plaintiff Podvinec obtained a judgment against Popov. During citation proceedings, plaintiff discovered that Popov had a case against the defendants pending in the chancery division of the Cook County circuit court. Plaintiff then sought to create a judicial lien upon any proceeds realized from the chancery case. To that end, plaintiff presented a petition to spread his lien of record in the chancery case where the defendants were all parties of record, had all been served with summons and received notice of plaintiff’s petition seeking the imposition of a "judicial lien.” An order was entered in the chancery case allowing the imposition of such a lien and some months later the defendants and Popov settled the chancery case, ignoring the "judicial lien” which had been spread of record. Plaintiff now seeks to hold the defendants to the amount they paid in settlement to Popov. To follow the letter of the provisions of section 2 — 1402, plaintiff should have initiated supplementary proceedings against the defendants, had summons issued and served upon them, examined them in an appropriate forum and then reduced to an order one or several of the remedies granted to a judgment creditor under the statute. Among other things, plaintiff could have compelled Popov to assign his cause of action to him (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(c)(5) (West Supp. 1993)) or obtained an order allowing plaintiff to maintain the action in the chancery against defendants or therein intervened (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(c)(6) (West Supp. 1993)) or restrained defendants from paying Popov any sums which may become due to him (735 ILCS 5/2— 1402(f)(1), (f)(2) (West Supp. 1993)). To be sure, there are technical requirements aimed at assuring that the parties all have notice and that they are aware of the details of the underlying judgment but plaintiff did none of these! However, these requirements have been obliquely satisfied by the petition offered in the chancery court of which the defendants do not deny they had notice. Like plaintiff, the defendants were not without options at the time plaintiff served them with notice that he sought to impress the proceeds of any money due or to become due with a "judicial lien.” They could have objected to the character of the lien or the failure of plaintiff to institute a proper supplementary proceeding, to issue new summons, or to serve the summons upon them. In addition, the defendants could have complained that the petition did not expressly use the language of the statute in seeking a remedy or that the magic language of section 2 — 1402(b) which provides the items of which the respondent in supplementary proceedings must be afforded notice is missing or that the debtor has not had an opportunity to assert any exemptions to which he might be entitled. (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(b) (West Supp. 1993).) But the defendants did none of these! Section 2 — 1402 provides a method of satisfying a judgment, not the method. Section 2 — 1402(i) provides that this section "is in addition to and does not affect enforcement of judgments or proceedings supplementary thereto, by any other methods now or hereafter provided by law.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(i) (West Supp. 1993). The 1993 amendment, by its terms declarative of existing law, provides us with language that appears to bring this case within its penumbra. Section 2 — 14020) allows a creditor to reach assets which may become due to the debtor from a third party.1 Thus the statute anticipates the creation of a lien and the effect of such on the debt- or’s property, whether due immediately or in the future, in the possession or control of third persons as was the case in the instant matter. The statute establishes the procedures that are to be followed in instituting supplementary proceedings: commencement by service of a citation issued by the clerk, certain language indicating that the person to whom the summons is directed could be in contempt of court and subject to jail if the document is ignored, limitation on the granting of a continuance and conditions under which an examination of a cited person should be conducted. 735 ILCS 5/1402(a) (West Supp. 1993). Save for the service requirement and the notice of possible contempt, none of the provisions raise due process concerns. As to the issue of service, the defendants were duly served in the chancery case and do not claim that they did not receive notice of plaintiff s intention to spread the judgment of the law division case of record nor ought we to concern ourselves with the required legend relating to contempt since plaintiff has not requested that the defendants be held in contempt but merely seeks that a judgment be entered against them. As to the subject matter jurisdiction of the chancery division to enforce the judgment of the law division, we note that circuit courts are tribunals of general jurisdiction which have equal and concurrent subject matter jurisdiction. (In re Estate of Zoglauer (1992), 229 Ill. App. 3d 394, 593 N.E.2d 93; Olsen v. Karwoski (1979), 68 Ill. App. 3d 1031, 386 N.E.2d 444.) Accordingly, a judge in one division can enforce an order entered by a judge sitting in another division. Olsen, 68 Ill. App. 3d at 1034. The method employed by plaintiff is not completely without precedent. In Home State Bank/ National Association v. Potokar (1993), 249 Ill. App. 3d 127, 617 N.E.2d 1302, the plaintiff creditor obtained a judgment against the defendant debtor in the circuit court of McHenry County. During examination of the debtor in a citation to discover assets, the creditor discovered that the debtor was a plaintiff in a lawsuit pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois and first obtained an order from the circuit court directing the debtor to assign his interest in the Federal cause of action to satisfy the judgment. In addition, the circuit court entered a second order "requiring [the debtor] to turn over the proceeds from his Federal court lawsuit. The [second] order further provided that it constituted a lien on such proceeds to be imposed upon the attorney for the defendants in that [the Federal] lawsuit.” (Emphasis added.) (Potokar, 246 Ill. App. 3d at 130.) The Potokar court did not find such procedure troublesome and in fact considered it an exercise in due caution: "[T]he [creditor] apparently was concerned about its ability to reach the proceeds of the Federal court litigation, should they actually be distributed to [the debtor], and the [second] order was an attempt to obtain control over any potential recovery in [the debtor’s] lawsuit before [the debtor] did.” Potokar, 249 Ill. App. 3d at 132. The majority would allow the defendants to sit idly by and at the appropriate moment ignore an order of the circuit court. To allow the defendants that luxury is contrary to the law and is not in the interest of a society that imposes upon itself the rule of law. I therefore dissent.  Action 2 — 1402(1) provides: "The judgement or balance due on the judgement becomes a lien when a citation is served in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section. The lien binds nonexempt personal property, including money, choses in action, and effects of the judgement debtor as follows: *** (2) When the citation is directed against a third party, upon all personal property belonging to the judgement debtor in the possession or control of the third party or which thereafter may he acquired or come due the judgement debtor and comes into the possession or control of the third party to the time of the disposition of the citation.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1402(1)(2) (West Supp. 1993).

=== CASE 2224548 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.554571+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 796 (1992)
Jean HOWARD and Jim Howard, Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
Robert D. SANBORN, Defendant and Appellee.
No. 17625.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs February 11, 1992.
Decided April 8, 1992.
Charles M. Thompson of May, Adam, Gerdes & Thompson, Pierre, for plaintiffs and appellants.
Roy A. Wise of Richardson, Groseclose, Kornmann & Wyly, Aberdeen, for defendant and appellee.
MILLER, Chief Justice.
Jean and Jim Howard sued for damages sustained when their car was struck from the rear by a car driven by Robert Sanborn. Sanborn principally defended on *797 grounds of contributory negligence and unavoidable accident. The jury returned a verdict for Sanborn. This is an appeal from the orders denying Howards' motions for directed verdict and judgment notwithstanding the verdict. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
FACTS
On the evening of November 20, 1987, Howards were enroute to dinner at the Cattleman's Club, a steakhouse which is located approximately five miles east of Pierre, South Dakota, on Highway 34. Jean was driving and Jim was in the passenger's seat. Jean testified that as they approached the driveway of the Cattleman's Club, she turned on her left turn signal and slowed to a stop.
Traffic was heavy that night and she had to wait for several cars to go by before she could safely make the left turn. Before making the turn, Jean noticed a car was coming up fast behind them. She remarked to her husband that she thought this car might hit them. Her husband had also seen the car approaching in the side mirror. He told his wife that she better turn quickly. Jean had started the turn when the vehicle driven by Sanborn crashed into Howards' car.
Howards initiated this suit against Sanborn to recover for damages they incurred as a result of the collision. Jean sought recovery for her personal injuries and other damages, including lost income and medical expenses. Jim claimed damages for replacement labor costs and loss of consortium. As noted earlier, Sanborn asserted contributory negligence and unavoidable accident and the jury returned a verdict in his favor.
On appeal, Howards assert that the trial court erred in: (1) instructing the jury on contributory negligence; (2) instructing the jury on unavoidable accident; and (3) giving the instruction on adjusting the award of damages to present value.[1]
I. WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN INSTRUCTING ON CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE.
Howards contend that it was improper for the trial court to instruct on the issue of contributory negligence since there was no evidence in the record supporting it. Sanborn's defense of contributory negligence was based on two theories: (1) Jean, the driver, failed to signal; and (2) Jim, the passenger, failed to warn his wife of the approaching danger.
"`In considering whether there is evidentiary support for an instruction, a reviewing court must give the evidence the most favorable construction it will reasonably bear. If there is some evidence bearing on the issue, a reviewing court will not disturb the trial court's giving of an instruction.'" Gerlach v. Ethan Coop Lumber Ass'n, 478 N.W.2d 828, 830 (S.D.1991) (quoting Zee v. Assam, 336 N.W.2d 162, 164 (S.D.1983)).
"Contributory negligence is conduct for which plaintiff is responsible, amounting to a breach of duty which the law imposes upon persons to protect themselves from injury, and which, concurring and cooperating with actionable negligence for which defendant is responsible, contributed to the injury complained of as a proximate cause."
Gerlach, supra (quoting Starnes v. Stofferahn, 83 S.D. 424, 432, 160 N.W.2d 421, 425 (1968)).
Failure to Signal
At trial, Jean testified that she activated her left turn signal and that both her signal lights and brake lights were properly functioning prior to the collision. Sanborn testified that he was aware he was following a vehicle which was some distance ahead of him. He testified that he met several cars going the other way and their headlights affected his ability to see what was in front of him. He also testified *798 that a coyote on the highway that night distracted him momentarily.
The last vehicle that Sanborn met was a pickup with a skewed headlight. He told the investigating officer that he was blinded by the glare of this headlight and that when he recovered he saw Howards' car immediately in front of him. (Howards testified that they also saw the pickup with the skewed headlight but it did not affect their ability to see.) The investigating officer testified that Sanborn told him that he did not see a turn signal before the accident. This hearsay testimony from the officer is the only evidence in the record on Jean's failure to signal!
Finally, at the hearing on the motion for judgment n.o.v., the trial court stated the following:
Well, one part of the motion that causes me some concern is the contributory negligence. When I look back on it, I don't recall testimony by Mr. Sanborn thatthe only contributory negligence that I could possibly see that could have been imputed to Jean Howard in this case would be that she didn't have her turn signal on, and I just don't recall any proof on that point.
....
Frankly, counsel, I've looked this over, and I think that I did make a mistake in submitting the contributory negligence[.]
These observations by the trial court were correct. Based on the record, it is clear there was no competent evidence indicating Jean failed to signal. Therefore, it was improper to instruct the jury on her alleged contributory negligence.
Jim's Duty To Warn
This court has recognized that a passenger's duty differs from that of the driver. Beyer v. Cordell, 420 N.W.2d 767 (S.D.1988); Miller v. Baken Park, Inc., 84 S.D. 624, 632, 175 N.W.2d 605, 609 (1970). In Beyer, we stated:
If the guest sees, or ought by due diligence to see, a danger not obvious to the driver, or sees that the driver is incompetent, careless, or not taking proper precautions, it is his duty to give some warning of danger, and a failure to do so constitutes contributory negligence[.]
420 N.W.2d at 769-70 (citing Hanisch v. Body, 77 S.D. 265, 90 N.W.2d 924 (1958), quoting 5A Am.Jur. Automobiles & Highway Traffic § 789).
The danger in this case (Sanborn's approaching vehicle) was obvious to both driver and passenger. In fact, Jean commented to her husband that she thought the car coming up behind them was going to hit them and he told her to turn quickly.
These facts do not give rise to a duty on Jim's behalf to warn Jean of the danger. Beyer, supra. Accordingly, the trial court erred in instructing on Jim's alleged contributory negligence.
Under South Dakota law and the instructions as given, the plaintiff is totally barred from recovering if the jury finds the plaintiff to be contributorily negligent in an amount more than slight. Thus, this instruction was extremely prejudicial to Howards. We believe the jury's verdict may and probably would have been different if the jury had not been instructed on contributory negligence.
II. WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN INSTRUCTING ON UNAVOIDABLE ACCIDENT.
Howards correctly assert that the trial court's submission to the jury of the instruction on unavoidable accident was prejudicial error.
We have stated that the propriety of such an instruction depends on the facts of each case. Stevens v. Wood Sawmill, Inc., 426 N.W.2d 13 (S.D.1988) (reversible error to give instruction where unattended truck rolled down hill and injured plaintiff).
"Although we believe unavoidable accident instructions should be restrictively used we do not favor ... total exclusion.... Such instruction may properly be given in those cases where there is evidence that something other than the negligence of one of the parties caused the mishap. It is particularly apt where the further element of `surprise' is *799 present such as the sudden and unexpected presence of ice, the blowout of a tire, the malfunction of brakes, or other mechanical failure."
Id. at 17 (quoting Cordell v. Scott, 79 S.D. 316,322-23, 111 N.W.2d 594, 598 (1961)).
Further, this instruction is not proper where the incident is reasonably foreseeable. Stevens, supra. See also Hoffman v. Royer, 359 N.W.2d 387 (S.D.1984) (reversible error to give instruction where passing defendant collided with a truck turning left on highway); Plucker v. Kappler, 311 N.W.2d 924 (S.D.1981) (improper instruction but not reversible error where defendant knew of icy road conditions); Del Vecchio v. Lund, 293 N.W.2d 474 (S.D. 1980) (reversible error to give instruction where defendant boat driver killed water skier on crowded lake); Meyer v. Johnson, 254 N.W.2d 107 (S.D.1977) (reversible error to give instruction where defendant knew of snow and slippery road conditions and was familiar with the road and its curves); Alley v. Siepman, 87 S.D. 670, 214 N.W.2d 7 (1974) (trial court did not err in refusing to give unavoidable accident instruction where element of surprise was lacking); Herman v. Spiegler, 82 S.D. 339, 145 N.W.2d 916 (1966) (instruction improper but not reversible error where vehicle collided with unlighted tractor pulling a stackmover on foggy morning); Cordell, supra (reference to unavoidable accident instruction was at most unnecessary surplusage in accident on icy road).
Based on the facts of this case, we hold the instruction was both improper and prejudicial. The facts reveal that no surprise factor was present. Sanborn testified that he had traveled on this stretch of Highway 34 every day, twice a day, for over thirty years. He knew the highway was busy that night and he knew people often stopped to turn into the Cattleman's Club. Prior to the accident, he saw Howards' taillights and knew a car was ahead of him.
Sanborn argues that the skewed headlight satisfies the "surprise" element; however, it has been recognized that the presence of "blinding headlights ... [is] not [an] intervening cause but [is among those] conditions which impose on drivers the duty to assure that safety of public by the exercise of a degree of care commensurate with such surrounding circumstances." 2 Blashfield Automobile Law and Practice § 53.6, p. 386. See also Pleinis v. Wilson Storage and Transfer Company, 75 S.D. 397, 400, 66 N.W.2d 68, 71 (1954) (blinding headlights are a condition which would call for some diminution of speed or care on the part of the defendant.) Interestingly, as noted earlier, this skewed light did not affect Howards' vision.
We must reiterate to the trial bench and bar that the unavoidable accident instruction was intended to have restricted use. (In fact, the comments to South Dakota Pattern Jury Instructions indicate that this instruction is not recommended.) Since Cordell was decided in 1961, each subsequent case on appeal has found the instruction to be improper. In all but two cases, it was found to be reversible error. In light of the evidence presented, this instruction unduly and improperly emphasized Sanborn's position and was prejudicial to Howards. Id.; Del Vecchio, 293 N.W.2d at 476.
III. WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN APPROVING AN INSTRUCTION ON ADJUSTING THE AWARD OF DAMAGES TO PRESENT VALUE.
The jury did not ultimately reach this issue; however, because we remand for a new trial, we will address it.
Howards contend that the trial court erred in giving an instruction which generally expanded upon the pattern instruction by adding a section on how to calculate the present cash value and included a present worth table, when no evidence was offered to support such an instruction. The trial court's Instruction No. 26, which is nearly identical to the federal instruction from Federal Jury Practice and Instructions, Devitt, Blackmar and Wolff, Vol. 3, § 85.11 (1987), reads as follows:
If you should find that plaintiff Jean Howard is entitled to a verdict, and further find that the evidence in the case establishes either: (1) a reasonable likelihood *800 of future medical expense, or (2) a reasonable likelihood of loss of future earnings, or if you should find that plaintiff Jim Howard is entitled to a verdict, and you further find the evidence establishes a reasonable likelihood that he will be deprived of the services, aid, comfort, society, companionship and conjugal affections of his wife then it becomes your duty to ascertain the present worth in dollars of such future damage, since the award of future damages necessarily requires that payment be made now for a loss that will not actually be sustained until some future date.
Under these circumstances, the result is that plaintiffs Jean and Jim Howard will in effect be reimbursed in advance of the loss, and so will have the use of money which they would not have received until some future date, but for the verdict.
In order to make a reasonable adjustment for the present use, interest free, of money representing a lump-sum payment of anticipated future loss, the law requires that you discount, or reduce to its present worth, the amount of the anticipated future loss, by taking (1) the interest rate or return which such plaintiffs could reasonably be expected to receive on an investment of the lump-sum payment together with (2) the period of time over which the future loss is reasonably certain to be sustained; and then reduce, or in effect deduct from, the total amount of anticipated future loss whatever that amount would be reasonably certain to earn or return, if invested at such rate of interest over such period of time; and include in the verdict an award for only the present-worththe reduced amountof anticipated future loss.
As already explained to you, this computation is made by using the so-called "present-worth" table (present worth of one per period), which the Court had judicially noticed and which are attached to this instruction for your use.
Bear in mind that your duty to discount to present value applies only to loss of future earnings, future medical expenses or loss of consortium and not to any other damages the plaintiffs may have sustained in this instance. Also bear in mind that the evidence of Jean Howard's claim for loss of future earnings as submitted by Dr. Brown has already been reduced to present value. It is, however, your duty to determine whether his adjustment for present value of that claim was reasonable, and if not, you should make your own adjustment for present value of any sum to which you determine Jean Howard is entitled, if any.
The federal instructions also include an alternative instruction entitled "Lost Wages and/or Earning CapacityWhen Economic Experts Testify." See Devitt, Blackmar and Wolff, § 85.12.[2]
*801 South Dakota law "is silent on the issue of proper computation of the discount rate for estimating the present value of future income." Robichaud v. Theis, 858 F.2d 392, 396 (8th Cir.1988). Additionally, the South Dakota Pattern Jury Instruction does not tell the jury how to reduce the damages.[3] As of yet, neither this court nor the United States Supreme Court has endorsed one particular method for determining present value. Some states have either statutorily or judicially endorsed a method.[4] We determine that, at this time, we should clarify the meaning of our previous holdings on how to properly instruct the jury on reducing awards to present value.
We held in Watkins v. Ebach, 291 N.W.2d 765, 767 (S.D.1980): "Although it is true this court has never held that the trial court must give a present value instruction regarding loss of future earnings, we think that this requirement should now be imposed." In that case, we adopted the prevailing rule that damages for loss of future earnings should be reduced to present value. However, therein we went on to say that the record did not support the giving of such an instruction because the appellant/defendant "offered no testimony upon which the jury could have made an intelligent decision on reducing the award for loss of future earnings to present value." Id. (emphasis added). See also Flagtwet v. Smith, 367 N.W.2d 188 (S.D.1985).
We used language in Watkins that might suggest that expert testimony is required in every case where future earnings might be awarded. We now hold that expert testimony on the reduction of future earnings is not required in every case. However, if an expert testifies and reduces the damages to present value for the jury, an instruction (such as the one given in this case) which includes present worth tables must be carefully crafted to prevent confusion. We believe the instruction given by the trial court here was adequate and not confusing.
When there is no expert testimony on present value, as in Watkins, then the jury must have some direction to help it intelligently reduce the award to present value. In Watkins, we quoted with approval from Brodie v. Philadelphia Transportation Co., 415 Pa. 296, 203 A.2d 657, 660 (1964), wherein it stated:
The involved process of reducing future losses to their present worth has, undoubtedly, led to confusion and guesswork verdicts. Reason, logic and fairness would, therefore, dictate that enlightenment *802 lightenment is necessary. Such can be provided, at least in part, by permitting the use of accepted tables or the testimony of a qualified expert, who can compose the proper computations.
This reflects our acceptance of the practice of either providing the jury with instructions including tables or some other helpful means to reduce to present value, or providing an expert to reduce the damages for the jury. We generally approve of the Devitt, Blackmar and Wolff instructions cited above.
Accordingly, we reverse and remand for a new trial consistent with the foregoing.
WUEST, HENDERSON, SABERS and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We have considered Howards' last issue that the trial court erred in admitting tax returns and testimony about the farm operation. After reviewing the record, we believe the trial court acted within its discretion in admitting this evidence. Stormo v. Strong, 469 N.W.2d 816, 820 (S.D.1991) (citing Zepp v. Hofmann, 444 N.W.2d 28, 31 (S.D.1989)).
[2]  Devitt, Blackmar and Wolff, § 85.12, provides:
Now in the event that you should find that plaintiff is entitled to an award of damages in this case for loss of wages and/or future earning capacity, you should take into consideration such loss after income tax; that is, you should determine the actual or net amount that plaintiff has lost or will lose, taking into consideration that any past or future earnings would be subject to income taxes, and you should award plaintiff only what he actually has lost or will lose, that is, his earnings less any such tax that would be due on them. Further, in consideration of such loss and to the extent there is evidence concerning such, you may take into consideration the following factors: the number of years the plaintiff may be expected to live and work; his wages and fringe benefits, his likely wage increases due to promotions, seniority or experience raises, merit raises, and the effect of inflation or deflation on his future wages.
Since money can earn interest, an amount to cover a future loss of earnings is more valuable to plaintiff if received today than if the same amount is received in the future. Therefore, if you decide to award plaintiff an amount for future loss of earning capacity, it must be discounted to present value by a factor equal to an after tax rate of return on a risk free investment according to accepted economic principles. Although you are not bound to accept the conclusions or opinions of the economists who testified during the trial, I instruct you that their testimony on discount was based on acceptable economic principles.
In the event you find that plaintiff is entitled to receive an award for physical disability, mental and/or physical pain and suffering, past, present, and future, I instruct you that such an award is not subject to income tax, and any amount which you award on this basis will not be taxed by the federal or state government. You are not to consider the effect of tax on said sum because no tax will be due on it.
[3]  Pattern Jury Instruction 30-07-(2) provides:
If you should find that the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict, and further find that the evidence in the case establishes either: (1) a reasonable likelihood of future medical expense, or (2) a reasonable likelihood of loss of future earnings, then it becomes the duty of the jury to ascertain the present cash value in dollars of such future damage, since the award of future damages necessarily requires that payment be made now for a loss that will not actually be sustained until some future date.
Under these circumstances, the result is that the plaintiff will in effect be reimbursed in advance of the loss, and so will have the use of money which plaintiff would not have received until some future date, but for the verdict.
"Present cash value" means the sum of money needed now, which, when added to what that sum may reasonably be expected to earn in the future, will equal the amount of the expenses and/or earnings at the time in the future when the expenses must be paid or the earnings would have been received.
Damages for pain, suffering and mental anguish/disability/and/disfigurement are not reduced to present cash value.
[4]  See Minn.Stat. § 604.07 (1986). "The objective of the [Minnesota] method is to determine the `real' yield of money: that portion of interest charged on virtually risk-free investments that represents only the real cost of money and not the additional cost the lender charges as a hedge against inflation." Kleeman v. Cadwell, 414 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Minn.App.1987) (citations omitted). In Iowa, the discount "rate to be used is the one found by the jury from the evidence to be fairly expected from reasonably safe investments which a person of ordinary prudence, but without particular financial experience or skill, could make in the locality." Von Tersch v. Ahrendsen, 251 Iowa 115, 122, 99 N.W.2d 287, 291 (1959).

=== CASE 9740697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:30.356017+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Judge.
Plaintiff-Appellant, John Doe appeals the summary judgment entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee, Cathy Duncan. Doe rais*684es two issues, neither of which constitute reversible error.
FACTS
The facts in the light most favorable to nonmovant Doe reveal that on January, 11, 1990, Doe, a letter carrier for the Post Office, suffered what appeared to be a heart attack while at work. He was taken from his workplace by ambulance to Co-Defendant Methodist Hospital [Hospital]. While being transported to the hospital, Doe disclosed to the paramedics that he had tested positive for HIV, the virus which causes AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome]. The par-amediecs noted Doe's HIV status on their report. The information became a part of Doe's confidential medical record at the Hospital.
Co-Defendant Logan Cameron, one of Doe's co-workers, telephoned his wife, Co-Defendant Lizzie Cameron, an employee of the Hospital, to inquire about Doe's condition. Lizzie examined Doe's medical record and advised Logan that Doe was HIV positive. Logan then relayed Doe's HIV status to other employees at the Post Office, including Co-Defendant Cathy Duncan.
Duncan relayed Doe's HIV status to two other co-workers, Ron Oakes and Becky Saunders. Oakes had already known about Doe's HIV infection, having been informed by Doe in confidence. Saunders, however, had not known.
Doe brought the present lawsuit for the invasion of privacy against Methodist Hospital, Lizzie Cameron, Logan Cameron, and Cathy Duncan. All defendants moved for summary judgment which was denied with respect to all defendants except Duncan. This appeal relates only to the summary judgment entered against Doe in favor of Duncan.
DECISION
On- appeal from the grant of summary judgment, we use the same standard in ascertaining the propriety of summary judgment as does the trial court. Newhouse v. Farmers National Bank of Shelbyville (1989), Ind.App., 532 N.E.2d 26, 28. Summary judgment is appropriate and "shall be rendered forthwith if the designated eviden-tiary matter shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Ind.Trial Rule 56(C). Any doubt about the existence of a fact or the reasonable inference to be drawn from it must be resolved in favor of the non-moving party. Allied Resin Corporation v. Waltz (1991), Ind., 574 N.E.2d 913.
On appeal, however, the party which lost in the trial court has the burden to persuade the appellate tribunal that the trial court's decision was erroneous. Ind. Department of Revenue v. Caylor-Nickel Clinic (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 1311, 1313. Our proper role includes the careful scrutiny of the trial court's determination to assure that the non-prevailing party is not improperly prevented from having his day in court. Id.
Indiana Trial Rule 56(C) provides that, at the time of filing the motion or response, a party shall designate to the court all parts of pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, matters of judicial notice, and any other matters on which it relies for purposes of the motion. A party opposing the motion shall also designate to the court each material issue of fact which that party asserts precludes entry of summary judgment and the evidence relevant thereto. Id. No judgment rendered on the motion shall be reversed on the ground that there is a genuine issue of material fact unless the material fact and the evidence relevant thereto shall have been specifically designated to the trial court. TR. 56(H).
I.
Whether the trial court erroneously relied on evidence that Duncan had failed to designate?
Doe bases this argument on a pleading Duncan filed in which she had requested the trial court to consider the arguments, not the designated evidence, submitted by her co-defendants in support of their motions for summary judgment. Doe points out that Duncan did not supplement her designation of the record when she incorporated the arguments of the other defendants.
In summary judgment proceedings, we presume the trial court applied the law correctly. Babinchak v. Town of Chesterton (1992), Ind.App., 598 N.E.2d 1099. The trial court shall make its determination on a mo*685tion for summary judgment only from evi-dentiary matter designated to the court. Id.; T.R. 56(C). Neither the trial court, nor the appellate court, may ground its determination upon materials which have not been designated. Id.
As will hopefully become apparent under Issue II, the dispositive fact, that Duncan had disclosed Doe's HIV status to only two co-workers, has not been seriously disputed. The evidentiary material supporting this fact is contained in Doe's "Supplemental Response to Defendant's Interrogatories" which Duncan had designated to the trial court,. Doe himself relied on this fact in opposition to summary judgment.
Dunean incorporated only the arguments, not the evidentiary matter designated, of her co-defendants. Duncan sufficiently designated evidentiary material to the trial court in support of her motion for summary judgment and we find no error.
IL.
Whether Duncan gave "publicity" to the private fact involved sufficient to sustain an action for an invasion of privacy?
Indiana recognizes the tort of invasion of privacy as follows:
The unwarranted appropriation or exploitation of one's personality, the publicizing of one's private affairs with which the public has no legitimate concern or the wrongful intrusion into one's private activities, in such manner as to outrage or cause mental suffering, shame or humiliation to a person of ordinary sensibility.
Continental Optical Company v. Reed (1949), 119 Ind.App. 643, 648, 86 N.E.2d 306, 308 (quoting 188 A.L.R. 22), trans. denied. In Near East Side Community Organization v. Hair (1990), Ind.App., 555 N.E.2d 1324, we noted:
The general tort of invasion of privacy has four distinct strands:
1) unreasonable intrusion upon the seclusion of another;
2) appropriation of the other's name or likeness;
3) unreasonable publicity given to the other's private life; and
4) publicity that unreasonably places the other in a false light before the public.
555 N.E.2d at 1334, 1335 (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 652A(2) at 376 (1977)).
Doe has never alleged that Duncan's communication of his HIV status placed him in a false light. Therefore, Doe's complaint can only state a claim under the third strand above, that Duncan gave unreasonable publicity to Doe's private life. See Hair, 555 N.E.2d at 1335. Thus, to prevail, Doe must establish that Duncan gave "publicity" to Doe's private life.
The issue of what constitutes "publicity" for the purposes of the tort of invasion of privacy (public disclosure of private facts) is one of first impression in Indiana. As we have in the past, we will turn to hornbook law for instruction regarding this tort.
The Restatement (Second) of Torts, synthesizing the cases to date, adopted a rule requiring proof, by the plaintiff of 'publicity' rather than publication as that term is used in the law of defamation-ie., publication to a single third person. Publicity was arbitrarily defined as communication to the 'public at large, or to so many persons that the matter must be regarded as substantially certain to become one of public knowledge ... (Dt is not an invasion ... to communicate a fact concerning the plaintiff's private life to a single person or even to a small group of persons.!
* "k "k * t *
Consistent with the Restatement (See-ond) of Torts publicity to the public at large or to many persons criteria, it has been held to be non-actionable to disseminate potentially actionable private matter to ... a limited number of co-workers,. ...
D.A. Elder, The Law of Privacy (1991) § 3:8 at 155, 156 (Citations omitted). In Wright v. Sparrow (1989), 298 S.C. 469, 381 S.E.2d 503, the court upheld the summary judgment in favor of the defendant, holding that disclosure of certain confidential matters to two coworkers and their secretary did not constitute a public disclosure sufficient to sustain an action for the invasion of privacy. Id., 381 S.E.2d at 505. In Eddy v. Brown (1986), Okla., 715 P.2d 74, the court upheld the summary judgment in favor of the defendant, holding that the fact that a limited number of *686co-workers heard that the plaintiff was undergoing psychiatric treatment did not amount to "publicity" sufficient to sustain an action for the invasion of privacy. 715 P.2d at 78.
In the present case, Duncan disclosed Doe's HIV status to only two co-workers (one of whom had already known). As a matter of law, Doe has failed to establish the "publicity" required to sustain his action for the invasion of privacy against Duncan. Doe has not persuaded us that the trial court's decision to grant summary judgment was erroneous, and we find no error.
Judgment affirmed.
RATLIFF, Senior Judge, concurs.
NAJAM, J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:30.360632+00 ===

NAJAM, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. I am not convinced that, as a matter of law, Doe has failed to establish the requisite "publicity" of a private fact. In my opinion, the degree of publicity required to prove the tort of invasion of privacy by public disclosure of private facts is a question of fact for the jury.
The majority relies upon a treatise and two decisions from other jurisdictions to hold that publicizing a private fact to a small group of coworkers is not "publicity" for purposes of invasion of privacy by public disclosure of private facts. It is true that many jurisdictions require disclosure to the public at large, not just a few people, in order to state an actionable claim for this type of invasion of privacy. However, other jurisdictions follow the rule that where (1) a plaintiff is not a public figure and (2) he has a special relationship with the "public" to whom the private fact is disclosed, the publicity requirement may be satisfied by disclosure to a particular public such as fellow employees, club members, church members and neighbors. See Beaumont v. Brown (1977), 401 Mich. 80, 257 N.W.2d 522, 531; Miller v. Motorola, Inc. (1990), 202 Ill. 976, 148 Ill.Dec. 303, 306, 560 N.E.2d 900, 903; see also McSurely v. McClellan (D.C.Cir.1985), 753 F.2d 88, 112, cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1005, 106 S.Ct. 525, 88 L.Ed.2d 457. Communication to the general public is not required because disclosure to those persons with whom the plaintiff has a special relationship may be just as devastating as disclosure to many. See Beaumont, 257 N.W.2d at 531; Miller, 560 N.E.2d at 903.
In Miller for example, an employer disclosed the fact of its employee's mastectomy to her fellow employees. Miller, 560 N.E.2d at 901. The trial court dismissed the employee's claim for invasion of privacy by public disclosure of private facts. Id. The II-nois Court of Appeals reversed and held that the employee's allegation that her medical condition was disclosed to her fellow employees "sufficiently satisfies the requirement that publicity be given to the private fact." Id. at 903.
Here, like the employee in Miller, the fact of Doe's medical condition was disclosed to his fellow employees. Doe's coworkers are a "public" with whom Doe has a special relationship and to whom disclosure of his HIV positive status would prove particularly embarrassing.1 See Beaumont, 257 N.W.2d at 531; Miller, 560 N.E.2d at 903. Thus, where such a special relationship exists between the plaintiff and those who learn of the embarrassing facts about him, the number of persons to whom the facts are disclosed is not dispositive.
Our courts should avoid the line drawing employed by the majority in this case in determining whether publicity has occurred for the tort of invasion of privacy by public disclosure of private facts. In our analysis we should not "attempt to numerically measure the persons to whom" Duncan disclosed Doe's HIV positive status. Beaumont, 257 N.W.2d at 529. Rather, the quantum of publicity required to prove this tort is a question of fact for the jury not appropriate for disposition on a motion for summary judgment. Id. at 532.
Gossip is commonplace in our society, and I agree with Dean Prosser's comment that the law should not put "a gag upon ordinary *687citizens." David E. Elder, The Law of Privacy § 8.3, at 158 n. 34 (quoting Dean Pros-ser's speech at the 1967 American Law Institute proceedings). I do not advocate limitless liability for every person in the chain of gossip who perpetuates the disclosure of a private fact about the plaintiff. However, the extent of Hability for subsequent disclosures addresses the second element of this tort that the disclosure must be made in a coercive and oppressive manner. See Kaletha v. Bortz Elevator Co. (1978), 178 Ind.App. 654, 658, 383 N.E.2d 1071, 1074, overruled on other grounds by Burks v. Rushmore (1989), Ind., 534 N.E.2d 1101, 1104; Patton v. Jacobs (1948), 118 Ind.App. 358, 365, 78 N.E.2d 789, 791, trans. denied. A jury should decide, applying contemporary social norms, whether a person who merely repeats the private fact should be held liable for invasion of privacy.
Accordingly, I would hold that Duncan's disclosure of Doe's HIV positive status to even one other employee in Doe's workplace presents a question of material fact as to whether this private fact about Doe was "publicly" disclosed in order to establish invasion of privacy. Summary judgment for Duncan should be reversed and this cause be remanded for a trial on Doe's claim for invasion of privacy by public disclosure of private facts.
. This court has previously observed that a person's HIV positive status is a "sensitive matter" affecting a person's interest in privacy. See R.E.G. v. L.M.G. (1991), Ind.App., 571 N.E.2d 298, 298 n. 1 (because parties to dissolution were at risk of developing AIDS, court granted party's request to employ initials in place of names in opinion to protect their privacy).

=== CASE 2224556 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.702703+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 380 (1994)
MID-AMERICA Mailers, Inc., Petitioner,
v.
STATE Board of Tax Commissioners, Respondent.
No. 45T10-9211-TA-00089.
Tax Court of Indiana.
August 15, 1994.
*381 Kenneth D. Reed, Abrahamson, Reed & Adley, Hammond, for petitioner.
*382 Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Joel Schiff, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for respondent.
FISHER, Judge.
The Petitioner, Mid-America Mailers, Inc. (Mid-America), appeals the final determination of the Respondent, the State Board of Tax Commissioners (the State Board) assessing non-owned business personal property to Mid-America for the March 1, 1991, assessment date.
ISSUES
I. Whether the First Amendment to the United States Constitution bars imposition of the property tax on the non-owned business personal property.
II. Whether the State Board properly determined the tax and assessed it to Mid-America as a non-owner in possession.
III. Whether Mid-America is entitled to an exemption from the tax under the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution.
FACTS
Mid-America is an Indiana corporation with offices and operating facilities in Hammond. The company provides mailing services to businesses, not-for-profit organizations, and political groups from several mid-western states. Customers send Mid-America their advertisements, fund raising requests, and various solicitations (collectively, the printed materials). Mid-America places these printed materials into appropriate mailing envelopes and mails them in bulk. The customers are responsible for printing their materials and shipping them to Mid-America. The customers also give Mid-America mailing instructions, including addresses and mailing dates. Mid-America does not pay for the printed materials and it cannot sell them or otherwise dispose of them except to mail them in accord with customer instructions. If, however, a customer decides not to send its printed materials, for whatever reason, Mid-America is then free to dispose of the printed materials as scrap. Mid-America scraps approximately 25 percent of the printed materials it receives. On some occasions, Mid-America is able to sell the scrap paper, and on other occasions, it must pay to have the scrap hauled away.
At the time Mid-America filed its 1991 business personal property tax return for non-owned property, Form 103N, it possessed customers' printed materials, but did not disclose them on the return. The State Board later conducted an audit, determined Mid-America possessed customers' printed materials on March 1, 1991, and assessed business personal property tax against Mid-America.
Mid-America stores the printed materials on pallets. The State Board's hearing officer initially estimated the cost of the printed materials at one dollar per pound. Ultimately, however, the State Board changed the cost to $1,425 per pallet. This figure was based on the average per pallet amount contained in an insurance claim Mid-America filed after a fire that occurred a few months before the assessment date. The State Board and Mid-America agreed on the average number of pallets Mid-America possessed and the average percentage of scrapped material, and the State Board's calculations led to a total assessed value of $492,910, an amount Mid-America contests.
Mid-America now appeals. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
STANDARD OF REVIEW
The court accords great deference to the State Board when the State Board is acting within the scope of its authority. Centrium Group v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1992), Ind.Tax, 599 N.E.2d 242, 243 (citing Rogers v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1991), Ind.Tax, 565 N.E.2d 398, 399). A State Board final determination is reversible only when it is unsupported by substantial evidence, constitutes an abuse of discretion, exceeds statutory authority, or is arbitrary and capricious. Hatcher v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1992), Ind.Tax, 601 N.E.2d 19, 20 (quoting Bailey Seed Farms, Inc. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1989), Ind.Tax, 542 *383 N.E.2d 1389, 1391). Like all other parties appealing an administrative decision, the taxpayer bears the burden to show the inaccuracy of the State Board's assessment. See Meridian Hills Country Club v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1987), Ind.Tax, 512 N.E.2d 911, 913 (quoting State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs v. Traylor (1967), 141 Ind. App. 324, 228 N.E.2d 46, 52, trans. denied).
I
Because the printed materials derive their value, not only from the paper on which they are printed, but also from the printing itself, Mid-America sees the imposition of the tax as a violation of Mid-America's First Amendment free speech rights. This is a rather creative argument.
Although "`[r]egulations which permit the government to discriminate on the basis of content of the message cannot be tolerated under the First Amendment,'" Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland (1987), 481 U.S. 221, 229-30, 107 S. Ct. 1722, 1728, 95 L. Ed. 2d 209, 220 (quoting Regan v. Time, Inc. (1984), 468 U.S. 641, 648-49, 104 S. Ct. 3262, 3266-67, 82 L. Ed. 2d 487), there is no allegation the property tax, IND. CODE 6-1.1-2-1, is content based. Moreover, "[i]t is beyond dispute that the States and the Federal government can subject [the press] to generally applicable economic regulations without creating constitutional problems." Emmis Publishing Corp. v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue (1993), Ind.Tax, 612 N.E.2d 614, 617 (quoting Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue (1983), 460 U.S. 575, 581, 103 S. Ct. 1365, 1369, 75 L. Ed. 2d 295, 302) (alteration added and in original).[1]
The property tax, which applies to "tangible property," IND. CODE 6-1.1-2-4, is a "generally applicable economic regulation." Indeed, Mid-America itself reported and paid the tax on leased vehicles and equipment in its possession on March 1, 1991. That the printed materials have messages is utterly irrelevant. The tax applies with equal force to motor vehicles, manufacturing/office equipment, and paper, with or without printed messages, and regardless of the content of any message.[2] First Amendment concerns are implicated when a tax "is directed at, or presents the danger of suppressing, particular ideas." Emmis, 612 N.E.2d at 617 (quoting Leathers v. Medlock (1991), 499 U.S. 439, 453, 111 S. Ct. 1438, 1447, 113 L. Ed. 2d 494, 507-08). The property tax is not in any way directed at suppressing any ideas, and imposition of the tax on the printed materials does not offend the First Amendment.
II
Mid-America next contends that it cannot be held liable for the tax because it lacked a "possessory interest" in the printed materials. Mid-America does not contest that it actually possessed the printed materials on the assessment date; it merely asserts its possession is insufficient to trigger liability. Mid-America is mistaken.
The State Board is obligated to "see that all property assessments are made in the manner provided by law." IND. CODE 6-1.1-35-1; Bielski v. Zorn (1994), Ind.Tax, 627 N.E.2d 880, 885. "Except as otherwise provided by law, all tangible property which is within the jurisdiction of this state on the assessment date of a year is subject to assessment and taxation for that year." IND. CODE 6-1.1-2-1 (emphasis added). These *384 rules place an affirmative duty on the State Board to assess all assessable property. See State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs v. South Shore Marina (1981), Ind. App., 422 N.E.2d 723, 730.
Within IND. CODE 6-1.1, "`tangible property' means real property and personal property as those terms are defined in [IC 6-1.1-1]." IND. CODE 6-1.1-1-19. IND. CODE 6-1.1-1-11 defines personal property as:
(1) nursery stock that has been severed from the ground;
(2) florists' stock of growing crops which are ready for sale as pot plants on benches;
(3) billboards and other advertising devices which are located on real property that is not owned by the owner of the devices;
(4) motor vehicles, mobile houses, airplanes, boats, and trailers;
(5) foundations (other than foundations which support a building or structure) on which machinery or equipment is installed; and
(6) all other tangible property (other than real property) which is being:
(i) held for sale in the ordinary course of a trade or business;
(ii) held, used, or consumed in connection with the production of income; or
(iii) held as an investment.
... .
(Emphasis added). The printed materials are pieces of paper with printing on them: in other words, they are tangible property. Preparing the printed materials for mailing is Mid-America's main source of income, and the materials therefore constitute tangible property "held, used, or consumed in connection with the production of income" within the meaning of IC 6-1.1-1-11.
The law determining liability for taxation of tangible property in this state is clear:
(a) The owner of any tangible property on the assessment date of a year is liable for the taxes imposed for that year on the property.
(b) A person holding, possessing, controlling, or occupying any tangible property on the assessment date of a year is liable for the taxes imposed for that year on the property unless:
(1) he establishes that the property is being assessed and taxed in the name of the owner; or
(2) the owner is liable for the taxes under a contract with that person.
When a person other than the owner pays any property taxes as required by this section, that person may recover the amount paid from the owner, unless the parties have agreed to other terms in a contract.
IND. CODE 6-1.1-2-4. This statute is unambiguous, and in enacting it, the legislature made clear its policy decision to give the State Board "the discretion to tax either the owner or the possessor unless the possessor can prove the owner is being taxed, or the owner has accepted liability for the tax under contract." Jewell Grain Co., 556 N.E.2d at 922 (emphasis added). Mid-America did not attempt to prove either that the various owners of the printed materials were being taxed or that any or all of them had contractually accepted liability. Mid-America is therefore liable for the tax.
Notwithstanding liability, Mid-America claims the State Board's cost per pallet valuation method was arbitrary, capricious, and wholly without support in the State Board's regulations. The State Board valued the printed materials as inventory, but Mid-America claims the printed materials did not constitute inventory because Mid-America neither owned nor leased them. This argument fails because Mid-America held the printed materials as a bailee.[3]
*385 Generally, "[a] bailment is an express or implied agreement between a bailor and a bailee in which the bailee is entrusted to accomplish a specific purpose with the bailor's personal property and when the purpose is accomplished, the property is returned to the bailor." Turner v. Clary (1993), Ind. App., 606 N.E.2d 878, 880 (citing Norris Automotive Serv. v. Melton (1988), Ind. App., 526 N.E.2d 1023). The bailee need not always return the property, however; a bailor may instruct a bailee to sell the property. See, e.g., Wilson v. Reynolds (1938), 213 Ind. 436, 13 N.E.2d 218; Reissner v. Oxley (1881), 80 Ind. 580. In the case at bar, Mid-America possessed the printed materials under agreement with the owners or the owners' brokers. The purpose of its possession was to assemble the printed materials and mail them to the stipulated addresses. This was a bailment, and it is not altered by the fact that Mid-America did not sell the printed materials.
One of the chief incidents of ownership is the right of disposition. Indiana Waste Systems of Indiana, Inc. v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue (1994), Ind.Tax, 633 N.E.2d 359, 367 (quoting Rhoades v. State (1946), 224 Ind. 569, 70 N.E.2d 27, 29). Just as the owners of the printed materials were free to distribute them to potential customers and donors without cost, so they were free to instruct their bailee, Mid-America, to do the same. More important, though, just as the printed materials would constitute inventory in the hands of the owners, so they constituted inventory in the hands of the owners' bailee.
Within 50 IAC 4.2,
`inventory' means the aggregate of those elements of cost incurred to acquire or produce items of tangible personal property as defined in 50 IAC 4.2-1-1(h) which are:
(1) held for sale in the ordinary course of business;
(2) are currently in the process of production for subsequent sale;
(3) are ultimately to be consumed in the production of the goods or services to be available for sale; or
(4) are utilized in marketing or distribution activities.
(b) The term `inventory' embraces the following:
(1) Goods awaiting sale. Goods or commodities awaiting sale which include, but are not limited to:
(A) the merchandise of a retail or wholesale concern;
(B) the finished goods of a manufacturer;
(C) commodities from farms, mines, and quarries; and
(D) goods which are used or trade-in merchandise and by-products of a manufacturer.
(2) Work in process. Goods or commodities which are in the course of production at the Indiana location, i.e., items needing further processing to be considered finished or ready for shipment.
(3) Raw materials and supplies. Goods which will be consumed or used in either the Indiana manufacturing process or in any other manner by the taxpayer, directly or indirectly. This category would include, but not be limited to, raw materials, supplies, repair parts, expendable tools and samples.
50 IAC 4.2-5-1 (emphasis added). The printed materials are business supplies of their owners. After Mid-America assembles them into mailable packages, the printed materials are distributed as part of a given owner's marketing activities. They therefore fall squarely within the category of inventory, and because Mid-America's acts of storing, assembling, and mailing are exactly the acts the owners would perform, the printed materials are inventory in Mid-America's hands, just as they would be in the owners'.
Because the printed materials are inventory, they must be valued as inventory. *386 Mid-America did not record the printed materials on its books. Under 50 IAC 4.2-5-8(c), unrecorded inventory is valued at its actual cost. As mentioned, the State Board valued the printed materials according to the amount used in an insurance claim. As the record stands now, however, there is no substantial evidence to support the conclusion that the insurance claim amount reflects the actual costs of the printed materials. The court will reverse a State Board final determination that is unsupported by substantial evidence. See, e.g., Monarch Steel Co., 611 N.E.2d at 711 (citing Lakeview Country Club v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1991), Ind.Tax, 565 N.E.2d 392, 394).
The record does not show how, if at all, the insurance claim amount reflects the actual costs of the printed materials. For example, the evidence reveals the State Board consulted a handful of Chicago area printers, but none of those printers worked on Mid-America's printed materials and, therefore, could not provide evidence of the printed materials' actual costs. Therefore, the court remands the valuation issue to the State Board for further consideration.[4]
III
Mid-America receives many of the printed materials at its Hammond facility from Illinois printers. After it completes its work on the printed materials, it mails them to their designated destinations, many of which are in Illinois. Mid-America therefore claims the printed materials are exempt from tax as items in interstate commerce under the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution. The case is not quite so simple, however.
IND. CODE 6-1.1-10-29, 29.3, 29.5, and 30 create exemptions from property tax for personal property in interstate commerce (the interstate commerce exemptions). See Monarch Steel Co., 611 N.E.2d at 711-13. IND. CODE 6-1.1-11 creates the procedures to claim the exemptions in IC 6-1.1-10. Mid-America did not seek the benefits of any of the exemptions for the printed materials; indeed, it could not have, since it did not disclose its possession of the printed materials on its Form 103-N.
In an attempt to avoid the effect of its failure to disclose, Mid-America asserts that the interstate commerce exemptions are nothing more than gratuitous statements because the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, not the interstate commerce exemptions, is the true source of the printed materials' allegedly exempt status. Mid-America makes no claim the interstate commerce exemptions are unconstitutional: it merely argues they are irrelevant. They are not.
Almost twenty years ago, the United States Supreme Court definitively laid to rest the notion, which had percolated through constitutional jurisprudence for years, that the States lacked the authority to regulate interstate commerce. See Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady (1977), 430 U.S. 274, 288, 97 S. Ct. 1076, 1083, 51 L. Ed. 2d 326, 336-37. See also Goldberg v. Sweet (1989), 488 U.S. 252, 109 S. Ct. 582, 102 L. Ed. 2d 607. Indiana exercises its right to regulate interstate commerce in situations like the case at bar through the property tax, the interstate commerce exemptions from that tax, and the procedures to apply for an exemption. Absent a judicial determination that Indiana's statutory scheme is unconstitutional, it is therefore incumbent on taxpayers, including Mid-America, both to comply with the procedures to seek an exemption under IC 6-1.1-11 and to meet the elements of the interstate commerce exemption sought.
Duly promulgated statutes enjoy a strong presumption of constitutionality, and the party challenging the constitutionality bears the burden to overcome the presumption. State Line Elevator, Inc. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1988), Ind.Tax, 528 N.E.2d 501, 503 (citing Bunker v. National Gypsum Co. (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 8, 11, appeal denied, 460 U.S. 1076, 103 S. Ct. 1761, 76 L. Ed. 2d 338). Mid-America, however, has not shown or attempted to show that imposition *387 of the tax on the printed materials violates the Commerce Clause under the Complete Auto test, which states that "a state tax will withstand scrutiny under the Commerce Clause if `the tax is applied to an activity with a substantial nexus with the taxing State, is fairly apportioned, does not discriminate against interstate commerce, and is fairly related to the services provided by the State.'" Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 257, 109 S. Ct. at 587, 102 L.Ed.2d at 614 (quoting Complete Auto, 430 U.S. at 279, 97 S. Ct. at 1079). Moreover, it is uncontested that Mid-America did not seek the exemption. It therefore cannot now be heard to complain.[5]
CONCLUSION
Mid-America was obliged to report the printed materials on its Form 103-N, and the State Board had the authority to assess the tax on the printed materials to Mid-America. Neither the First Amendment nor the Commerce Clause has any effect on Mid-America's liability.
The State Board was obligated to value the printed materials in accord with its regulations. The record, however, lacks substantial evidence to show the State Board adhered to its regulations in valuing the printed materials. Therefore the court remands the matter to the State Board for further consideration on this issue and affirms the State Board's final determination in all other respects.
NOTES
[1]  Mid-America is not a member of the fourth estate, but Mid-America's First Amendment rights are neither greater nor less than the press's. See, e.g., Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia (1980), 448 U.S. 555, 100 S. Ct. 2814, 65 L. Ed. 2d 973 (discussing the First Amendment rights of the public and press to attend criminal trials). See generally 4 Ronald D. Rotunda & John E. Nowak, Treatise on Constitutional Law: Substance & Procedure § 20.19, at 113 & n. 2 (2d ed. 1992).
[2]  See, e.g., State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs v. Jewell Grain Co. (1990), Ind., 556 N.E.2d 920 (grain in elevators); Paul Heuring Motors, Inc. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1993), Ind.Tax, 620 N.E.2d 39 (automobiles); Monarch Steel Co. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1993), Ind.Tax, 611 N.E.2d 708 (large pieces of steel); Glass Wholesalers, Inc. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1991), Ind.Tax, 568 N.E.2d 1116 (automobile glass); Rogers v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1991), Ind.Tax, 565 N.E.2d 398 (formal wear).
[3]  Aside from the bailment, however, Mid-America's good faith belief that its possession was without legal effect because it neither owned nor leased the printed materials is irrelevant. Like our supreme court in Jewell Grain Co., the court is unaware of any "provision allowing one protection from tax liability merely because one's failure to file [the Form 103-N] was in good faith." Jewell Grain Co., 556 N.E.2d at 923. Moreover, "[g]rowing crops in the ground, property subject to taxation under the Public Utility Tax Act, and household goods are the only types of property that do not have to be reported." Gulf Stream Coach, Inc. v. State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs (1988), Ind.Tax, 519 N.E.2d 238, 241 (citing 50 IAC 4.1-1-2) (repealed, now 50 IAC 4.2-1-1(h)).
[4]  On remand, the parties, of necessity, will address the entire range of valuation questions. Accordingly, the court at this time need not, and does not, address any of the questions the not-for-profit status of some of the owners may raise.
[5]  Mid-America protests vigorously on the ground that IC 6-1.1-10-29.3 applied only to owners, and not possessors, prior to 1992. This is irrelevant.
Mid-America was obligated to report the printed materials. See IND. CODE 6-1.1-3-9; Gulf Stream Coach, 519 N.E.2d at 241. Without first disclosing, there can be no exemption, and because Mid-America did not disclose, the inquiry ends, regardless of the non-discloser's status as either an owner or a possessor.

=== CASE 9740699 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:31.739599+00 ===

DAY, J.
This is a review of a published decision of the court of appeals,1 which affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded a judgment of the Circuit Court for Brown County, N. Patrick Crooks, Judge, granting partial summary judgment in favor of plaintiff, the State of Wisconsin, against defendants Better Brite, The Zinc Shop, Inc., and John E. Zenner and David J. Matyas personally.
We conclude that Wisconsin courts have no jurisdiction over defendants John E. Zenner or David J. Matyas personally and therefore dismiss the case against them for lack of jurisdiction.
This case arises out of a suit brought by the State of Wisconsin against Better Brite Plating, Inc. (Better Brite) a Wisconsin corporation; The Zinc Shop, Inc. (Zinc Shop) a Wisconsin Corporation; John E. Zenner (Zenner), bankruptcy examiner with powers of a trustee *368for Better Brite; and David J. Matyas (Matyas), bankruptcy trustee for Better Brite. The claims against defendants Zenner and Matyas are for personal liability and are the only claims we consider.
The factual and procedural history of this case is complex and will be detailed later in the opinion. Basically, however, the State filed a Complaint on September 13, 1988, alleging that defendant Zenner, after being appointed examiner with the powers of a trustee for Better Brite in a Ch. 11 bankruptcy reorganization proceeding, and defendant Matyas, after being appointed trustee for Better Brite in a Ch. 7 liquidation proceeding,2 each violated Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Management Act, secs. 144.64 to 144.74 Stats., 1985-86, by storing hazardous waste for a period in excess of 90 days without obtaining a license from the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) as required by sec. 144.64(2) Stats.3 The State sought forfeitures and penalties under *369secs. 144.74(2) Stats. (Penalties),4 and 165.87 Stats. (Law enforcement training fund), and injunctive relief.
The issue confronting the lower courts was whether trustees Zenner and Matyas were personally liable for violating Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act. The circuit court concluded that Zenner and Matyas, as trustees, may be held personally liable for willful, intentional or negligent violations of Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act. Zenner and Matyas appealed and the court of appeals concluded that trustees may be held personally liable only for knowing and intentional violations of the Hazardous Waste Act.
We conclude that Wisconsin courts lack jurisdiction in cases where, as here, trustees are sued personally for actions taken in their official capacities and within their scope of authority even where the trustees' actions violated Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act. Therefore, we dismiss the case against defendants Zenner and Matyas personally for lack of jurisdiction.
Prior to September, 1985, Better Brite, a Wisconsin corporation, owned and operated two electroplating and metals finishing facilities. One facility (chrome facility), located in DePere, Wisconsin, used chromic acid plating bath solutions. The other facility (zinc facility), also *370located in DePere, Wisconsin, used zinc/cyanide bath solutions. Because of the nature of its business, Better Brite had been dealing with environmental problems for a number of years. In early 1985, Better Brite ceased operating the chrome facility in DePere and moved it to Kaukauna, Wisconsin. We address only the operations at the zinc facility.
On September 5, 1985, Better Brite filed a voluntary petition for corporate reorganization under Ch. 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. On September 16, 1985, Zenner was appointed by the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin to act as examiner with the powers of trustee for Better Brite. As the trustee for Better Brite, Zenner operated the zinc facility between September 16, 1985, and August 27, 1986.
During Zenner's trusteeship, and under his operation and direction, Better Brite installed and operated an industrial waste water treatment plant designed to treat the waste waters from Better Brite's zinc facility in an attempt to comply with environmental protection laws. The operation of the treatment plant commenced on May 11, 1986, and continued at least until July 14, 1986. During this treatment period, Better Brite, under the direction and control of Zenner, accumulated approximately twenty full or partially filled fifty-five gallon barrels of sludge wastes from the operation of the treatment plant. These twenty barrels comprise the hazardous waste which gives rise to this action.5
Though the treatment ceased on July 14, 1986, the accumulated waste remained. Thus, hazardous waste was stored at the zinc facility during Zenner's trustee*371ship from May 11, 1986, through August 27, 1986, a period in excess of 90 days.
On August 27, 1986, the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin converted the proceeding to a proceeding for dissolution of the corporation under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code and appointed Matyas to act as trustee for Better Brite.
Between August 27, 1986, and December 18, 1986, Matyas and Better Brite, under the direction and supervision of Matyas, as trustee for Better Brite, employed Zenner as a consultant to operate the facility and continued to store the hazardous waste previously generated.
Thus, hazardous waste was stored at the zinc facility during Matyas' trusteeship from the time of his appointment, on August 27, 1986, through December 18, 1986, a period in excess of 90 days.
On December 18, 1986, according to the circuit court, "Matyas, as trustee for Better Brite, entered into an agreement with Zenner and/or Zinc Shop," a corporation Zenner formed for the specific purpose of purchasing Better Brite's personal property, "for the sale of the building and all equipment and personal property" of Better Brite's zinc facility, "with the exception of the hazardous wastes accumulated at the site, and the lease of the real property underlying the building."
Under the terms of the agreement, Better Brite and Matyas, as trustee for Better Brite, continued to own the previously accumulated hazardous waste.
On March 19, 1987, Matyas filed an application for attorney's fees and a notice of his intent to abandon the residual assets of Better Brite.6
*372From the time the zinc facility's treatment plant begem accumulating hazardous waste, on May 11, 1986, neither Better Brite nor Zenner or Matyas, as trustees for Better Brite, applied for or received a license to store hazardous waste from the DNR.
It is clear from the record that defendants Zenner and Matyas worked diligently with limited resources to remedy the environmental problems of Better Brite. In his opinion, Judge Ihlenfeldt noted that "So far as the evidence showed, Zenner did his best during the chapter 11 proceedings, albeit without success, to bring the zinc shop into compliance with the DNR's requirements." In Re Better-Brite Plating, Inc., 105 B.R. at 916 n.1. And, referring to Matyas, Judge Ihlenfeldt stated, "The trustee had only a few hundred dollars, with all other assets subject to valid encumbrances," Id. at 915.
*373On September 13, 1988, the State of Wisconsin filed a Complaint against Better Brite, Zinc Shop, and Matyas and Zenner for personal liability under Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act, for storing hazardous waste in excess of 90 days without obtaining a license from the DNR.
On May 2, 1989, the state filed a motion for summary judgment with the circuit court. On December 7, 1989, the circuit court granted summary judgment against Better Brite, Zinc Shop, and Zenner and Matyas personally. The circuit court concluded that Zenner and Matyas, as trustees, may be held personally liable for willful, intentional or negligent violations of the States's laws and regulations occurring during their operation of Better Brite's zinc facility. Without specifying whether they willfully, intentionally or negligently violated the Hazardous Waste Act, the circuit court granted summary judgment against Zenner and Matyas.
The circuit court ordered Better Brite, Zinc Shop, and Zenner and Matyas personally, jointly and severally liable for the removal of the waste generated and accumulated by Better Brite and enjoined all operations of the electroplating facility owned by Zinc Shop until a bond or escrow account sufficient to ensure the environmentally safe storage, transport, treatment and/or disposal of the hazardous waste could be secured.
Zenner and Matyas appealed.7 The court of appeals affirmed the circuit court's summary judgment against Zinc Shop, but reversed the summary judgments against Zenner and Matyas concluding that trustees are personally liable only for knowing and intentional violations of *374Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act. The court of appeals remanded the cause for proceedings to determine whether Zenner and Matyas knowingly and intentionally violated Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act.
The State argues that 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959(b),8 which provides that trustees shall act in accordance with state law, defines a trustee's scope of authority such that where a trustee violates state law, such trustee, ipso facto, has acted outside of his or her scope of authority and is therefore subject to state court jurisdiction in suits seeking personal liability. Next, the State argues that the Hazardous Waste Act does not conflict with federal law and thus is not pre-empted by federal law. Finally, the State argues that, if a conflict of law does exist, the Hazardous Waste Act, which provides strict liability for violations, is pre-empted only to the extent that the federal law requires a showing of negligent violation of state law.
The issue in this case is one of jurisdiction: whether Zenner and Matyas, by violating Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Act, acted outside of their scope of authority and therefore are subject to Wisconsin State court jurisdic*375tion in their personal capacities. Initially, we conclude that 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959 applies only to trustees in their official capacities and does not grant state court jurisdiction over trustees in their personal capacities where such trustees acted in their official capacities. Next, we conclude that violating state law does not mean, ipso facto, that the trustee acted outside of his or her scope of authority such that state courts obtain jurisdiction over the trustee in his or her personal capacity. We therefore do not reach the pre-emption issues, for, lacking jurisdiction, Wisconsin State courts are precluded from applying either federal or state law.
The law surrounding a trustee's personal liability is complex. However, there are several concepts which help frame the issue before us. First, where a trustee acts in excess of his or her authority, such trustee may be held personally liable for his or her actions. This long standing common law rule was explained in Ziegler v. Pitney, 139 F.2d 595, 596 (2d Cir. 1943):
But receivers and trustees appointed under the Bankruptcy Act and authorized to conduct business on behalf of an estate in reorganization are by the weight of authority only liable as receivers or trustees, and not individually except in cases where they act outside their authority.
See also Leonard v. Vrooman, 383 F.2d 556, 560-61 (9th Cir. 1967), cert. denied, 390 U.S. 925 (1967); 1 COLLIER on Bankruptcy ¶¶ 2.30 and 2.36 (14th ed. 1976); 2 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 23.20 (14th ed. 1976); 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 721.05 (15th ed. 1992); Cowans Bankruptcy Law and Practice, Sec. 2.7 (1989).
Where a trustee acts outside of his or her scope of authority, such trustee may be sued in state court without leave of the appointing court. Leonard v. Vrooman, *376383 F.2d at 560-61. See also 1 COLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY ¶¶ 2.30 and 2.36 (14th ed. 1976); 2 COLLIER ON BANKRUPTCY ¶ 23.20 (14th ed. 1976).
Second, a trustee may be personally liable for breaches of his or her fiduciary duty. The fundamental case in this area is Mosser v. Darrow, 341 U.S. 267 (1951), where the Supreme Court held that a trustee was personally liable for allowing key employees to profit from trading in securities of the debtor's subsidiaries. Lower courts are split, however, as to whether Mosser requires proof of willful and deliberate breach to impose personal liability or if proof of negligent breach is sufficient. For example, citing Mosser, the Ninth Circuit concludes: "A bankruptcy or reorganization trustee is a fiduciary of each creditor of the estate. . . . Although a trustee is not liable in any manner for mistakes in judgment where discretion is allowed, he is subject to personal liability for not only intentional but also negligent violations of duties imposed upon him by law." In re Cochise College Park, Inc., 703 F.2d 1339, 1357 (9th Cir. 1983) (citations omitted). Conversely, the Seventh Circuit, also citing Mosser, concludes: "A trustee may be held personally liable only for a willful and deliberate violation of his fiduciary duties." In Re Chicago Pacific Corp., 112, F.2d 909, 915 (7th Cir. 1985).9
The State relies on breach of fiduciary duty cases such as Cochise to substantiate their argument that a trustee's negligent violation of state law subjects the trustee to personal liability in state courts. The basis for this argument is misplaced. For, state courts traditionally do not have jurisdiction over breach of fiduciary cases. Maguire v. Puente, 466 N.Y.S.2d 934, 120 Misc. *3772d 871 (1983), specifically addressed whether a state has jurisdiction over a debtor in possession for breach of fiduciary duty and held that the state did not: "Although the defendant may be personally liable for his wrongful or unauthorized use of corporate funds, that liability should take the form of a surcharge imposed by the bankruptcy court." Id. at 937 (emphasis added). The court also concluded that 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959(a), discussed infra, which grants state courts jurisdiction over trustees in their official capacities, "would have no apparent application to the breach of fiduciary duties in the administration of a bankruptcy estate." Id. at 938. Moreover, we can find no case where a breach of fiduciary suit was brought against a bankruptcy trustee in state court.
Third, under 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1911, a trustee may be held criminally liable in federal court and subject to fines and imprisonment where such trustee willfully violates state law.10
The State's interpretation of 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959 — that it defines a trustee's scope of authority such that a violation of state law means, ipso facto, that the trustee acted outside of his or her authority and therefore is subject to state court jurisdiction in a personal capacity — would conflict with section 959's historical purpose, its long standing interpretation, and its structure.
*378We initially observe that 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959 and 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1911, the criminal liability statute, are related. Both were created on March 3, 1911 by Congress. See ch. 231 Secs. 65, 66, 36 Stats. 1104-05.11 Sections 65 and 66 were codified at 28 U.S.C. Secs. 124 and 125 respectively in 1940. On June 25, 1948, Congress recreated and renumbered sections 65 and 66 creating section 959 and section 1911. See ch. 645 Sec. 1911, 62 Stats. 792, and ch. 646 Sec. 959, 62 Stats. 926-27. They were codified at 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959 and 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1911. Supra, notes 8 and 10.
It is repeatedly and consistently recognized that the purpose of section 959 and its predecessor statutes is to act as an exception to the Barton v. Barbour, 104 U.S. 126 (1881), doctrine which required one bringing a suit against a receiver in his or her official capacity to obtain leave of the appointing court before a state had jurisdic*379tion over such trustee: "It is a general rule that before a suit is brought against a receiver leave of the court by which he was appointed must be obtained." Id. at 128. Vass v. Conron Bros. Co., 59 F.2d 969, 970 (2d Cir. 1932), applied the Barton doctrine to trustees in bankruptcy.
Citing Barton v. Barbour, the United States Bankruptcy Court for Idaho summarized:
The trustee in bankruptcy is an officer of the court appointing him, and courts other than the appointing court have no jurisdiction to entertain suits against the trustee, without leave from that appointing court, for acts done in his official capacity and within his authority as an officer of the court.
A limited exception to this rule exists by way of 28 U.S.C. § 959 which allows for suit against trustees, receivers, or managers of any property, including debtors-in-possession, without leave of the court appointing them, with respect to any of their acts or transactions "in carrying on business connected with such property."
Matter of Campbell, 13 B.R. 974, 976 (Bankr. D. Idaho 1981). See also In re Baptist Medical Center of New York, 80 B.R. 637, 643 (Bankr. E.D. N.Y. 1987); In Re Beck Industries, Inc., 725 F.2d 880, 888 (2d Cir. 1984); Vass, 59 F.2d at 970.
The purpose of the section 959 exception was not to change the nature of a trustee's liability from official to personal. Rather, section 959 and its predecessor statutes simply allowed for state court jurisdiction over certain official capacity liability cases which, under the Barton doctrine, the states did not previously have.
Given such purpose, courts interpreting section 959 and its predecessor statutes have specifically and repeat*380edly concluded that such statutes apply only to trustees in their official capacities. In Vass v. Conron, the Second Circuit affirmed a bankruptcy court's rule which enjoined the prosecution of an action against a trustee in state court in his official capacity. The court concluded that 28 U.S.C. 125, supra, note 11, the predecessor statute to 28 U.S.C. 959, applied to trustees in their official capacities: "Upon both grounds we think that in bankruptcy at least an action against a receiver as such may be enjoined, unless within the exception of section 125 of title 28, U.S. Code." Vass, 59 F.2d at 970 (emphasis added).
In McNulta v. Lochridge, 141 U.S. 327 (1891), the Supreme Court held that a receiver could be sued in his official capacity for actions the preceding receiver took with respect to the property in trust. Addressing the Act of March 3, 1887, ch. 373, § 3, 24 Stat. 552, 554,12 the predecessor statute to 28 U.S.C. Sec. 125 and 28 U.S.C. Sec. 959, the Court stated: "Actions against the receiver are in law actions against the receivership, or the funds in the hands of the receiver, and his contracts, misfea-sances, negligences and liabilities are official and not personal, and judgments against him as receiver are payable only from the funds in his hands." McNulta, 141 U.S. at 332.
*381In Reading Co. v. Brown, 391 U.S. 471 (1968), a claim priority case, the Supreme Court, referring to the above quoted McNulta language, stated: "This statement of course means only that torts of a receiver are in principle compensable out of the assets of the estate in receivership and, again, does not indicate whether such claims shall be paid prior to, equally with, or after other claims against the receivership." Id. at 478 n.7 (emphasis added). The Court specifically declined to address whether an action against the receiver personally would ever be available. Id.
Each of these cases interpreted section 959 and its predecessor statutes as applying only to suits brought against a trustee or receiver in his or her official capacity as a trustee or receiver. In fact, no court that we can find has ever interpreted section 959 as applying to or creating personal liability.
Therefore, given section 959's universally recognized purpose as well as its consistent interpretation, it is clear that the section did not grant state's jurisdiction over trustees in their personal capacities. Rather, section 959(a) granted state courts jurisdiction over trustees in their official capacities where the trustee's acts or transactions were with respect to "carrying on business” connected to the property in trust.
Where a trustee's acts do not constitute "carrying on business" connected to the property in trust, such trustee may be sued in state court only in his or her official capacity and only with leave of the appointing court. Discussing section 959(a), the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of New York explained:
If it is found that a putative suitor's case does not fit within the statutory exception — i.e. the trustee's acts *382did not constitute "carrying on business" — his suit is not barred from adjudication by the non-appointing forum forever. The suitor simply must apply for leave from the appointing forum.
In re Baptist Medical Center of New York, 80 B.R. at 643 (footnote omitted). See also Matter of Campbell, 13 B.R. at 976.
Thus, it is in the context of section 959(a), which applies only to trustees in their official capacities, that we consider section 959(b).
Structurally, the only logical reading of section 959(b) is that it provides the basis for suits against trustees brought under section 959(a). Thus, where a trustee violates state law while performing acts that constitute "carrying on business" connected with the property in trust, such trustee may be sued in his or her official capacity in state court without leave of the appointing court. And, where the trustee violates state law performing acts that do not constitute "carrying on business" connected with the property in trust, such trustee may be sued in his or her official capacity in state court only if leave of the appointing court is granted.
To conclude that section 959(b) defines a trustee's scope of authority would render section 959(a) nugatory. For, if violation of state law meant that the trustee acted outside his or her scope of authority and was thus personally liable in state court, then section 959(a) would not apply because, as shown above, section 959(a) grants states jurisdiction only over trustees in their official capacity. Thus, under section 959(a), the state would not have jurisdiction over the trustee in his or her official capacity for a violation of state law. If that were the case, however, section 959(a) would be meaningless because, but for state law violations, there are no grounds upon *383which a trustee could be sued under section 959(a).13
To summarize, section 959 applies only to trustees in their official capacities. Section 959(a) establishes the jurisdiction of state courts over trustees in their official capacities. Section 959(a) grants states jurisdiction over trustees in their official capacities where the trustees' acts constitute "carrying on business" connected with the property in trust. Where a trustee's actions do not constitute "carrying on business" connected with the property in trust, leave of the appointing court must be obtained before a suit can be brought in state court against the trustee in his or her official capacity.14
*384Section 959(b) establishes the basis for suits to be brought against trustees in their official capacities under section 959(a). Where a trustee violates state law when "carrying on business" connected to the property in trust, such trustee may be sued in state court in his or her official capacity without leave of the appointing court. Where a trustee violates state law but his or her violative acts do not constitute "carrying on business" connected with the property in trust, leave of the appointing court must be obtained before the state court acquires jurisdiction.
In this case, it is clear from the record that Zenner and Matyas were acting in their official capacities. The circuit found repeatedly that at every relevant time period, Zenner and Matyas were acting in their official capacities, as trustees, when they violated state law. Relevant "Findings of Fact" paragraphs of the circuit court opinion state:
17. Neither Better Brite nor Zenner, as examiner/trustee for Better Brite, had the hazardous waste generated by Better Brite removed from the site of generation before August 9, 1986.
18. Between August 9, 1986 and August 27, 1986, Better Brite and Zenner, as examiner/trustee for Better Brite, continued to store the accumulated *385hazardous wastes identified in paragraph thirteen above.
20. Between August 27, 1986 and December 18, 1986, Matyas and Better Brite, under the direction and supervision of Matyas, as trustee for Better Brite, employed Zenner as a consultant to operate the facility and continued to store the hazardous wastes previously generated by Better Brite at the site of generation.
23. Under the terms of the agreement [entered into on December 18, 1986, which sold all non-hazardous waste contaminated personal property to Zinc Shop and Zenner], Matyas, as trustee for Better Brite, and Better Brite continued to own the previously accumulated hazardous wastes.
In addition, that Zenner and Matyas acted within their scope of authority is equally clear. The Bankruptcy Court, in its "Findings of Fact" section stated:
2. (k) Zenner was appointed examiner with authority to manage and operate the debtor's plants and business in the ordinary course of business for a few days . . ..
3. (b) Zenner was authorized to continue the operation of the business . ...
14. On application of the trustee, an order was entered on September 8, 1986 granting [Matyas] authority to continue in this manner for a limited period of time after his appointment but no longer than through September 11, 1986 . ...
*38615. [Matyas] and the bank continued with their discussions and efforts to arrange a sale following the September 8, 1986 order. . . . Arranging a sale to Zenner took longer than expected, and the anticipated sale was conditioned upon the continued operation of the business, but no further order was sought or obtained from the court authorizing operation of the business to continue after September 11, 1986.
Though Matyas continued operating the business after the court's order expired, it is clear that Matyas was merely attempting to accomplish the goals of the initial order, that is, the sale of the property. Moreover, the resulting sale on December 18, 1986, was approved by the bankruptcy court after Matyas notified the creditors of his intent to sell the personal property of the estate and after a hearing was held with objections heard from the State of Wisconsin. It would be unreasonable to conclude that, though the sale was approved by the bankruptcy court, Matyas' actions in arranging the sale were unauthorized.
The defendants argue that holding trustees personally liable in situations such as this may well cause potential trustees to decline to operate bankrupt businesses that have environmental problems. The court of appeals noted the "potential devastating impact" that such a holding would have on the pool of persons willing to serve as trustees. State v. Better Brite, 160 Wis. 2d at 823. We find such public policy considerations compelling. Matters involving the complex legal area of environmental and bankruptcy law depend on the involvement of skilled trustees.
In conclusion, where trustees act outside of their official capacities and scope of authority they may be sued personally in state court. We do not interpret sec*387tion 959(b) as defining a trustee's scope of authority such that a violation of state law automatically means that the trustee acted outside his or her scope of authority and therefore is subject to state court jurisdiction for suits seeking personal liability. We conclude that Zenner and Matyas were acting within their official capacities and within their scope of authority.
We therefore modify the court of appeals opinion by directing that the action against Zenner and Matyas in their personal capacities be dismissed rather than remanded to the circuit court for a determination of whether their acts were knowing and intentional.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is modified and, as modified, affirmed and the matter is remanded to the circuit court with directions to dismiss the action against defendants Zenner and Matyas personally and for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
State v. Better Brite Plating, Inc., 160 Wis. 2d 809, 466 N.W.2d 239 (Ct. App. 1991).
Under the Bankruptcy Code, 11 U.S.C. 101, et seq., one of several court officers may be authorized to continue the operation of an enterprise in bankruptcy: a trustee, an examiner with the powers of a trustee, or a debtor in possession. For our purposes, there is no difference between an examiner with powers of a trustee and a trustee. Therefore we will refer to Zenner and Matyas as trustees.
144.64 Licenses.
(2) Treatment, storage or disposal, (a) The storage of hazardous waste at the generation site by the generator of that waste for a period of less than 90 days is not subject to this subsection. The storage of hazardous waste for a period of less than 10 days is exempt from this subsection if the storage is in connection with the transportation or movement of the hazardous waste. Notwithstanding the exemptions granted under this paragraph, no person may store or cause the storage of hazardous waste in a manner which causes environmental pollution.
(am) No person may:
*3691. Construct a hazardous waste facility unless the person complies with s. 144.44 (2) to (3).
2. Operate a hazardous waste facility without an interim or operating license issued under this subsection.
144.74 Penalties.
(2) Any person who violates ss. 144.60 to 144.74, or any rule promulgated under ss. 144.60 to 144.74, or any term or condition of a license issued under ss. 144.60 to 144.74, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $25,000 for each day of violation. The time elapsed prior to the expiration of a compliance order shall not constitute a violation.
These barrels contained hazardous waste under secs. 144.43(2) and 144.62(2), Stats., 1985-86, and WlS. Admin. Code Sec. NR 181.16(2) (Oct. 1985).
Matyas' motion for abandonment resulted in In Re Better-Brite Plating, Inc., 105 B.R. 912, 919 (Bankr. E.D. Wis. 1989), wherein the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin, Dale E. Ihlenfeldt, Judge, approved Zen-*372ner's request to abandon conditioned upon an order (1) giving the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the DNR access to the two sites to carry out their statutory duties, and (2) giving to EPA, for response costs, and to DNR for actions taken pursuant to sec. 144.76(7) (a), Stats., administrative expense liens with priority over secured creditors to the proceeds of any sale of the property subsequent to decontamination. The DNR appealed, and on April 24, 1990, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin gave its decision and order affirming the order of the Bankruptcy Court. The DNR appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. Pending the appeal to the Seventh Circuit, the issue was rendered moot by the EPA's disposal of the hazardous wastes. The Seventh Circuit ordered the judgment of the district court vacated and remanded the case to the district court with directions to remand to the bankruptcy court for vacatur. On October 15, 1990, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin vacated its 1989 decision and order, 105 B.R. 912 (Bankr. E.D. Wis. 1989), as moot. 136 B.R. 527 (Bankr. E.D. Wis. 1990).
Neither Zenner nor Matyas complied with the circuit court's order and, on or about June 1, 1990, the EPA remediated the environmental contamination by disposing of the accumulated hazardous wastes.
Section 959 Trustees and receivers suable; management; State laws.
(a) Trustees, receivers or managers of any property, including debtors in possession, may be sued, without leave of the court appointing them, with respect to any of their acts or transactions in carrying on business connected with such property. Such actions shall be subject to the general equity power of such court so far as the same may be necessary to the ends of justice, but this shall not deprive a litigant of his right to trial by jury.
(b) A trustee, receiver or manager appointed in any cause pending in any court of the United States, including a debtor in possession, shall manage and operate the property in his possession as such trustee, receiver or manager according to the requirements of the valid laws of the State in which such property is situated, in the same manner that the owner or possessor thereof would be bound to do if in possession thereof.
For a discussion of the split of authority, see COWANS BANKRUPTCY Law and Practice, Sec. 2.7 (1989).
18 U.S.C. Sec. 1911. Receiver mismanaging property.
Whoever, being a receiver, trustee, or manager in possession of any property in any cause pending in any court of the United States, willfully fails to manage and operate such property according to the requirements of the valid laws of the State in which such property shall be situated, in the same manner that the owner or possessor thereof would be bound to do if in possession thereof, shall be fined not more than $3,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Act of Mar. 3 1911, ch. 231 Secs. 65, 66, 36 Stats. 1104-05 (codified at 28 U.S.C. Secs. 124, 125 (1940)).
Section 65. Whenever in any cause pending in any court of the United States there shall be a receiver or manager in possession of any property, such receiver or manager shall manage and operate such property according to the requirements of the valid laws of the State in which such property shall be situated, in the same manner that the owner or possessor thereof would be bound to do if in possession thereof. Any receiver or manager who shall willfully violate any provision of this section shall be fined not more than three thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Section 66. Every receiver or manager of any property appointed by any court of the United States may be sued in respect of any act or transaction of his in carrying on the business connected with such property, without the previous leave of the court in which such receiver or manager was appointed; but such suit shall be subject to the general equity jurisdiction of the court in which such manager or receiver was appointed so far as the same may be necessary to the ends of justice.
Act of Mar. 3, 1887, ch., 373 Sec. 3, 24 Stat. 652, 554.
Section 3. That every receiver or manager of any property appointed by any court of the United States may be sued in respect of any act or transaction of his in carrying on the business connected with such property, without the previous leave of the court in which such receiver or manager was appointed; but such suit shall be subject to the general equity jurisdiction of the court in which such receiver or manager was appointed, so far as the same shall be necessary to the ends of justice.
One could not bring a breach of fiduciary duty suit against a trustee personally in state court under section 959 because section 959 applies only where official liability is sought. And, as discussed above, we find no case where a state court has exercised jurisdiction over a breach of fiduciary case, and Puente, the only case addressing this issue, held that the state court did not have jurisdiction over a debtor in possession personally in a breach of fiduciary duty case and concluded that section 959(a) "would have no apparent application" to such fiduciary duty cases. Puente, 466 N.Y.S.2d at 938.
Exactly what constitutes "carrying on business" is not well settled. See 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 721.05 (1992); In Re Wall Tube & Metal Products Co., 831 F.2d 118, 122 (6th Cir. 1987) ("that the trustee in this case is liquidating the estate rather than reorganizing it is inconsequential"); Matter of Borne Chemical Co., Inc., 54 B.R. 126, 135 (Bankr. D. New Jersey 1984) ("it appears that § 959(b) is applicable only where the property is being managed or operated for the purpose of continuing operations"); Matter of Campbell, 13 B.R. at 976 ("Merely collecting, taking steps to preserve, and/or holding assets, as well as other aspects of administering and liquidating the estate, do not constitute 'carrying on business' as that term has been judicially interpreted.") (citations omitted).
We note, however, that the issue of whether a trustee is *384"carrying on business" under section 959 is a different issue than whether a trustee is acting in his or her official capacity or within his or her scope of authority. That a trustee acted in an official capacity is the condition precedent to the applicability of section 959 to such trustee. We merely conclude today that violating state law does not, ipso facto, mean that a trustee acted outside his or her scope of authority.

=== CASE 9740700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:31.746216+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). In this action, the State of Wisconsin seeks civil forfeitures from David J. Matyas and John E. Zenner, two bankruptcy trustees who allegedly violated Wisconsin's Hazardous Waste Management Act while operating a bankrupt Wisconsin corporation in DePere, Wisconsin. If Matyas and Zenner had operated a corporation that was not bankrupt when they violated the Wisconsin statute, a Wisconsin court would have held them strictly and personally liable for the violation of sec. 144.64, Stats. 1985-86.
The majority concludes that because Matyas and Zenner were bankruptcy trustees at the time of their violations and were not acting outside the scope of their authority, Wisconsin courts do not have jurisdiction *388over this matter. I disagree. The majority opinion has reserved more extensive exclusive jurisdiction to the bankruptcy courts than have the federal statutes.
I conclude that the state courts have subject matter jurisdiction over claims made against trustees personally, as in this case.1 Section 959(a) (28 U.S.C.) expands state court jurisdiction to allow a trustee to be sued in his or her representative capacity if the action arises out of an act or transaction in carrying on the bankrupt business. Section 959(a) has not eliminated or narrowed the state court's jurisdiction to determine the personal liability of a bankruptcy trustee alleged to have acted outside the scope of his or her authority.2
Whether the state court holds the trustees personally liable depends on the resolution of several issues: whether the trustees acted outside the scope of their authority in a manner rendering them personally liable (and the standards for making this determination when the trustees are charged with violating state law),3 to *389what extent, if any, federal law immunizes the trustees from personal liability for violations of state law, and whether federal law preempts the operation of state law. These are, I believe, the issues which the majority must decide.
For the reasons set forth, I would not hold that the circuit court has no jurisdiction. Accordingly, I dissent.
Wisconsin statutes clearly grant the state courts jurisdiction to decide cases under the Wisconsin Hazardous Waste Management Act. Section 144.98, Wis. Stats., states:
The circuit court for Dane County or for any other county where a violation occurred in whole or in part has jurisdiction to enforce this chapter ... by injunctional and other relief appropriate for enforcement.
See, e.g., Vass v. Conron Bros. Co., 59 F.2d 969 (2nd Cir. 1932); In re Kalb & Berger Mfg. Co., 165 F. 895 (2nd Cir. 1908). See also E. Allan Tiller, Personal Liability of Trustees and Receivers in Bankruptcy, 53 Am. Bankr. L.J. 75, 83-88 (1979).
To reach its result that Wisconsin courts do not possess jurisdiction over this action, the majority summarily concludes that the bankruptcy trustees did not act outside their scope of authority even though the trustees violated Wisconsin law. The majority notes only that the trustees acted "to accomplish the *389goals of the initial order" of the bankruptcy court, which apparently included managing and operating the business and ultimately selling the property. Majority opinion at 386.
The majority does not support its conclusion nor distinguish the facts of this case from other cases in which a trustee would exceed the scope of his or her authority by violating state law. The broad grant of authority to the trustee cited by the majority does not justify the trustee's violation of state law. A bankruptcy court does not possess unlimited power to authorize a bankruptcy trustee to violate state law. Midlantic Nat'l Bank v. New Jersey Dep't of Envtl. Protection, 474 U.S. 494 (1986); Gillis v. California, 293 U.S. 62 (1934).

=== CASE 2224564 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.882696+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 105 (1992)
In the Matter of the Application for Combined Air and Solid Waste Permit No. 2211-91-OT-1 for the DAKOTA COUNTY MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE INCINERATOR.
Nos. C7-91-2551, C8-92-9.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 7, 1992.
James C. Backstrom, Dakota County Atty., Karen A. Schaffer, Asst. County Atty., Hastings, and Charles Dayton, Leonard Street and Deinard, Minneapolis, for relator Dakota County, in No. C7-91-2551.
Richard Ihrig, Sarah D. Halvorson, Lindquist & Vennum, Minneapolis, for relator ABB Resource Recovery Systems Combustion Engineering, Inc., in No. C8-92-9.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., Eldon G. Kaul, Asst. Atty. Gen., Stephen Shakman, Ann M. Seha, Sp. Asst. Attys. Gen., St. Paul, for respondent Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Lawrence J. Coleman, St. Paul, for respondent Earth Protector, Inc.
John E. Grzybek, St. Paul, for respondent Clean Water Action.
Barbara J. Blumer, Eagan, for respondent Dakota County Citizens Against Burning.
Jay M. Heffern, Chief Counsel, St. Paul, for amicus Metropolitan Council.
Duncan J. McCampbell, Minneapolis, for amicus Minnesota Resource Recovery Assn.
Considered and decided by WOZNIAK, C.J., and HUSPENI and RANDALL, JJ.
SPECIAL TERM OPINION
WOZNIAK, Chief Judge.
FACTS
Relators ABB Resource Recovery Systems Combustion Engineering, Inc. (ABB) *106 and Dakota County applied to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (PCA) for a combined air and solid waste permit for a proposed solid waste incinerator. The PCA held numerous hearings on the permit application, but ultimately denied a contested case hearing and denied the permit request. This certiorari appeal followed.
On appeal, relators ABB and Dakota County argue that the PCA's denial of the permit was affected by procedural irregularities. More than one month after the appeals were filed, ABB submitted interrogatories to PCA board members on the alleged procedural irregularities. The board members refused to respond to the interrogatories, and ABB moved this court for an order compelling responses or, in the alternative, for an order transferring this case to the district court for testimony and evidence on the alleged procedural irregularities. See Minn.Stat. § 14.68 (1990).
DECISION
Certiorari review in this court is limited to the existing record
except that in cases of alleged irregularities in procedure, not shown in the record, the court of appeals may transfer the case to the district court for the county in which the agency has its principal office[.] * * * The district court shall have jurisdiction to take testimony and to hear and determine the alleged irregularities in procedure. Appeal from the district court determination may be taken to the court of appeals as in other cases.
Minn.Stat. § 14.68 (1990). Relators argue that this is an extraordinary case meriting transfer to the district court. We disagree.
Before the creation of this court, agency proceedings were reviewed by the district courts. Relators rely on decisions which defined the scope of discovery available in the district courts, without recognizing that this court's review of agency proceedings differs, and discovery is not appropriate or available before the court of appeals.
By decision, the supreme court narrowed the extent of discovery available in the district courts reviewing agency proceedings. See Mampel v. Eastern Heights State Bank of St. Paul, 254 N.W.2d 375 (Minn.1977). The court proscribed inquiry into the mental processes of agency officials, emphasizing that discovery is limited to information concerning the procedural steps required by law. People for Envtl. Enlightenment & Responsibility v. Minnesota Envtl. Quality Council, 266 N.W.2d 858, 873 (Minn.1978). Later, the supreme court specified five questions, limited to the procedural steps followed by the agency, on which discovery is permissible. In re Application of Lecy, 304 N.W.2d 894, 900 (Minn.1981).
Some, but not all, of relators' proposed interrogatories in this case would appear to fall within the limited discovery authorized by Lecy. However, we conclude that it is unnecessary to determine the propriety of the specific interrogatories, because relators have not established that discovery during the appellate process is an appropriate remedy in this case.
Certiorari review is limited to legal issues, and a certiorari appeal is not the proper forum for development of a factual record. White Bear Rod & Gun Club v. City of Hugo, 388 N.W.2d 739, 742 (Minn. 1986). Our review is limited to the record made in the agency, whether that record arose from a formal hearing or other proceedings. See Dokmo v. Independent Sch. Dist. No. 11, 459 N.W.2d 671, 675 (Minn. 1990). A complete factual record should be developed in the agency. Relators in this case made no apparent attempt to establish a factual record on the claimed irregularities in the agency proceedings.
In an analogous context, an allegation of improper ex parte contacts by agency officials was properly raised before the agency. In re Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm'n's Initiation of Summary Investigation, 417 N.W.2d 274, 282 (Minn.App. 1987), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Mar. 18, 1988 and Apr. 4, 1988). Because the claimed irregularities were raised before the agency, the agency was afforded an opportunity to respond to the allegations of impropriety and to reconsider its decision. *107 The PCA has been afforded no such opportunity in this case.
Development of a complete record in the agency is preferable to an attempt to develop the record for the first time on appeal. Agencies should generally permit parties to establish a record in similar cases, whether the issues arise during the proceedings or are raised in a petition for reconsideration or to vacate. In this case, relators failed to establish that they learned of the alleged procedural irregularities so long after the agency proceedings had concluded that they were unable to raise the issue before the agency, and the agency has not refused to entertain the issue in its own proceedings. Mindful of the supreme court's admonitions regarding the limited role of certiorari review and the disfavor with which it looks upon discovery into agency decisionmaking processes, we conclude that further discovery on appeal, either in this court or by transfer to the district court, is inappropriate.
Motion to compel discovery or transfer matter to district court denied.

=== CASE 9740701 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:34.38207+00 ===

Armstrong, J.
The defendant was tried and found guilty by a jury on an indictment charging him with possession of cocaine with intent to distribute (“cocaine distribution conviction”). He was next tried jury-waived on an indictment charging that the cocaine distribution conviction was his second conviction under G. L. c. 94C, § 32A. The judge found him guilty (“repeat offender conviction”). The principal issue *365on appeal arose on sentencing. The district attorney argued that the cocaine distribution conviction was under § 32A(c), with the consequence that the defendant faced a mandatory minimum term of five years for the repeat offender conviction under § 32A(if). Defense counsel argued that the cocaine distribution conviction was under § 32A(a), and thus that the repeat offender conviction was under § 32A(¿), with a minimum term of only three years.1 The judge agreed with the Commonwealth and imposed a five-to-seven year sentence.2
*366The defendant’s argument is premised on a statement made in Cedeno v. Commonwealth, 404 Mass. 190 (1989), to the effect that cocaine distribution is prohibited by two different statutory provisions (i.e., G. L. c. 94C, § 32A[a] and § 32A[c]) with different penalties. The indictment of the defendant did not, on its face, as contrasted with its back, specify whether the charge was laid under subsection (a) or subsection (c).3 Hence, the defendant’s argument goes, a rule of lenity should be applied, and the indictment taken to be laid under subsection (a), as the more lenient of the two statutes prohibiting cocaine distribution. If this is done, the second offender conviction would be under subsection (b), with a mandatory minimum prison term of three years. Thus, he argues, the case should be remanded for resentencing.
The trial judge properly rejected this contention. The words of the indictment4 tracked the language of G. L. c. 94C, § 32A(c), rather than § 32A(a). The purpose of subsection (c), as it read at the time of the events in issue here, was to single out for more stringent punishment two of the substances (phencyclidine and cocaine) that are included within the broader prohibition of subsection (a) (Class B substances generally). Because this indictment charged the defendant with possession with intent to distribute, not just a Class B controlled substance, but rather cocaine specifically, it put the defendant on notice that he was exposed to the more stringent penalties of subsection (c).
*367A limited analogy may be drawn to the familiar law of lesser included offenses.5 One who is charged with armed robbery while masked knows that he can receive the mandatory minimum term of imprisonment (five years for the first offense, ten for repetitions) specified in the second clause of G. L. c. 265, § 17. Conduct that violates that clause also violates the first clause of § 17 (unmasked armed robbery), as well as G. L. c. 265, § 19(6) (unarmed robbery, see Commonwealth v. Saia, 18 Mass. App. Ct. 762, 764 [1984]), and the prosecutor, acting in his discretion, might frame the charge as such, thus exposing the defendant to less severe penalties. Mention of the dangerous weapon and the mask, however, gives the defendant notice that he is charged with the greater crime, whether § 17, second clause, is mentioned or not. Here, similarly, the grand jury, having before it evidence of the defendant’s possession of cocaine with intent to distribute, might have framed the indictment as possession of a Class B substance with intent to distribute, thus exposing the defendant only to the lesser penalty of § 32A(o); but because the indictment identified the Class B substance as cocaine, it was a charge under § 32A(c). It is not necessary that the indictment state the particular subsection under which it is framed, so long as it charges conduct that constitutes a violation of that subsection. Commonwealth v. Jiminez, 22 Mass. App. Ct. 286, 295-296 (1986). Commonwealth v. Bradley, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 525, 527 & 528 n.5 (1993).
In Cedeno v. Commonwealth, the complaint charged the defendant with trafficking in cocaine. The District Court had jurisdiction neither of that charge nor the lesser included charge of possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. 404 Mass. at 194 n.5. To enable the District Court to dispose of the complaint with finality, the prosecutor in effect exercised *368his discretion to proceed only on so much of the complaint as charged possession of a Class B substance with intent to distribute — the offense set out in § 32A(a) — an offense over which the District Court did have jurisdiction. 404 Mass. at 192-193 n.4. If the case had been bound over for trial in the Superior Court, Cedeno could have been found guilty of so much of the complaint as charged possession of cocaine with intent to distribute and sentenced under § 32A(c). Cedeno’s conviction under subsection (a) was predicated, not on the fact that the complaint did not refer to that subsection, but on the fact that the prosecutor elected to try the case in the District Court, foreclosing sentencing under subsection (c). No such election having been made in the present case, the defendant’s conviction on an indictment charging possession of cocaine with intent to distribute was correctly treated as one under subsection (c). On proof that this conviction was the defendant’s second under § 32A, the defendant was properly sentenced under subsection (d).6
The defendant’s other arguments concerning alleged constitutional infirmity in the framework of § 32A have been dealt with in Commonwealth v. Cedeno, supra. His argument concerning the sufficiency of the evidence is without merit. The jury could properly infer from the testimony of surveilling detectives that the defendant in at least two instances had received cash from buyers and spoken to Gonsalves, who went into the alleyway to get crack cocaine from a tin box and delivered it to the buyers. A police expert testified to his familiarity with such two-person, street-level distribution arrangements. The inference that the defendant was an accomplice is reasonable despite the facts that he *369himself never handled the crack cocaine and that some other buyers were seen to go directly to Gonsalves.
Judgment affirmed.
General Laws c. 94C, § 32A, as in effect on November 2, 1990, the date of the cocaine distribution offense, read, in material part, as follows (with emphasis supplied):
“(a) Any person who knowingly or intentionally manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or possesses with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense a controlled substance in Class B of section thirty-one shall be punished. . . .
“(6) Any person convicted of violating [subsection (a)] after one or more prior convictions of [distributing or possessing with intent to distribute] a controlled substance . . . shall be punished by a term of imprisonment in the state prison for not less than three nor more than ten years. No sentence imposed under the provisions of this section shall be for less than a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of three years. . . .
“(c) Any person who knowingly or intentionally manufactures, distributes, dispenses or possesses with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense phencyclidine or a controlled substance defined in clause (4) of paragraph (a) of class B of section thirty-one shall be punished ....
“(d) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of subsection (c) after one or more convictions of [distributing or possessing with intent to distribute] a controlled substance . .. shall be punished by a term of imprisonment in the state prison for not less than five nor more than fifteen years. . . .”
Concerning subsection (c): The words “clause (4) of par. (a) of class B” include coca leaves and their derivatives, one of which is cocaine. Subsection (c) of § 32A was amended after 1990 to include methamphetamine and its derivatives. See St. 1991, c. 391.
A five-to-seven year State prison sentence is within the range permitted under subsection (b), but the judge expressly stated that she was constrained to give a five-year minimum by subsection (d). Compare Commonwealth v. Bradley, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 525, 526 n.3 (1993).
For purposes of this decision we shall accept the defendant’s contention that the body of the indictment is controlling (see Commonwealth v. McClaine, 367 Mass. 559 [1975] and treat as irrelevant the inscription on the indictment’s back indicating that the within charge was laid under G. L. c. 94C, § 32A(c).
The indictment charges that the defendant “did knowingly or intentionally manufacture, distribute, dispense or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense a controlled substance defined in clause (4) of paragraph (a) of Class B of section thirty-one, to wit: Cocaine” (emphasis supplied).
We refer to the analogy as “limited” having in mind, hypothetically, a charge of cocaine distribution where the proof is that the defendant distributed a Class B substance other than cocaine. Were the analogy perfect, the defendant in such a case could be convicted under subsection (a), but we prefer to avoid deciding such a case until it is necessary to do so.
Justice Dreben’s concurring opinion draws a distinction — significant for purposes of jurisdiction and punishment — between an indictment that charges possession “with intent to . . . distribute ... a controlled substance defined in clause (4) of paragraph (a) of Class B of section thirty-one: to wit, Cocaine”; and one that charges, simply, “possession of cocaine with intent to distribute,” despite the fact that the two phraseologies mean the same thing in common English. Nothing in the Cedeno decision requires such a formalistic distinction, and the majority do not see that it makes any sense for us to draw it.

=== CASE 9740702 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:34.386489+00 ===

Dreben, J.
(concurring). I would uphold the conviction on the narrow ground that the indictment, as recognized by the majority, follows the exact wording of G. L. c. 94C, § 32A(c). See note 4 and accompanying text, supra. It charges that the defendant “did knowingly or intentionally manufacture, distribute, dispense or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense a controlled substance defined in clause (4) of paragraph (a) of Class B of section thirty-one, to wit: Cocaine.” Since the indictment stated the violation in the language of subsection 32A(c), the defendant was given notice under which subsection of the statute the indictment was framed. That the indictment did not specifically refer to the subsection by name did not create any doubt as to which subsection was violated. See Commonwealth v. Jiminez, 22 Mass. 286, 295-296 (1986). Cf. Commonwealth v. Bradley, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 525, 527 & 528 n.5 (1993).
The reason I concur specially is that the much broader analysis of the majority opinion, in my view, is not consistent with the interpretation given to the two subsections of G. L. c. 94C, § 32A, in Cedeno v. Commonwealth, 404 Mass. 190 (1989). The majority of the panel upholds the defendant’s conviction under § 32A(c) “because the indictment identified the Class B. Substance as cocaine.” In the majority’s view, the mere listing of the drug as cocaine (or another drug defined in clause [4] of par. [a] of class B) is sufficient to indicate that the indictment is under § 32A(c).
In Cedeno v. Commonwealth, the Supreme Judicial Court explicitly stated with reference to §§ 32A(a) and 32A(c): “The Legislature has enacted two statutory provisions making the possession of cocaine with intent to distribute it unlawful. The two provisions set forth somewhat inconsistent *370potential penalties for conviction of that crime.” 404 Mass. at 190.
The foregoing quotation was not an off-hand comment, but was central to the opinion. The challenge by the defendant in Cedeno was that the statute was void for vagueness because two provisions with two different penalties proscribed the same conduct. As a result, he claimed he could not be convicted under either section. In rejecting that argument, as applied to the defendant who was convicted under § 32A(a), the court reiterated the applicability of both subsections saying, “Section 32A(c) proscribes certain conduct which also falls within the conduct proscribed by § 32A(a) .... No one can be confused about what the Legislature intended. If a person possesses cocaine with the intent to distribute it, that conduct is criminal. That point is clear. The Legislature has said it twice in § 3 2A.” (Emphasis supplied.) Id. at 196. See also id. at 191 n.l.
In view of the interpretation by the Supreme Judicial Court that both subsections proscribe possession of cocaine with the intent to distribute, I think it behooves a prosecutor who wishes to charge a defendant under § 32A(c) to give the defendant notice that the proceeding is under that subsection by either referring to the subsection in the indictment or, as in this case, by charging the defendant in substantially the language of the subsection. “The principle that no one may be required at his peril to speculate as to the meaning of a criminal statute applies to sentencing as well as to substantive provisions.” Commonwealth v. John G. Grant & Sons, 403 Mass. 151, 155 (1988). Commonwealth v. Cedeno, 404 Mass. at 193. See United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114, 123 (1979). I cannot accept the majority’s conclusion that “[bjecause this indictment charged the defendant with possession with intent to distribute, not just a Class B controlled substance, but rather cocaine specifically, it put the defendant on notice that he was exposed to the more stringent penalties of subsection (c).”
Accordingly, I would affirm the defendant’s conviction on the more narrow basis.

=== CASE 9740703 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:34.956085+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Levine, J.
Defendant appeals from the Appellate Division’s affirmance of his conviction in Supreme Court, Queens County, of criminal possession of a weapon in the third degree. Defendant was arrested on August 2, 1990 when a number of police officers responded to a radio report of shots fired in the vicinity of defendant’s residence in Queens. Three of the responding officers testified at defendant’s trial. According to their testimony, upon arriving at the defendant’s home, the officers *176observed what appeared to be bullet holes in a window screen and the garage door, and a spent round was recovered next to the house. Defendant then gave the officers consent to enter the house. While the officers were inside, they observed defendant reaching toward a pile of clothes on a table. As one officer stopped defendant’s movement, another officer sifted through the clothes and discovered a .45 caliber pistol. The officer who actually physically recovered the pistol from under the pile of clothes did not testify at trial.
The theory of the defense was that defendant was in temporary and lawful possession of the pistol (see, People v Williams, 50 NY2d 1043). In support, defendant testified as follows. The pistol belonged to his father, who also lived in the same house. His father was totally blind and suffered from serious depression, and had expressed a desire to kill himself the night before defendant’s arrest. The next day, after hearing gunshots in the kitchen and finding his father holding the pistol, defendant took the gun from his father and hid it in a hutch in the living room. Defendant’s brother came to the house and took their father to his home before the police arrived and found the pistol secreted in the hutch. Defendant, however, did not call or subpoena his father as a witness to confirm the foregoing version of his temporary, innocent possession of the gun.
Upon the People’s request, the trial court granted a missing witness charge against defendant based upon his failure to call his father as a witness, notwithstanding defense counsel’s contention that the father, if called, would probably have to assert his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. The court, however, declined defendant’s request for a missing witness charge regarding the officer who actually recovered the pistol. Defendant appealed and the Appellate Division affirmed (193 AD2d 702), concluding that because defendant’s father was not called or subpoenaed by the defense, the missing witness charge was properly granted to the People. A Judge of this Court granted defendant leave to appeal and we now affirm.
Defendant’s primary contention on this appeal is that the trial court erred in granting a missing witness charge as to defendant’s father. Defendant’s essential position is that a missing witness charge should not be given with respect to an uncalled defense witness in any case where the witness’ potential testimony could be self-incriminating, such that the witness might invoke his or her Fifth Amendment privilege.
*177Although a court may not ordinarily comment on a defendant’s failure to testify or otherwise come forward with evidence at trial, it is by now well settled that once a defendant does so, the customary standards for giving a missing witness charge apply (see, People v Wilson, 64 NY2d 634, 635-636; People v Rodriguez, 38 NY2d 95, 98; see also, Graves v United States, 150 US 118, 121). As set forth in People v Gonzalez (68 NY2d 424), the party seeking the missing witness charge must sustain an initial burden of showing that the opposing party has failed to call a witness who could be expected to have knowledge regarding a material issue in the case and to provide testimony favorable to the opposing party (id., at 427-428; see also, People v Kitching, 78 NY2d 532, 536-537). The burden then shifts to the opposing party, in order to defeat the request, "to account for the witness’ absence or otherwise demonstrate that the charge would not be appropriate. This burden can be met by demonstrating that the witness is not knowledgeable about the issue, that the issue is not material or relevant, that although the issue is material or relevant, the testimony would be cumulative to other evidence, that the witness is not 'available’, or that the witness is not under the party’s 'control’ such that he would not be expected to testify in his or her favor” (People v Gonzalez, supra, at 428; see, People v Kitching, supra, at 537).
In the instant case, the People made an adequate prima facie showing, based upon defendant’s own testimony, that his father was knowledgeable about a material issue in the case, i.e., whether defendant’s possession of the weapon was innocent and lawful. It was also established that this missing witness could be expected to testify favorably to defendant (see, People v Rodriguez, supra, at 98, n 1 ["A spouse or relative is perforce deemed to be under the defendant’s control”]). Accordingly, the burden shifted to defendant to account for the witness’ absence or to otherwise demonstrate that the charge would be inappropriate. The only showing made by defendant to counter the People’s request was defense counsel’s unsubstantiated statement that the father would probably have to invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination if called to testify.
In People v Rodriguez, we recognized that if the uncalled witness were a codefendant likely to invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to testify, a missing witness charge against the defense would be inappropriate (supra, at 100). The same
*178rule extends to uncalled accomplices, even if uncharged (see, 1 Wharton, Criminal Evidence § 88, at 275 [14th ed 1985]). The reasons underlying this exception are: (1) that the witness’ probable invocation of the privilege casts into doubt one of the requisite preconditions of the missing witness inference, that the uncalled witness would likely testify favorably to the party opposing the charge (see, United States v Pitts, 918 F2d 197, 200 [DC Cir]); (2) that such a witness must be deemed "unavailable” to the opponent of the charge (see, Lawson v United States, 514 A2d 787, 791-792 [DC Ct App]; and (3) the concern that the witness’ invocation of the privilege on the stand might result in undue prejudice to the defendant (see, United States v Pitts, supra, at 200; Christensen v State, 274 Md 133, 140, 333 A2d 45, 49).
The dispositive issue on this point is whether, in order to avoid a missing witness charge, defendant was required to verify that his father’s material testimony would have been self-incriminating and that he would likely have invoked the privilege against self-incrimination and refused to testify. One eminent authority has suggested that such verification should be required in all cases: "the witness should at least have been summoned and asked, for he may waive the privilege” (2 Wigmore, Evidence § 286, at 201 [Chadbourn rev 1979]).
Nonetheless, there are instances where the prosecution’s own evidence establishes the existence of the witness and his or her involvement in the criminal activity for which the defendant is on trial. Because the undisputable inference in such circumstances would clearly be that the material testimony of that witness would likely be incriminating and that the witness would refuse to testify, further verification would be unnecessary. And the cases, generally involving uncalled accomplices, so hold (see, e.g., United States v Pitts, supra; Lawson v United States, supra; Christensen v State, supra; State v Cavness, 46 Haw 470, 381 P2d 685).
Additional safeguards should, however, be required when the defendant is the only source of proof of either the existence of the uncalled witness or that favorable testimony of that witness would be self-incriminating. In such circumstances, the possibility of incurring an unfavorable missing witness charge would be a significant deterrent against a fabricated defense version, shifting criminal responsibility to the uncalled witness. Charges of illegal possession of contraband are particularly amenable to such a defense stratagem. *179Thus, although Maryland does not require verification in denying a missing witness charge when the uncalled witness is a known, acknowledged accomplice (see, Christensen v State, 274 Md 133, 333 A2d 45, supra), that State’s highest court has required verification in a criminal possession of a stolen vehicle case when the "[uncalled witness’] existence and his involvement in this case were not demonstrated by any evidence other than the testimony of the defendant”, explaining that "[i]t is not uncommon for one found in exclusive possession of recently stolen property to fabricate a story involving another person as the provider of the property — some person often said to be known only by a street name, who supposedly gave, sold, or loaned the property to the defendant under the most innocent of circumstances” (Robinson v State, 315 Md 309, 317, 554 A2d 395, 399).
Likewise here, defendant’s position on appeal would permit him to shift the criminal wrongdoing from himself to his father and absolve him from calling his father as a witness, based solely on his own assurances that the father was present, participated in the criminal activity and would verify defendant’s version except for the risk of self-incriminatian. None of these facts was subject to confirmation by the police because, according to the defendant, his father left the premises between the time the weapon was fired and the police arrived. Under these circumstances, requiring some additional, nonprejudicial substantiation by the defendant represents a fair balancing of the competing legitimate interests of the People (to deter a perjurious defense) and of the defendant (to avoid an unfavorable missing witness charge when a material witness would actually be likely to refuse to testify because of the risk of self-incrimination). As the Maryland Court of Appeals noted, "it should be kept in mind that the witness may be questioned out of the presence of the jury concerning the privilege, and if a privilege is claimed the trial judge may use that information to rule out a missing witness instruction” (Robinson v State, 315 Md, at 316, 554 A2d, at 398, supra). We suggested as much in People v Rodriguez when we stated, in upholding a missing witness instruction in that case, "[n]or was there here an assertion by or on behalf of the witness that he would invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer questions” (38 NY2d 95, 100, supra [emphasis supplied]). Thus, we cannot conclude that it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court to grant the missing witness charge against the defendant in the absence of any verifica*180tian that the witness’ testimony would be self-incriminating and he would likely refuse to testify on self-incrimination grounds.
We likewise conclude that the trial court acted within the bounds of its discretion in rejecting defendant’s request for a missing witness charge as to the officer who actually retrieved the gun from underneath the pile of clothing. Three officers testified regarding defendant’s movements toward the location where the gun was found, and two testified specifically as to the retrieval of the gun from a pile of clothing on a table by their fellow officer. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the missing officer would have testified differently or in accordance with defendant’s claim that the gun was retrieved from the living room hutch. "It is not incumbent upon the prosecution 'to call at trial every witness to a crime or to make a complete and detailed accounting to the defense of all law enforcement investigatory work’ ” (People v Buckler, 39 NY2d 895, 897 [quoting People v Stridiron, 33 NY2d 287, 292]), and there is ample support in the record that the missing officer’s testimony would have been cumulative and therefore not a proper subject of a missing witness charge.
Finally, upon our review of the record, we conclude that the trial court’s charge on temporary and innocent possession, when read as a whole, was sufficient to impart to the jury the correct rule to apply in reaching its verdict (see, People v Canty, 60 NY2d 830).
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9740704 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:34.960386+00 ===

Titone, J.
(dissenting). The simple premise underlying an adverse inference charge for a missing witness is that a person in a party’s control, and capable of offering favorable, material testimony, would "naturally” be expected to testify for that party given the party’s litigation theory (People v Gonzalez, 68 NY2d 424, 427). Thus, the party’s failure to call that presumably "friendly” witness permits the logical inference that the witness was not summoned because the anticipated testimony would have been unfavorable. Where, under the party’s theory, that person could give material testimony only by incriminating himself or herself, it is no longer a valid assumption that he or she would testify in the party’s favor and simultaneously risk his or her own prosecution. Accordingly, I cannot join the majority’s conclusion that a missing *181witness charge was warranted here because defendant failed to verify that his father would have invoked the privilege against self-incrimination — a point which was never disputed by the People. Rather, I would hold that because defendant’s father would undeniably have had to place himself in criminal jeopardy to materially support his son’s defense, the People failed to meet their initial burden of proving that the missing witness would "naturally” be expected to testify favorably to defendant, and an adverse inference charge was improper on the record before us.
As the majority recognizes, the People bore the burden in the first instance, as the proponents of the missing witness charge, to establish both that defendant’s father was "knowledgeable about a material issue” in the case and "would naturally be expected to provide * * * testimony favorable to the party who has not called him” (Gonzalez, 68 NY2d, at 427; see, majority opn, at 177). The latter element of that test, referred to as "control,” will be satisfied when the prosecution establishes that the absent witness’ testimony would not be hostile to the defense theory of the case. Only after that burden was satisfied was defendant required to come forward with evidence within his exclusive knowledge to otherwise "account for the witness’ absence” (Gonzalez, supra, at 428) and defeat the prosecution’s claim that his father would have been a witness with " 'good will’ ” towards the defense (id., at 430, quoting Richardson, Evidence § 92, at 66 [Prince 10th ed]). In this case, the burden never shifted to defendant, and it is on this point that I depart from the majority’s holding.
The majority erroneously concludes that the People met their burden of proving that defendant’s father was under defendant’s "control” merely by demonstrating that a familial relationship existed between defendant and the missing witness, and that the burden then shifted to defendant to verify that his father would have invoked the privilege against self-incrimination (see, majority opn, at 177). This overly simplistic view ignores the reality that other circumstances — such as the obvious risk of criminal prosecution — may operate to negate the inference derived from the natural tendency of a family member to testify with a bias in favor of a relative and will preclude the party seeking the charge from satisfying its initial burden. Indeed, while a familial relationship may generally be indicative of good will between a party and a witness, it is by no means dispositive of the determination that the witness is within that party’s control, and the major*182ity misreads this Court’s precedent in concluding that the prosecution met its burden here simply by relying on that fact (see, People v Gonzalez, 68 NY2d 424, supra; People v Rodriguez, 38 NY2d 95; People v De Jesus, 42 NY2d 519, 525).
The majority properly acknowledges that no further verification of a missing witness’ existence or plans to invoke the privilege against self-incrimination is needed where "the undisputable inference * * * would clearly be that the material testimony of that witness would likely be incriminating and that the witness would refuse to testify” (majority opn, at 178). In other words, where "the most likely result of calling * * * a witness would have been his refusal to testify on self-incrimination grounds”, the inference that the witness would have given testimony favorable to the party who otherwise would have naturally called him or her is negated and the proponent’s burden is not satisfied (People v Bessard, 148 AD2d 49, 54 [3d Dept 1989, Levine, J.]). Indeed, "the jury is not entitled to draw any inference from a failure to testify that is ascribable to the witness’s reliance on his Fifth Amendment privilege” (Bowles v United States, 439 F2d 536, 542 [DC Cir 1970]; see also, Pennewell v United States, 353 F2d 870, 871 [DC Cir 1965]). There is no sound reason for the majority’s failure to apply that analysis to preclude adverse comment on the absence of defendant’s father here.
Part of the internal logic of defense theory — i.e., that defendant’s father was the true possessor of the gun — is inherently inconsistent with any expectation that the absent father would substantiate that defense. Thus, it would not be natural or logical for the defense to call this witness, whose interests are potentially adverse to the defense theory, and no adverse comment is justified on this record (see, United States v Pitts, 918 F2d 197, 200 [DC Cir 1990]). Additionally, the majority’s fears that a defendant could mount a perjurious defense by shifting the blame to a fictitious third party are not implicated here (see, majority opn, at 178). Significantly, the People do not dispute that defendant’s father exists, or that he owned the house where the gun was found. Indeed, the People never disputed that defendant’s father was likely to invoke the 5th Amendment privilege, that defense counsel had knowledge of that fact or that he had met with the missing witness. Rather, the People’s sole contention in support of their request for an adverse inference charge — and the sole basis for the trial court’s grant of that request — was that defendant’s father could testify to other nonincriminatory facts, such as his *183depression and suicidal thoughts, which would not subject him to criminal prosecution. Tellingly, the framing of the prosecution’s request itself is internally inconsistent with the notion that any doubt existed as to the witness’ existence or intent to invoke the privilege. Defense counsel was never required to substantiate the accepted assertion that defendant’s father would have invoked his privilege, and should not now be penalized for failing to do so.
In any event, testimony by the father as to those collateral facts, although relevant, would not have supported the defense in any material respect. To do so, defendant’s father would have had to testify as to the sole material issue in the case— who possessed the gun. Indeed, even a statement by defendant’s father that he owned or was present in the house when the shots were fired and where the gun was found could have potentially subjected him to criminal liability on a constructive possession theory. Clearly, where, as here, an alternative explanation exists for a witness’ absence which is at least as likely as the prospect that the witness was not called because the testimony would be damaging, the adverse inference loses its probative force and should not be given.
Finally, it cannot be said on this record that the error in adversely commenting on defendant’s father’s absence was harmless where the heart of the defense was that the missing witness was the actual culprit and that defendant had temporarily taken possession of the gun to secure that witness’ safety. Indeed, defendant’s success depended solely on the jury’s assessment of his credibility and its acceptance of defendant’s claim that his father was the true possessor of the gun, and the missing witness charge may well have influenced the jury on this critical determination (see, United States v Pitts, 918 F2d 197, 201, supra). Accordingly, I vote to reverse.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Bellacosa, Smith and Ciparick concur with Judge Levine; Judge Titone dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion in which Judge Simons concurs.
Order affirmed.

=== CASE 2224569 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:24.962996+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 240 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 422
DeBOARD
v.
FAIRWOOD VILLAS CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION
Docket No. 126229.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 15, 1992.
Approved for publication March 11, 1992, at 9:00 A.M.
O'Reilly, Rancilio, Nitz, Andrews & Turnbull, P.C. (by Michael J. Piatek and Kenneth L. Rancilio), for Michael DeBoard.
Jacobs & Miller (by James J. Raftery), for Fairwood Villas Condominium Association and Metro Group Management Corporation.
*241 Lizza & Mulcahy, P.C. (by David M. Lawson), for William and Lisa Boyer.
Before: WEAVER, P.J., and MICHAEL J. KELLY and MARILYN KELLY, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
This case arose when plaintiff, Michael DeBoard, tripped over a warped board on the deck of his sister's condominium fracturing his hip. The complaint named Fairwood Villas Condominium Association, which maintains the condominium, and Metro Group Management Corporation as defendants. DeBoard's sister and brother-in-law, William and Lisa Boyer, were later added as third-party defendants. The circuit court granted defendants' motion for summary disposition because of unrebutted testimony that plaintiff was fully aware of the deck's defective condition before he fell. MCR 2.116(C)(10).
On appeal, plaintiff claims that a genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether he appreciated the danger and risk of harm. He alleges, also, that the trial court erroneously invoked the doctrine of contributory negligence to bar him from relief. We affirm the grant of summary disposition.
It is undisputed that plaintiff was a social guest, a licensee, in the Boyers' home when the accident occurred. The parties also agree that the duty of care that a premises owner owes to a licensee is accurately stated in SJI2d 19.06:
A possessor of premises is liable for physical harm caused to a licensee by a condition on the premises if, but only if 
a. the possessor knew or should have known of the condition and should have realized that it involved an unreasonable risk of harm to the licensee, and should have expected that he would not discover or realize the danger; and
b. the possessor failed to exercise reasonable *242 care to make the condition safe, or to warn the licensee of the condition and the risk involved; and
c. the licensee did not know or have reason to know of the condition and the risk involved. [Emphasis added.]
Similarly, our Supreme Court has stated that a "landowner only owes a licensee a duty to warn the licensee of any hidden dangers he knows or has reason to know of, if the licensee does not know or has no reason to know of the dangers involved." Wymer v Holmes, 429 Mich. 66, 71, n 1; 412 NW2d 213 (1987). See also Forche v Gieseler, 174 Mich. App. 588, 597; 436 NW2d 437 (1989); 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 342, p 210.
In the instant case, the trial court granted defendants' motion, because deposition testimony showed that plaintiff was made aware of the defect in the deck the day before he tripped on it. We agree that there existed no genuine issue of fact on this issue and that summary disposition was therefore proper. MCR 2.116(C)(10); Farm Bureau Mutual Ins Co v Stark, 437 Mich. 175, 184-185; 468 NW2d 498 (1991).
Andrea Resnick testified that, the day before the accident, she and plaintiff looked out the window at the deck and noticed a board "sticking up" four to six inches. She commented to plaintiff that the deck was the sloppiest carpentry job she had ever seen, and plaintiff agreed. Resnick's deposition was never contradicted, and plaintiff's counsel conceded that plaintiff was aware of the defect.
Plaintiff's counsel argues, however, that there was no testimony that plaintiff realized the danger posed by the deck's condition. In situations such as this one, where the licensee is an adult, "the fact that the [defective] condition is obvious is usually sufficient to apprise [the licensee], as fully as the *243 possessor, of the full extent of the risk involved." 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 342, comment b, p 210. Given plaintiff's knowledge of the board protruding four or more inches from the deck, no reasonable person could conclude that he was unaware of the danger of tripping over it. Accordingly, summary disposition was properly granted. Stark, supra.
Plaintiff argues that the trial court erroneously applied the abandoned doctrine of contributory negligence to bar plaintiff from recovering. He is incorrect. The trial court granted summary disposition because, under the facts of this case, defendants had no duty to warn plaintiff of the defect in the deck. The court's decision had nothing to do with damages or contributory and comparative negligence.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740705 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:36.378289+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The defendant insurer appeals as of right from a jury award of $42,875.42 for plaintiff representing first-party no-fault benefits. The sole issue on appeal is whether plaintiff’s injuries fall within the statutory definition of those for which a no-fault insurer is liable. We find they do.
The facts of this case are that plaintiff became involved in a dispute as he drove home from a party. He and his passenger, Jeffrey Dingo, pursued another vehicle in a high speed chase while Dingo threw several beer bottles at it. The chase ended when the driver of the other vehicle, Vernon Oaks, reached his home.
Oaks ran into the house, brought out a 20-gauge pump shotgun, walked into the street and approached plaintiff’s car which began "creeping” toward Oaks. Oaks testified that he aimed between the headlights of the car and fired in an attempt to disable the car. Although Oaks intended to strike the radiator, the shot struck plaintiff in*334stead. In a separate criminal proceeding, Oaks pled guilty to careless discharge of a firearm.
Plaintiff sued defendant, his automobile insurer, when defendant refused to pay him no-fault benefits. Defendant’s liability in this case hinges on the meaning of the language at MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1):
Under personal protection insurance an insurer is liable to pay benefits for accidental bodily injury arising out of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle .... [Emphasis added.]
Defendant argues that plaintiff did not sustain an injury arising out of the operation of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle regardless of the intent of Vernon Oaks.
The same issue was addressed by this Court in Jones v Allstate Ins Co, 161 Mich App 450, 454-456; 411 NW2d 457 (1987). There, we stated:
In Thornton v Allstate Ins Co, 425 Mich 643, 659-660; 391 NW2d 320 (1986), the Supreme Court noted:
"In drafting MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1), the Legislature limited no-fault pip benefits to injuries arising out of the 'use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle’ In our view, this language shows that the Legislature was aware of the causation dispute and chose to provide coverage only where the causal connection between the injury and the use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle is more than incidental, fortuitous, or 'but for.’ The involvement of the car in the injury should be 'directly related to its character as a motor vehicle.’ Miller v Auto-Owners [Ins Co], supra [411 Mich 633; 309 NW2d 544 (1981)]. Therefore, the first consideration under MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1), must be the relationship between the injury and the vehicular use of a motor vehicle. *335Without a relation that is more than 'but for,’ incidental, or fortuitous, there can be no recovery of pip benefits.”
An assault by an armed assailant upon the driver of a car is generally not the type of conduct that is reasonably identifiable with the use of an automobile, O’Key v State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins Co, 89 Mich App 526; 280 NW2d 583 (1979), lv den 406 Mich 1014 (1979); DAIIE v Higginbotham, 95 Mich App 213; 290 NW2d 414 (1980); Hamka v Automobile Club of Michigan, 89 Mich App 644; 280 NW2d 512 (1979); Ciaramitaro v State Farm Ins Co, 107 Mich App 68; 308 NW2d 661 (1981), lv den 413 Mich 861 (1982); Shaw v Allstate Ins Co, 141 Mich App 331; 367 NW2d 388 (1985); Thornton, supra, 646. However, when an assault is directed at the vehicle itself, rather than the driver, the causal relationship is sufficient for liability, Mann v DAIIE, 111 Mich App 637; 314 NW2d 719 (1981), lv den 414 Mich 903 (1982); Saunders v DAIIE, 123 Mich App 570; 332 NW2d 613 (1983). In such a case, the automobile is not merely the situs of the injury, and there is a direct relation between the functional character of the motor vehicle and the injuries. See Thornton, supra, 660.
In Jones, the plaintiff was shot as he sat in a car. The trial court granted the insurer’s motion for summary disposition. We reversed, because the plaintiff had presented evidence that the assault was directed, not at him, but at his automobile. Thus, there remained a material factual issue over the insurer’s liability. Jones, 456.
Here, the jury expressly found that Oaks’ assault was directed at plaintiffs automobile rather than at plaintiff. As in Jones, supra, the assault created a sufficient causal relationship between the injury and the injured party’s use of the insured automobile to allow recovery of no-fault benefits. Also see Mann, supra; Saunders, supra; *336Kreighbaum v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 170 Mich App 583; 428 NW2d 718 (1988).
Defendant argues that this case should not turn on whether Oaks intended to shoot plaintiff or to shoot the car. It relies on a footnote in Thornton, which states, in pertinent part:
We reject the focus that the Florida and Minnesota courts place upon the intent of the assailant as providing the requisite nexus between the injury and the use of the motor vehicle. See generally Government Employees Ins Co v Novak, [453 So 2d 1116, 1119 (Fla, 1984)] and Meric v Mid-Century Ins, [343 NWd 688, 655 (Minn App, 1984)]. [Thornton, 660, n 10; emphasis added.]
However, the Thornton Court did not reject the distinction between attacks directed at a driver versus attacks directed at a vehicle. To the contrary, the Court cited with seeming approval two earlier cases that held an insurer liable for no-fault coverage based on this precise distinction. Thornton, 660, citing Saunders, supra; Mann, supra.
Rather, the Court’s use of the expression "intent of the assailant” in the footnote referred to the underlying purpose of or motivation behind the assailant’s acts. For example, in both opinions cited in the footnote, an assailant, motivated by the intent to steal a vehicle, shot the driver of the vehicle. Both the Florida and Minnesota courts held that, since the drivers’ injuries stemmed from the assailants’ intent to take the vehicles, the insurers were obligated to provide benefits. Novak, supra; Meric, supra.
What the Thornton Court rejected was the approach of permitting recovery so long as the assailant’s underlying reason for committing the attack had some fortuitous connection to a motor vehicle. *337Accordingly, in that case, the mere fact that a taxi driver was robbed in his taxi was insufficient to establish entitlement to no-fault benefits for injuries sustained during the robbery. The taxi was simply the situs of the injury. Thornton, 659-661.
The present case is distinguishable from cases such as Thornton, Novak and Meric in that the assault was directed at the vehicle plaintiff was driving, not at plaintiff. Here, the car was not merely the situs of the insured’s injuries; plaintiff would not have been shot had he not been in the car. Rather, his injuries stemmed from the functional character of the motor vehicle. Jones, 455-456. Accordingly, plaintiff is entitled to no-fault benefits. Id.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740706 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:36.382471+00 ===

Mackenzie, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. In my view, the award of no-fault benefits to plaintiff was improper under the circumstances of this case.
The sole issue in this case is whether plaintiff’s injuries "[arose] out of the use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle.” MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1). In Thornton v Allstate Ins Co, 425 Mich 643, 659-660; 391 NW2d 320 (1986), our Supreme Court stated:
In drafting MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1), the Legislature limited no-fault pip benefits to injuries arising out of the "use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle.” In our view, this language shows that the Legislature was aware of the causation dispute and chose to provide coverage only where the causal connection between the injury and the use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle is more than incidental, fortuitous, or "but for.” The involvement of the car in the injury should be "directly related to its character as a motor vehi*338cle.” Miller v Auto-Owners [Ins Co, 411 Mich 633; 309 NW2d 544 (1981)]. Therefore, the first consideration under MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 13105(1), must be the relationship between the injury and the vehicular use of a motor vehicle.10 Without a relation that is more than "but for,” incidental, or fortuitous, there can be no recovery of pip benefits.
The majority concludes that because Oaks intended to harm plaintiffs automobile rather than plaintiff, his injuries arose out of the use of his motor vehicle as a motor vehicle. See Jones v Allstate Ins Co, 161 Mich App 450; 411 NW2d 457 (1987). In my opinion, in reaching this conclusion, the majority has misconstrued the Thornton decision. I read Thornton as determining that the intent of an assailant is irrelevant when deciding whether the requisite causation exists under § 3105(1) to justify no-fault coverage.
In Thornton, the plaintiff was injured during an armed robbery of the taxicab that he drove. The Supreme Court concluded that Thornton was not entitled to personal injury protection benefits because the taxi "was merely the situs of the armed robbery—the injury could have occurred whether or not Mr. Thornton used a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle.” 425 Mich 660.
This case presents a similar situation. As in Thornton, the inherent nature or the functional *339character of plaintiff’s motor vehicle did not cause his injuries. Instead, plaintiff was injured as a result of his dispute with Oaks, and plaintiff’s automobile merely served as the target of Oaks’ gunfire and the situs where plaintiff was shot. See 425 Mich 660-661.
The relationship between the functional character of plaintiff’s automobile and his injuries is too indirect to satisfy the statutory requirement that the injuries "aris[e] out of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle.” Because a motor vehicle was not the cause of plaintiff’s injuries, he was not entitled to recover no-fault benefits. Accordingly, I would reverse.
We reject the focus that the Florida and Minnesota courts place upon the intent of the assailant as providing the requisite nexus between the injury and the use of the motor vehicle. See generally Government Employees Ins Co v Novak, [453 So 2d 1116 (Fla, 1984)] and Meric v Mid-Century Ins, [343 NW2d 688 (Minn App, 1984)]. Under our no-fault legislation, intentionality is relevant where specified by the statute. See, e.g., MCL 500.3105(4); MSA 24.13105(4). However, for purposes of determining whether the requisite causation exists under § 3105(1), the proper focus is upon the relation between the injury and the use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle. [Emphasis in the original.]

=== CASE 2224574 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.078481+00 ===

37 Mass. App. Ct. 377 (1994)
639 N.E.2d 1113
SUSAN M. CATALANO & another[1]
vs.
FIRST ESSEX SAVINGS BANK & another.[2]
No. 93-P-1564.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
June 9, 1994.
September 30, 1994.
Present: BROWN, FINE, & PORADA, JJ.
*378 Evan T. Lawson for the plaintiffs.
Steven M. Cowley for the defendants.
PORADA, J.
The plaintiff Susan M. Catalano filed a complaint in the Superior Court for negligent infliction of emotional distress against her former employer, First Essex Savings Bank (employer), and for intentional interference with an advantageous relationship against her former co-employee, James A. Sgroi. Her husband filed claims against the defendants for loss of consortium based on those torts. The defendants filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that the claims were barred by the exclusivity provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act. G.L.c. 152, § 24, as in effect prior to St. 1991, c. 398, § 43. Citing Anzalone v. Massachusetts Bay Transp. Authy., 403 Mass. 119 (1988), the judge allowed the motion. The plaintiffs appeal from the dismissal of their action. The defendants have filed a cross appeal alleging that the appeal is not properly before us. We agree that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons stated, but express our views on the merits at the urging of counsel because of the alleged uncertainty and confusion that purportedly exists among the members of the bar and public concerning the initiation of legal proceedings involving the claims raised in this appeal. See Maguire v. Boston Rent Equity Bd., 25 Mass. App. Ct. 951, 951 (1988).
We address each of the parties' claims of error.
1. Negligent infliction of emotional distress. The plaintiffs argue that the claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is not barred by the exclusivity provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act because injuries incurred by the negligent infliction of emotional distress are not compensable under the Act. They point to those provisions of G.L.c. 152, § 1(7A), as amended through St. 1985, c. 572, § 11, and St. 1986, c. 662, § 6, which define personal injury as follows: "Personal injuries shall include mental or emotional disabilities only where a significant contributing cause of *379 such disability is an event or series of events occurring within the employment. No mental or emotional disability arising principally out of a bona fide, personnel action including a transfer, promotion, demotion, or termination except such action which is the intentional infliction of emotional harm shall be deemed to be a personal injury within the meaning of this chapter." The plaintiffs read this statute to mean that only intentionally inflicted emotional injuries arising out of personnel actions are covered under the act.
Prior to the 1985 and 1986 amendments to G.L.c. 152, § 1(7A), emotional distress arising out of one's employment was recognized as a compensable injury. Fitzgibbon's Case, 374 Mass. 633, 637-638 (1978). Albanese's Case, 378 Mass. 14, 17 (1979). Foley v. Polaroid Corp., 381 Mass. 545, 550 (1980). In Kelly's Case, 394 Mass 684 (1985), the Supreme Judicial Court was faced with the issue whether an emotional disability suffered by an employee after she was transferred to another department was a compensable personal injury under the act. In holding that it was, the Court stated that it was up to the Legislature "to determine, as a matter of public policy, whether one of the costs of doing business in this Commonwealth shall be the compensation of those few employees who do suffer emotional disability as a result of being laid off or transferred...." Id. at 689. In apparent response, the Legislature shortly thereafter enacted those amendments to § 1 (7A), which are the subject of this action. Robinson's Case, 416 Mass. 454, 459 (1993). The 1985 amendment simply codified the inclusion of mental and emotional disabilities within the definition of "personal injury" under the act and provided that in order to recover for that type of injury the employee must prove that a significant contributing cause of the disability was an event or events occurring within the employment. Ibid. The 1986 amendment provided that if the emotional disability arises out of a bona fide personnel action, it is not compensable unless it is the result of intentional infliction of emotional harm. Ibid.
Although the Legislature did not explicitly mention claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress in the enactment *380 of those amendments, this does not prevent us from giving those amendments a reasonable construction in accord with the framers' probable intent. Tedford v. Massachusetts Hous. Fin. Agency, 390 Mass. 688, 696 (1984). It is obvious that the Legislature wished to protect the employer from liability under the Act for claims arising out of bona fide personnel actions unless motivated by an intent to inflict emotional distress. In those circumstances, it seems unlikely that the Legislature intended to preserve a civil action from claims based on negligent infliction of emotional distress that arise from a bona fide personnel action. To do so would negate not only the purpose of relieving employers from the financial burdens of such claims, see Mullen v. Ludlow Hosp. Soc., 32 Mass. App. Ct. 968, 970 (1992)(it would be a "paradox to eliminate nonintentional infliction of emotional harm ... as a workers' compensation claim but to allow such a claim through another door as a common law action"), but also negate the intended purpose of the Workers' Compensation Act to provide a uniform, statutory remedy for injured workers, in contrast to a piecemeal, tort-based system, see Ferriter v. Daniel O'Connell's Sons, Inc., 381 Mass. 507, 519 (1980). As a result, there is no reason to believe that the Legislature intended to open the door for civil actions based on claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress arising out of bona fide personnel actions. But see Locke, Workmen's Compensation 2d § 10.5, at 143-144 (Nason & Wall Supp. 1990).
Nor are we persuaded that the Legislature intended to eliminate claims under the Workers' Compensation Act for negligent infliction of emotional distress not arising from a bona fide personnel action. Traditionally, the key to whether the Workers' Compensation Act precludes a common law right of action has always rested upon the nature of the injury for which a plaintiff seeks to recover and not the nature of the defendant's act. Foley v. Polaroid Corp., 381 Mass. at 553. The 1985 and 1986 amendments make clear that when events occurring at work are a significant contributing cause of emotional or mental disabilities, those injuries are compensable *381 under the Act unless they arose from a bona fide personnel action not intended to inflict emotional distress. Where the plaintiffs' complaint in this case alleges that Susan Catalano's emotional disability arose out of a daily "campaign" of harassment by Sgroi, a fellow worker, of which her employer was on notice but failed to take steps to prevent, we conclude that her claim was compensable under the Workers' Compensation Act and, thus, properly dismissed under the exclusivity clause of the Workers' Compensation Act, G.L.c. 152, § 24.[3]
2. Intentional interference with an advantageous relationship. As the basis for the plaintiffs' claim of intentional interference with an advantageous relationship against Sgroi in their complaint, the plaintiffs allege that Sgroi harassed Susan M. Catalano by his "(a) constant detailed direction of [her] and her subordinates although [he] was not directly in authority over her; (b) continual interference with her performance of her duties which prevented [her] from performing her job properly; (c) verbally harassing and intimidating [her] and causing her to reasonably fear that her job was in jeopardy; and (d) making unreasonable demands as to the hours [she] was to work and time she was allowed to take for vacation, threatening that if she did not comply her job was in jeopardy." The complaint further alleges that as a result the plaintiff Susan M. Catalano suffered an emotional disability resulting in her resignation.
A claim against a fellow worker for the commission of an intentional tort will be barred by the exclusivity clause of the Workers' Compensation Act, G.L.c. 152, § 24, if committed within the course of the worker's employment and in furtherance of the employer's interest. O'Connell v. Chasdi, 400 *382 Mass. 686, 690-691 (1987). Apparently finding that Sgroi's conduct was similar in kind to that inflicted on the plaintiff in Anzalone v. Massachusetts Bay Transp. Authy., 403 Mass. at 122-125, which the Supreme Judicial Court found to be within the course of the coworker's employment and in furtherance of the interests of his employer, the motion judge dismissed the claim. The plaintiffs argue that the Anzalone case is not controlling because Sgroi was not Susan M. Catalano's supervisor. We find this to be a distinction without a difference, because Sgroi was indeed a vice president of the corporation and Susan M. Catalano, an assistant treasurer. In any event, we do not consider Anzalone controlling because at this stage of the proceeding, at least with respect to the allegation that Sgroi continually interfered with Susan M. Catalano's performance of her duties preventing her from doing her job properly, we are not prepared to say that the plaintiffs cannot prove any set of facts demonstrating that Sgroi's actions were not within the course of his employment or not in the furtherance of his employer's interests. Nader v. Citron, 372 Mass. 96, 97-98 (1977). Our decision, however, is of little consequence in light of the result we reach on the procedural issues in this case.
3. Propriety of the appeal. The defendants argue that the plaintiffs' appeal is not properly before us. We agree.[4]
In order to understand the result we reach, we set forth the confusing procedural history of this case. After the judge allowed the defendants' motion to dismiss on October 25, 1990, the plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal from the order of dismissal on November 20, 1990. No judgment of dismissal had entered at that time. The plaintiffs took no further action in this case until April 20, 1993, when they filed a motion for entry of judgment. The defendants opposed this motion and moved to dismiss the appeal on the ground that the *383 plaintiffs had taken no action to prosecute their appeal for two and one-half years. On May 20, 1993, the motion judge in the Superior Court denied the plaintiffs' motion for entry of judgment and allowed the defendants' motion to dismiss the appeal for failure to prosecute the appeal.
The plaintiffs then filed a petition for relief with the single justice of the Appeals Court under G.L.c. 231, § 118, first paragraph, from those rulings. After the single justice denied the petition, the plaintiffs returned to the Superior Court and filed a motion requesting entry of final judgment on the May 20, 1993, order dismissing the appeal. The defendants opposed that motion. Noting that no judgment of dismissal had ever entered on the allowance of the defendants' motion to dismiss, another judge of the Superior Court allowed the motion for entry of judgment and ordered that judgment of dismissal on the order dismissing the plaintiffs' complaint enter forthwith. The judgment of dismissal was entered on October 21, 1993. The plaintiff then appealed from the October 21, 1993, judgment, and the defendant filed a cross appeal.
The thrust of the defendants' cross appeal is that the plaintiffs never filed an appeal from the first Superior Court judge's denial of their motion for entry of judgment and dismissal of their appeal and, as a result, the second Superior Court judge lacked the authority to act on the plaintiffs' motion for entry of judgment. It is well established that the proper appellate route from the dismissal of an appeal is an appeal to the full court of the Appeals Court rather than an appeal to a single justice of the Appeals Court. Zieminski v. Berkshire Div. of the Probate and Family Court, 408 Mass. 1008, 1009 (1990). Robinson v. Planning Bd. of Wayland, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 920, 922 (1986). Consequently, if the plaintiffs had filed a timely appeal with us, we could have considered and, if appropriate, rectified the errors claimed by the plaintiffs in the motion judge's rulings. Robinson v. Planning Bd. of Wayland, 23 Mass. App. Ct. at 921.
Instead, the plaintiffs sought to reactivate their appeal by filing another motion for entry of judgment in the trial court. They contend that this course of action was appropriate because, *384 at the time that the first Superior Court judge acted on those motions, no final judgment had entered in this case. Consequently, they argue that until a final judgment entered, a Superior Court judge would not be bound by the prior rulings entered by another Superior Court judge.
While it is true, that under the law of the case doctrine, a second judge does have the power until final judgment to rule differently from the first judge on "`an issue or a question of fact or law once decided' in order to reach a just result," Goulet v. Whitin Machine Works, Inc., 399 Mass. 547, 554 (1987) (citation omitted), this doctrine is inapplicable to the circumstances of this case. Once the first Superior Court judge denied the plaintiffs' motion for entry of final judgment and allowed the defendants' motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' appeal, the case had reached finality in the trial court and the plaintiffs' only redress lay in an appellate court. Zieminski v. Berkshire Div. of the Probate and Family Court, 408 Mass. at 1009. Robinson v. Planning Bd. of Wayland, 23 Mass. App. Ct. at 921. See also Maciuca v. Papit, 31 Mass. App. Ct. 540, 544-545 (1991).
Accordingly, we conclude that the plaintiffs' appeal is not properly before us because of their failure to take a timely appeal from the rulings of the first Superior Court judge dismissing their appeal and denying their motion for entry of final judgment and that the appeal should be dismissed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Anthony Catalano.
[2]  James A. Sgroi.
[3]  Following oral argument in this case, the defendants have submitted to the panel a copy of a lump sum settlement by Susan M. Catalano of her claim for mental or emotional injuries against her employer pursuant to the provisions of G.L.c. 152, § 48. The plaintiffs have not challenged its authenticity. Accordingly, the plaintiffs' claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress and for loss of consortium based on this tort would be barred under the provisions of G.L.c. 152, §§ 23, 24. McLaughlin v. Stackpole Fibers Co., 403 Mass. 360, 361-362 (1988).
[4]  The within is not a case where plaintiffs' appellate rights should be preserved because the procedural tangle lay with the failure of the court to follow its rules, see Knupp v. Gulf Oil Corp., 29 Mass. App. Ct. 116, 121 (1990), or the defendant should be estopped by inconsistent conduct from raising the issue, see Brown v. Quinn, 406 Mass. 641, 646 (1990).

=== CASE 2224575 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.099311+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 481 (1992)
Bobbie J. KAY, Respondent,
v.
PETER MOTOR COMPANY, INC., Appellant.
No. C1-91-1251.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
March 31, 1992.
*482 Robert J. Feigh, Hall, Byers, Hanson, Steil & Weinberger, P.A., St. Cloud, for respondent.
Douglas P. Anderson, Rosenmeir, Anderson & Vogel, Little Falls, for appellant.
Considered and decided by CRIPPEN, P.J., and PARKER and MULALLY,[*] JJ.
OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
Appellant challenges the trial court's determination that (1) the company had notice of sexual harassment where the chief executive officer was the perpetrator of the harassment, (2) punitive damages were appropriate given the circumstances of the case, and (3) evidence of the supervisor's treatment of other employees was admissible. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant Peter Motor Company, Inc. is a closely held corporation, owned in part by Peter Lillemoe, which primarily sells new and used automobiles. In October 1988, respondent Bobbie Kay began work for Peter Motors as a salesperson. The record reveals that Lillemoe and Kay developed a friendly relationship and that Kay would often share her personal problems with Lillemoe and he would give her advice.
However, the record also reveals a number of incidents which demonstrate another side to their relationship which forms the basis of her complaint. At a sales meeting in March 1990, Lillemoe asked respondent when she last experienced an orgasm. Also in March, Lillemoe displayed a windup toy penis to Kay while at work. Sometime in the spring, Lillemoe also participated in collecting money in an attempt to encourage another female employee to shake her breasts. Lillemoe asked respondent for some change for this fund, although he did not fully explain why he was asking for the money.
On May 5, 1990, Lillemoe directed a number of sexually derogatory remarks to Kay. Among other statements, Lillemoe asked, in the presence of other salespersons, when respondent had last been "gang banged." Later in the day, Lillemoe informed Kay that he had been at a party where he had watched a woman suck on her own nipples. Still later in the day, Lillemoe announced *483 over the intercom, while customers and employees were present, "Let's have a gang bang." Respondent testified that she told Lillemoe about the presence of customers and he answered "so let them join in." Thereafter Lillemoe held a quarter pitching contest with male salespersons to determine who would get to "have Bobbie" first. Testimony also revealed that Lillemoe referred to Kay as a "fat pig in heat" to another employee and asked "how would you like to jump in the sack with that?" Lillemoe stated that these comments were merely friendly comments which should not be taken out of context.
Respondent's employment terminated on May 16, 1990, after Lillemoe stated that she had mishandled a deal and it would be better if they parted company. Kay never filed a complaint with Peter Motors alleging sexual harassment by Peter Lillemoe while she was employed by the company.
In January 1991, respondent filed suit against the appellant company alleging sexual harassment in violation of Minn. Stat. § 363.01, subd. 41 (1990). After a bench trial, the court found that appellant's chief executive officer and president, Lillemoe, was respondent's supervisor and that he had engaged in harassing conduct which made her employment atmosphere hostile. The court also found that the employer knew or should have known of the harassment and that it failed to take corrective action. The court awarded respondent $38,000 in compensatory damages, $20,593 in attorney fees, and $7,000 in punitive damages. In addition, the court awarded the State of Minnesota a $1,000 civil penalty. Thereafter, the court denied appellant's motion for a new trial.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err as a matter of law when it determined that respondent was entitled to recover damages against her former employer even though she had never formally complained, either orally or in writing?
2. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in concluding that appellant's conduct was willfully indifferent to respondent's rights and therefore she was entitled to an award of punitive damages?
3. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in admitting testimony about past wrongs when the purpose was to demonstrate the person's knowledge, intent and motive?
ANALYSIS
The denial of a motion for a new trial will not be reversed absent a clear abuse of the trial court's discretion. Eklund v. Lund, 301 Minn. 359, 362, 222 N.W.2d 348, 351 (1974). The trial court's findings should not be disturbed if they are reasonably supported by evidence in the record considered as a whole. Hubbard v. United Press Int'l, Inc., 330 N.W.2d 428, 441 (Minn.1983). This deference is especially strong in employment discrimination cases. Sigurdson v. Isanti County, 386 N.W.2d 715, 721 (Minn.1986). However, questions of law are reviewed de novo. Western Insulation Servs., Inc. v. Central Nat'l Ins. Co., 460 N.W.2d 355, 357 (Minn. App.1990).
1.
The central issue in this appeal concerns the legal determination that the appellant company had sufficient notice of the alleged sexual harassment. Appellant contends that because respondent did not complain there was no reason for appellant to know that sexual harassment was occurring and it did not have a proper opportunity to address the harassment. Respondent contends the company had notice because the company's president and chief executive officer was the harasser.
The Minnesota Supreme Court in McNabb v. Cub Foods, 352 N.W.2d 378 (Minn.1984), stated that the liability inquiry should focus on whether the employer knew or should have known about the harassment:
This case is like Continental Can Co. v. State, 297 N.W.2d 241 (Minn.1980). Continental Can established employer culpability if the employer "knew or should have known" that sexual harassment *484 was taking place. 297 N.W.2d at 249. See also Hussa v. Employment Sec. Dept., 34 Wash.App. 857, 664 P.2d 1286 (1983). It involved management acceptance of an environment of sexual harassment. See, e.g., Heelan v. Johns-Manville Corp., 451 F. Supp. 1382, 1390 (D.Colo.1978).
McNabb, 352 N.W.2d at 382. The court found that Cub Foods knew about the harassment because the victim had communicated her problems to her immediate supervisor, whom the court deemed to be "management" for the purpose of imputing knowledge to the corporation. Id. at 383; see also Tretter v. Liquipak Int'l, Inc., 356 N.W.2d 713, 715 (Minn.App.1984) (imputing supervisor's knowledge of harassment to employer).
We observe that the McNabb court adopted the trial court's conclusion that the victim "was not required to formally complain of sexual harassment of which the employer had knowledge." McNabb, 352 N.W.2d at 383; see also Bersie v. Zycad Corp., 417 N.W.2d 288, 291 (Minn.App. 1987) (employer liability may be created through either actual knowledge of incidents or the fact that incidents were so obvious or pervasive employer should have known of alleged misconduct), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. May 5, 1988).
Despite this authority, appellant contends a victim of sexual harassment should not be allowed to recover absent a complaint to the employer. No reported case has required a complaint where the employer's grievance procedures do not outline a mandatory complaint procedure. See Bersie, 417 N.W.2d at 294 (Lansing, J., dissenting) (employer not entitled to complaint on harassment perpetrated by supervisors, "particularly if the employer has not established an express policy against sexual harassment or any procedure for resolving harassment claims") (citing Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 72-3, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 2408, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986)). Compare Heaser v. Lerch, Bates & Assocs., Inc., 467 N.W.2d 833, 835 (Minn.App.1991) (where manager commits sexual harassment, such knowledge is imputed to employer and absent specific, detailed company policy, victim not required to make further complaints) with Weaver v. Minnesota Valley Lab., Inc., 470 N.W.2d 131, 135 (Minn.App.1991) (where company has written reporting policy, victim had duty to complain to identified individual in order to preserve sexual harassment claim against company).[1] In this case the employer had no express grievance reporting procedure and no policy for reporting wrongful harassment. Moreover, the employer has shown no training program or policy announcements which demonstrate a sincere desire to receive harassment complaints and respond to them.
The McNabb court also rejected an employer's argument that although the supervisor knew what was happening, he did not know it was "sexual harassment." McNabb, 352 N.W.2d at 383. The statute and prior harassment decisions permit objective characterization of wrongful harassment without reference to the victim's pain, outrage or complaints. Minn.Stat. § 363.01, subd. 41 (1990); see Gradine v. College of St. Scholastica, 426 N.W.2d 459, 465 (Minn.App.1988) (Foley, J., dissenting) (determination of whether acts constitute sexual harassment involves an objective standard), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Aug. 24, 1988).
We have no doubt that efforts of respondent to complain would add compulsion for a finding that Lillemoe knew his conduct was wrongful. Nonetheless, there was abundant evidence here to support the trial court's findings that Lillemoe's actions were patently intimidating, hostile and offensive; *485 and that by reason their "nature, intensity, location and object" they would have devastating impact.
Appellant cites Klink v. Ramsey County, 397 N.W.2d 894 (Minn.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Feb. 13, 1987), as authority that Lillemoe's comments and actions were not so intrinsically offensive as to give Peter Motors knowledge of the harassment. Klink must be distinguished as it involved the use of foul language and the display of obscene materials in private places. Id. at 902. The Klink court concluded that in the circumstances of that case
there was no realistic and reasonable way for the employer to know of the existence of sexual harassment unless Klink called it to the employer's attention.
Id. In contrast, the more personalized and derogatory nature of Lillemoe's public comments is patently offensive such that an employer should reasonably and realistically conclude that the actions constituted sexual harassment.
Since there was no specific sexual harassment policy at Peter Motors requiring respondent to report sexual harassment to the employer, she was not required to file a complaint. In addition, because Lillemoe's actions were patent acts of sexual harassment, his employer knew or should have known that Lillemoe's conduct constituted wrongful harassment. The trial court's finding of liability was not erroneous.
2.
Appellant also challenges the trial court's award of punitive damages pursuant to Minn.Stat. §§ 363.14, subd. 2, 363.071, subd. 2, and 549.20 (1990). Appellant contends that punitive damages were inappropriate in this case because (1) as appellant assesses the evidence, the acts of harassment occurred on a single day and (2) even though Lillemoe may have personally acted with willful indifference, there is no evidence that the company acted with willful indifference.
A party must prove that a defendant's acts showed a willful indifference to the rights or safety of others before punitive damages may be awarded. Minn.Stat. § 549.20, subd. 1; see Peterson v. Sorlien, 299 N.W.2d 123, 129 (Minn.1980) (punitive damages appropriate if plaintiff proves defendant "acted willfully, wantonly and maliciously"), cert. denied, 450 U.S. 1031, 101 S. Ct. 1742, 68 L. Ed. 2d 227 (1981). "Willful indifference" does not imply an intent to harm the plaintiff, but a knowing disregard for the plaintiff's rights or safety. Wirig v. Kinney Shoe Corp., 461 N.W.2d 374, 381 (Minn.1990). A punitive damage award should not be disturbed on appeal unless the award is so excessive that it is unreasonable. Stuempges v. Parke, Davis & Co., 297 N.W.2d 252, 259 (Minn.1980).
Appellant has failed to demonstrate that the award of punitive damages as authorized by statute was unreasonable. First, the record supports the trial court's finding that there were multiple acts of harassment that occurred over a period of months. Moreover, duration is simply one of the factors to be considered. See Minn. Stat. § 549.20, subd. 3; cf. Kienholz, 381 N.W.2d at 93-95 (single remark can constitute sexual harassment). Second, the knowledge of Lillemoe as both employee and officer was properly imputed to the corporation by the trial court. Lillemoe, as chief executive officer, failed to bring under control his own conduct, which he knew was offensive and knew or should have known constituted sexual harassment. See Tretter, 356 N.W.2d at 716 (punitive damages awarded because harassment continued for six months and employer did not take corrective action). Finally, the trial court properly considered the factors listed in Minn.Stat. § 549.20, subd. 3. The court's order made findings regarding Lillemoe's knowledge that respondent was entitled to a workplace free from harassment, Lillemoe's deliberate disregard for her rights, the specific occasions when harassment occurred, and the financial condition of the company.
3.
Appellant claims that the introduction of testimony from two former employees at *486 Peter Motor Company was an attempt by respondent to use past wrongs to prove current conduct. Such a use would violate Minn.R.Evid. 404 which prohibits the use of character evidence to prove current behavior. However, character evidence may be used if offered to demonstrate motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity or absence of mistake or accident. Minn.R.Evid. 404(b).
Appellant relies heavily on Kresko v. Rulli, 432 N.W.2d 764 (Minn.App.1988), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 31, 1989). This reliance is misplaced. In Kresko, the court upheld the exclusion of testimony offered by the victim to demonstrate that the employer's past relationships with other women showed a pattern or habit, and specifically found that none of the exceptions present in Rule 404(b) were at issue in the case. Id. at 768-69. By contrast, the trial court in this case determined that the offered testimony of other employees was not received for the purpose of showing that Lillemoe acted similarly toward respondent. Rather, it was offered to demonstrate Lillemoe's intent to make harassing comments to Kay, his knowledge of the offensive nature of his remarks and the hostile working environment he created by making such remarks, as well as his motive to make the remarks. Because of this, the trial court's limited use of this testimony was not erroneous.
DECISION
The trial court properly determined that Peter Motor Company should be held liable for Peter Lillemoe's acts of sexual harassment. In addition, the trial court's award of punitive damages was not unreasonable and the admission of testimony from other employees was not an improper use of character evidence.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the district court, acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn.Const. art. VI, § 2.
[1]  We also note that there is no reason to require an employee to complain to their supervisor when the supervisor is the harasser because the employee would not likely have a "reasonable expectation of assistance." True-Stone Corp. v. Gutzkow, 400 N.W.2d 836, 838 (Minn.App.1987); see also Dura Supreme v. Kienholz, 381 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Minn.App.1986) (no expectation of assistance where supervisor viewed harassment as "joke"); Porrazzo v. Nabisco, Inc., 360 N.W.2d 662, 664 (Minn.App.1985) (employer deemed to have knowledge of continuing harassment where supervisor was source of many problems).

=== CASE 9740707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:38.43841+00 ===

RUCKER, Judge.
Defendant-Appellant Natalie Hagy appeals the trial court's order revoking her probation and reinstating her previously sus*694pended sentence. Hagy raises a single issue for our review which we rephrase as whether she knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived her right to counsel.
We reverse.
On August 12, 1991, pursuant to the terms of a plea agreement, Hagy pled guilty to theft as a Class D felony for which she received an eighteen-month suspended sentence and was placed on probation. Approximately one month later, on September 14, 1991, Hagy appeared in court to respond to the State's allegations that she had violated the terms of her probation. Hagy was not represented by counsel. The trial court asked Hagy what she wanted to do about an attorney, and when Hagy replied that she did not know, the court continued the case for two weeks so that Hagy could review the allegations and decide whether she wanted to be represented by counsel. At the continued hearing on September 28, 1992, Hagy appeared without counsel and agreed to the trial court placing her on intensive supervision.
On April 12, 1993, Hagy appeared in court, again without counsel, regarding allegations that she had violated the terms of the intensive supervision program. The trial judge advised Hagy that she was entitled to representation by an attorney and that she could receive appointed counsel if she were indigent. Hagy requested court appointed counsel which the trial judge granted. The case was then continued. On May 8, 1998, Hagy appeared in court with her attorney and the judge gave Hagy until June 1, 1998, to begin complying with the terms of her probation, namely: report to her probation officer at least three times a week, obtain employment, regularly attend the Second Chanee Program, make an attempt to obtain her GED, and complete her community service hours. On June 14, 1998, Hagy again "appeared in court without counsel regarding allegations that she had still failed to comply with the terms of her probation. The trial judge again advised Hagy that she was entitled to counsel and asked Hagy what she wanted to do. Hagy replied that she would hire her own attorney. The case was continued for two weeks. At the continued hearing held June 28, 1993, Hagy appeared in court without counsel. The judge asked Hagy if she were representing herself, and Hagy replied yes. The hearing then proceeded. After listening to the evidence, the trial judge revoked Hagy's probation and ordered her to serve the previously imposed eighteen-month sentence. This appeal arose in due course.
The law is well-settled that whenever a defendant proceeds to trial without the benefit of counsel, the record must reflect that the right to counsel was voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived. Martin v. State (1992), Ind.App., 588 N.E.2d 1291; Mitchell v. State (1981), Ind.App., 417 N.E.2d 364. Waiver of the right to counsel may involve an assertion by the defendant of his or her constitutionally protected right of self-representation. However, where the defendant chooses to represent himself or herself, the defendant "should be made aware of the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation, so that the record will establish that 'he knows what he is doing and his choice is made with eyes open'" Faretta v. California (1975), 422 U.S. 806, 835, 95 S.Ct. 2525, 2541, 45 L.Ed.2d 562, 581. Following Faret-ta, our courts have required that where a defendant requests to proceed without counsel, the defendant must be fully advised regarding the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation. Kindred v. State (1988), Ind., 524 N.E.2d 279, McKeown v. State (1990), Ind.App., 556 N.E.2d 3, trans. denied.
The State does not argue that the trial court advised Hagy of the dangers or disadvantages of proceeding without counsel. Rather, relying on Leonard v. State (1991), Ind., 579 N.E.2d 1294, the State implies that Hagy waived her right to counsel by her background, experience, and conduct. However, in Leonard, the trial judge explicitly warned the defendant of the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation. Id. at 1296. Here, the trial judge merely asked Hagy, a nineteen-year-old high school dropout who appeared in court without counsel, "Are you just going to represent yourself today?" Record at 100. Hagy replied, "Yeah." Record at 100. The trial judge then asked the State to present its case. At *695the close of the hearing Hagy was ordered to serve her eighteen-month sentence. Hagy was never advised of the dangers and disadvantages of proceeding pro se. The record does not support the State's argument that Hagy knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived her right to counsel. The judgment of the trial court is therefore reversed.
Judgment reversed.
BARTEAU, J., concurs.
STATON, J., concurs with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740791 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:41:49.456352+00 ===

JUSTICE MYERSCOUGH, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I disagree that defendant State Farm owed no duty of indemnification to plaintiff. The majority simply concludes that the word “accident” does not encompass the event alleged in plaintiffs complaint but provides no reasoning to support that conclusion. Plaintiff Johnson has alleged in his complaint an “accident” that falls within the relevant coverage provisions of the insurance policy in question and triggers defendant’s duty to indemnify. As the majority observed, the insurance contract itself does not define the term “accident” and to determine whether the event alleged by defendant is an “accident,” we need to give the term “accident” its plain, ordinary, and popular meaning. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill. 2d at 108, 607 N.E.2d at 1212. According to its dictionary definition, “accident” means “an unforseen and unplanned event or circumstance” or “an unfortunate event resulting esp. from carelessness or ignorance.” Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 7 (10th ed. 2000). Such a definition is consistent with the policy’s exclusionary provision, which states: “we will not provide insurance for personal injury or property damage which is either expected or intended by you.” The parties have agreed in their briefs that an “accident” occurs when something “unexpected, unintended, and unusual happens.” Plaintiff clearly alleged an event that was both unexpected and unintended. Such an event qualifies as an “accident.” As plaintiff alleged in his complaint, his coexecutor, White, caused property damage to the estate; the estate’s successor administrator, Alton Bank, settled and assigned its claim for the damages to Safeco; and plaintiff is required to indemnify Safeco for these losses. Defendant State Farm admitted that it did not investigate the loss, and it did not allege in its motion for summary judgment that plaintiff expected, planned, or intended for his coexecutor to cause such a loss. Therefore, the trial court correctly concluded that, based on the above allegation, plaintiff only became liable under a theory of vicarious liability and his action was “clearly not intended or willful.” Accordingly, plaintiffs complaint alleged facts that constitute an “accident,” and these facts fall within the coverage of the policy and trigger defendant’s duty to indemnify. Moreover, as the Supreme Court of Illinois pointed out, in construing an insurance policy, any ambiguity should be resolved against the insurer. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill. 2d at 108-09, 607 N.E.2d at 1212. Therefore, even if we find that the term “accident” in the umbrella policy is susceptible to more than one reasonable interpretation and one such interpretation would exclude the facts alleged by plaintiff from coverage under the policy in question, we are still required to construe the term “accident” in plaintiffs favor and consider only the interpretations providing coverage. Accordingly, I would find that plaintiff alleged facts that fall within the coverage of the umbrella policy and affirm summary judgment in plaintiffs favor. Defendant State Farm argues that it had no duty to indemnify plaintiff for the judgment in Safeco’s favor because that judgment arose out of plaintiffs breach of a contractual indemnity agreement. I disagree. First I note that, even though defendant based its argument on the contractual indemnification theory, it did not supply this court with the indemnification agreement in question, nor did defendant provide a copy of the surety bond. I farther note that, contrary to defendant State Farm’s assertion in its brief, Madison County circuit court, the trial court in the underlying lawsuit, did not specifically find plaintiffs liability to Safeco based solely on the contractual indemnity agreement, but the court also found liability on an implied indemnity theory. In other words, plaintiff was hable whether the indemnity agreement existed or not. Plaintiff sufficiently so alleged in his complaint. As plaintiff alleged, he was appointed the coexecutor of the estate and was required by law to file a surety bond (755 ILCS 5/12 — 2 (West 2000)). Plaintiff signed the indemnity agreement with Safeco so that Safeco would become the corporate surety on the bond (755 ILCS 5/12 — 3 (West 2000)). Regardless of the indemnity agreement, plaintiff was responsible for any damage that his coexecutor, White, caused to the estate because of joint and several liability. Plaintiffs responsibility to the estate led to his alleged breach of the indemnification agreement, and his liability to Safeco arose out of his liability to the estate. In other words, absent a contractual relationship between plaintiff and Safeco, plaintiff would still be liable to the estate and plaintiff would still be seeking indemnification from defendant under the umbrella policy. Therefore, the existence of the indemnificátion agreement does not impact defendant’s duty to plaintiff as the insurer. Accordingly, as the trial court concluded, the basis of plaintiff’s liability is not his contractual obligation to Safeco but his vicarious liability as a coexecutor. This is also why Alton Bank, the successor administrator, not only sued Safeco but also both plaintiff and White in its initial action. The fact that Safeco settled with Alton Bank and claimed damages against plaintiff under the indemnity agreement does not change the nature and cause of the damage. Therefore, I disagree with defendant State Farm’s contention that plaintiffs liability was based on plaintiffs breach of contract with Safeco. Defendant State Farm also asserts that plaintiff intentionally breached a contractual indemnity clause and a finding in plaintiffs favor would “transform the insurance policy into a bond that guarantees the performance of fiduciary duties and contractual obligations.” This is also not accurate. As alleged in his complaint, plaintiff did not intentionally or willfully breach the indemnity agreement. Plaintiff is liable to Safeco solely because of White’s action, which was neither “intended” nor “expected” by plaintiff. Further, the insurance policy in question had many exclusions, and, as listed above, two of the provisions specifically exclude any expected losses and any losses caused by the insured’s intentional or willful acts. These and any other exclusion provisions operate to ensure that the policy does not become a performance-guarantee bond. Therefore, I conclude plaintiff Johnson had sufficiently alleged an “accident” that triggers defendant State Farm’s duty to defend and to indemnify. Accordingly, I would affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 9740792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:41:49.70669+00 ===

ANDREASEN, Justice.
This is an appeal from the district court order that modified the alimony provisions of the dissolution decree. The court of appeals reversed the district court and found the petitioner had failed to sustain her burden to show a material change in circumstances had occurred since the dissolution was granted. Upon further review, we vacate the court of appeals ruling and affirm the district court order.
*775
I.Background.
The parties’ marriage of thirty-two years was dissolved in August of 1982. The dissolution decree approved and incorporated the terms of a stipulation between the parties. The decree ordered the sale of the parties’ home, the major marital asset, and provided for the division of the net proceeds from the sale and all other remaining property. It also ordered the respondent, Richard Lesley Sjulin (Richard), to pay alimony to the petitioner, Ruth Elizabeth Sju-lin (Elizabeth). The decree provided
Respondent shall pay to petitioner as alimony the sum of $175 bi-weekly, commencing August 13, 1982, and continuing bi-weekly thereafter until the house of the parties is sold, whereupon alimony shall decrease to the sum of $100 biweekly for five (5) years. This court retains jurisdiction to review this matter at the end of five years based on the respective financial conditions of the parties.
In May of 1987 Elizabeth filed an application for modification of the dissolution decree. The application alleged that she continued to need alimony for her support and asked that alimony be continued at its present rate. She later amended the application to request alimony at the rate of $200 bi-weekly, attorney fees and costs. Richard denied the allegation and asked that the application be dismissed. The application was heard by the district court in August of 1987.
The court filed its rulings and order on November 10, 1987. It found there had been a substantial and material change of circumstances since the dissolution decree was entered. The court ordered
that the alimony shall continue at the rate of $100 bi-weekly commencing November 1, 1987, and continue until Petitioner Ruth Sjulin remarries or dies, or upon the death of Richard, whichever event should first occur.
Richard appealed from this ruling and order.
The court of appeals concluded the dissolution decree could be modified only upon a proper showing of a change of circumstances. It held Elizabeth failed to sustain her burden to show a change of circumstances and it reversed the district court. Elizabeth then filed her application for further review and asked that the district court allow her alimony and that the amount be increased to $125 bi-weekly. She also made application for allowance of appellate attorney fees. We granted further review.
II. Alimony.
The term alimony usually and technically means an allowance for spousal support and is distinguishable from property division and child support. Brin v. Brin, 240 Iowa 659, 661, 37 N.W.2d 261, 262 (1949). A division of property has for its basis the spouse’s right to a just and equitable share of that property which has been accumulated by the parties as a result of their joint efforts during the years of the marriage to serve their mutual needs. Knipfer v. Knipfer, 259 Iowa 347, 353, 144 N.W.2d 140, 143 (1966). Alimony is an allowance to the spouse in lieu of the legal obligation for support. See In re Marriage of Hitchcock, 309 N.W.2d 432, 437 (Iowa 1981). Alimony is not an absolute right. See In re Marriage of Maskel, 225 N.W.2d 115, 120 (Iowa 1975). We have previously stated:
When the court awards alimony, however, it refuses to wipe clean the marital slate. The court determines, instead, the husband has a continuing support obligation and the lots of the parties are to this extent still bound together. The reach of that obligation may vary with the financial fates of the parties, but the obligation has been created and it survives the marriage.
In re Marriage of Carlson, 338 N.W.2d 136, 140 (Iowa 1983).
III. Need to Show Substantial Change in Circumstances.
Both the trial court and the court of appeals concluded Elizabeth must establish a substantial change in circumstances before the court could modify the alimony provision of the dissolution decree. Iowa Code section 598.21(8)(1987) provides that
*776“[t]he court may subsequently modify orders made under this section when there is a substantial change in circumstances.” The statutory authorization for modification based upon a change in circumstances has existed for over 100 years. See In re Marriage of Marshall, 394 N.W.2d 392, 397 (Iowa 1986) (Larson, J., dissenting). We have long recognized the well-established rule that the modification of an alimony award is proper only when there has been a material and substantial change in the circumstances of the parties making it equitable that different terms be fixed. See In re Marriage of Glass, 213 N.W.2d 668, 671 (Iowa 1973).
Elizabeth argues under the terms of the dissolution decree that she is only required to show that she still needs alimony. She urges the language of the decree expresses a clear intent that the court retain jurisdiction to modify the alimony provision without the necessity of showing a change of circumstances. As authority for an exception to the general rule, she cites the case of In re Marriage of Schlenker, 300 N.W.2d 164 (Iowa 1981). In Schlenker, we expressed our distaste for decrees that retain jurisdiction to review alimony, child support, or custody. While retention of jurisdiction is discouraged, it is not forbidden. Id. at 165. Only when the decree unequivocally provides for later trial court review without the necessity of showing a change of circumstances will we find this was the court’s intent. Id. at 166. In Schlenker the trial court ordered the respondent to pay alimony until March 31, 1982. The decree further provided:
The court shall retain jurisdiction so as to review the provision concerning alimony at the end of two years from the date of filing.
We held the language of the decree was final and could be modified only upon a proper showing of a change of circumstances.
The language of the Schlenker decree is similar to the language in the present case. We agree that the decree does not unequivocally provide for later court review without proof of a change of
circumstances. We again express our reluctance to recognize piecemeal decrees.
IV. Proof of Substantial Change in Circumstances.
Our review is de novo; we give weight to the findings of the trial court but are not bound by them. Iowa R.App.P. 4 & 14(f)(7). Our duty is to examine the entire record and adjudicate rights anew on those questions properly presented. In re Marriage of Novak, 220 N.W.2d 592, 597 (Iowa 1974). The burden is on the party seeking modification of a dissolution decree to prove a substantial change in circumstances from the time the decree was entered which makes modification of the decree equitable and just. Even if a substantial change is shown, we will not modify the terms of the decree unless its enforcement will be attended by a positive wrong or injustice as a result of changed conditions. Ellis v. Ellis, 262 N.W.2d 265, 267 (Iowa 1978).
Iowa Code section 598.21(8)(1987) states in part:
In determining whether there is a substantial change in circumstances, the court shall consider the following:
a. Changes in the employment, earning capacity, income and resources of a party.
[[Image here]]
c. Changes in the medical expenses of a party.
[[Image here]]
f. Changes in the residence of a party-
g. Remarriage of a party.
[[Image here]]
k. Other factors the court determines to be relevant in an individual case....
During the marriage, Elizabeth was the homemaker and mother of their two children. She was not employed outside of the home and did not have vocational skills or training. Soon after the dissolution of marriage she secured employment at a health care center. Her initial wage of $3.35 per hour has increased to $4.13 per hour. Her gross annual wage at the health *777care center has increased from $6600 in 1983 to $8100 in 1987. Her net income is approximately $500 per month while her current expenses are $900 per month.
During the marriage Richard graduated from the State University of Iowa and then returned to Hamburg, Iowa to work in his family nursery business. His gross annual wage of approximately $20,500 has remained the same from the time of the marriage dissolution until the modification hearing. He has taken additional college courses in accounting in anticipation that he would be losing his nursery job later in 1987. The nursery was involved in bankruptcy proceedings which would soon be completed. His net income is approximately $1400 per month, while his current expenses are $950 per month.
Elizabeth suffered stress and emotional problems at the time of the dissolution. She had been hospitalized for alcohol-related problems. She remains an alcohol-dependent person.
At the time of the dissolution she was living in a duplex, paying $140 per month rent. She now is living in an apartment paying $199 per month rent. Under the terms of the decree Richard was given the right to possess the parties home pending its sale. After the home was sold in 1982, he purchased another home and is making house payments of $250 per month. Richard remarried in 1983 and his wife, Cheryl, is a supervisor at the health center. Her annual gross wages average over $10,000.
We consider the language of this decree a relevant factor. In Schlenker, we suggested that the unknown earning potential of a spouse would properly be considered in determining if an extension of alimony was justified. See In re Marriage of Schlenker, 300 N.W.2d 164, 166 (Iowa 1981). The employment potential of Elizabeth was unknown at the time the dissolution decree was entered. Her income and earning capacity can now be established.
When we consider all of the circumstances, including Elizabeth’s needs and Richard’s ability to provide support, we find it equitable and just that the decree be modified as provided by the trial court. Because Elizabeth did not cross-appeal from the district court order we cannot now consider awarding an increase in the amount of alimony. See Sandler v. Sandler, 258 Iowa 84, 86-87, 137 N.W.2d 591, 592 (1965).
V. Appellate Attorney Fees.
In a proceeding to modify a dissolution decree the court may award reasonable attorney fees. In evaluating Elizabeth’s request for $1110 attorney fees on appeal, we consider both the needs of the party making the request and the ability of the other party to pay. We conclude that a reasonable allowance should be made and hereby ordered that Richard pay $750 of the attorney fees incurred by Elizabeth on appeal in this case and the costs of appeal.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except CARTER, J., who concurs specially.

=== CASE 9741383 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:34.438143+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(dissenting in part, with whom Lynch, J., joins). The policies provide Sarnafil with liability coverage for damage to property. Coverage does not extend, however, to damage to Sarnafil’s products arising out of those products in whole or in part. Sarnafil supplied, and Taylor installed, roofing membrane and adhesive to attach the membrane to an airport roof. As a result of the membrane’s coming loose on September 7, 1984, Taylor wrote to Sarnafil on September 20 that Taylor intended to hold Sarnafil responsible for unspecified, unidentified “damage and repairs at the airport.” Taylor also sent Sarnafil a copy of a letter from an architect in which the architect opined that Taylor and Sarnafil would be responsible for unidentified repairs, including repair of “damage to the existing building.” On September 27, Sarnafil sent copies of those letters to Barnes (the agency) and requested that coverage be acknowledged.
*308Regardless of when those letters were received by Peerless, the information contained in them may have suggested the possibility or even probability that specific claims of detailed damage would be forthcoming, but the letters did not tell Sarnafil or Peerless whether Taylor’s claims would relate in whole or in part to items of property that had not been furnished by Sarnafil and would therefore probably be within the policies’ liability coverage. In those circumstances, several options were available to Peerless. Peerless could have categorically denied (disclaimed) all coverage of Sarnafil’s losses due to airport damage and announced its decision not to defend Sarnafil with respect to any claim that might be made against Sarnafil. Had Peerless done so, it would have run the risk of breaching its contractual duty to cover Sarnafil’s liability for damage to property other than Sarnafil’s product, and its duty to defend Sarnafil. Also, Peerless would have forfeited its contractual right to control the investigation and resolution of claims that it, as insurer, might ultimately have to pay. See Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. 677, 682 (1964), and cases cited. In the alternative, Peerless could have remained silent, allowed time to pass, and in the meanwhile conducted extensive investigation, thereby running the risk that ultimately a judge, based on principles of estoppel or waiver, would rule that, having led Sarnafil to rely exclusively on Peerless’s protection at a time when Sarnafil could have protected itself, Peerless, in fairness, should not later be permitted to withdraw that protection even if and when it has become clear that Sarnafil’s losses in whole or in part were not within the coverage of the policies. See Salonen v. Paanenen, 320 Mass. 568, 572 (1947). Neither of those options would or should have been satisfactory to an insurer in the circumstances of this case.
Peerless, therefore, chose a third alternative. On October 4, 1984, Peerless wrote to Sarnafil as follows:
“Based on the limited information presently available to us, it is possible your policy with our Company may not provide coverage or protect you from or against any *309claims or expenses incurred in connection with the situation outlined in your [September] letter.
“We are reserving our rights under the policy because there are many unanswered questions pertaining to the scope and nature of coverage afforded a liability assured under the policy.
“We will promptly and diligently attempt to ascertain factual information to help us resolve these questions.”
That kind of letter, generally known as a reservation of rights letter, avoids the aforementioned risks and has been approved by this court on several occasions. See Three Sons, Inc. v. Phoenix Ins. Co., 357 Mass. 271, 276 (1970); Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., supra; Salonen v. Paanenen, supra at 572-573. As the court said in Salonen, supra at 573, “Where an insurer seasonably notifies its insured that it is continuing to [investigate or] defend the case subject to its right to disclaim later, the insured is in no position to say that he has been misled, and can take necessary steps to protect his rights. In this situation the basis for an estoppel is lacking.” Peerless’s October 4 letter in no way implied a refusal to defend Sarnafil, should a defense become necessary. Indeed, the very purpose of a reservation of rights letter, approved by this court in numerous cases, is to allow an insurer to investigate and to defend its insured without running the risk of misleading its insured and then being es-topped from disclaiming coverage.1
*310In response to Peerless’s October 4 reservation of rights letter, Sarnafil wrote to Peerless on October 15 conveying no new information concerning the airport damage but insisting there was coverage, and on October 24, Sarnafil’s counsel sent Peerless’s counsel a copy of a “proposal to the airport for repair of the roof damage. The proposed repairs included items, that had not been furnished by Sarnafil.” Ante at 299. In the October 24 communication, therefore, Sarnafil for the first time identified some items of damage which, if ultimately established, would result in liability covered by the policies. Finally, on November 1, Sarnafil’s counsel wrote to Peerless’s counsel that the airport’s architects had concluded that there was “damage to the structure itself’ which presumably was in addition to damage to items that had been furnished by Sarnafil. Having reserved its right to disclaim at a later date by its October 4 letter, Peerless did not communicate with Sarnafil in writing again until November 20, 1984, when it wrote that it was studying the coverage question. Significantly, nothing Peerless did or failed to do between October 4 and November 20 reasonably communicated to Sarnafil that Peerless had abandoned its reservation of the right to disclaim in the future and that instead it was disclaiming coverage or was refusing to defend Sarnafil. Peerless said or did nothing that would release Sarnafil from its contractual duty to notify Peerless of any claims made against it.
Peerless’s next written communication with Sarnafil was on December 18, 1984. On that date, Peerless was totally unaware that on November 14, without having sought Peerless’s authorization, Sarnafil had filed a demand for arbitration of its dispute with Taylor as to liability for airport damage. Peerless was also unaware that on December 7, Taylor had counterclaimed that Sarnafil’s adhesive had been defective, entitling Taylor to damages. On December 18, Peerless *311wrote Sarnafil a letter containing the following relevant paragraphs:
“Based on the information presently available to us, it is our position that no coverage is afforded under either of the . . . policies for any of the claims which have thus far been made against your client. As further developments regarding this matter occur and more specific claims are made against [the insured], we will be pleased to review the question of coverage under these policies.
“We wish to advise you that no action taken by this company [in] the course of investigating any of these matters is to be construed as a waiver of any rights it may have under the . . . policies. We also wish to advise you that we reserve any and all rights we may have to disclaim coverage, for any of the above-mentioned reasons or for any other reason. Finally, nothing set forth in this letter is to be construed as a waiver or relinquishment of any rights of this company under the . . . policies whether specified herein or not, and no act or acts of this company, its agents, servants or attorneys is to be so construed.”
Peerless’s assessment of the coverage was described as being based on several factors, the most significant of which were the policies’ exclusion of coverage for damage to Sarnafil’s own products (materials furnished by Sarnafil) and the policies’ lack of coverage for loss prevention measures.
Like Peerless’s October 4 letter, Peerless’s December 18, 1984, letter was a reservation of rights letter. Furthermore, like the October 4 letter, the December 18 letter in no way implied a refusal to provide a defense to Sarnafil. Sarnafil could not reasonably have construed that letter either as a disclaimer of coverage or as a refusal to defend Sarnafil with respect to any claim and especially with respect to Taylor’s counterclaim in arbitration, about which, as Sarnafil knew, Peerless was totally ignorant. The letter did not simply state *312that “no coverage is afforded under either of the . . . policies” as the court implies. Ante at 303. Instead, the letter expressly stated that Peerless’s position was “[b]ased on the information presently available to [it],” that is, that it was not premised on the specific claims contained in Taylor’s counterclaim of which Peerless was unaware. Indeed, the letter made clear that Peerless’s position as to coverage related only to “any of the claims which [Peerless knew] ha[d] thus far been made against [Sarnafil].” In addition, the December 18 letter clearly notified Sarnafil that “as . . . more specific claims are made,” which would include Taylor’s counterclaim in arbitration, Peerless “will be pleased to review the question of coverage.” Yet, as the summary judgment materials demonstrate, Peerless was not informed of Sarnafil’s demand for arbitration until months later, in April, 1985, after Peerless had brought a declaratory judgment action seeking a determination as to coverage and defense costs. Sarnafil did not send Peerless a copy of Taylor’s counterclaim until after the arbitration proceeding was completed in 1986.
Any obligation that Peerless might have to reimburse Sarnafil for its expenses of preparation for, and participation in, the arbitration proceedings, and for its expenses related to the commencement of an action to confirm the arbitrator’s award, could only derive from an unfulfilled obligation on Peerless’s part to provide representation in connection with those proceedings, including prehearing investigation. The critical question, then, is whether Peerless owed Sarnafil a duty to represent Sarnafil in the arbitration proceedings because, if Peerless did not breach such a duty, there is no basis on which an obligation to reimburse Sarnafil’s defense costs may be posited.
Both policies provide that “[i]f a claim is made or suit is brought against [Sarnafil], [Sarnafil] shall immediately forward to [Peerless] every demand, notice, summons or other process received by [it] and [its] representative.” The court acknowledges that “Sarnafil was contractually obligated to notify Peerless of the initiation of arbitration and the filing of Taylor’s counterclaim.” Ante at 302. The court also states,. *313however, that “the violation of a policy provision should bar coverage only where the breach frustrates the purpose underlying that provision,” and concludes that it is apparent from materials in the record that, in this case, a reasonable fact finder could find that Sarnafil’s secrecy about the arbitration proceeding, including Taylor’s counterclaim, did not frustrate the purpose of the policies’ notice of claim provisions. Ante at 303. The court is correct in saying that coverage is barred only when the insured’s breach of policy provisions frustrates their purpose, but the court is wrong when it says that, here, a reasonable fact finder could find that Sarnafil’s policy violations did not frustrate the purpose of the provisions.
A manifest purpose of a notice of claim provision is to give the insurer an opportunity to analyze specific claims against its insured in order that it fairly might determine whether it is obliged under its policy to. provide a defense to its insured. A second purpose is to give the insurer an opportunity, if it decides it is obliged to defend, not only to defend effectively but also to do so in the most cost effective way, perhaps utilizing the services of its own employees. As a matter of law, those objectives were frustrated in this case by Sarnafil’s reserving its defense to itself rather than tendering its defense to Peerless, and by Sarnafil’s maintaining silence concerning even the existence, let alone the progress, of the arbitration proceeding involving Sarnafil and Taylor. No fact finder could rightly find an absence of prejudice to Peerless, due to Sarnafil’s failure to notify Peerless of Taylor’s counterclaim, if Peerless was to be held responsible for this payment of Sarnafil’s legal expenses over which Peerless had no control.
The court’s conclusion that a fact finder could find that Peerless was not prejudiced by Sarnafil’s breach of its notice obligations is not the court’s only error. The court also seems to reason that a trial is necessary because, based on materials in the record, a fact finder would be warranted in finding that Peerless acted in bad faith because of its “failure to investigate the facts or inform Sarnafil of its decision on coverage by December 7, 1984 [the date Taylor filed its counter*314claim — unknown to Peerless] . . . justifying Sarnafil in regarding Peerless’s silence, in all the circumstances, as the equivalent of a disclaimer of coverage [which] disclaimer could be found to have been unjustified if in fact there was coverage under the policies, and if Peerless knew or should have known that to be so.” Ante at 303-304, quoting Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 34 Mass. App. Ct. 248, 255 (1993). The court also reasons that “[a] fact finder could reasonably conclude that Peerless’s December 18 letter, couched as it was in terms of ‘no coverage is afforded,’ amounted to an actual disclaimer of coverage, a conclusion which had been reached by Peerless by December 7, 1984, when Taylor filed its counterclaim.” Ante at 304. No worthwhile purpose would be served by a protracted discussion in this dissenting opinion of these several assertions in support of the court’s conclusion that summary judgment for Peerless on counts I and VI should not have been ordered. It should be noted, however, that the court points to no authority, and I am aware of none, for the proposition that an insurer’s failure to investigate a claim beyond reviewing materials submitted by its insured before it has been made in a court or similar forum, or an insurer’s failure to make a decision on coverage within two months after sending the insured a reservation of rights letter, without more, warrants a finding of bad faith which, in turn, warrants either the insured or a fact finder in concluding that the insurer disclaimed. By its decision, unsupported by authority, the court seriously confounds insurance law by blurring the long-recognized and very important distinction between a present disclaimer of coverage and an insurer’s reservation of the right to proceed with investigation and the defense of its insured and to disclaim coverage thereafter if further developments establish that the loss is not within the coverage.
When an insurer seeks to defend its insured under a reservation of rights, and the insured is unwilling that the insurer do so, the insured may require the insurer either to relinquish its reservation of rights or relinquish its defense of the insured and reimburse the insured for its defense costs. Three *315Sons, Inc. v. Phoenix Ins. Co., 357 Mass. 271, 274-277 (1970). In the present case, however, Sarnafil gave no such option to Peerless. Instead, in violation of its contractual duty, Sarnafil decided, unilaterally and without notice, to conduct its own defense, thereby relieving Peerless of any duty to defend Sarnafil or reimburse it for its defense related costs. It is true, as the court says, ante at 304, that “the reservation of rights would not have excused Peerless’s duty to protect Sarnafil while Peerless investigated to determine whether coverage existed.” However, Peerless’s duty to protect Sarnafil was contingent on Sarnafil’s notifying Peerless of specific claims having been made, such as Taylor’s counterclaim, from which Sarnafil sought protection. Because there was no notice, there was no duty. I dissent from the court’s reversal of the judgment as to counts I and VI. This opinion is a “dissent in part” because I agree with the court that the judgment of the Superior Court should be affirmed as to counts II, IV, and VII.
The court states, ante at 303, “Peerless had, on October 4, 1984, written to Sarnafil reserving its rights on the coverage issue, and had promised that it would ‘promptly and diligently attempt to ascertain factual information* to resolve what a fact finder could reasonably conclude were both the coverage and defense questions” (emphasis added). Contrary to the court’s assertion, the October 4 letter made no reference to defense questions. The words contained in the letter, “or protect you from or against any claims or expenses incurred in connection with the situation outlined in your letter” was an obvious reference to the expenses incurred or anticipated by Sarnafil in connection with emergency loss prevention measures. The existence of coverage for such expenses was in dispute. The sole focus *310of the letter was the preservation of Peerless’s right to disclaim responsibility to indemnify Sarnafil for losses Sarnafil might suffer despite any investigation Peerless might make into the “unanswered questions pertaining to the scope and nature of coverage afforded [Sarnafil] under the policy.”

=== CASE 9740708 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:38.442+00 ===

STATON, Judge,
concurring.
I concur in the opinion of the Majority. I write separately to emphasize the specific factual context of this case; that is, waiver of right to counsel at a probation revocation hearing.
A criminal defendant's right to counsel at a probation revocation hearing is provided by statute. IND.CODE § 835-38-2-3(e) (1998); Bradford v. State (1990), Ind.App., 550 N.E.2d 1353, 1354. However, the statute does not define the requirements for a valid waiver of this right in a probation revocation hearing, which is otherwise in the nature of a civil proceeding. Isaac v. State (1992), Ind., 605 N.E.2d 144, 147, cert. denied, - U.S. -, 113 S.Ct. 2373, 124 LEd.2d 278. In the context of right to counsel, courts have analogized a probation revocation hearing to a sentencing hearing, in which a defendant stands to lose certain rights guaranteed by state law. See Guojardo v. State (1989), Ind.App., 544 N.E.2d 174, 176. Accordingly, a probationer who waives his statutory right to counsel and chooses to proceed pro se at a revocation hearing is entitled to be fully advised regarding the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation. Because the instant record is devoid of any such advisement, I concur in the Majority's view that reversal is warranted.

=== CASE 2224580 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.179867+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 68 (1992)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Jimmy Robert HUMMEL, Appellant.
No. C4-90-2416.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
April 17, 1992.
*69 Steven J. Meshbesher, Sean M. Quinn, Meshbesher, Birrell & Dunlap, Ltd., Minneapolis, for appellant.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., Paul R. Kempainen, Asst. Atty. Gen., St. Paul, and Stephen Rathke, Crow Wing County Atty., Brainerd, for respondent.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
GARDEBRING, Justice.
This is an appeal by the petitioner, Jimmy Robert Hummel, from his 1990 conviction for first degree murder in the 1989 *70 killing of Shana Pesheck. The petitioner, then 16, was certified to stand trial as an adult, and that decision was affirmed. In re the Matter of the Welfare of J.R.H., C3-89-2045, 1990 WL 81402 (Minn.App. June 19, 1990), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. July 31, 1990). Petitioner was indicted on two counts of first degree murder (premeditated and felony-burglary), two counts of second degree murder (intentional and felony) and one count of third degree murder. After a jury trial, petitioner was convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to life in prison. On appeal, petitioner argues his constitutional rights were violated when the trial court (a) declined his request to conduct an in camera inspection of the victim's psychiatric/psychological records; (b) denied a motion to suppress evidence gained from two warrantless searches; and (c) allowed into evidence photographs and videotape of the victim's body at the crime scene and photographs from the autopsy. We affirm.
I.
Petitioner and Shana Pesheck began dating in 1988. They argued and fought frequently, and by the spring of 1989, although they still saw each other often and talked on the telephone daily, the relationship was deteriorating. At approximately 10:30 p.m. on July 26, 1989, petitioner was at his home, talking with Ms. Pesheck on the telephone. They had a long, heated conversation; petitioner hung up five times, and Ms. Pesheck called back each time. After the calls, petitioner decided to drive to Ms. Pesheck's house to see her. However, petitioner's car was not yet insured and his mother would not give him the keys. Petitioner left on foot, grabbing what his mother believed to be a knife. Petitioner's father set off to find him, and petitioner's brother called the police and Ms. Pesheck. A sheriff's deputy went to Ms. Pesheck's home to warn her. Ms. Pesheck said she did not consider petitioner a threat, but she did agree to lock the doors. About an hour after petitioner left his home, police were notified that he had returned without going to Ms. Pesheck's house. Petitioner, still upset, stayed up until 1:30 a.m., then went to his bedroom. Meanwhile, Ms. Pesheck had gone to sleep on her family's living-room couch. Sometime during the early-morning hours, petitioner drove his mother's car to Ms. Pesheck's home and stabbed her to death.
At 5:30 a.m. on July 27, the victim's mother awoke to find the body, later determined to have 21 or 22 stab wounds. The mother called police, and one of the first officers to arrive was Deputy Sheriff James Peterson, who was aware of the call to police the night before. Peterson went inside the house and surveyed the scene. Later, he and Brainerd Patrolman Terry Crocker left for the Hummel house. They arrived at about 6:20 a.m. Petitioner's mother answered the door, and Peterson, who was in street clothes, showed her his badge and identification card and asked if petitioner was home. When Mrs. Hummel said yes, Peterson said he needed to talk to petitioner and it was important. Mrs. Hummel, followed by Peterson, went to petitioner's bedroom, but he was not there and the window screen had been cut. By that time, petitioner's father also was awake, and Peterson told both parents that petitioner was a possible suspect in a homicide. Peterson asked where petitioner might be and whether he had access to any firearms. Petitioner's father went to see if any guns were missing and Peterson followed. While they looked for a shotgun in petitioner's room, Peterson noticed a shirt and pair of white shorts covered with what appeared to be blood.
Peterson returned outside, where Crocker told him that in looking at a car in the driveway he had seen blood on the car, on the keys in the ignition, and on two knives on the floor of the passenger side. Shortly thereafter, Chief Sheriff's Deputy Irv Tollefson arrived at the Hummels' home with consent-to-search forms. Peterson filled out a form, presented it to petitioner's father, explained what it was and asked him to sign. However, Peterson noticed that Mr. Hummel was having trouble reading the form and suggested that he show it to Mrs. Hummel, which Mr. Hummel did. Peterson explained the form to Mrs. Hummel, *71 who looked it over, gave it back to her husband, and indicated approval to sign it, which Mr. and Mrs. Hummel both did. Inside the house, the officers retrieved the bloody clothing from petitioner's bedroom. Later that morning, petitioner was arrested after he was found sleeping in a deer stand behind his parents' home.
Before trial, petitioner made motions for (a) the court to subpoena and conduct an in camera inspection of the victim's psychiatric/psychological records from Grace Unit, a treatment facility for adolescents, where both the victim and petitioner had been hospitalized; (b) a change of venue; (c) suppression of a statement petitioner made to police; and (d) suppression of evidence gained from the searches of petitioner's home. The statement was suppressed, but petitioner's other motions were denied. At trial, the bloody clothing found in the Hummel home was admitted. The trial court also admitted twelve photographs of the victim's body at the death scene, seven photographs showing blood splatters, ten photographs from the autopsy, several diagrams of the body from the autopsy, and a videotape of the crime scene. The videotape did not go to the jury. The trial court felt the videotape might be cumulative, but decided to allow it in. On appeal, petitioner raises the following issues:
(1) Did the trial court violate petitioner's fourteenth amendment right to due process when it declined his request to subpoena and review, in camera, a psychiatric/psychological file on the victim?
(2) Did the trial court violate petitioner's rights under the fourth and fourteenth amendments by admitting evidence gained in two warrantless searches?
(3) Did the trial court violate petitioner's right to a fair trial by admitting into evidence twelve photographs of the victim at the death scene, seven photographs of blood splatters, ten photographs from the autopsy and a videotape from the death scene?
(4) Did the cumulative effect of these decisions violate petitioner's right to a fair trial?
II.
The first issue in this case is under what circumstances must a trial court review, in camera, confidential medical records when requested by a defendant to do so. The question arises in the context of petitioner requesting in camera review with no showing of relatedness to the case.
"There is no general constitutional right to discovery in a criminal case." Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 559, 97 S. Ct. 837, 846, 51 L. Ed. 2d 30 (1977). But due process requires that "criminal defendants have the right to the government's assistance in compelling the attendance of favorable witnesses at trial and the right to put before a jury evidence that might influence the determination of guilt." Ritchie v. Pennsylvania, 480 U.S. 39, 56, 107 S. Ct. 989, 1000, 94 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1987). Under the Minnesota rules, a defendant may seek a discovery order from the court in its discretion, Minn.R.Crim.P. 9.01, subd. 2(3), or request a subpoena of witnesses and records, Minn.R.Crim.P. 22.01, 22.02. The rules "are intended to give the defendant and prosecution as complete discovery as is possible under constitutional limitations." Minn.R.Crim.P. 9.03, Comment, para. 1.
At the same time, Minn.Stat. § 595.02 subd. 1(d) and (g) (1988) prohibits unauthorized disclosure of medical and psychiatric/psychological information. At issue, then, is how these competing concerns are to be reconciled.[1] "[T]he medical privilege, like other privileges, sometimes must give way to the defendant's right to confront his accusers." State v. Kutchara, 350 N.W.2d 924, 926 (Minn.1984). See also State v. Paradee, 403 N.W.2d 640 (Minn.1987) (adopting the Ritchie analysis for child welfare reports in criminal sexual conduct case).
But a defendant may not have direct access to the confidential material sought. It first must be screened by the trial court. *72 "The in camera approach strikes a fairer balance between the interest of the privilege holder in having his confidences kept and the interest of the criminal defendant in obtaining all relevant evidence." Paradee, 403 N.W.2d at 642.
In this case, petitioner argued that he was entitled, under Ritchie and Paradee, to have the trial court examine the victim's records in camera. The trial court denied the motion, reading Ritchie and Minn. R.Crim.P. 9.03(6) as requiring an offer of proof that the material sought was relevant and contained exculpatory information. Petitioner argues, correctly, that the trial court applied the wrong standard in relying on Rule 9.03(6);[2] however, the conclusion of the trial court was correct, nonetheless.
The Ritchie Court said in a footnote that a defendant may not have a confidential file reviewed "without first establishing a basis for his claim that it contains material evidence." Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 58 n. 15, 107 S. Ct. at 1002 n. 15. He must make some "plausible showing" that the information sought would be "both material and favorable to his defense." Id., (quoting United States v. Valenzuela-Bernal, 458 U.S. 858, 867, 102 S. Ct. 3440, 3446, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1193 (1982)).
While the Ritchie standard does not give trial courts detailed guidance, we conclude that the showing made by the petitioner was insufficient to trigger the need for in camera review. His motion and brief gave the trial court no theories on how the file could be related to the defense or why the file was reasonably likely to contain information related to the case. Petitioner cannot complain that he was denied notice of the requirement that he show some connection between the file and his case. The Ritchie Court's analysis, which we adopted in Paradee, makes it absolutely clear that some showing is required before in camera review is granted. Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 58 n. 15, 107 S. Ct. at 1002 n. 15. Petitioner made no showing to the trial court, which is deficient under any applicable standard. Contrary to petitioner's position, having the trial court review confidential material is not a right. It is a discovery option, but only after certain prerequisites are satisfied. In this case, they were not.
There are two warrantless searches at issue in this case. The first involves Deputy Peterson entering the Hummel home behind Mrs. Hummel in the belief that petitioner was in the bedroom. The second concerns the validity of the consent petitioner's parents gave police to re-enter the house.
Under the fourth amendment, warrantless searches and seizures are per se unreasonable unless they fall under an established exception. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 357, 88 S. Ct. 507, 514, 19 L. Ed. 2d 576 (1967). That is especially so when it occurs inside a home. Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 586, 100 S. Ct. 1371, 1380, 63 L. Ed. 2d 639 (1980). Two of the recognized exceptions are consent and exigent circumstances. Id. at 576, 590, 100 S. Ct. at 1374, 1382. If a warrantless search does not fall within a proper exception, its fruits must be suppressed. Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 484, 83 S. Ct. 407, 415, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441 (1963).
There are two fact patterns that will justify a warrantless search and/or seizure based on exigent circumstances: (1) a situation in which a single matter, such as a fleeing felon or danger to persons or evidence, is highly compelling; and (2) a "totality of the circumstances" situation. State v. Gray, 456 N.W.2d 251, 256 (Minn. 1990), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 687, 112 L. Ed. 2d 678 (1991). To weigh the "totality of the circumstances," courts should apply the factors set forth in Dorman v. United States, 435 F.2d 385, 392-93 (D.C.Cir.1970). These factors are:
(a) whether a grave or violent offense is involved; (b) whether the suspect is reasonably believed to be armed; (c) whether there is strong probable cause connecting the suspect to the offense; (d) *73 whether police have strong reason to believe the suspect is on the premises; (e) whether it is likely the suspect will escape if not swiftly apprehended; and (f) whether peaceable entry was made.
Gray, 456 N.W.2d at 256. The test is not to be applied rigidly. "[T]he Dorman factors are part of a flexible approach that encompasses all relevant circumstances." State v. Olson, 436 N.W.2d 92, 97 (Minn. 1989), aff'd, 495 U.S. 91, 110 S. Ct. 1684, 109 L. Ed. 2d 85 (1990).
In this case, the trial court properly held that there was no single exigent factor which justified the initial warrantless search of the Hummel house. Rather, the trial court found that the search was justified by the Dorman "totality of the circumstances" exigent factors. Unquestionably, this was a grave and violent crime. After police saw the crime scene and before they looked inside a car at petitioner's home, they had reason to believe the suspect was armed with a knife. Police also had strong reason to believe petitioner was on the premises because his mother said so, and it is undisputed that the police entry into the Hummel home was peaceable.
There also was strong probable cause connecting petitioner to the crime. "Probable cause to arrest exists when reasonable grounds for suspicion are accompanied by circumstances sufficiently strong in themselves to warrant a cautious person in believing the accused to be guilty of a crime." State v. Filipi, 297 N.W.2d 275, 277 (Minn. 1980). The night before, petitioner's own family was concerned enough about the victim's safety that they called her and the police. That, plus the timing and manner of the victim's death, certainly would establish probable cause to arrest under Filipi. It also should be noted that the Dorman list is not exhaustive and exigent circumstances also may justify warrantless arrests in the home that are not planned, but that occur "in the field as part of unfolding developments." Olson, 436 N.W.2d at 97 (citing 2 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 6.1(f) at 605-08 (2d ed. 1987) and State v. Lohnes, 344 N.W.2d 605, 611 (Minn.1984)).
The only Dorman factor lacking is the likelihood the suspect would escape if not quickly apprehended. But there is no requirement that all of the Dorman factors be equally satisfied before a warrantless search is justified. In looking at the totality of the circumstances, there was ample cause on the other Dorman factors to justify the warrantless entry of the Hummel home. Because the exigent circumstances justified the initial warrantless entry, anything within Deputy Peterson's plain view was lawfully discovered. See Arizona v. Hicks, 480 U.S. 321, 326, 107 S. Ct. 1149, 1153, 94 L. Ed. 2d 347 (1987).
The second search also was valid. "[C]onsent to search need only be voluntary, that is, uncoerced, and need not be knowing or intelligent." State v. Alayon, 459 N.W.2d 325, 330 (Minn.1990), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 757, 112 L. Ed. 2d 777 (1991) (citing Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 93 S. Ct. 2041, 36 L. Ed. 2d 854 (1973)). Upon review, the trial court's determination of consent will not be overturned unless it is clearly erroneous. Alayon, 459 N.W.2d at 330. "Consent must be the product of more than mere submission to legal authority." State v. High, 287 Minn. 24, 27, 176 N.W.2d 637, 639 (1970). But "knowledge of a right to refuse is not a prerequisite of a voluntary consent." Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 234, 93 S. Ct. at 2051. Valid consent may be given by a third party who possesses common authority over the premises. United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164, 170, 94 S. Ct. 988, 992, 39 L. Ed. 2d 242 (1974). Analyzing the search at issue, it is unimportant whether Mr. Hummel could read and understand the search consent form. Mrs. Hummel, who had common authority over the premises, could read it and, in fact, signed it. There is no evidence of coercion, so the consent must be upheld as valid.
Petitioner contends that the number and gruesome nature of the photographs and videotape so inflamed the jury that he was denied a fair trial. Petitioner argues there was no need for such evidence, or at least not to the extent used, when petitioner did not deny killing the victim and the *74 only issue was whether the killing was intended and premeditated.
Photographs are admissible as competent evidence where they accurately portray anything which it is competent for a witness to describe in words, or where they are helpful as an aid to a verbal description of objects and conditions, provided they are relevant to some material issue; and they are not rendered inadmissible merely because they vividly bring to jurors the details of a shocking crime or incidentally tend to arouse passion or prejudice.
State v. Alton, 432 N.W.2d 754, 758 (Minn. 1988) (emphasis in original) (quoting State v. De Zeler, 230 Minn. 39, 46-47, 41 N.W.2d 313, 319 (1950)). The admission of photographs is in the discretion of the trial judge. State v. Daniels, 361 N.W.2d 819, 828 (Minn.1985).
These cases make it clear that it is within the trial court's discretion to admit photographs, even ghastly ones, so long as they show something that a witness could describe and are material to some relevant issue. The exhibits in this case allowed the jury to better visualize the crime scene. And the extent and type of harm to the victim is material to the issues of intent and premeditation. Also, as the prosecution argued at trial, the videotape gave jurors a different perspective on the scene than the photographs.
This final assertion, while literally true, is extremely weak. The duplicative nature of the videotape troubled the trial court and it troubles this court. We also wonder whether twelve photographs of the bloodcovered victim, including three facial close-ups, really were necessary to the state's case, especially when the jury also received ten autopsy photographs that showed the victim's wounds very clearly. On balance, in light of our earlier cases, the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting the photographs and videotape.
But we are very concerned about the tendency of some prosecutors to make excessive use of shocking visual evidence from crime scenes. We caution prosecutors and trial courts to examine each visual exhibit of this type very carefully. A photograph or videotape should not be admitted if it is only subtly different from other photographic or video evidence. And such exhibits should be limited to a reasonable quantity. The purpose of visual evidence is to inform jurors, not shock and overwhelm them.
Petitioner next contends that the combined effect of the previously cited issues deprived him of a fair trial. That contention is without merit. "A defendant is entitled to a fair trial but not a perfect one." State v. Mastrian, 285 Minn. 51, 75, 171 N.W.2d 695, 710 (1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1049, 90 S. Ct. 1381, 25 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1970) (quoting Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123, 135, 88 S. Ct. 1620, 1627, 20 L. Ed. 2d 476 (1968)). In this case, any errors the trial court made were minor, and petitioner was not denied a fair trial.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Ms. Pesheck's death does not negate the issue because the medical privilege survives its holder's death. In re Estate of Koenig, 247 Minn. 580, 585, 78 N.W.2d 364, 367 (1956).
[2]  Under Minn.R.Crim.P. 9.03(6), the trial court "may permit any showing of cause for denial or regulation of discovery, or portion of such showing, to be made in camera." It has no bearing on the inspection of confidential documents contemplated by Ritchie and Paradee.

=== CASE 9740709 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:39.09796+00 ===

CHEZEM, Judge.
Case Summary
Appellant-respondent, Craig D. Keller ("Craig"), appeals the trial court's order dividing the marital property. We affirm.
Issue
Craig presents one issue for review: whether the trial court's order dividing the marital property 28% ($14,365.04) to Craig and 72% ($36,852.06) to appellee-petitioner Mary J. Keller ("Mary") was just and reasonable.
Facts
Mary and Craig were married in June of 1977. On July 9, 1981, Mary inherited a home on Ivy League Drive in Fort Wayne from her mother. The Ivy League property was deeded solely to Mary as provided in her mother's will. The inheritance taxes were paid out of the couple's joint checking account-into which both Mary, a counsel- or/teacher, and Craig, a carpenter, deposited their incomes. Other expenses for the Ivy League home-i.e., mortgage payments, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs-were also paid from the joint checking account for the nearly six years they lived in the home.
On June 4, 1987, they sold the home, and Mary placed the proceeds from the sale ($29,946.77) into the couple's joint checking account. On June 5, 1987, they closed on the purchase of a house located on Hemlock Lane. The home cost $82,900 and they put down $32,791.64 in the form of a cashier's check (drawn from the joint checking account) naming both Mary and Craig as re-mitters. The Hemlock home was deeded to both Craig and Mary, as husband and wife. Over the years, the mortgage payments, insurance, and property taxes for the Hemlock home were all paid from the joint checking account. When the couple decided to divorce in October 1992, they sold the Hemlock property and placed its net proceeds-$27,-428.82-in an escrow account at Standard Federal Bank. In addition, Craig deposited a check for $1,081.37-money remaining in the Hemlock home's escrow after the sale-into the Standard Federal escrow.
The trial court found that since Mary inherited the Ivy League home, "and because the funds from the inheritance are specifically traceable," it would deviate from the presumptive 50/50 split and award 98.7% of the Standard Federal escrow account to Mary ($25,700.15). The court awarded Craig 6.3% ($1,727.97) of the escrow account on its finding that this amount represented Craig's 50% share of the joint funds used to purchase the Hemlock property.
Discussion and Decision
Craig contends the trial court erred in awarding Mary 72% of the marital estate. Essentially, he argues that the money attributable to Mary's inheritance should have been split equally between them, as was the rest of the marital estate. When reviewing a claim that the trial court improperly divided marital property, we must decide whether the trial court's decision constitutes an abuse of discretion. Van Riper v. Keim (1982), Ind.App., 437 N.E.2d 130. We consider only that evidence most favorable to the trial court's disposition of the property. Benda v. Benda (1990), Ind.App., 553 N.E.2d 159, trans. denied. We will reverse only if the result is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. In re Marriage of Salas (1983), Ind.App., 447 N.E.2d 1176.
Marital property distributions are governed by Ind.Code § 81-1-11.5-11(c), which provides as follows:
The court shall presume that an equal division of the marital property between the parties is just and reasonable. However, this presumption may be rebutted by a party who presents relevant evidence, in*374cluding evidence of the following factors, that an equal division would not be just and reasonable:
(1) The contribution of each spouse to the acquisition of the property, regardless of whether the contribution was income producing.
(2) The extent to which the property was acquired by each spouse prior to the marriage or by inheritance or gift.
(8) The economic cireumstances of each spouse at the time of the disposition of the property is to become effective, including the desirability of awarding the family residence or the right to dwell in that residence for such periods as the court may deem just to the spouse having custody of the children.
(4) The conduct of the parties during the marriage as related to the disposition or dissipation of their property.
(5) The earnings or earning ability of the parties as related to the division of property and final determination of the property rights of the parties.
(Emphasis added).
This provision imposes a presumption that an equal division of property is just and reasonable. Castaneda v. Castaneda (1993), Ind.App., 615 N.E.2d 467, 470. However, the presumption may be rebutted by presenting evidence supporting the factors listed in IC 81-1-11.5-1l1(c)(1)-(5). Where the trial court has determined that a party opposing an equal division has met his or her burden under the statute and the trial court adequately records its reasons based on the evidence for an unequal division, we will affirm the trial court's decision. Id.
Craig argues that the trial court did not consider the enumerated statutory factors in determining that an unequal property division was just and reasonable, but instead based that determination on a new factor: "traceability." Craig mischaracterizes the trial court's findings. The trial court specifically stated:
That because [Mary] imherited the real estate located at 3405 Ivy League Drive, and because the funds from the imheri-tance are specifically traceable, the court mow deviates from the 50/50 distribution as follows: [Mary] shall be entitled to 93.7% of the Standard Federal escrow account which represents twenty-seven thousand four hundred twenty-eight dollars and 12/100 ($27,428.12), plus any deposit made subsequent to the date of separation or interest earned during that period of time with [Craig] entitled to 6.3% of the aforementioned Standard Federal escrow account, which sum represents his 50% share of joint funds used to purchase the 5011 Hemlock Lane property.
R. 40 (emphasis added).
The trial court did not base its award of an unequal division of property on the traceability of an asset. Rather, the trial court used "traceability" as a tool to determine the extent to which some of the marital property was acquired through inheritance. Craig's argument that the trial court created a new factor for dividing marital property is without merit.
Here, Mary presented evidence that she inherited the Ivy League property from her mother worth approximately $27,000.00, and that the value of the inheritance still existed in the "marital pot." This evidence, which is reflected in the trial court's findings, satisfies the factor listed in IC 81-1-11.5-ll1(c)(@2), and serves to rebut the statutory presumption that a 50/50 split of the marital property is just and reasonable. The trial court's decision to award the proceeds from the sale of the Hemlock property to Mary is, therefore, justified and we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion. See Castaneda v. Castaneda (19983), Ind.App., 615 N.E.2d 467 (where Wife inherited money, invested it in her name alone, and husband did nothing to contribute to accumulation of inherited funds, nor were inherited funds commingled with marital assets, court found these facts satisfied several factors outlined in 1.0. 81-1-11-11.5(c) and justified awarding inherited funds to Wife); and Shumaker v. Shumaker (1990), Ind.App., 559 N.E.2d 315 (the fact that Husband acquired disputed properties before marriage, by inheritance, in addition to the fact that Wife made no contribution to the value or acquisition of the properties satisfied factors (1) and (2) found *375in LC. 31-1-11.5-11(c) and, therefore, justified unequal division of marital property).
Affirmed.
SULLIVAN, J., concurring.
STATON, J., dissenting with opinion.

=== CASE 9740710 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:39.101976+00 ===

STATON, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent from the Majority Opinion because the judgment of the trial court is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and cireumstances presented in this divorce action. I would reverse the judgment of the trial court with instructions for an equal distribution of marital assets.
Absent a valid antenuptial agreement, all assets of divorcing spouses are part of the "marital pot" and are subject to division. Huber v. Huber (1992), Ind.App., 586 N.E.2d 887, 889, trans. denied. L.C. 8B1-1-11.5-l1(c) provides for an equal division of assets in the marital pot, unless one spouse establishes by relevant evidence that an equal division would not be just and reasonable. Evidence of the existence of one of the specified factors for the court's consideration (e.g., acquisition by inheritance) does not, without more, satisfy the statutory criteria that a deviation from the presumed 50/50 split is appropriate only if an equal division would be unjust or unreasonable.
Here, the wife presented evidence that she inherited a residence 11 years before the parties' final separation. For approximately six years, the Kellers resided together in the inherited residence. Each spouse exerted efforts to maintain the home; joint funds were used to pay mortgage installments, taxes and insurance. The Kellers subsequently sold the inherited residence, deposited the proceeds into a joint checking account and purchased a second residence. Again, cach spouse exerted efforts to maintain the home; joint funds were used to pay mortgage in-. stallments, taxes and insurance. The Kellers clearly commingled all their assets and efforts; their situation was directly opposite that of spouses where inherited property has been set aside to one spouse upon dissolution. See Castaneda v. Castaneda (1993), Ind.App., 615 N.E.2d 467, 470.
The trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and cireum-stances before it. This court should reverse and remand for an equal distribution of the marital assets.

=== CASE 2224582 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.212172+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 102 (1992)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Joyce Ann WHITFIELD, Appellant.
No. C7-92-3.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 7, 1992.
*103 Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Michael O. Freeman, Hennepin County Atty., Michael Richardson, Asst. County Atty., Minneapolis, for respondent.
William R. Kennedy, Hennepin County Public Defender, Renee J. Bergeron, Asst. Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Considered and decided by AMUNDSON, P.J., and PETERSON and STONE, JJ.
OPINION
BRUCE C. STONE, Judge.[*]
This appeal is from an order revoking probation. We reverse.
FACTS
Appellant Joyce Whitfield pleaded guilty in 1986 to wrongfully obtaining public assistance. She was sentenced on September 9, 1986, to a stay of imposition and five years' probation. One of the conditions of probation was that she pay $19,636.70 in restitution.
On August 19, 1991, Whitfield's probation officer reported that Whitfield still owed $18,711.70 of the restitution ordered. On August 22, 1991, the trial court signed an arrest and detention order, based on the report, and ordered the stay of imposition revoked "and the probation time * * * tolled until further order of this Court." The probation officer scheduled a probation revocation hearing for the following day, August 23, 1991. On that day, Whitfield signed an acknowledgment of receipt of the revocation notice, but no hearing was held.
Whitfield's attorney at the plea and sentence left the public defender's office in 1990. Substitute counsel, assigned to represent her on the probation revocation matter, submitted an affidavit stating he was not notified of the August 23 hearing date until after it had been continued to August 28, and that he had a conflict, a felony trial, on the rescheduled August 28 hearing date. The attorney asked that the probation revocation hearing be rescheduled to either September 9 or September 16. (The revocation hearing was rescheduled to September 16.) The affidavit further states counsel was not aware Whitfield's probation was about to expire until he appeared for the hearing on September 16.
At the September 16 hearing, Whitfield questioned whether the court still had jurisdiction to revoke probation. To preserve this issue for appeal, the court revoked probation, pronounced a stay of execution of the presumptive year-and-a-day sentence concurrent with the five years already served, and ordered a confession of judgment be executed. The record does not indicate whether a confession of judgment has been signed.
ISSUE
Did the trial court exceed its jurisdiction in revoking probation?
*104 ANALYSIS
Whitfield contends the trial court had no jurisdiction to revoke probation after September 9, 1991, when the five-year period of probation expired.
This court has held that the trial court has no authority to "toll" the period of probation past the maximum period the defendant could receive. State, City of Eagan v. Stofferahn, 434 N.W.2d 501, 502 (Minn.App.1989). Whitfield's probation time was approaching the five-year maximum sentence, and thus the limit of the permissible probationary period. See Minn. Stat. § 609.135, subd. 2(1) (1990).
When the probation officer gives notice of an alleged probation violation, "the court may without notice revoke the stay * * * and probation and direct that the defendant be taken into immediate custody." Minn.Stat. § 609.14, subd. 1 (1990). The trial court signed such an order on August 22, 1991, before the expiration of the probationary period. However, the purpose of this provision, Stofferahn held, is only to
[enable] incarceration of a defendant after expiration of the stay when the defendant cannot be found or apprehended before expiration occurs.
Stofferahn, 434 N.W.2d at 502. Because Whitfield could be located, and in fact appeared from Colorado the following day, the trial court's order could not serve to "toll" or extend the probationary period.
Whitfield was entitled to a hearing before probation was finally revoked. Pearson v. State, 308 Minn. 287, 290, 241 N.W.2d 490, 492 (1976); Minn.R.Crim.P. 27.04, subd. 3. Whatever the effect of the revocation of the stay of imposition on August 22, 1991, it had no permanent validity until a Morrissey hearing had been held to assure that defendant was accorded all constitutional rights to due process before probation is revoked. Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 487-88, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 2603, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1972).
Whitfield's attorney, in submitting the alternative dates of September 9 and 16, for purposes of rescheduling the August 28 hearing, was not aware of the impending expiration of the court's jurisdiction. Thus, there is no claim of misleading the court or the county attorney.
We note that the statute provides that the probation officer "shall ask for the hearing if the restitution ordered has not been paid prior to 60 days before" the end of probation. Minn.Stat. § 609.135, subd. 1a (1990). Although the hearing was requested, it was requested only 21 days before the scheduled expiration of probation and long after the probation office was on notice of probation violation and that a hearing would be required. This case is illustrative of the need, in cases of failure to make restitution, for the Department of Court Services and probation officers to report the failure promptly to the court and county attorney as the defalcation becomes apparent.
The only practical effect of the revocation order and subsequent sentence appears to be that Whitfield's conviction could not be deemed a misdemeanor. See Minn.Stat. § 609.13, subd. 1(2) (1990) (conviction may be deemed for a misdemeanor if a stay of imposition was given and defendant discharged "without a prison sentence"). However, this consequence is sufficient to present an actual controversy. Moreover, the case involves a question which may recur in the future. See In re Peterson, 360 N.W.2d 333, 335 (Minn.1984) (court may review issues capable of repetition yet evading review). Finally, this disposition is not intended to interfere with Whitfield's civil liability for her failure to make restitution.
DECISION
The trial court exceeded its jurisdiction in revoking probation.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the district court, acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 2.

=== CASE 9740711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:39.985719+00 ===

*518Phr Curiam.
The plaintiff-appellant employee, Ella Brandt, challenges the dismissal of her claim for benefits from the defendantappellee employer, Leon Plastics, Inc., claiming the compensation court erred by (1) concluding the medical evidence was in conflict, (2) applying an improper standard of proof, and (3) concluding that she failed to sustain her burden of proof. We affirm.
Brandt is now 52 years old, has an eighth-grade education, and moved to the United States from Germany in 1958 at the age of 18. She began working for Leon Plastics in October 1979 and held but one other job in this country, when she worked as a waitress for a year. She denies suffering any injury or disabilities before she began to work for Leon Plastics.
After working as a sander at Leon Plastics for 2 years, she became an inspector on an assembly line. As such, her duties included removing parts from the line, touching them up with paint, and then passing them to the next person.
In approximately 1986, the parts Brandt worked with began to include “deck panels.” Brandt described these 14-pound panels, measuring 5 feet by 3 feet, as being similar to a big tabletop with brackets on the back. Brandt lifted them over her head, set them on a table, and then inspected them. She would then place them on a 1-foot-high stool and bend over to touch up the sides. Finally, she would place them back on the table to paint the bottom before passing them on to the next person.
There is evidence that Brandt worked on these panels 3 weeks of every month in 1989. Leon Plastics set a quota of 300 panels in an 8-hour day, and Brandt worked up to 56 hours a week during the fall and winter of 1989. One worker testified that the line employees worked more overtime during that period than at any other time in the worker’s 18 years with the company. The record reveals that several workers developed back pain after working with the panels and that management considered reassigning some of the workers because the activity was so hard on them.
Brandt began experiencing lower back pain within 6 months to a year prior to her last day of work on December 22, 1989. She testified that during November and December 1989 the *519pain increased and began radiating into her hip and right leg. Her coworkers noticed that during this time Brandt was in pain — she walked with a limp and complained about pain and numbness in her leg. She also became uncharacteristically willing to allow others to perform the more difficult tasks.
Leon Plastics closed its plant for the Christmas holiday. On December 29, 1989, while doing some housework, Brandt decided to sec a physician, as she could no longer tolerate her back pain.
Prior to this time Brandt did not report any problems to her supervisors and had continued to participate in a weekly bowling league which began in August 1989. While bowling, she used a 12-pound ball and did a lot of stooping and bending. Brandt testified that her housework on December 29 included mopping, vacuuming, and hanging out the bedding. She also gardened a small plot in her yard and mowed the lawn on occasion during the summer and fall of 1989.
Brandi also testified that she did not slip or fall or suffer any type of trauma while bowling or doing the housework on the 29th, but that her tolerance just gave out.
The physician who examined Brandt on December 29 recommended she stop working and scheduled a CAT scan for January 4,1990. On January 2, Brandt reported for work but a foreman, who knew of her medical problems, told her to go home.
On January 4, Brandt provided her personnel manager a physician’s note excusing her from work, at which time she requested some insurance forms. Brandt filled out two applications for group health plan benefits, indicating on each that her injury was not work-related. She explained that she did not check the workers’ compensation box at the instruction of the personnel manager, who told her such benefits were unavailable as she had not immediately reported an accident. However, the personnel manager denied this assertion, stating that the subject of workers’ compensation did not come up at all during the January 4 conversation.
On January 11, Brandt was examined by a physical therapist. The therapist indicated on a form he used that workers’ compensation was not involved. Nonetheless, the *520therapist testified that Brandt told him she experienced back pain while working. The therapist also stated that Brandt seemed confused as to the correct procedures for asserting a workers’ compensation claim.
Brandt first raised the possibility of receiving workers’ compensation benefits with her personnel manager sometime in mid-February 1990. At that time the personnel manager told her she could not claim such benefits because she failed to report the accident on January 2, when it first happened.
After physical therapy proved unsuccessful, Brandt came under the care of Drs. John A. Albers and Gordon D. Bainbridge. Bainbridge concluded that Brandt was suffering from a herniated disk and performed a laminectomy on April 2, 1990.
In letters dated August 13 and December 13, 1990, and January 10, 1991, Bainbridge wrote that, in his opinion, Brandt’s injury was, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, caused by the repetitive and cumulative trauma she sustained during her employment at Leon Plastics.
However, in a letter dated September 21, 1990, Bainbridge attributed Brandt’s disability to a work-related injury occurring on December 12,1989. Later, in a letter dated October 31,1990, Bainbridge declared that his earlier reference to a December 12 injury was inadvertent and that date was intended only to approximate the onset of the radiating pain into her leg. The record contains no other medical evidence on the issue of causation.
The first assignment of error is resolved adversely to Brandt by the rule that where the testimony of the same expert is conflicting, resolution of the conflict rests with the trier of fact. See Doggett v. Brunswick Corp., 217 Neb. 166, 347 N.W.2d 877 (1984). Thus, it was for the compensation court to determine whether to believe Bainbridge’s explanation for writing that the injury occurred on two different dates. Moreover, the compensation court is not required to take an expert’s opinion as binding and may, as may any other trier of fact, either accept or reject such an opinion. See, Liberty v. Colonial Acres Nsg. Home, ante p. 189, 481 N.W.2d 189 (1992); Bernhardt v. County of Scotts Bluff, ante p. 423, 482 N.W.2d 262 (1992).
*521Brandt’s second assignment of error, which claims the compensation court employed an improper standard of proof, stems from the recitation in the compensation court’s order that in cases involving a series of repeated traumas, the claimant must show that the employment exertion “contributed in some material and substantial degree to cause the injury.” The order also recites, “The medical evidence is in conflict and does not establish preponderantly that plaintiff’s problems are the result of a work injury in December of 1989 or of repetitive trauma.” It is clear, therefore, that because of Bainbridge’s contradictory history concerning when the injury manifested itself, the compensation court found his opinion unpersuasive.
Neither is there any merit in the suggestion that requiring a showing that the repeated traumas Brandt alleges to have experienced contributed in some material and substantial degree to her claimed injury somehow enhanced her burden of proof beyond that required by the law. Under the circumstances, the expression is but a different formulation of the rule that a workers’ compensation claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the employment proximately caused an injury which resulted in disability compensable under the Workers’ Compensation Act. Liberty v. Colonial Acres Nsg. Home, supra; Phipps v. Milton G. Waldbaum & Co., 239 Neb. 700, 477 N.W.2d 919 (1991).
The third assignment of error, in which Brandt quarrels with the compensation court’s finding that she did not sustain her burden of proof, is subsumed in the analyses of the first two assignments of error.
Accordingly, the order of dismissal entered by the compensation court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740712 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:39.989994+00 ===

White, J.,
dissenting.
It is well established that a workers’ compensation claimant complaining of a subjective injury or disability cannot recover on the basis of nonmedical evidence alone. See, Fees v. Rivett Lumber Co., 228 Neb. 617, 423 N.W.2d 483 (1988); Coco v. Austin Co., 212 Neb. 95, 321 N.W.2d 448 (1982); Mack v. Dale Electronics, Inc., 209 Neb. 367, 307 N.W.2d 814 (1981). In Eiting v. Godding, 191 Neb. 88, 91-92, 214 N.W.2d 241, 244 *522(1974), we explained the rationale for this rule:
Where the claimed injuries are of such a character as to require skilled and professional persons to determine the cause and extent thereof, the question is one of science. Such a question must necessarily be determined from the testimony of skilled professional persons and cannot be determined from the testimony of unskilled witnesses having no scientific knowledge of such injuries.
The obvious corollary of this proposition is that when expert evidence regarding the cause of a subjective injury is produced and is uncontroverted, it is entitled to greater deference. As this court stated in Mann v. City of Omaha, 211 Neb. 583, 592-93, 319 N.W.2d 454, 459 (1982):
[W]here the medical testimony is uncontroverted, unimpeached, and is given in matters of medical diagnosis which arc peculiarly within the range of the knowledge of the expert, the compensation court is not free to substitute its own diagnosis. It is not true that in every case the uncontested opinion of an expert is binding on the trier of fact, but where, as here, the testimony is based on firsthand knowledge, is credible, and has no demonstrable weaknesses or failure of foundation, such testimony cannot be ignored.
Accord, Sondag v. Ferris Hardware, 220 N.W.2d 903 (Iowa 1974) (greater deference is accorded expert testimony when the issue necessarily rests on medical expertise); Rutledge v. Industrial Commission, 9 Ariz. App. 316, 451 P.2d 894 (1969) (in workers’ compensation cases where causation is denied, uncontroverted expert opinion based on the facts is conclusive upon the trier of fact); Ross v. Sayers Well Servicing Company, 76 N.M. 321, 414 P.2d 679 (1966) (given the requirement that medical testimony is necessary where causation is contested, an uncontradicted medical opinion based upon the facts is conclusive upon the court); Hill v. Culligan Soft Water Service Company, 386 P.2d 1018 (Okla. 1963) (rule that trier of fact determines questions of causation inapplicable where only medical evidence in the record unequivocally attributes claimant’s condition to an industrial accident); Travelers Ins. Co. v. Blazier, 228 S.W.2d 217 (Tex. Civ. App. 1950) (the *523question whether the claimant suffered from polio or a heatstroke was peculiarly within the realm of scientific knowledge and thus the trial court was not authorized to make a diagnosis contrary to that of the only medical witness).
In this case only one physician offered an opinion as to the cause of Brandt’s injuries. In three separate letters and during his deposition Dr. Bainbridge stated his conclusion, based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that Brandt’s injury resulted from cumulative and repetitive trauma arising from her employment at Leon Plastics. Despite the clarity of Dr. Bainbridge’s opinion, the rehearing panel and a majority of this court characterize his statements as “conflicting.” They do so based upon another letter written by Dr. Bainbridge in which he refers to Brandt’s “work related injury of December 12,1989.”
Contrary to the majority’s assertion,, however, Dr. Bainbridge did not write that “the injury occurred on two different dates.” Dr. Bainbridge made clear that the reference to a December 12 injury was inadvertent and intended only to identify the approximate date Brandt began experiencing pain radiating into her right leg. Dr. Bainbridge began treating Brandt on March 8,1990, personally discussed her history with both her and her husband, performed surgery on April 2,1990, and continued treating her through January 1991. His opinion as to the cause of Brandt’s injury is based upon a solid foundation of firsthand knowledge. There is nothing in his attempt to pinpoint the date Brandt’s pain became severe which detracts from the certainty of his opinion as to the cause of her injury.
The injury sustained by Brandt is of the type peculiarly within the knowledge of medical experts. There is no justification in law or reason for allowing the Workers’ Compensation Court to simply ignore Dr. Bainbridge’s conclusion that Brandt’s injury resulted from work-related activity. Though judges generally lack the skill and training to competently diagnose the etiology of subjective injuries and disabilities, the majority is determined to anoint them with the power to evaluate the accuracy of uncontroverted opinions rendered by those who are so trained. I therefore cannot join in the majority’s decision in this case and the sub silentio *524overruling of Mann v. City of Omaha, supra, which it represents.
In addition, I would note that in Heiliger v. Walters & Heiliger Electric, Inc., 236 Neb. 459, 461 N.W.2d 565 (1990), we rejected the proposition that an enhanced burden of proof applies in cases involving a preexisting disease or condition and disapproved of language in prior cases indicating such a burden exists. Significantly, language requiring proof that employment exertion contributed in a “material and substantial” degree to causing an injury appears in some pre-Heiliger cases imposing an enhanced burden of proof on the issue of causation. See, Spangler v. State, 233 Neb. 790, 448 N.W.2d 145 (1989); Sellens v. Allen Products Co., Inc., 206 Neb. 506, 293 N.W.2d 415 (1980). See, also, Chrisman v. Greyhound Bus Lines, Inc., 208 Neb. 6, 301 N.W.2d 595 (1981).
Given the decision in Heiliger, continued use of language regarding a “material and substantial” degree of proof is confusing and subject to the interpretation that it signifies the imposition of an enhanced burden of persuasion on the issue of causation. More to the point, the rehearing panel’s finding that Brandt failed to adduce sufficient evidence of causation is perhaps only explainable as the result of its deciding the case under an enhanced burden of proof. I respectfully dissent.
Grant, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2224587 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.320492+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 241 (1994)
266 Ill.App.3d 81
203 Ill. Dec. 202
Thomas KLEKAMP, Ted Klekamp, Steve Merva and Nick Cinquepalmi, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
The CITY OF BURBANK, an Illinois municipal corporation, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-93-2365.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
August 24, 1994.
*242 Widman, Goldberg & Zulkie, Ltd., Chicago, for appellant.
Louis F. Cainkar, Ltd., Chicago, for appellee.
Justice GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs Thomas Klekamp, Ted Klekamp, Steve Merva and Nick Cinquepalmi, filed this declaratory judgment action seeking additional compensation from The City of Burbank (Burbank) for their employment as firefighter/paramedics rather than firefighters. The trial court entered summary judgment in favor of Burbank and plaintiffs appeal.
The issue on appeal is whether or not plaintiffs were entitled, as a matter of law, to compensation at the salary level of firefighter/paramedics for the work they performed during their first two years of employment by defendant.
We affirm and file our decision as a published opinion in accordance with Supreme Court Rule 23(a) (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 15 (July 20, 1994), R. 23, effective July 1, 1994) because there appears to be a conflict among appellate districts of issues addressed herein.
The parties stipulated to the facts. During early 1985, all four plaintiffs participated in the testing process for the position of firemen on defendant's fire department. Prior to testing for the full-time fire department positions, all four plaintiffs worked as paid on-call firefighters for defendant's fire department.
On November 18, 1985, defendant hired three of the plaintiffs (Thomas Klekamp, Ted Klekamp and Steve Merva) as full-time firemen and compensated them accordingly. However, when hired, these three plaintiffs were licensed paramedics. In November 1987, after a two-year probationary period ended, these three plaintiffs were paid as firefighter/paramedics.
On February 18, 1986, defendant hired plaintiff Nick Cinquepalmi as a full-time fireman and compensated him at the salary of a firefighter. Subsequently, in December 1986, plaintiff Cinquepalmi became a licensed paramedic. At the end of his probationary period, he received the salary of a firefighter/paramedic.
From the date plaintiffs began service with defendant's fire department, they functioned as firemen and paramedics, including being assigned on a regular basis to the fire department's ambulance. The fire department required that two paramedics always be on duty. At times, plaintiffs were the only paramedics on duty for certain shifts.
Prior to being hired by defendant, none of the plaintiffs were advised by defendant that they would be paid as a firefighter/paramedic. *243 Each plaintiff was sworn in as a firefighter. Upon their inquiry after being hired, plaintiffs were advised by the deputy chief of the Burbank Fire Department, and later by the chief, that although they would be performing the functions of a firefighter and paramedic, they would only be paid as a firefighter for the first two years of employment. They continued their employment.
When plaintiffs were hired in 1985 and 1986, defendant had separate salary schedules in effect for firefighter/paramedics and firefighters. Defendant's policy also provided that all newly hired firefighters, regardless of paramedic certification, would be paid as a firefighter for a two-year probationary period and employees with paramedic certificates would be elevated to the pay status of firefighter/paramedic beginning with their third year of service.
For fiscal years 1985, 1986 and 1987, defendant appropriated funds to pay plaintiffs in accordance with the salary schedule for firefighters. For fiscal year 1988, defendant appropriated sufficient funds to pay fire department employees with more than one year of service and paramedic certification in accordance with the salary schedule of firefighter/paramedic. In February 1988, Burbank reworded its newspaper advertisements for the hiring of paramedics to acknowledge that paramedics would start at a higher salary than firefighters.
In July 1988 plaintiffs made a written request to the fire chief for the salary difference owed to them based on their service as paramedics. In December 1988 plaintiffs filed a complaint seeking a declaration by the court that they were entitled to be paid as firefighter/paramedics from the time they were hired.
The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. In June 1993 the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Burbank reasoning that plaintiffs were clearly hired as firefighters and were paid accordingly. The trial court further found that no contract implied in law was created since there was no evidence that plaintiffs had a reasonable expectation of additional compensation for their services as paramedics or that Burbank intended to compensate the plaintiffs as firefighter/paramedics. Furthermore, Burbank could not be held to have been unjustly enriched because its fire department informed plaintiffs that they would not be paid as firefighter/paramedics and plaintiffs continued to perform their duties of paramedics for almost three years without filing a formal complaint.
Plaintiffs assert that their paramedic services created a contract implied in law because plaintiffs actually rendered the services of licensed paramedics and defendant unjustly reaped the benefits of plaintiffs' services as paramedics.
Burbank primarily contends that the absence of an ordinance to appropriate money to pay plaintiffs at any rate other than the firefighter's salary vitiates any alleged contract to pay plaintiffs at a different rate because a municipal employee cannot receive additional compensation without a prior appropriation by the city and no such appropriation was ever authorized by defendant.
To determine the propriety of summary judgment, we must apply the de novo standard of review. (Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 90, 102, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204.) Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings, depositions and admissions on file, together with any affidavits, show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1992).) As evidenced by the parties' stipulated statement of facts, there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and thus we determine whether defendant was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
Plaintiffs' request to recover compensation based on a salary schedule established for a job classification for which they were not hired is precluded by the prior appropriation rule established in the Illinois Municipal Code (Code) (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq. (West 1992)) and interpreted by this court in Lindahl v. City of Des Plaines (1991), 210 Ill.App.3d 281, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306, and Jordan v. Civil Service Commission *244 (1993), 246 Ill.App.3d 1047, 186 Ill. Dec. 903, 617 N.E.2d 142.
The Code requires passage of an ordinance to spend or appropriate money on behalf of a city (65 ILCS 5/3-11-17 (West 1992), repealed and now codified at 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40 (West 1992) effective May 13, 1993) and establishes the prior appropriation rule:
"Except as provided otherwise in this section, no contract shall be made by the corporate authorities, or by any committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments of any municipality, whether the object of the expenditure has been ordered by the corporate authorities or not, unless an appropriation has been previously made concerning that contract or expense. Any contract made, or any expense otherwise incurred, in violation of the provisions of this section shall be null and void as to the municipality, and no money belonging thereto shall be paid on account thereof." 65 ILCS 5/8-1-7(a) (West 1992).
In Lindahl, this court held that section 3-11-17 barred the plaintiff's claim to recover compensation for overtime work because "[a] municipal employee is not entitled to additional compensation or benefits absent an express authorization and appropriation by an ordinance." (Lindahl, 210 Ill.App.3d at 294, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306.) A plaintiff seeking additional compensation bears the burden of showing that he is entitled to additional compensation by a relevant appropriation and in Lindahl there was no provision or authorization for the defendant city to pay the plaintiff for his overtime work. Lindahl, 210 Ill.App.3d at 293-94, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306.
Following Lindahl, this court in Jordan held that under section 8-1-7 of the Code "any unauthorized contract or expense incurred on behalf of the City would be deemed null and void." (Jordan, 246 Ill. App.3d at 1051, 186 Ill. Dec. 903, 617 N.E.2d 142.) In accordance with this statutory law, the Jordan court held that the defendant city did not breach an unwritten agreement with the plaintiff employee for overtime compensation because the record failed to indicate that any appropriation had been made concerning the plaintiff's alleged unwritten agreement with the defendant city. (Jordan, 246 Ill.App.3d at 1051, 186 Ill. Dec. 903, 617 N.E.2d 142.) The Jordan court also held that "a contract made in violation of section 8-1-7 is void ab initio and cannot be enforced by estoppel or ratification." Jordan, 246 Ill.App.3d at 1051, 186 Ill. Dec. 903, 617 N.E.2d 142, quoting Ligenza v. Village of Round Lake Beach (1985), 133 Ill.App.3d 286, 291, 88 Ill. Dec. 579, 478 N.E.2d 1187.
In the present case, the record is clear that plaintiffs were hired as firefighters, not firefighter/paramedics, that defendant established a separate salary schedule for the two different positions, and that defendant appropriated funds to pay plaintiffs as firefighters for the relevant fiscal years. Under the statute and holdings in Lindahl and Jordan, plaintiffs were not entitled, as a matter of law, to compensation beyond the salary of firefighters during the first two years of their employment.
We recognize that our finding presents an apparent conflict with the third district on the application of the prior appropriation rule. (Eertmoed v. City of Pekin (1980), 83 Ill.App.3d 362, 39 Ill. Dec. 351, 404 N.E.2d 942 (the absence of approval of an employment contract by the defendant city in contravention of section 3-11-17 of the Code did not preclude the plaintiff employees' action to recover accumulated sick leave pay); see also Dell v. City of Streator (1990), 193 Ill.App.3d 810, 140 Ill. Dec. 616, 550 N.E.2d 252 (city was equitably estopped from refusing lifetime life and health insurance benefits to qualified non-union retirees to whom it had promised such benefits during their employment).) However, we agree with the characterization in Lindahl, that the Eertmoed decision "is an aberration because it is contrary to the relevant provisions of the Municipal Code and recent case law." Lindahl, 210 Ill.App.3d at 292, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306.
To support their contention that the absence of prior appropriations does not necessarily defeat a claim based on a contract implied in law, plaintiffs misplace their reliance on this court's decision in Woodfield Lanes, Inc. v. Village of Schaumburg (1988), *245 168 Ill.App.3d 763, 119 Ill. Dec. 568, 523 N.E.2d 36, which involved a recapture ordinance enacted but not enforced by the defendant village. The plaintiff in Woodfield Lanes constructed a sewer and water main in a manner that allowed connections for four other parcels of property. The defendant village enacted an ordinance which allowed the plaintiff to recover part of its costs by imposing payment on owners of the other four parcels. However, the defendant village failed to enforce the recapture ordinance as to one property owner. This court found that under these circumstances the defendant village "had a duty to enforce its ordinance, and its voluntary acceptance of the benefit from plaintiff together with its failure [to] meet its duty constitutes unjust enrichment, even in the absence of a prior request for plaintiff's work." Woodfield Lanes, 168 Ill.App.3d at 768, 119 Ill. Dec. 568, 523 N.E.2d 36.
To circumvent the prior appropriation rule, plaintiffs also suggest alternative methods of funding retroactive paramedic pay, i.e., from the line item budget for fire department salaries (see Aiardo v. Village of Libertyville (1989), 184 Ill.App.3d 653, 132 Ill. Dec. 939, 540 N.E.2d 861) or from defendant's approval of back-pay settlements (City of Burbank v. Illinois State Labor Relations Board (1989), 185 Ill.App.3d 997, 133 Ill. Dec. 821, 541 N.E.2d 1259) or from the creation of a "working cash fund" authorized by section 8-7-1 of the Code to meet demands for ordinary and necessary expenditures (65 ILCS 5/8-7-1 (West 1992)). Plaintiffs' suggestions, however, may address appropriate ways in which monies could be procured if plaintiffs prevail but do not apply to the threshold issue of whether or not plaintiffs are entitled to such back pay.
Plaintiffs may not recover under any theory of contract implied in law, quasi-contract or quantum meruit (see Rutledge v. Housing Authority of East St. Louis (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 1064, 1068-69, 44 Ill. Dec. 176, 411 N.E.2d 82).
The law will not imply a contract where an express contract exists (e.g., People ex rel. Hartigan v. E & E Hauling Inc. (1992), 153 Ill. 2d 473, 497, 180 Ill. Dec. 271, 607 N.E.2d 165) or where a contract implied in fact exists (Zadrozny v. City Colleges (1991), 220 Ill.App.3d 290, 295, 163 Ill. Dec. 93, 581 N.E.2d 44). In the present case, an express contract did not exist and a contract implied in fact was neither asserted by plaintiffs nor established.
Equitable principles create and govern contracts implied in law. (Zadrozny, 220 Ill.App.3d at 295, 163 Ill. Dec. 93, 581 N.E.2d 44 (no cause of action existed for breach of an implied or express contract for a teacher seeking extra compensation above his regular salary); Mueller v. City of Highland Park (1988), 166 Ill.App.3d 114, 116 Ill. Dec. 644, 519 N.E.2d 712 (a contract implied in law did not exist concerning water supplied by a city to a village during the period of negotiations between the two municipalities after the written contract had expired).) The law presumes that services or property are rendered and received with the expectation of payment and thus the law implies a promise to pay their reasonable worth. Mueller, 166 Ill.App.3d at 120, 116 Ill. Dec. 644, 519 N.E.2d 712.
A contract implied in law intends to prevent unjust enrichment on the part of the receiving party who voluntarily accepts a benefit which would be inequitable for him to retain without payment. E.g., E & E Hauling Inc., 153 Ill.2d at 497, 180 Ill. Dec. 271, 607 N.E.2d 165.
It is axiomatic "from the requirement of an inequity that there is no general responsibility to compensate one for work and labor done irrespective of the circumstances in which it is carried out." Rutledge, 88 Ill.App.3d at 1069, 44 Ill. Dec. 176, 411 N.E.2d 82.
Cases which have addressed employees' claims based on implied contract theories for extra compensation beyond a pre-determined salary are sparse and have held against the employees. E.g., Chicago Patrolmen's Association v. City of Chicago (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 503, 309 N.E.2d 3 (denied "step" and "longevity" salary increases to police officers); Gathemann v. City of Chicago (1914), 263 Ill. 292, 104 N.E. 1085 (denied overtime compensation *246 to a civil service employee who had changed to a new job position which did not, by ordinance, provide for such additional earnings); May v. City of Chicago (1906), 222 Ill. 595, 599, 78 N.E. 912 (denied overtime compensation and held that a salaried municipal employee "is bound to perform the duties of his office for the compensation fixed, even though additional duties are imposed upon him").
Although neither overtime nor step increases nor seniority raises are involved in the present case, plaintiffs seek additional compensation by asking the law, in effect, to place them retroactively in a job classification different from the category for which they were initially hired and thereby provide additional money from the higher-paid job classification.
The principles articulated in Rutledge are particularly instructive and persuasive in the present case. While the dual services performed by plaintiffs as firefighters and paramedics must not be minimized and cannot be viewed as unbeneficial to defendant, the circumstances under which these duties were performed do not warrant the imposition of a contract implied in law. The linchpin of the equity principle inherent in the doctrine of a contract implied in law goes beyond the receipt and retention of a benefit and requires that the circumstances connote an injustice. Plaintiffs acknowledge that they were hired as firefighters and would serve a two-year probationary period before their job classification, and correspondingly their salaries, would change. Defendant hired and retained plaintiffs and appropriated funds to conform to this plan. Under these circumstances, we cannot find that defendant was unjustly enriched.
Affirmed.
TULLY, P.J., and CERDA, J., concur.

=== CASE 9740713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:42.10971+00 ===

Mallett, J.
Plaintiffs, injured in a one-car accident in Gratiot County, Michigan, filed separate product liability actions against defendant Ford Motor Company in Wayne Circuit Court. Because plaintiffs were injured there, defendant contends that venue is proper only in Gratiot County. Plaintiffs appeal a Court of Appeals decision reversing the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion for change of venue. 187 Mich App 63; 466 NW2d 346 (1991). We reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals.
FACTS
This is a products liability case involving a 1982 Ford Escort in which plaintiffs were injured in a one-car accident in Gratiot County. The car was designed, manufactured and inspected at Ford Motor Company’s Wayne Assembly plant, located in Wayne County, Michigan.
Plaintiffs, Julius and Kathy Lorencz, as next friends of Nicholas Lorencz, and Frances and LaVern Gross, filed separate products liability actions against Ford Motor Company in Wayne Circuit Court. Each claimed venue was proper in Wayne County because the car was defectively designed, manufactured, and assembled at Ford’s Wayne County facilities.
Defendant Ford Motor Company filed motions in both lawsuits for change of venue claiming it was improperly laid in Wayne County. Ford argued that venue belonged only in Gratiot County since that is where plaintiffs’ injuries arose and defendant conducted business there.
The trial court denied defendant’s motion, stat*373ing that plaintiffs’ cause of actions arose, in part, in Wayne County as required under the venue statute, MCL 600.1629(1)(a); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a). The court agreed with plaintiffs that because defendant admitted the car was designed, manufactured, and assembled in Wayne County, part of the cause of action arose in Wayne County, therefore, venue was properly laid in Wayne County. On appeal, the Court of Appeals reversed the decision of the trial court and found that in a tort action, the county where all or part of a plaintiff’s injuries or damages occur is the first priority for determining proper venue. 187 Mich App 64. The Court held:
[I]n actions based on tort the county of first priority for venue is the county or counties in which the injuries or damages occurred. The statutory phrase "in which all or part of the cause of action arose” refers to the situs of the injuries or damages and not to the situs of the wrongful act or acts. [187 Mich App 75.]
i
We are asked to construe the meaning of MCL 600.1629(1)(a); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a), part of the changes of the Revised Judicature Act passed by the Legislature in 1986.1 It was originally designed to eliminate forum shopping and the filing of only tangentially related lawsuits in Wayne, Oakland, *374and Macomb counties. A number of versions of the bill, HB 5150, were considered by the Legislature before final enactment. The language actually adopted, however, nullified HB 5150’s original purpose.
The first draft of HB 5150 amended MCL 600.1627; MSA 27A.1627, the former tort venue statute, by eliminating the language allowing a plaintiff to file a tort claim in the "county in which all or a part of the cause of action arose.” HB 5150 would have inserted a new § 2 in § 1627, which stated:
In a tort action, venue shall be determined in the following order of priority:
(A) The county in which all or a part of the injury occurred.
(B) The county in which a defendant resides.
(C) If none of the defendants meets any of the criteria in subdivision (B), the county in which any plaintiff resides[2]
This version of the bill was rejected by the House.
On December 11, 1985, the House unanimously adopted amended § 1627 and the language "in which all or a part of the cause of action arose,” rejecting the language that limited venue to the situs of the injury.3 The amended version of HB 5150 was eventually incorporated, unchanged, into HB 5154, revisions to the Revised Judicature Act, and sent to the Senate.4 The Senate passed HB 5154 on March 18, 1986.5 On July 6, 1986, HB 5154 was enacted into law and signed by the Governor without any further modifications to the *375venue provisions that subsequently became § 1629.6
In a cause of action arising from a tortious injury, there are four elements:
"1. The existence of a legal duty by defendant toward plaintiff;
2. the breach of such duty;
3. the proximate causal relation between the breach of such duty and an injury to the plaintiff; and
4. the plaintiff must have suffered damages.”[7]
It is clear that a breach of duty can occur in a different venue than the injury in a tort case. For example, in a products liability action, the product can be designed in one county, manufactured in another, and the injury may occur in yet a third. A plaintiff, alleging proper facts, can file suit in any one of these places because all or a part of the cause of action arose in any one of them. Under the plain language of MCL 600.1629(1)(a); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a), venue would be properly laid in any one of them.
ii
The Court of Appeals panel in Lorencz, however, took a different view. It held that under MCL 600.1629; MSA 27A.1629, venue is properly laid only in the county which is the situs of plaintiff’s injuries, or where plaintiff’s damages arose, not where all or part of the cause of action occurred.
The panel went through a lengthy discussion of the history of § 1629, its legislative intent and *376purpose. It quoted various legislative materials and committee reports, including the House Legislative Analysis Section’s first analysis after the wording of the proposed statute had been changed from "where the injuries occurred” to "[where] all or a part of the cause of action arose.” However, the Court of Appeals focus in its discussion of the House Analysis is misplaced. Instead of looking at the precise wording of the statute, which is in the analysis, the Court of Appeals focused on the discussion of the reason to vote in favor of the proposed bill. At one time, the Legislature had before it a version of the venue statute that corresponded perfectly to the Court of Appeals ruling in this case. It was rejected. Because the plain wording of the statute conflicts with the finding that venue is proper only at the situs of an injury, the panel’s concentration on the statute’s original intent is improper.
III
When a statute is clear and unambiguous, judicial construction or interpretation is unnecessary and therefore, precluded. Dussia v Monroe Co Employees Retirement System, 386 Mich 244, 248-249; 191 NW2d 307 (1971); Land v George Schmidt Co, 122 Mich App 167, 170; 333 NW2d 30 (1982); City of Lansing v Lansing Twp, 356 Mich 641, 648-650; 97 NW2d 804 (1959); Wills v Iron Co Bd of Canvassers, 183 Mich App 797, 801; 455 NW2d 405 (1990). However, if construction is necessary, the Court is required to determine and give effect to the Legislature’s intent and employ the ordinary and generally accepted meaning of the words used by the Legislature. Town & Country Dodge, Inc v Dep’t of Treasury, 420 Mich 226, 240; 362 NW2d *377618 (1984). "When determining legislative intent, statutory language should be given a reasonable construction considering its purpose and the object sought to be accomplished.” Wills, supra, p 801. Additionally, it is the primary objective in statutory interpretation and construction to effectuate legislative intent without harming the plain wording of the act. 22 Callaghan, Michigan Civil Jurisprudence, Statutes, § 108, p 379.
Our reading of the statute, MCL 600.1629(1)(a); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a), "[a] county in which all or a part of the cause of action arose,” leads us to conclude that it is unambiguous and needs no judicial interpretation.8 Under the statute, venue is proper where part or all of the cause of action arose, not merely at the situs of the injury. That a cause of action may arise in more than one place, making venue proper in more than one jurisdiction, is apparent from the clear wording of the statute.
CONCLUSION
Because of the clear meaning of the wording where "all or a part of the cause of action arose,” we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals and find that venue is properly laid in Wayne County.
Cavanagh, C.J., and Levin, Brickley, Boyle, and Riley, JJ., concurred with Mallett, J.
MCL 600.1629(1)(a); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a) provides:
(a) A county in which all or a part of the cause of action arose and in which either of the following apply is a proper county in which to commence and try the action:
(i) The defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county.
(ii) The registered office of a defendant corporation is located in that county. [Emphasis added.]
HB 5150 (November 5, 1985).
1985 Journal of the House 2583 and Substitute for HB 5150.
1985 Journal of the Senate 2546.
1986 Journal of the Senate 590.
1986 Journal of the House 1932.
Thomas v Process Equipment Corp, 154 Mich App 78, 86; 397 NW2d 224 (1986), citing Lefever v American Red Cross, 108 Mich App 69, 72; 310 NW2d 278 (1981).
What the Legislature actually enacted may not have been what it intended to do; however, we are not entitled to say that the language it did adopt is equivalent to what it actually rejected.

=== CASE 2224591 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.403647+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 126 (1992)
240 Neb. 566
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Thomas J. KELLER, Appellant.
No. S-90-974.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 23, 1992.
*127 Calvin D. Hansen, Lincoln, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Donald A. Kohtz, Lincoln, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE and GRANT, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
PER CURIAM.
After a bench trial the Lancaster County Court found the defendant-appellant, Thomas J. Keller, guilty of driving while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 39-669.07 (Reissue 1988). An enhancement hearing was held and resulted in a determination that the defendant's conviction constituted his second violation of § 39-669.07. Accordingly, the trial court sentenced the defendant to serve 30 days in the county jail, fined him $500, suspended his driver's license for 1 year, and ordered him not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a like period. See § 39-669.07(4)(b). The defendant appealed to the Lancaster County District Court, which affirmed the county court's judgment. This appeal followed.
On appeal to this court, the defendant assigns as error the district court's failure to find (1) the defendant was denied effective assistance of counsel; (2) the trial court imposed an unlawful sentence by effectively revoking his driver's license for 1 year and 30 days; (3) the trial court abused its discretion in rejecting his request for probation; and (4) the evidence is insufficient to sustain the conviction.
This case involves an appeal to the district court filed after March 23, 1990, and is thus subject to the following rule of practice established in State v. Erlewine, 234 Neb. 855, 857, 452 N.W.2d 764, 767 (1990): "The Supreme Court, in reviewing decisions of the district court which affirmed, reversed, or modified decisions of the county court, will consider only those errors specifically assigned in the appeal to the district court and again assigned as error in the appeal to the Supreme Court."
Notwithstanding this rule, the defendant did not specifically assign any errors in his appeal to the district court. Therefore, absent plain error appearing on the record, there is nothing for this court to review on appeal. See State v. Nowicki, 239 Neb. 130, 474 N.W.2d 478 (1991).
We have reviewed the record and find no plain error in this case. Accordingly, the order of the Lancaster County District Court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9740715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:42.622246+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Bonnie Stevens appeals from a denial of her T.R. 60(B)(1) motion for relief from judgment following a grant of summary judgment in favor of ap-pellees-co-defendants/cross-plaintiffs Michael Brooks Butler and Angie L. Butler; Susan B. Thomas and Kris B. Thomas (collectively all of the above appellees are referred to as "purchasers"). Stevens and the Indiana Real Estate Commission ("Commission") 1 also appeal from the trial court's order directing payment from the Indiana Real Estate Recovery Fund (Fund) (IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7, et seq.)
The designated evidentiary matter discloses that Stevens is an Indiana licensed real estate broker. Between August 1991 and December 1991, she represented to the purchasers 2 that she owned and could convey good title to certain parcels of real estate located in the town of Atwood, Kosciusko County, Indiana. Relying upon these representations and her status as a licensed real estate broker, each purchaser entered into contracts to buy property from her. To secure their purchases, earnest money, which was to be applied to the final price at closing, was forwarded to Stevens.
Stevens failed to initiate closing procedures on the real estate. A subsequent investigation revealed that Stevens did not yet have title to the properties. Rather, she was in the process of purchasing them on land contract from others. Upon discovering this, the purchasers requested a refund of their earnest money deposits. Alternatively, they asked for conveyance of good title to the properties. She did not do either.
Based on the above, the purchasers initiated proceedings against Stevens in the Kos-clusko Circuit Court. They filed three count *665cross-complaints alleging: breach of contract (Count 1), fraud (Count II), and conversion (Count III). The purchasers then requested summary judgment on all three counts. At no time did Stevens respond to their motions. At the summary judgment hearing, Stevens conceded lability as to Count I stating, "I have no defense."
At the request of the trial court, the purchasers prepared a proposed order of summary judgment. This order, accepted by the trial court and entered on June 2, 1992, directed summary judgment in favor of the purchasers on all three counts as set forth in the cross-complaints. Stevens did not seek either a motion to correct error or direct appeal from this order.
In July 1992, after obtaining judgment against Stevens, the purchasers notified the Commission, by letter, of their intention to seek recovery under the Fund. In September 1992, the purchasers then filed with the trial court verified applications for an order directing payment from the Fund.
On October 5, 1992, the Commission answered and objected to payment alleging the purchasers' failure to timely notify it, pursuant to IND. CODE § 25-834.1-7-7 (1988 Ed.), of their pending actions against Stevens. On November 5, 1992, the court granted the purchasers' motions and ordered payment from the Fund.
On November 13, 1992, Stevens filed a TR. 60(B)(1) motion for relief from the judgment. Along with this motion, Stevens filed a motion to reconsider the order of payment. Both motions were denied. This appeal ensued.
Stevens raises two issues on appeal. As restated, they are:
(1) whether the trial court abused its discretion in failing to grant Stevens' T.R. 60(B)(1) motion; and
(2) whether the trial court erred in granting the purchasers' motions for recovery from the Fund.
On appeal, the Commission argues its position as to issue (2) only.
Stevens contends the trial court erred in failing to grant her T.R. 60(B)(1) motion for relief from judgment. Our review 'of this matter is limited to whether the trial court abused its discretion. Waddell v. Waddell (1992), Ind.App., 588 N.E.2d 601, 602. An abuse of discretion has occurred if the trial court's ruling on Stevens' TR. 60(B)(1) motion is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and inferences supporting the judgment for relief. Id.
TR. 60(B) provides that relief from judgment may be granted for "(1) mistake, surprise, or excusable neglect." TR. 60(B)(1). To succeed on her claim, Stevens must successfully show not only that one of the above elements exists in the entry of summary judgment, but that a meritorious defense to the judgment exists as well. Waddell, 588 N.E.2d at 602. A meritorious defense is one that would lead to a different result if the case were tried on the merits. State, DNR v. Van Keppel (1991), Ind.App., 583 N.E.2d 161, 162.
In her motion, Stevens alleged the form summary judgment submitted by the purchasers improperly included findings as to fraud, conversion and treble damages which were not reflective of the trial court's verbal order. According to her, the trial court had orally ordered summary judgment on the breach of contract claim (Count I) only, but denied summary judgment as to the fraud (Count II) and conversion (Count III) claims. As her meritorious defense, Stevens argued the designated evidentiary matter did not support either a finding of fraud or conversion as a matter of law.
The trial court accepted Stevens' proposition that a mistake had occurred and that summary judgment was not warranted on, either the fraud or conversion claims. Nonetheless, her motion was denied. Relying upon Ind. Trial Rule 56 subsections (C) and (H), the trial court found Stevens was not entitled to relief due to her failure to designate an issue of material fact in a timely manner, that is, in a response to the purchasers' motions.
For purposes of our review, we will assume, as the trial court did, a mistake was made in the entry of judgment. Thus, Stevens' need only establish a meritorious defense to the judgment.
*666Our standard of review for summary judgment is the same as the trial court. Summary judgment will be granted only when the expressly designated evidentiary matter shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C) provides in pertinent part:
"At the time of filing the motion or response, a party shall designate to the court all parts of pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, matters of judicial notice, and any other matters on which it relies for purposes of the motion. A party opposing the motion shall also designate to the court each material issue of fact which that party asserts precludes entry of summary judgment and the evidence relevant thereto...." (Emphasis added.)
T.R. 56(C). Subsection (H) further provides:
"No judgment rendered on this motion shall be reversed on the ground that there is a genuine issue of material fact unless the material fact and the evidence relevant thereto shall have been specifically designated to the trial court."
T.R. 56(H).
The initial burden is on the party seeking summary judgment to show the propriety of granting the motion. Babinchak v. Town of Chesterton (1992), Ind.App., 598 N.E.2d 1099, 1101. Thus, relying on specifically designated evidence, the purchasers, as the moving parties, must make a prima facie showing: (1) there are no issues of material fact, and (2) they are entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. Only when these two requirements are met does the burden then shift to Stevens, the non-moving party, who must point to specifically designated eviden-tiary matter to establish an issue of material fact. Id.
The essential elements of actual fraud are: (1) a material representation of past or existing fact which (2) is made with knowledge or reckless ignorance of its falsity (3) which causes reliance to the detriment of the person relying upon it. Ryan v. Chayes Virginia, Inc. (1990), Ind.App., 553 N.E.2d 1237, 1239, trons. denied. Stevens made claims, relied upon by the purchasers, that she could convey good title to the properties upon closing. As the purchasers note, such closings never occurred. However, we agree with Stevens that although not yet title owner, because she was purchasing the properties on land contract, she had an equitable interest in the property. See Skendzel v. Marshall (1973), 261 Ind. 226, 301 N.E.2d 641, 646 (equitable title vests in vendee at the time land sale contract is consummated although legal title does not vest until satisfaction of contract terms). Therefore, it is possible that at the time the representations were made, she could have potentially conveyed good title, as promised, upon closing. The designated evidentiary matter does not support a finding of fraud as a matter of law. Additional factual inquiry is necessary on this issue. See Holtzclaw v. Bankers Mut. Ins. Co. (1983), Ind.App., 448 N.E.2d 55, 58. (whether a material misrepresentation was made is generally a matter for the trier of fact unless reasonable minds can reach only one conclusion).
Stevens also disputes the entry of summary judgment as to the claims of conversion. To constitute the tort of conversion, there must be an appropriation of the personal property of another. National Fleet Supply, Inc. v. Fairchild (1983), Ind.App., 450 N.E.2d 1015, 1019. Although money may be the subject of an action for conversion, it must be capable of being identified as a special chattel. Kopis v. Savage (1986), Ind.App., 498 N.E.2d 1266, 1270. The money must be a determinate sum with which the defendant was entrusted to apply to a certain purpose. Id.
In Kopis, the appellant, Kopis, received a $40,000.00 deposit towards the purchase of certain property. The parties neither agreed to set up an escrow account nor to deliver the money to a third party for safekeeping. Ko-pis commingled the deposit with other unrelated accounts and refused to refund the money when the real estate deal collapsed.
In reversing the trial court's finding that Kopis committed criminal conversion, this Court held the commingled funds had ceased to be a separate, specifically identifiable chattel and plaintiffs no longer had a property *667interest in those specific funds. The Kopis Court rejected plaintiffs' contention that the words "the full amount will be refunded" upon failure to obtain financing, established continued ownership of the money. Without a more specific identification of the funds to be returned and without a clearer statement of the parties' intention that the funds be separated in some manner, the defendants' refusal to return the deposit was a failure to pay a debt which generally does not support a finding of conversion. See National Fleet Supply, Inc. v. Fairchild (1983), Ind.App., 450 N.E.2d 1015, 1019 (no action for conversion will lie where there is simply the refusal to pay a debt).
As in Kopis, the designated eviden-tiary matter does not disclose the funds were to be placed in an escrow account, were to be forwarded to a third party for safekeeping, or that a possessory interest in those specific funds would be maintained by the purchasers. To the contrary, like in Kopis, the funds forwarded to Stevens were in the nature of earnest money deposits which were to be applied to the final purchase price, with the balance due at delivery of the respective warranty deeds. Consequently, as in Kopis, Stevens' refusal to refund the purchasers deposits amount to a refusal to pay her debts. However, her actions do not support a claim for conversion as a matter of law.
The trial court correctly found that summary judgment was not appropriate as to the fraud and conversion claims. However, since the purchasers failed to meet their initial burden as is required under TR. 56(C), the burden did not shift to Stevens to designate an issue of material fact. Summary judgment being inappropriate, Stevens established a meritorious defense. Consequently, the trial court abused its discretion in denying her T.R. 60(B)(1) motion based solely on her failure to designate an issue of material fact. See TR. 56(C) ("(summary judgment shall not be granted as of course because the opposing party fails to offer opposing affidavits or evidence ..."; rather, "the court shall make its determination from the evidentiary matter designated to the court").
Next, relying upon the notice provision set forth in IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-7, Stevens and the Commission argue the trial court erred in directing payment from the Fund. IND.CODE § 25-84.1-7-7, reads in pertinent part, "When any person commences an action for a judgment that may result in an order for payment from the fund, the person shall notify the commission in writing of the commencement of the action." (Emphasis added.)
As the purchasers correctly note, the Fund provisions speak of two separate actions: the underlying action addressing the wrongful acts of the licensee, and the action seeking an order directing payment from the Fund. The purchasers interpret the above language to require notice at the commencement of the action seeking an order of payment. The Commission and Stevens construe the same language to require notice of the commencement of the underlying claim, Le., the action for fraud and conversion.
Within the provisions of the Fund, the underlying action is referred to as "final judgment," or "judgment." See e.g. IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-4 (1988 Ed.). The see-ond action is consistently termed "the action to recover from the real estate recovery fund," IND. CODE § 25-84.1-7-7, or in other instances, the filing of a verified application "for an order directing payment from (out of) the ... fund." See IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-4(a); IND. CODE § 25-84.1-7-8 (1988 Ed.). Therefore, the interpretation of Stevens and the Commission is the correct one. Although the purchasers notified the Commission before they commenced the action seeking payment from the Fund, notice was untimely under IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-7 as it was done only after obtaining summary judgment in the underlying action.
The Commission goes on to argue that failure to comply with IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-7 acts as a complete bar to recovery from the Fund. However, unlike notice provisions found in statutes such as the Indiana Tort Claims Act, IND. CODE § 34-4-16.5-6 (claim against state is completely barred unless notice is filed with state agen-ey within 180 days of loss) (1998 Ed.), IND. CODE $ 25-34.1-7-7 does not expressly pro*668vide for specific time limits on the filing of notice. Phrased broadly in its terms, the notice provision appears to serve more as a safeguard intended to assist the Commission in the effective administration of the Fund.3
Similar in many respects to a private insurance policy, the Fund acts as a form of public insurance providing monetary compensation for those who are harmed by the wrongful acts of Indiana licensed real estate brokers. The Commission, as insurer, is bound by the result of the underlying action against one of its licensees. Thus, like a private insurer, it is intimately concerned with the same events and issues resulting in liability to a'licensee and ultimately a claim against itself. See Vernon Fire and Casualty Insurance Co. v. Matney (1976), 170 Ind.App. 45, 51, 351 N.E.2d 60, 64-65. (uninsured motorist insurance carrier bound by judgment against its insured must be notified of pending actions against insured so it may intervene to protect its interests, to raise any available defenses, and to have all issues litigated in one trial).
As in the context of private insurance litigation, adequate forewarning in the form of notice of the underlying claim, allows the Commission time to conduct an independent investigation into the allegations against its licenses, to intervene in the underlying action to protect its rights.4 Moreover, it assists in the Commission's management of its funds by ensuring knowledge well in advance of the number of potential claims against the Fund and the amounts which it may be potentially required to disburse. Thus, contrary to the Commission's contention, lack of notice under IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-7 does not act as a complete bar to recovery.
The trial court erred in denying Stevens' T.R. 60(B)(1) motion and in ordering payment from the Fund. Therefore, the entry of summary judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
STATON, J., concurs.
CHEZEM, J., dissents with opinion.
. The original action against Stevens was brought by Joseph Scott and Elsie Swanson on July 3, 1991, on a complaint to foreclose a real estate contract. The Butlers and both Thomases ~ entered into the dispute and filed their cross-claims against Stevens on July 26, 1991, restating allegations contained in previous actions against her filed in April 1991. The above causes were consolidated with another similarly situated co-defendant, Linda Bennett, in August 1991.
. Although the circumstances surrounding their transactions were nearly identical, the property Stevens offered to the Butlers was not the same as the property offered to either Susan or Kris Thomas. Each transaction occurred separately and independently of the others.
. See also IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-4(a) (setting limits of $20,000.00 per judgment and an aggregate lifetime limit of $50,000.00 as to any one licensee); IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-5(b) (1988 Ed.) (allowing the court to join in one action all claimants against one licensee); and IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-8 (court may direct payment out of Fund only if it finds no collusion existed between licensee and claimant, the application was made within one year of termination of all proceedings, no property to satisfy claim is available, wrongful acts were due to actions of licensee, and claimant has diligently pursued all remedies against licensee).
. Although IND. CODE § 25-34.1-7-8 provides that "the commission shall be made a party defendant" to the action for an order of payment, nothing in the act expressly bars the Commission from also intervening in the underlying action, if it elects to do so. (Emphasis added.)

=== CASE 2224597 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.517045+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 66 (1992)
Robert AST, Respondent,
v.
HAR NED LUMBER and American Mut. Ins. Liability Co./MN Ins. Guar. Assn. (MIGA), Respondents, and
Har Ned Lumber and Retail Lumbermen's Inter-Insurance Exchange, Relators, and
Har Ned Lumber and American Motorist Ins. Co., Respondents.
No. C2-91-1629.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
April 17, 1992.
*67 James S. Pikala, Arthur, Chapman, McDonough, Kettering & Smetak, Minneapolis, for relators.
Robert Ast, pro se.
Peter M. Banovetz, Adam S. Wolkoff, Gilmore, Aafedt, Forde, Andersen & Gray, Minneapolis, for Har Ned Lumber and American Mut. Ins. Liability Co./MN Ins. Guar. Assn.
Thomas J. Misurek, Pustorino, Pederson, Tilton & Parrington, Minneapolis, for Har Ned Lumber and American Motorist Ins. Co.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
TOMLJANOVICH, Justice.
We affirm the decision of the Workers' Compensation Court of Appeals that it did not have subject matter jurisdiction to decide a reimbursement issue arising under the Minnesota Insurance Guaranty Association Act, Minn.Stat. ch. 60C (1990).
This action arises from compensation benefits paid to Robert Ast, an employee of Har Ned Lumber who sustained several work-related injuries. Over the period of time Ast suffered his injuries, Har Ned Lumber was insured for workers' compensation benefits by three different insurers: American Mutual Liability Insurance (Mutual), Retail Lumbermen's Inter-Insurance Exchange (Lumbermen's) and American Motorist Insurance Company (Motorist). On December 22, 1986, the Workers' Compensation Division issued a Temporary Order requiring Lumbermen's to pay Ast compensation benefits pending a final determination of liability as provided by Minn.Stat. § 176.191.[1]
On March 2, 1989, Lumbermen's Petition for Reimbursement pursuant to section 176.191, subd. 1, was heard before the compensation division. The compensation judge found that Lumbermen's was not responsible for any of the benefits it paid under the Temporary Order. Accordingly, the compensation judge ordered Mutual to reimburse Lumbermen's for 75 percent of the compensation benefits and ordered Motorists to reimburse Lumbermen's the remaining 25 percent. There is no dispute regarding this apportionment.
After the hearing before the compensation judge, Mutual was declared insolvent. The Guaranty Association then stepped in and administered all claims against Mutual pursuant to Minn.Stat. ch. 60C. Lumbermen's *68 then sought reimbursement from the Guaranty Association for benefits paid on behalf of the insolvent Mutual in the Workers' Compensation Division. The compensation judge and the Workers' Compensation Court of Appeals (WCCA) both held that no subject matter jurisdiction existed. This appeal followed.
The issue is whether Lumbermen's may proceed through the Workers' Compensation Division in its claim against the Guaranty Association or whether it must follow the established procedures set out in the Insurance Guaranty Act.
The resolution of this issue is governed by our recent decision of Taft v. Advance United Expressways, 464 N.W.2d 725 (Minn.1991). In Taft, we held that the WCCA lacked subject matter jurisdiction over a claim brought by a workers' compensation insurer against the Guaranty Association for benefits paid on behalf of an insolvent insurer. We explained:
[T]he legislature has provided a specific mechanism for dealing with claims against insolvent insurers in this state. Claims are filed with the Guaranty Association, which determines if the claim is a covered claim and what payment is to be made. If a claimant is dissatisfied, there is a prescribed procedure for further administrative and judicial review.
464 N.W.2d at 727.
Lumbermen's argues that this action falls under the workers' compensation laws since it was ordered by the Workers' Compensation Division to pay temporary benefits pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 176.191. We think not. As we stated in Taft, "[i]f [Lumbermen's] wished to obtain a judicial construction of what constitutes a covered claim under chapter 60C, it should have either pursued an appeal from the association's denial of its claim as outlined in that chapter, or have brought a declaratory judgment action in district court." 464 N.W.2d at 727.
Lumbermen's also raises constitutional challenges to a finding that the claim is not a covered claim under the Insurance Guaranty Act. That finding has not been made and the constitutional challenges are therefore premature. We do not reach them.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Minn.Stat. § 176.191, subd. 1 (1990) provides in relevant part:
A temporary order may be issued under this subdivision whether or not the employers or insurers agree to pay under the order.
When liability has been determined, the party held liable for the benefits shall be ordered to reimburse any other party for payments which the latter has made, including interest at the rate of 12 percent a year.

=== CASE 2224599 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.546672+00 ===

37 Mass. App. Ct. 332 (1994)
639 N.E.2d 1088
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
RICHARD NICHOLS.
No. 93-P-772.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
May 9, 1994.
September 27, 1994.
Present: KASS, FINE, & GREENBERG, JJ.
Carlo Obligato, Committee for Public Counsel Services, for the defendant.
Phillip E. Shea, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
KASS, J.
Richard Nichols was convicted by a jury on ten indictments charging sexual molestation of a child and one indictment of assault and battery. In his appeal, Nichols argues principally that the trial judge erroneously denied his request to cross-examine the victim witness about false allegations of sexual molestation she had made against an uncle subsequent to the complaints against the defendant. The complaints against the uncle were retracted two days after they had been made. We think the circumstances of the false complaint were such as to invoke the limited exception announced in Commonwealth v. Bohannon, 376 Mass. 90 (1978), to the general rule of exclusion of prior false allegations. See Miller v. Curtis, 158 Mass. 127 (1893). We need *333 not consider a secondary argument concerning a portion of the prosecutor's closing argument, to which, incidentally, the defense did not object at trial.
All the charges against Nichols were made by his stepdaughter, Lynn,[1] who alleged various acts of sexual abuse perpetrated by Nichols while she was between ages eleven and fifteen. Among other things, Lynn testified, Nichols had touched her breasts and genitalia and had her perform fellatio upon him. During the time when the offenses were said to have occurred, Lynn lived with Nichols, her mother (Debra Nichols), and two other children. Debra and Nichols were, in Lynn's opinion, too strict  Lynn was required to do chores, adhere to a curfew, and was not allowed to wear makeup or to cut or "perm" her hair. Her parents (she regarded Nichols as her father) disciplined her by grounding her, denying her privileges, and hitting her. Lynn expressed a desire to live with her aunt and uncle, Richard and Lisa Openshaw (the latter is Nichols's sister), but Debra did not allow that.
Lynn did not speak of sexual abuse by Nichols until after she had been in a violent argument with her parents early in November, 1991. Lynn told Lisa Openshaw that the quarrel had occurred after Debra had observed her engaging in sexual misconduct with a boy in the family's backyard. Lynn had allowed the boy to touch her "in the wrong places." During the argument, Debra gave Lynn the back of her hand in the eye. Lynn thereupon, so Debra testified, vowed to "get even" with Debra and Nichols. Lynn subsequently told a friend that Nichols had been molesting her and that he had hit her (during a different argument). On November 10, 1991, Lynn called Lisa Openshaw and told her that Nichols had been molesting her. On November 13, 1991, Lynn spoke to a social worker employed by the Department of Social Services (DSS) about being hit and Nichols having molested her.
One week after making those allegations, Lynn was removed from her home by DSS and placed with the Openshaws, *334 where she enjoyed greater freedom, at least until the summer of 1992, when the Openshaws became more strict with her. They were concerned about her hanging around with teenagers whom they did not consider suitable companions. In September, 1992, Lynn complained to DSS that her uncle, Richard Openshaw, had been playing "sexual games" with her. The details of Lynn's complaint, which appeared in a DSS report available to the defense[2] and the judge, were that Openshaw would watch her take showers, told her she had a nice body, got into the shower with her and washed her back, buttocks, and hair, slapped her buttocks as she walked past him, tried to pull her towel off when she got out of the shower, and had asked her opinion whether a centerfold picture in a Playboy magazine didn't look like her.
Those allegations Lynn recanted in a matter of days, at the same time that she expressed a wish to return to the Openshaws from a foster home in which DSS had placed her on receiving the sexual abuse complaint against Richard Openshaw. Lynn told social workers she had lied but did not know why, suggesting the charges against Openshaw were flashbacks of what she had experienced with Nichols or that she had dreamed it because she was testifying against Nichols. DSS determined that her complaint of sexual abuse against Openshaw was unsupported.
Nichols's lawyer moved before trial for an order allowing her to question Lynn about the allegations she had made against her uncle and her subsequent retraction. Defense counsel's offer of proof was that the responses would illuminate Lynn's motives and proclivity for mendacity when she felt put upon or kept on what she thought was an unfairly tight leash. To counsel's arguments that the inquiry was matter of right under the Fifth and Sixth amendments to the United States Constitution and under Bohannon, the judge responded that the Bohannon exception was not applicable because the claimed false allegation was made after, not before, the acts for which the defendant was on trial. The *335 judge also expressed her view that Lynn's false allegations against Openshaw might be attributable to posttraumatic stress syndrome or some sort of flashback. Counsel had also argued, though less explicitly, that the evidence of the false allegations should be received because they tended to prove the bias of the complaining witness, i.e., she was moved to fabricate claims of sexual molestation to achieve her purpose of extricating herself from the household in which she felt constrained.
Following the opinion in Commonwealth v. Bohannon, 376 Mass. 90, there has been a long line of decisions explaining why, in the circumstances of each, the Bohannon rule was not applicable. For a sampling, see Commonwealth v. Sperrazza, 379 Mass. 166, 169 (1979); Commonwealth v. McDonough, 400 Mass. 639, 650-651 (1987); Commonwealth v. Lavelle, 414 Mass. 146, 151-152 (1993); Commonwealth v. Hrycenko, 417 Mass. 309, 318-319 (1994); Commonwealth v. Blair, 21 Mass. App. Ct. 625, 627-629 (1986); Commonwealth v. Hicks, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 487 (1987); Commonwealth v. Rathburn, 26 Mass. App. Ct. 699, 709-711 (1988). Most often, a proffer under the Bohannon exception failed because of the absence of evidence from an independent source that the collateral allegation was false.
In the instant case, the independent evidence of the falsity of the collateral allegation is clear, even stark. The complaining party has admitted making false allegations, and the evidence is available from the DSS records. To that degree, there is a solid basis for cross-examining the complaining witness about her false allegation against the uncle. As in Bohannon, the witness concerned was the victim at trial.
Unlike Bohannon, the collateral false allegation was not a prior one but a subsequent one, as the trial judge emphasized. We do not think sequence is critical. It is surely important that the collateral allegation be proximate in time to the primary accusation against the defendant, but the collateral allegation has no less bearing on the credibility of the accusing witness if made after the primary allegation. See People v. Nicholl, 210 Ill. App. 3d 1001, 1010-1011 (1991). Indeed, *336 a lie subsequent to the primary event, if closer in time, may be more probative of a proclivity to lie and fabricate than a prior false allegation.
As to the judge's reflections that the second and false allegation may have been the consequence of posttraumatic stress syndrome or flashback, the difficulty is that the judge's thoughts assume the very proposition to be tested, the credibility of the complaining witness. To that we may add that there was no evidence that the victim witness suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome. The possibility that Lynn might be affected with that syndrome was an idea introduced by the judge and, however astute a theory, did not provide a basis for a ruling. The flashback theory (alluded to by the witness when she recanted) is also doubtful because, while the second allegation is generically similar, i.e., it deals with sexual molestation, the details are different. The allegations against Nichols included touching of breasts and vagina, having her commit fellatio, and an attempt at intercourse; the allegations against Openshaw involved touching of buttocks, ogling, and suggestive remarks and body contact. A common charateristic of each set of allegations is that the man showed her a picture from Playboy and made suggestive remarks. Thus, there is an over-all similarity of subject and as to a particular detail, but if there was a flashback it had been subjected to severe editing.
It is well understood that evidence of prior bad acts of a victim witness, such as sexual conduct that violates community standards, will not be received because that would unfairly place the witness on trial. So it is that G.L.c. 233, § 21B, the rape-shield statute, bars evidence of specific instances (subject to precisely described exceptions) of the sexual conduct of an alleged rape victim. The essence of the Bohannon exception is that the evidence deals not with sexual conduct but false allegation. False allegations do not attack the witness for lifestyle but for an ability, readiness, or proclivity to lie and fabricate. That is, such evidence bears on the credibility of the witness, a subject that may be properly tested in any trial. The Bohannon exception is applicable in *337 "unusual fact situations where justice demands." Commonwealth v. McDonough, 400 Mass. at 650. Commonwealth v. Trenholm, 14 Mass. App. Ct. 1038, 1039 (1982).
This is such an unusual situation. Lynn was the key witness. The trial was fundamentally a contest of credibility between what she said happened and what the defendant said had not happened. Lynn had sworn revenge against the defendant and her mother because she had been sharply disciplined. Relatively close in time to the complaint against Nichols (ten months later), while living with her aunt and uncle, she leveled charges of sexual molestation following discipline  then said they were false. That the charges are made on the heels of abrasive argument is probative of fabrication. See the extensive discussion in Commonwealth v. Wall, 413 Pa. Super. 599, 616-625 (1992). We are of opinion that the jury were entitled to hear and weigh the evidence of the allegations against Openshaw. We do not understand the list of the Bohannon circumstances made in Commonwealth v. Sperrazza, 379 Mass. at 169, to require that every aspect of Bohannon must be present before the Bohannon exception may be applied. So, for example, in the instant case consent to the sexual conduct is not an issue, and, although one may poke holes in the consistency of Lynn's testimony, it does not seem as notably inconsistent as that of the victim witness in Bohannon. But the circumstances are such as to cause the evidence of the collateral allegation  obtained from an independent source  to be exceptionally probative so far as the credibility of the victim witness is concerned.
It may also be that an alternative ground for allowing cross-examination based on the false allegation is that the defendant may do so for the purpose of showing bias of the witness. Commonwealth v. Ahearn, 370 Mass. 283, 287 (1976). Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308, 318 (1974). That is, the defendant had a right under the confrontation clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution to present to the jury evidence to support his theory that Lynn was a wilful adolescent prepared to manipulate those who *338 had custody of her and controlled her activities, United States v. Stamper, 766 F. Supp. 1396, 1401-1402 (W.D.N.C. 1991), affd., 959 F.2d 231 (4th Cir.1992), and that her testimony was tinged with bias.
The defendant is entitled to a trial at which defense counsel may cross-examine the victim witness about her subsequent false allegation.
Judgments reversed.
Verdicts set aside.
NOTES
[1]  A fictitious name.
[2]  In response to a Stockhammer motion. See Commonwealth v. Stockhammer, 409 Mass. 867 (1991).

=== CASE 2224602 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:25.595569+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 584 (1994)
266 Ill.App.3d 1
203 Ill. Dec. 264
TWIN CITY FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY and California Union Insurance Company, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
The OLD WORLD TRADING COMPANY, Defendant-Appellant, and
BASF Corporation, Defendant.
No. 1-91-1373.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
December 30, 1993.
Rehearing Denied September 12, 1994.
*585 Office of McNally, Maloney & Peterson, Milwaukee, WI (John F. Maloney and Daniel M. Leep of counsel), Office of Freeborn & Peters, Chicago, IL (David H. Kistenbroker and James G. McConnell of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Office of Johnson & Bell, Ltd., Chicago, IL (Thomas H. Fegan of counsel), Office of Hinshow & Culbertson, Chicago, IL (Stephen R. Swofford and Kathleen A. McQueeny of counsel), for plaintiffs-appellees.
Presiding Justice MANNING delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal arises from the circuit court's entry of summary judgment in favor of plaintiffs-appellees, Twin City Fire Insurance Company (hereafter "plaintiffs" or "Twin City") and California Union Insurance Company (hereafter "plaintiff" or "California Union"), on their consolidated declaratory judgment actions against The Old World Trading Company (hereafter "defendant" or "Old World"). In a declaratory judgment action, plaintiffs sought a determination as to whether they had a duty, as excess carriers, to defend or indemnify their insured, Old World, in an underlying Federal lawsuit involving BASF Corporation (not a party to this appeal) and Old World.
BASF filed an unfair competition action in the United States district court against Old World on July 30, 1986, and served summons on August 4, 1986. Initially, BASF was seeking compensatory damages in the amount of $500,000, punitive and exemplary damages of not less than $500,000, and an unspecified amount of attorney's fees. BASF sought damages against Old World arising from Old World's alleged violations of 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a), and the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act resulting in unfair competition. BASF alleged that Old World made improper advertising claims in 1983-1986 which caused damage to BASF's antifreeze business. In late 1987 BASF and Old World agreed to the terms of a stipulation with regard to the issues existing between them for injunctive relief. By order of the court BASF was held bound by the stipulation on November 18, 1987. In this stipulation Old World admits that one of its products did not meet the performance specifications as advertised by Old World. The stipulation included the following:
(a) No dynamometer or fleet testing required by the Ford Specification was even performed by Dearborn or Old World or to the knowledge of Old World, by any other person, on the antifreeze/summer coolant products sold by Old World using Dearborn inhibitor additive package since May, 1982.
(b) As a result of not performing the dynamometer and fleet test referred to in subparagraph (a) above, the antifreeze/summer coolant sold by Old World using the Dearborn inhibitor additive package did not meet or exceed the Ford Specification.
On April 19, 1989, F.P. McLaughlin, a Senior Vice President for Old World wrote the following letter:
Mr. Dan Pancake
Vice Chairman
Affiliated Insurance Consultants
1023 Burlington Avenue
Western Springs, Il XXXXX-XXXX
Dear Dan:
As a result of some recent conversations we have had regarding Product Liability Insurance, I find that there may be a legal matter in which we are involved which would more properly be covered by our *586 Comprehensive General Liability and Umbrella carriers.
In September, 1986, The Old World Trading Company, Inc. was sued by BASF. BASF alleged that Old World had made improper advertising claims in 1983-1986 which had caused damage to BASF's antifreeze business. I have enclosed a copy of their complaint.
Based upon our recent discussions and after reviewing a number of our past insurance policies, I believe that you should contact our comprehensive general liability carriers for 1983 and 1984 in order to put them on notice about this matter. We specifically request that you tender the defense of this matter to the appropriate carriers at this time.
We have been aggressively defending our interest in this matter since the time the suit was filed. We have incurred substantial legal fees regarding this matter. I believe the insurance carriers for our CGL and Umbrella should get together and discuss further defense issues with our attorney; Mr. John Maloney at the firm of McNally, Maloney & Peterson, 2600 North Mayfair Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226 telephone: XXX-XXX-XXXX.
This is a very important matter to us, Dan, and it obviously falls under the purview of these policies.
Let me know what else is needed and I will provide it. I look forward to an expedient and fair response from all the carriers in the very near future.
Sincerely,
THE OLD WORLD TRADING COMPANY, INC.
F.P. McLaughlin, Senior Vice President
Old World notified Twin City and California Union of the BASF suit on May 25, 1989, and May 23, 1989, respectively. Old World vigorously defended BASF's suit. By the time the notice was first given to any of its carriers, Old World had incurred over $500,000 in attorneys fees and had taken over 41 depositions.
Twin City filed a declaratory judgment action, on January 22, 1990 and California Union filed a declaratory judgment action on February 26, 1990, contending they had no duty to defend or indemnify Old World in the BASF litigation. California Union and Twin City consolidated their declaratory judgment actions seeking non-liability to Old World under policies of umbrella insurance. California Union's policy had a limit of $10,000,000 with an underlying retained limit of $10,000, effective November 18, 1984 through November 18, 1985. Twin City issued two $10,000,000 policies to Old World, effective from September 24, 1982 through November 1983 and from November 18, 1983 through November 18, 1984.
Subsequently, Twin City filed its motion for summary judgment asserting a late notice defense. Twin City argued that Old World breached Twin City's policy by failing to give it notice of the BASF lawsuit "as soon as practicable," according to the terms of the policy. Twin City further claimed that Old World's failure to give it notice of the BASF lawsuit until 32 months after service of summons was untimely, as a matter of law.
Twin City's policies contained the following conditions:
3. Notice of Occurrence:
Whenever it appears that an occurrence is likely to involve indemnity under this policy, written notice thereof shall be given to the Company or any of its authorized agents as soon as practicable. Such notice shall contain particulars sufficient to identify the insured and also reasonably obtainable information respecting the time, place and circumstances of the occurrence, the names and addresses of the injured and available witnesses.
4. Assistance and Cooperation of the Insured:
The Company shall have the right and shall be given the opportunity to associate with the insured or its underlying insurers, or both, in the defense and control of any claim suit or proceeding which involves or appears reasonably likely to involve the Company and in which event the insured, its insurers and the Company shall cooperate in all *587 things in defense of such claim, suit or proceeding.
The insured shall cooperate with the underlying insurers as required by the terms of the underlying insurance and comply with all the terms and conditions thereof, and shall enforce any right of contribution or indemnity against any person or organization who may be liable to the insured because of bodily injury, property damage or advertising injury with respect to which insurance is afforded under this policy or the underlying policy.
Similarly, California Union filed a motion for summary judgment. California Union also argued that Old World's notice to it about the BASF lawsuit was late as a matter of law. The California Union policy contained the following conditions:
(a) In the event of an occurrence, reasonably likely to exceed the retained limit, written notice containing particulars sufficient to identify the Insured and also reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place and circumstances thereof, and the names and addresses of the injured and of available witnesses, shall be given by or for the insured to The Company or any of its authorized agents as soon as practicable.
(b) If claim is made or suit is brought against the Insured, the Insured shall immediately forward to The Company every demand, notice, summons or other process received by him or his representative.
(c) The insured shall cooperate with The Company and upon The Company's request, assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits and in enforcing any right of contribution of indemnity against any person or organization of who may be liable to the Insured because of personal injury or property damage or advertising injury with respect to which insurance is afforded under this policy; and the Insured shall attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses. The Insured shall not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense; however, if the amount of ultimate net loss becomes certain either through trial court judgment or agreement among the Insured, the claimant and The Company, then, the Insured my pay the amount of ultimate net loss to the claimant to effect settlement and, upon submission of due proof thereof. The Company shall indemnify the Insured for that part of such payment which is in excess of the retained limit, or, The Company will, upon request of the Insured, make such payment to the claimant on behalf of the Insured.
On appeal, Old World contends the trial court erred by granting summary judgment on the basis that neither insurer had a duty to defend or indemnify because of their respective policies on late notice defenses. The defendant further contends that the trial court improperly ignored its contention that both insurers waived the late notice defense by their conscious failure to promptly raise it pursuant to the Illinois Insurance Code and Regulations or in accordance with their own respective policy provisions.
Both plaintiffs initially responded that the trial court properly entered summary judgment in their behalf because Old World's notice to them of the Federal lawsuit was untimely as a matter of law. They argue that Old World's admitted 32 month delay in giving notice to its carriers violated the notice provisions of the respective insurance policies. Additionally, plaintiffs maintained that the delay does not fall into the category of "reasonable time" as delineated under Illinois case law, nor is the Illinois statutory insurance law relied upon by Old World applicable in the present case.
The trial court agreed that the plaintiffs had no duty to defend or indemnify and on March 26, 1991, entered summary judgment in their favor and against Old World. Old World appeals the final judgment pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rule 301. No question is raised on the pleadings.
The first issue is whether the insured has given reasonable notice to the *588 insurers to merit the trial court granting summary judgment to the insurers as a matter of law. In the instant case, there are no disputed material facts. If there are no disputed material facts, the trial court may in appropriate circumstances decide the issue of reasonable notice as a matter of law. (Fletcher v. Palos Community Consolidated School District No. 118 (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 921, 115 Ill. Dec. 838, 518 N.E.2d 363; and Illinois Valley Minerals Corporation v. Royal-Globe Insurance Company (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 296, 26 Ill. Dec. 629, 388 N.E.2d 253.) The time within which notice is required is determined by a standard of reasonableness, based upon the facts and circumstances of a particular case. (Fletcher v. Palos Community Consolidated School District No. 118 (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 921, 115 Ill. Dec. 838, 518 N.E.2d 363; and United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company v. Maren Engineering Corporation (1980), 82 Ill.App.3d 894, 38 Ill. Dec. 277, 403 N.E.2d 508.) Actual prejudice to the insurer and due diligence of the insured are but factors to be considered in the propriety of the notice and do not conclusively establish the timeliness of the notice. (Sisters of Divine Providence v. Interstate Fire & Casualty Company (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 158, 162, 72 Ill. Dec. 731, 734, 453 N.E.2d 36, 39.) The purpose of the notice requirement is to enable the insurer to make a timely and thorough investigation of the injury claim. (INA Insurance Company v. Chicago (1978), 62 Ill.App.3d 80, 19 Ill. Dec. 519, 379 N.E.2d 34; and Barrington Consolidated High School v. American Insurance (1974), 58 Ill. 2d 278, 319 N.E.2d 25.) The test is whether any reasonably prudent person could foresee a lawsuit upon receipt of the first notice that would involve the insurer's policy and would either contact his attorney or his liability carrier. (Hartford Casualty Insurance Company v. Snyders (1987), 153 Ill.App.3d 1040, 106 Ill. Dec. 827, 506 N.E.2d 627.)
In INA Insurance Co. v. City of Chicago (1978), 62 Ill.App.3d 80, 19 Ill. Dec. 519, 379 N.E.2d 34, the trial court granted INA's motion for summary judgment, reasoning that since the facts are undisputed, the determination of whether the City used due diligence in giving INA notice of the accidents is a question of law. In INA the City's apparent two months delay in failing to comply with the notice provisions was deemed to be a lack of diligence in ascertaining whether the policy was still in effect. In Equity General Insurance Company v. Patis, (1983), 119 Ill.App.3d 232, 74 Ill. Dec. 846, 456 N.E.2d 348, a nearly five month delay in giving notice could not reasonably be construed as "as soon as practicable." In Hartford a 7 to 13 month delay in notice was deemed a failure to act with reasonable prudence. Furthermore, in Hartford the court cited other opinions that found a three months delay in giving notice was not reasonable diligence, a four months delay in giving notice unjustified or inexcusable, a five months delay in giving notice was not considered as soon as practicable, and a six months delay in giving notice was not given within time.
Old World contends that the delay was due to an undertaking to determine the extent and timing of BASF's claimed losses. Old World further contends that the insurers failed to explain how they have been prejudiced by the alleged delay in notifying them of the pendency of the BASF lawsuit.
Based upon the facts, Old World failed the Hartford test of whether any reasonably prudent person could foresee a lawsuit upon first notice that would involve the insurers' policy and would contact an attorney or liability carrier. Old World could and did foresee a lawsuit that would involve the insurers before May 1989. In fact, the F.P. McLaughlin letter to Dan Pancake, dated April 19, 1989, states "Based upon our recent discussions and after reviewing a number of our past insurance policies, I believe that you should contact our comprehensive general liability carriers for 1983, 1984, 1985 and 1986 and our umbrella carriers for 1983 and 1984 in order to put them on notice about this matter. We specifically request that you tender the defense of this matter to the appropriate carriers at this time * * *..... it obviously falls under the purview of these policies." Since Old World acknowledges that it "obviously" falls under the purview of these policies, this delay in giving notice to its insurers is unreasonable as a matter of law, based *589 upon the undisputed facts. Additionally, by April 2, 1987, Old World knew BASF was seeking damages of $11,074,000, which is in excess of Old World's $500,000 retained limit under the California Union policy.
An insurer does not have to prove that it was prejudiced by an insured's breach of the notice clause in a policy in order to be relieved of its duty to pay. (Illinois Insurance Fund v. Lockhart (1987), 152 Ill.App.3d 603, 105 Ill. Dec. 572, 504 N.E.2d 857.) Lack of prejudice to the insurer is a factor to be considered only where the insured has a good excuse for the late notice or where the delay was relatively brief. Fletcher v. Palos Community Consolidated School District No. 118 (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 921, 115 Ill. Dec. 838, 518 N.E.2d 363. In the instant case, the insured did not present a good excuse for the late notice nor was the delay relatively brief; therefore, prejudice to the insurers is a factor to be considered.
Twin City claims prejudice by Old World's failure to promptly notify Twin City of the lawsuit because it deprived Twin City of its rights to promptly investigate the claim and to direct the settlement. In addition, prior to giving notice of the BASF lawsuit to Twin City, Old World settled the part of the action seeking injunctive relief against Old World. This partial settlement was reached in late 1987 when Old World and BASF entered into a stipulation. In the stipulation, Old World admitted some of the allegations of BASF's complaint. Old World admitted that it had not had the proper test performed on its product and that this product did not meet the performance specifications as advertised by Old World. The admissions were made by Old World over sixteen months prior to the time that Old World gave the insurers notice of the BASF litigation. Twin City contends that without proper notice, they were deprived of the right to control the defense and make the determination regarding whether the stipulation was advisable. Based upon all of the above, Twin City claims to be prejudiced by Old World's failure to promptly advise Twin City of the lawsuit, thus, depriving Twin City of its contractual right to control the defense, investigation and settlement of the litigation.
California Union asserts, as in Sisters of Divine Providence v. Interstate Fire & Causality Company (1983), 117 Ill.App.3d 158, 72 Ill. Dec. 731, 453 N.E.2d 36:
Prejudice, or the lack thereof, is not the factor which determines coverage. Instead, courts have consistently held that the determination is based upon a standard of reasonableness, i.e., did the insured give notice as soon as it was practicable for him to do so ... Although the cited cases involve primary carriers, the same principles should apply to excess carriers as well. Consequently, plaintiffs' argument that Interstate must establish prejudice in order to be relieved of liability under the policy is without merit.
Both Twin City and California Union claim prejudice by the delay in Old World giving notice of the BASF lawsuit. The delay in giving notice was a violation of both insurers policies. Twin City's policy required notice of an occurrence as soon as practicable and California Union required notice of an occurrence immediately. The stipulations that Old World made, the taking of over 41 depositions and the incurrence of $500,000 in attorney fees during the BASF lawsuit before notifying the insurers of its lawsuit are evidence of prejudice to plaintiffs. Since Old World did not present a good excuse for the delayed notice, prejudice to the plaintiffs is a factor to be considered, in this case.
The next issue is whether the insurers waived the defense of late notice by failing to affirm or deny coverage of claims within a reasonable time as required by the statute. In response to the question whether the trial court properly found that Old World's notice to Twin City and California Union of the underlying action brought by BASF Corporation was untimely as a matter of law, we answer in the affirmative.
However, we add the caveat that the trial court's decision can stand only if the facts show that the insurers did not waive the policy defense of untimely notice. We find that neither Twin City nor California Union waived the late notice defense. Our reasons follow.
*590 The Illinois Insurance Code & Regulations 215 ILCS 5/154.5 (1993) state that it is an improper claims practice for any domestic, foreign or alien company transacting business in this State to commit any of the acts contained in Section 154.6 [215 ILCS 5/154.6]. The applicable provisions of Section 154.6 state that acts by a company, if committed without just cause and in violation of Section 154.5, constitute an improper claims practice, as follows:
"(b) Failing to acknowledge with reasonable promptness pertinent communications with respect to claims arising under its policies;
(c) Failing to adopt and implement reasonable standards for the prompt investigation and settlement of claims arising under its policies;
(i) Failing to affirm or deny coverage of claims within a reasonable time after proof of loss statements have been completed."
According to Title 50, Chapter I, Section 919.40 of the Illinois Administrative Code:
"Prompt investigation" as used in Section 154.6(c) of the Illinois Insurance Code shall apply to all activities of the company related directly or indirectly to the determination of liability based on claims under the coverage afforded by the policy and shall be evidenced by a bonafide effort to communicate with all insureds and claimants where liability is reasonably clear within 21 working days after a notification of loss. Evidence of such a bonafide effort to communicate with insureds and claimants shall be maintained in the company's claim files. "Reasonable promptness" as used in Section 154.6(b) of the Illinois Insurance Code shall mean a maximum of 15 working days from receipt of communication from a claimant or insured.
Old World asserts that an insurer wishing to assert its non-liability under a policy must notify the insured without delay. (Krutsinger v. Illinois Casualty Co. (1957), 10 Ill. 2d 518, 141 N.E.2d 16.) Section 154.5 supra evidences a strong legislative intent to impose a duty upon insurance companies to affirm or deny coverage within a reasonable time after notification of claim. (Dickman v. Country Mutual Insurance Company. (1983), 120 Ill.App.3d 470, 472, 76 Ill. Dec. 60, 458 N.E.2d 199.) Extended delay in informing the insured of its intention to deny liability because of the insured's breach of policy provisions, after the carrier learns of the breach, Old World maintains constitutes a clear waiver of the breach. See Krutsinger v. Illinois, 10 Ill. 2d 518, 141 N.E.2d 16; and Kenilworth Insurance Company v. McDougal (1974), 20 Ill.App.3d 615, 313 N.E.2d 673. Waiver arises from an affirmative act, is consensual, and consists of the intentional relinquishment of a known right. (Crum and Forester Corporation, et al. v. Resolution Trust Corporation (1993), 156 Ill. 2d 384, 396, 189 Ill. Dec. 756, 620 N.E.2d 1073; and Western Casualty and Surety Company v. Brochu (1985), 105 Ill. 2d 486, 499, 86 Ill. Dec. 493, 475 N.E.2d 872.) A waiver may be express or implied, arising from acts, words, conduct or knowledge of the insurer. (Crum and Forester Corporation v. Resolution Trust Corporation, supra; and Western Casualty and Surety Company v. Brochu, supra.) To constitute a waiver, the words or conduct of an insurer must be inconsistent with the intention to rely on the requirements of the policy. (Ames v. Crown Life Insurance Company (1980), 85 Ill.App.3d 203, 204, 40 Ill. Dec. 521, 406 N.E.2d 222; and Florsheim v. Travelers Indemnity Company (1979), 75 Ill.App.3d 298, 30 Ill. Dec. 876, 393 N.E.2d 1223.) If the insurance company is fully advised of the facts bearing on its policy defense and does not insist on noncoverage but recognizes the continued validity of the policy by requiring the insured to go through the trouble and expense, if any, of preparing proofs of loss and related matters, an intention to waive would follow. (Kenilworth Insurance Company v. McDougal (1974), 20 Ill.App.3d 615, 313 N.E.2d 673.) Further, while a long delay without explanation in asserting a policy defense or disclaimer is normally not enough to constitute an estoppel or waiver, such a delay is an important factor to be considered where there is evidence of prejudice; and the length of delay is an element in determining the reasonableness or fairness of the insurer's conduct toward the insured. (Kenilworth Insurance *591 Company v. McDougal, (1974) 20 Ill.App.3d 615, 620, 313 N.E.2d 673; and Zak v. Fidelity-Phenix Insurance Company (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 438, 444, 216 N.E.2d 113; and McMahon v. Cornet Insurance Company (1972), 6 Ill.App.3d 704, 286 N.E.2d 631.)
In Intel Corporation v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company, et al. (N.D.Cal. 1988), 692 F. Supp. 1171; and Insurance Company of the West v. Haralambos Beverage Company (1987), 195 Cal. App. 3d 1308, 241 Cal. Rptr. 427, the court outlines the subtle but significant distinction between estoppel and waiver:
Although the terms `waiver' and `estoppel' are sometimes used indiscriminately, especially in the law of insurance, they are two distinct and different doctrines that rest on different legal principles. Strictly speaking, `waiver' is used to designate the act, or the consequences of the act, of one side only, while `estoppel' is applicable where the conduct of one side had induced the other to take such a position that it would be injured if the first should be permitted to repudiate its acts.
In the instant case, based upon the Intel definition of estoppel and waiver, estoppel has no application in this case. The conduct of one side had not induced the other to take such a position that it would be injured if the first should be permitted to repudiate its acts.
The Insurance Code [154.6(i) ] refers to a "reasonable time" after proof of loss statements have been completed for the insurer to affirm or deny coverage. According to the record, clearly there is no evidence of express waiver of late notice policy defense by Twin City or California Union. Likewise, there is no evidence of implied waiver of late notice by their conduct. On June 15, 1989, Twin City acknowledged notification by Old World of their claim, stating that "We have received notification of this event and have assigned the file number shown. Please refer to it in future correspondence." Twin City conducted a four months investigation of the claim, and on October 2, 1989, notified Old World of its intent to assert the late notice defense in its reservation of rights letter. Considering that the litigation between BASF and Old World had been going on for 32 months before Twin City was notified, during which time at least 41 depositions had been taken and $500,000 in attorney fees incurred, we find that Twin City's notification to Old World of its intention to assert the late notice defense was done within a reasonable time, and that no waiver can be inferred from Twin City's conduct.
On June 23, 1989, California Union, initiated a reservation of rights letter to Old World. The reservation of rights letter states, in part:
California Union pursuant, to its Umbrella Policy, has undertaken a review of this claim in order to determine California Union's duties and obligation under its policy. By such conduct, California Union does not intend to waive its right to deny coverage of the claim. Such conduct by California Union and/or its representatives, is subject to all of the terms, provisions and conditions of its policy. Your attention is specifically drawn to the following matters constituting a Reservation of Rights as respects potential indemnity for loss.
While California Union does not mention "late notice" in its reservation of rights letter, the language of the letter explicitly states that California Union does not intend to waive its rights to deny coverage of the claim. Additionally, we do not find the conduct of California Union inconsistent with the intention to rely on the requirement of the policy that Old World was to immediately forward to the company every demand, notice, summons or other process received * * *. Clearly there is no express waiver, nor is there implied waiver by conduct.
Based on the foregoing reasons, we affirm the summary judgment in favor of Twin City. We affirm the summary judgment in favor of California Union.
Affirmed.
BUCKLEY and CAMPBELL, JJ., concur.