=== CASE 9741230 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:58.942077+00 ===

Wright, J.
Marie Swoboda brought a negligence action against the defendants, Mercer Management Company and First National Bank of Omaha, seeking damages for personal injuries sustained when Swoboda fell while ascending a flight of stairs in a building then owned by First National and managed by Mercer Management. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants, and Swoboda appealed. The Nebraska Court of Appeals reversed the district court’s judgment and remanded the cause. We granted further review.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996).
FACTS
On February 2, 1992, Swoboda fell as she reached the top of a flight of stairs inside the Howard Street entrance to the Old Market Passageway in Omaha. At the time of the accident, Swoboda, who was 95 years of age, was accompanied by her granddaughter, Mary Stitt. The accident occurred as Swoboda and Stitt ascended a stairway leading from the lower level of the building to a set of large double doors at the Howard Street entrance. There were handrails on both sides of the stairway, but the handrail on the right side was inaccessible because five *349large potted plants had been placed on the steps along the right edge of the stairway. As a result, Swoboda ascended the stairs using the left handrail, and Stitt assisted Swoboda by holding on to Swoboda’s right arm.
The stairway and the landing inside the Howard Street entrance were made of the same type of red brick. The double doors leading out to Howard Street were 4 to 5 feet across the landing from the top of the stairway. The brick wall along the left side of the stairway extended 17 inches onto the landing and then gave way to an open corridor with a wooden floor. The wooden floor was elevated a few inches higher than the landing, and a brick ramp extended from the wooden floor down to the landing. This ramp protruded from the edge of the wall onto the landing at an angle perpendicular to the stairway. At the point closest to the stairs, the edge of the ramp began 17 inches from the leading edge of the landing. The ramp was 272 inches high at the point where the edge of the ramp closest to the stairway began to protrude from the wall. The ramp sloped down until it became flush with the landing at a point 14 inches from the edge of the wall, and the ramp was constructed of the same brick as the landing and the stairway. There were no markings or other safety devices to differentiate the ramp from the landing.
As Swoboda and Stitt approached the last step before arriving at the landing, Stitt left Swoboda to cross the landing and open the door. When Stitt reached the door and looked back, she saw Swoboda sitting on the floor in a position perpendicular to the stairway. Swoboda was sitting on the wooden floor, and her legs extended down the ramp. Swoboda’s left leg was broken. Swoboda does not remember the circumstances surrounding the fall, and there were no eyewitnesses. Stitt testified by deposition that prior to the fall, Swoboda appeared to be in relatively good physical health, she had no trouble walking, and she negotiated each step of the staircase without any sign of weakness.
Swoboda sued the defendants, alleging that the ramp extending onto the landing created a dangerous condition and was an unreasonable risk to Swoboda, a business invitee. Swoboda contended that the ramp created a change in floor level on the landing which caused her to trip and fall.
*350The affidavit of an architectural engineer stated that the ramp which extended onto the landing was in violation of the 1967 National Building Code requirement that the width of a landing shall be no less than the width of the stairs in which they occur. In addition, the stairway violated the code because it did not have an intermediate handrail, which was required for a stairway of that width.
The district court granted summary judgment because it found no nexus between the defendants’ possible negligence and Swoboda’s fall. The court found that the allegation that the defective ramp was the proximate cause of Swoboda’s injuries was based solely on speculation and conjecture and that, therefore, no genuine issue of material fact existed.
The Court of Appeals reversed the district court’s judgment, finding that while it was possible that Swoboda tripped over the top step, her path, her physical condition, and the position in which she was seen immediately after the fall supported a reasonable inference that the ramp was the proximate cause of Swoboda’s fall. Swoboda v. Mercer Mgmt. Co., 96 NCA No. 10, case No. A-94-756 (not designated for permanent publication). The Court of Appeals concluded that because Swoboda introduced evidence which presented a question of fact concerning the defendants’ negligence and a reasonable inference that this negligence was the proximate cause of her injuries, the district court erred in granting summary judgment. Id.
ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR
In their petition for further review, the defendants allege that the Court of Appeals erred by reversing the district court’s judgment.
ANALYSIS
Summary judgment is proper only when the pleadings, depositions, admissions, stipulations, and affidavits in the record disclose that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Zion Wheel Baptist Church v. Herzog, 249 Neb. 352, 543 N.W.2d 445 (1996); John Markel Ford v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., *351249 Neb. 286, 543 N.W.2d 173 (1996). After the party moving for summary judgment has shown facts entitling it to a judgment as a matter of law, the opposing party has the burden to present evidence showing an issue of material fact which prevents judgment as a matter of law for the moving party. Zion Wheel Baptist Church v. Herzog, supra. In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996).
The question is whether Swoboda has introduced evidence which presents a question of fact as to whether the defendants’ negligence was the proximate cause of her injuries. While circumstantial evidence may be used to prove causation, the evidence must be sufficient to fairly and reasonably justify the conclusion that the defendants’ negligence was the proximate cause of Swoboda’s injury. See Hahn v. Weber & Sons Co., 223 Neb. 426, 390 N.W.2d 503 (1986). Swoboda was not required to eliminate all alternate theories regarding how the accident may have happened, but she was required to establish with a reasonable probability that the accident happened in the manner alleged in her petition. The practical difficulty with Swoboda’s theory of how the accident occurred is that no one saw her fall and that Swoboda herself cannot remember how she fell.
We addressed a similar situation in Shibata v. College View Properties, 234 Neb. 134, 449 N.W.2d 544 (1989). Shibata’s personal representative alleged that College View Properties (College View) was negligent in failing to keep a basement stairway lighted, failing to equip the stairway with a handrail, and other acts of negligence, which were alleged to have proximately caused Shibata’s injuries and death. It was alleged that College View’s negligence caused Shibata to fall down a flight of stairs and that she died as a result of such fall.
We held that the record failed to establish directly or inferentially that any act of claimed negligence on College View’s part was the proximate cause of Shibata’s death. A pathologist testified that one of many possible explanations for the incident was that Shibata suffered a pain in her chest, leaned against the *352stairway door, and tumbled down the stairs. We concluded that the pathologist’s statement was nothing more than conjecture and that it was just as possible that Shibata was going to the basement to retrieve an item and for reasons entirely independent of any one of College View’s alleged acts of negligence, lost her balance and fell down the stairs. We held that the jury could only arrive at its conclusion regarding what actually occurred by guess, speculation, conjecture, or choice of possibilities.
An allegation of negligence is insufficient where the plaintiff asks the jury to guess the cause of an accident. See Richardson v. Ames Avenue Corp., 247 Neb. 128, 525 N.W.2d 212 (1995). In Richardson, a grocery store customer slipped and fell on liquid soap that had spilled onto a store aisle. The evidence established that store employees were trained and instructed to regularly inspect the aisles for spillage. Nonetheless, the last inspection that could be firmly established occurred at 5:50 p.m. The slip occurred at about 7:30 p.m. The plaintiff insisted that the store was negligent because it failed to clean up a spill which it should have known existed.
We held that the evidence regarding the time the soap was spilled and the time the slip occurred was insufficient to permit the trial court to submit to the jury the question of whether the store was negligent. There was nothing in the record to make it more or less probable that the soap had been on the store floor for almost 2 hours or less than 2 minutes. Therefore, if the trial court in Richardson had given the case to the jury, the jury could have been left to merely speculate without any factual basis in the record for when the spill occurred. We concluded that such speculation was unacceptable. The burden of proving a cause of action is not sustained by evidence from which a jury can arrive at its conclusion only by guess, speculation, conjecture, or choice of possibilities; there must be something more which would lead a reasonable mind to one conclusion rather than another. See id.
In the present case, a jury presented with the question of why Swoboda fell would be faced with at least two possibilities: (1) Swoboda tripped over the top step or (2) Swoboda tripped over the ramp. As in Richardson, the evidence in this case leaves the jury with the prospect of guesswork as to which of these possi*353bilities actually caused Swoboda’s injuries. Because Swoboda has not produced evidence that the defendants’ negligence was the proximate cause of her fall, she cannot recover. Therefore, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals and remand the cause with directions to affirm the judgment of the district court.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
Lanpheer, J., participating on briefs.
Caporale, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9741231 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:58.946132+00 ===

Lanphier, J.,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The two cases cited by the majority, Shibata v. College View Properties, 234 Neb. 134, 449 N.W.2d 544 (1989), and Richardson v. Ames Avenue Corp., 247 Neb. 128, 525 N.W.2d 212 (1995), were not matters decided upon a motion for summary judgment. Both cases were decided upon motions for directed verdict after the close of all the evidence. In both Richardson and Shibata, the plaintiffs had the opportunity to discover and present the totality of evidence at trial. In the instant case, Swoboda’s opportunity to have her case fully discovered and litigated is cut off. As a procedural equivalent to a trial, a summary judgment is an extreme remedy because a summary judgment may dispose of a crucial question in litigation, or the litigation itself, and may thereby deny a trial to the party against whom the motion for summary judgment is directed. Bruning v. Law Offices of Ronald J. Palagi, 250 Neb. 677, 551 N.W.2d 266 (1996); Oliver v. Clark, 248 Neb. 631, 537 N.W.2d 635 (1995); Wachtel v. Beer, 229 Neb. 392, 427 N.W.2d 56 (1988).
I also dissent for the reasons that Chief Justice White and I dissented in Richardson v. Ames Avenue Corp., supra. I believe the majority failed to give Swoboda the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence as required by precedent. It is well settled that in reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Moulton v. Board of Zoning Appeals, ante p. 95, 555 N.W.2d 39 (1996); Polinski v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., ante p. *35414, 554 N.W.2d 636 (1996); State Farm v. D.F. Lanoha Landscape Nursery, 250 Neb. 901, 553 N.W.2d 736 (1996); Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996). Swoboda is entitled to have the benefit of every reasonable inference, because the summary judgment was granted against her.
The evidence, with reasonable inferences in Swoboda’s favor, showed that Swoboda walked around the Old Market in Omaha for 20 minutes, without incident, before entering the restaurant; that her ability to walk was impeded by neither clothing, dizzy spells, nor a cane; that she needed no assistance in walking; and that she ascended the stairs at the restaurant in a normal fashion.
Further, Swoboda’s granddaughter, who accompanied Swoboda at the time of the injury, gave a lay opinion that her grandmother broke her leg when she tripped over the ramp alleged to be the defendants’ defective condition. Importantly, it was the defendants’ attorney who asked Swoboda’s granddaughter for her opinion as to what caused Swoboda’s fall. The granddaughter’s testimony was unrefuted. Lay opinion testimony is competent evidence when it is rationally based on the witness’ perceptions and helpful to a clear understanding of his or her testimony or the determination of a fact in issue. Neb. Evid. R. 701. The granddaughter’s lay opinion, as the only evidence of causation in the record, fits these requirements.
Because all reasonable inferences which can be drawn from the evidence must be to the benefit of Swoboda and the majority fails to give Swoboda the benefit of those reasonable inferences, I am compelled to dissent. I would affirm the Court of Appeals’ reversal of the district court’s order sustaining the defendants’ motion for summary judgment.
Gerrard, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2226652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.154782+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 618 (1997)
RAINBOW TERRACE, INC., Respondent,
v.
Barbara HUTCHENS, et al., Appellants.
No. C3-96-1349.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
January 14, 1997.
*619 James J. Schlichting, Peterson, Savelkoul, Schlichting & Davies, Ltd., Albert Lea, for Respondent.
Gary M. Hird, Southern Minnesota Regional Legal Services, Inc., Albert Lea, for Appellants.
Considered and decided by HARTEN, P.J., and CRIPPEN and KALITOWSKI, JJ.
OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.
This is an appeal from an unlawful detainer judgment granting a writ of restitution that required appellants to surrender possession of a mobile home park lot. Respondent brought this action against appellants, residents of a mobile home located in respondent's park. The district court determined that Minnesota Statutes chapter 327C did not apply because appellants did not have a written lease agreement as required by Minn.Stat. § 327C.02, subd. 1; it ordered that a writ of restitution issue 60 days from the date of the order to allow appellants an opportunity to sell their mobile home.
FACTS
Respondent owns and operates Rainbow Terrace mobile home park in Albert Lea. In May 1995, appellants, Gordon and Barbara Hutchens, moved into a mobile home owned by Lillian Hutchens, Gordon Hutchens' mother, and located on a rented lot in respondent's mobile home park. At the time appellants moved into her home, Lillian Hutchens was hospitalized; in August 1995, she died without leaving the hospital. Thereafter, appellants did not enter into a written rental agreement with respondent.
Appellants received several notices from respondent during their park residency. In February 1996, they received notice to visit the park office to determine who was residing in the home and a notice to vacate for nonpayment of rent because of an insufficient funds check. Appellants thereafter paid the past-due rent.[1] On March 31, 1996, respondent issued a second notice to vacate, indicating that appellants had 30 days to vacate the mobile home lot. The notice did not state a reason for terminating appellants' tenancy.
On or before May 1, 1996, appellants delivered a residency application to respondent's manager. On May 3, 1996, appellants paid their May lot rent; the same day, respondent filed the unlawful detainer summons and complaint (the documents were served upon appellants on May 6).
ISSUES
1. Does Minnesota Statutes chapter 327C apply to residents of a mobile home park despite the lack of a written rental agreement?
2. Did respondent waive the second notice to vacate by accepting rent after the expiration of the notice?
3. Was respondent's second notice to vacate defective because it failed to provide a basis for terminating appellants' tenancy?
4. Did respondent violate Minn.Stat. § 327C.07, subd. 2, by failing to act *620 within 14 days on appellants' application for residency?
ANALYSIS
The district court found Minn.Stat. §§ 327C.01-.15 (1996) inapplicable because appellants had no written rental agreement as required by Minn.Stat. § 327C.02, subd. 1. Whether chapter 327C applies is a question of law that we review de novo. See Hibbing Educ. Ass'n v. Public Employment Relations Bd., 369 N.W.2d 527, 529 (Minn.1985) (appellate court need not defer to district court's purely legal determination).
The district court's finding chapter 327C inapplicable for lack of a written rental agreement is inconsistent with this court's decision in Lea v. Pieper, 345 N.W.2d 267 (Minn.App.1984), review denied (Minn. June 12, 1984). In Lea, the district court issued a writ of restitution based on its finding that the Leas did not comply with park rules by failing to sign a written rental agreement. In reversing the district court's decision, we utilized chapter 327C, and, by doing so, implicitly applied chapter 327C to the rental of a mobile home lot regardless of whether the tenant has a written agreement with the park. Accordingly, we conclude that the district court in the instant case erred by holding chapter 327C inapplicable.
2. Appellants argue that the district court erred because respondent waived the 30-day March 31 notice to vacate by accepting May rent after that notice expired. Minn.Stat. § 327C.11, subd. 2 governs eviction proceedings; it provides:
Acceptance of rent for a period after the expiration of a final notice to quit waives that notice unless the parties agree in writing after service of the notice that the notice continues in effect.
The district court found that the March 31 notice, which stated that appellants had 30 days to deliver possession of the lot, expired on April 30. It also found that on May 3, 1996, appellants paid rent for May. The district court concluded that
[a]cceptance of rent should constitute a waiver of any defaults related to nonpayment of rent. However, this logic should not extend to a waiver of the agreement under Minn.Stat. § 327C.02, subd. 1.
We conclude that the district court erred in limiting application of Minn.Stat. § 327C.11, subd. 2 to defaults relating to the nonpayment of rent. The statute does not so provide. By accepting payment of rent on May 3, 1996, after the notice to vacate expired, respondent waived the notice. Therefore, the district court erred by issuing the writ of restitution based on the expired notice.
3. Appellants further contend that even if the notice to vacate had not expired, the district court erred in issuing the writ of restitution because respondent's notice was defective  it did not indicate the reason for terminating appellants' tenancy. Respondent claims that its basis for the unlawful detainer proceeding was appellants' failure to have a written rental agreement in accordance with Minn.Stat. § 327C.02, subd. 1. But this basis for termination triggers Minn. Stat. § 327C.09, subd. 3 (relating to termination for violations of law), which requires respondent to give written notice of noncompliance and afford the tenant a reasonable time to remedy the violation before terminating the tenancy. The March 31, 1996, notice to vacate merely informed appellants that they had 30 days to vacate the premises; it did not state the reason for termination. Since appellants were not advised of the reason for termination, they did not have an opportunity to remedy the violation within a reasonable time. Thus, respondent's failure to satisfy the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 327C.09, subd. 3, supplies an additional reason why it was not entitled to restitution.
4. Finally, appellants argue that the district court erred by failing to conclude that respondent violated Minn.Stat. § 327C.07, subd. 2, by not acting within 14 days on their residency application. Appellants submitted their residency application on or before May 1, 1996, and respondent had not notified them concerning the status of their application by the time of trial on May 16, 1996. A residency application pertinent to "in park sales" is governed by Minn. Stat. § 327C.07, subd. 2, which in part provides:
*621 Any in park sale is subject to the park owner's approval of the buyer as a resident. A park owner may not deny a prospective buyer approval as a resident unless:
* * * * * *
(g) within 14 days of receiving a completed application form, the park owner makes a decision or gives the prospective buyer and the seller a written explanation of the specific reasons for the delay and makes a decision as soon as practicable * * *.
The district court concluded that respondent indicated its rejection of appellants' application by commencing the instant unlawful detainer action. The statute does not specify a method for a park owner to decide on an application; it merely requires that the park owner respond within 14 days. We conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion by inferring that the filing of the unlawful detainer action constituted a denial of appellants' residency application.
Appellants also argue that respondent's institution of this action violates Minn.Stat. § 327C.12, which prohibits a park owner from seeking to recover possession of a lot where a resident makes a good faith attempt to exercise legal rights. We need not address this issue because in district court appellants did not allege retaliation or present evidence of retaliatory conduct. See Thiele v. Stich, 425 N.W.2d 580, 583 (Minn.1988) (appellate court must generally only consider issues presented and considered by district court).
DECISION
The district court erred in finding chapter 327C inapplicable because appellants had no written rental agreement. Respondent waived the March notice to vacate by accepting rent after the expiration of that notice. In addition, the March notice to vacate was defective as a matter of law because it failed to provide a basis for terminating appellants' tenancy, and, to the extent that termination resulted from a violation of law, it afforded appellants no opportunity to remedy the violation.
Reversed.[2]
NOTES
[1]  Respondent accepted monthly rent payments from appellants until May 1996.
[2]  Our reversal of the district court judgment is based upon respondent's failure to follow the statutory requirements in terminating appellants' tenancy. This decision, however, does not preclude respondent from asserting a future unlawful detainer action in accordance with law.

=== CASE 9741276 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:40.862859+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Defendant pled guilty to five counts of knowingly retaining or securing a credit card without the consent of the cardholder, MCL 750.157n; MSA 28.354(14). She was sentenced to five concurrent prison terms of from 32 to 48 months and appeals as of right.
Defendant now contends that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to grant her motion to withdraw her guilty plea. The motion was made prior to sentencing.
The plea proceeding took place on February 20, 1979. Defendant pled guilty pursuant to a plea bargain whereby the prosecution agreed not to bring habitual offender charges. Three days later, defendant filed a written motion to withdraw the plea. On February 28, 1979, a hearing was conducted on the plea withdrawal motion and an additional motion by defense counsel to withdraw from the case. Defendant testified that she was innocent of the charges and pled guilty to take advantage of the plea bargain. She claimed that *670she repeatedly told her attorney that she was innocent and that he convinced her to plead guilty anyway. The court then granted the attorney’s motion to withdraw from the case and took defendant’s motion to withdraw her plea under advisement.
On May 9, 1979, the court again heard argument on the plea withdrawal motion. The prosecution requested a ruling that defendant’s former attorney be allowed to testify regarding conversations with defendant. The court held that, because defendant, at the prior proceeding, accused her former counsel of unethical conduct, she waived the attorney-client privilege. Another hearing took place on May 30, 1979, and defendant’s former attorney testified that, while she had claimed innocence at times, she had also informed him of facts which indicated that she was guilty. He stated that he discussed the charges, the possibility of a trial and the plea bargain with defendant and that she did not assert her innocence on the date of the plea. The trial court denied the motion to withdraw the plea at the close of this hearing. In reaching his decision, the judge cited a number of factors, including defendant’s statements at the plea proceeding which indicated that she understood the charges and the possible penalty as well as the rights waived by a guilty plea, her failure to claim innocence at the plea proceeding and the fact that the plea bargain was favorable to her. The court also found the former defense counsel’s testimony credible and concluded that defendant’s withdrawal motion was frivolous.
A defendant has no absolute right to withdraw a guilty plea once it is accepted. People v Bentley, 94 Mich App 19; 287 NW2d 355 (1979). However, the trial court must treat a plea withdrawal motion *671with great liberality if it comes before sentencing. People v Hatcher, 83 Mich App 307, 308; 268 NW2d 389 (1978). In People v Bencheck, 360 Mich 430, 433; 104 NW2d 191 (I960), the Supreme Court stated:
"Where, as here, a defense of innocence is asserted at the time of a request to withdraw the plea, and the request is not obviously frivolous, and is made before commencement of trial and before sentence, the plea should be granted. The right we deal with here is the right to a jury trial, and even what may prove a well-founded belief in defendant’s guilt on the part of the trial judge should not impede the exercise of that right.”
Doubts regarding substantiation of the reasons for. withdrawal are to be resolved in the defendant’s favor. People v Thomas (After Remand), 83 Mich App 235; 268 NW2d 356 (1978).
In the present case, defendant’s motion for withdrawal was made prior to sentencing and was accompanied by a claim of innocence. The crucial inquiry was whether the motion was . obviously frivolous. An affirmative answer to that question hinged lipón a finding that defendant was lying when she testified that she was innocent, continually told her attorney she was innocent and was convinced by her attorney to plead guilty despite her innocence. Under the circumstances here, we believe that the liberality standard and the rule requiring resolution of doubts in favor of defendant operated to preclude a holding that defendant’s motion was obviously frivolous. Therefore, the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to grant defendant’s motion to withdraw her plea. We remand this Case to the trial court with the *672instruction that defendant be allowed to withdraw her plea and proceed to trial.
Reversed and remanded.
Banhof, C.J., and R. M. Maher, J. concurred.

=== CASE 9741388 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:36.719111+00 ===

D. E. Holbrook, Jr., P.J.
This action arises from a wrongful death action filed by the administrator *341of the estate of Timothy Kirk against Ford Motor Company alleging that the negligent design and placement of the gas tank resulted in fatal burn injuries when the automobile which Timothy Kirk was driving was involved in an accident. After a two-month jury trial, a verdict of $3,500,000 was returned in favor of plaintiff. Since the jury also found decedent to be ten percent negligent, the award was reduced to $3,150,000. Defendant is appealing as of right and alleges that numerous errors in the admission and exclusion of evidence and arguments of plaintiffs counsel require reversal.
Defendant first argues that it should have been allowed to utilize a jury instruction which stated in part that:
"If you find that a reasonably prudent driver would have used a seat belt, and that he would not have received some or all of his injuries had he used the seat belt, then you may not award any damages for those injuries you find he would not have received had he used the seat belt. The burden of proving that some or all of Mr. Kirk’s injuries would not have been received had he used the seat belt rests upon the defendant.
"Therefore, if you find that the decedent was negliegent for not using the seat belt and if you find that plaintiffs decedent’s non-use of a seat belt contributed as a proximate cause to his death you will consider this non-use of the seat belt as comparative negligence on the part of plaintiffs decedent.”
Extensive argument and briefs have been filed with this Court regarding this instruction. While the instant case has been pending before this Court, other panels have held that the seat belt defense was not available in Michigan. Schmitzer v Misener-Bennett Ford, Inc, 135 Mich App 350, 358-360; 354 NW2d 336 (1984), and DeGraaf v General Motors Corp, 135 Mich App 141; 352 *342NW2d 719 (1984). We are aware that the Legislature has recently required the use of seat belts and provided for a limited mitigation of damages for the failure to wear seat belts. 1985 PA 1, MCL 257.710e et seq.; MSA 9.2410(5) et seq., effective July 1, 1985. However, this legislation is not retroactive. As the accident and trial occurred long before the effective date of the passage of this act, we do not find the new legislation to be controlling. Accordingly, for accidents that occurred prior to July, 1985,
"We conclude that under our system of comparative negligence, evidence of a plaintiffs failure to use a seat belt is not admissible as evidence of plaintiff’s contributory negligence or of plaintiff’s failure to mitigate damages.” Schmitzer, supra, pp 359-360.
Thus we find no eror in the trial court’s refusal to give a jury instruction regarding the seat belt defense at the time of the trial.
Defendant contends that the trial court abused its discretion in admitting into evidence proposed government standards of crashworthiness that were never adopted. As the standards were not in effect at the time of the accident, defendant states that MCL 600.2946; MSA 27A.2946 prohibits their admission. Without deciding the merits of that particular argument, we hold that that statute only applies when such evidence is offered for the purpose of proving liability. These standards were not introducted to show that defendant was liable for failure to comply with them, rather they are relevant to show why, after testing and design of vehicles which would meet these standards, defendant abandoned its attempt at providing a safer over-the-axle fuel tank location. The proposed standards were not admitted as exhibits.
*343We find that this evidence was relevant and therefore was admissible.
"This Court will not reverse a trial judge’s determination that the prejudicial effect of evidence outweighs its probative value or his decision that certain proffered evidence is not relevant unless we are convinced that the judge’s rulings in these matters amount to an abuse of discretion. See Aetna Life Ins Co v Brooks, 96 Mich App 310; 292 NW2d 532 (1980), Jarecki v Ford Motor Co, 65 Mich App 78; 237 NW2d 191 (1975).” Keefer v C R Bard, Inc, 110 Mich App 563, 568; 313 NW2d 151 (1981).
Ford argues that the introduction of evidence regarding defects which were not related to the particular cause of the accident constituted error. We disagree. This action was based on plaintiffs claim that the fuel tank design was defective. As defendant had no duty to produce a crash-proof automobile, Rutherford v Chrysler Motors Corp, 60 Mich App 392; 231 NW2d 413 (1975), and Dayhuff v General Motors Corp, 103 Mich App 177, 181; 303 NW2d 179 (1981), lv den 412 Mich 914 (1982), it was imperative that plaintiff demonstrate that this was not the only circumstance in which the fuel system design would result in injury or death. Additionally, the design of the auto as a whole had to be ascertained. We find no error in the trial court’s decision. Muniga v General Motors Corp, 102 Mich App 755, 761; 302 NW2d 565 (1980).
Defendant contends that the crash-test evidence, consisting of reports, films and photos, was inadmissible because plaintiff did not prove that the tests were conducted under conditions substantially similar to those involved in the accident.
"In order for results obtained in out-of-court experiments to be admissible in evidence, the conditions of *344the experiment must be sufficiently similar to those involved in the particular case. The decision to admit experimental test results rests within the trial court’s sound discretion.” Przeradski v Rexnord, Inc, 119 Mich App 500, 506; 326 NW2d 541 (1982). (Footnotes omitted.)
However, this evidence did not purport to have been conducted under similar conditions, rather it was to illustrate certain general principles.
"Where motion pictures are offered to recreate the scene of an accident, they are not admissible unless they portray conditions almost identical to those prevailing at the time of the accident itself. Green v General Motors Corp, 104 Mich App 447, 449; 304 NW2d 600 (1981). On the other hand, where a film is not offered for the purpose of duplicating or recreating an accident, but instead merely to illustrate certain general principles, differences in surrounding conditions are less relevant and do not require the film’s exclusion. Id.” Gorelick v Dep’t of State Highways, 127 Mich App 324, 336; 339 NW2d 635 (1983).
Plaintiff was attempting to illustrate the vulnerability of under-the-floor fuel tanks in rear-end collisions and to establish defendant’s negligence in the design. Since this evidence showed generalities rather than a specific instance, we find no error in its admission.
"As a general rule, a trial court has broad discretion in ruling on the relevancy of evidence submitted at trial, Wilson v W A Foote Memorial Hospital, 91 Mich App 90, 96-97; 284 NW2d 126 (1979), Orquist v Montgomery Ward, 37 Mich App 36, 41; 194 NW2d 392 (1971). This Court will not reverse a trial court’s decision absent an abuse of discretion. Wilson, supra, 97.” Muniga, supra, p 761.
Defendant has made a blanket objection to the *345admission of documents given by Ford to plaintiff pursuant to a discovery order, on the grounds that $hey are hearsay. These documents are numerous, yet defendant has argued in this appeal its objections as to the documents without specificity. Specific objections to specific documents must be raised by counsel via appellate brief for us to consider such objections. It is for counsel to point out specific errors to this Court. Couple-Gear Freight Wheel Co v Lake Shore & M S R Co, 196 Mich 429, 433-434; 163 NW 25 (1917). "Failure to object specifically and for proper reasons to the admission of evidence precludes appellate review unless there is manifest injustice.” George v Travelers Indemnity Co, 81 Mich App 106, 116; 265 NW2d 59 (1978).
Ford alleges that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting rebuttal testimony. Our review of the record reveals that decedent’s contributory negligence was at issue. Defendant introduced evidence and testimony to show that decedent was at fault for the accident. Plaintiff then produced a rebuttal witness to testify that steering problems were common to the type of car in question and to introduce the psossibility of a defect as the cause of the accident.
"The rule of rebuttal evidence is stated in People v Utter, 217 Mich 74, 83; 185 NW 830, 833-834 (1921):
" 'Rebuttal evidence is broadly defined as that given by one party to contradict, repel, explain or disprove evidence produced by the other party and tending directly to weaken or impeach the same. In paractical application the line of demarcation between rebuttal evidence and that which should properly be given in chief before the prosecution rests is frequently more or less obscure, and it is a general rule that whether evidence which could have been offered before resting may be given in rebuttal is a matter within the discretion of the trial court.’
*346"See also Litle v Grieve, 25 Mich App 107; 181 NW2d 5 (1970); Gonzalez v Hoffman, 9 Mich App 522; 157 NW2d 475 (1968).” Barrows v Grand Rapids Real Estate Board, 51 Mich App 75, 97; 214 NW2d 532 (1974).
While this testimony might have been more properly presented in plaintiff’s case in chief, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting such testimony. As the jury did deduct ten percent of the award for decedent’s negligence, we believe any error was harmless, GCR 1963, 529.1, and that no manifest injustice occurred.
Defendant addditionally contends that its motion for remittitur or for a new trial should have been granted as the damage award was excessive, contained punitive damages, and was influenced by passion, prejudice and sympathy as well as being enhanced by errors in the proceedings. We do not agree.
The decedent’s siblings are entitled to damages for loss of companionship even when the person is survived by parents or a spouse. Crystal v Hubbard, 414 Mich 297; 324 NW2d 869 (1982).
Defendant in the instant case has argued as did the defendant in May v Grosse Pointe Park, 122 Mich App 295, 297; 332 NW2d 411 (1982):
"On appeal, defendant first alleges that the verdict was excessive and influenced by passion or prejudice and that the trial judge abused his discretion in denying the motion for new trial or remittitur. The appropriate standard of review is the 'shock the judicial conscience’ standard. Burnett v Mackworth G Rees, Inc, 109 Mich App 547; 311 NW2d 417 (1981). If the amount awarded does not 'shock the judicial conscience’, the trial judge has not abused his discretion in denying the motion for a new trial or remittitur.”
This Court went on to say that:
*347"The wrongful death act provides for compensation for the loss of society and companionship. Bradfield v Estate of Burgess, 62 Mich App 345, 350-351; 233 NW2d 541, 544 (1975). Just as no marketplace formula exists to mathematically calculate pain and suffering, no precise formula exists for the loss of society and companionship. Those determinations are for the jury, and a reviewing court will not arbitrarily substitute its judgment for that of the factfinder. Brown v Arnold, 303 Mich 616, 627; 6 NW2d 914, 918 (1942). Furthermore, placing a monetary value on a human life is at best a nebulous decision-making process which does not lead itself to an exacting type of review.” May, supra, p 298.
See also Cryderman v Soo Line R Co, 78 Mich App 465; 260 NW2d 135 (1977), lv den 402 Mich 867 (1978). The amount of the jury award of over $3 million for the loss of society and companionship of a 19-year-old son and brother is within the limits of what reasonable minds might deem just compensation. We cannot say that the trial judge abused his discretion.
Defendant has also argued that it was reversible error not to instruct the jury on the income tax consequences of an award. While this allegation may have some merit in federal cases, Michigan law does not require this. The majority view is not to discuss taxes with the jury. Anno., Propriety of Taking Income Tax into Consideration in Fixing Damages in Personal Injury or Death Action, 63 ALR2d 1393, 1408, and Grant v National Acme Co, 351 F Supp 972 (WD Mich, 1972).
"Defendant also specifically objects to the court’s refusal to instruct the jury as to the tax consequences of any damage award. The law is clear that such an instruction is within the trial court’s discretion. Indeed, the majority view apparently favors withholding all reference to income tax consequences.” Grant, supra, p 979.
*348The trial court was correct in refusing to instruct the jury on exemplary damages. King v General Motors Corp, 136 Mich App 301; 356 NW2d 626 (1984).
Defendant alleges that plaintiff’s counsel improperly inflamed the passions of the jury and attempted to influence the jury to impose punitive damages. Our review of the transcript reveals that defendant did object four times during plaintiff’s closing argument and over 30 allegations of error are listed in its appeal. While defendant did not make a motion for a mistrial or a curative instruction, which is generally required before we will review on appeal, this requirement is not immutable.
"* * * a litigant has no right to appellate review unless he has requested a curative instruction or made a motion for mistrial. Nevertheless, the rule is not an absolute bar to review, for it does not preclude an appellate court from correcting substantial errors which were not preserved in the trial court.
"Our prior cases have clearly stated that incurable errors are not shielded from appellate review because an attorney fails to request what in that case would be a futile instruction.” Reetz v Kinsman Marine Transit Co, 416 Mich 97, 100-101; 330 NW2d 638 (1982). (Footnotes omitted.)
While we agree that plaintiff’s counsel’s remarks were improper, we feel that such error was curable. In the instant case, the trial court gave a sua sponte curative instruction. This instruction was identical to that given in Belue v Uniroyal, Inc, 114 Mich App 589, 596-597; 319 NW2d 369 (1982):
"Any alleged prejudicial effect of the argument in question was further eliminated by the trial court’s instruction to the jury that: 'Arguments, statements, and remarks of attorneys are not evidence, and you *349should disregard anything said by an attorney which is not supported by the evidence or by your own general knowledge and experience.’ See, e.g., Dalm v Bryant Paper Co, 157 Mich 550; 122 NW 257 (1909).”
We fail to find that any substantial prejudice resulted; any error in the argument was rendered harmless. While defendant may have been entitled to a more specific curative instruction, failure to request it precludes reversal. Kinsman Marine Transit, supra, and Koepel v St Jospeh Hospital, 381 Mich 440; 163 NW2d 222 (1968).
While we agree that awarding damages solely to punish defendant is prohibited in Michigan, Willett v Ford Motor Co, 400 Mich 65; 253 NW2d 111 (1977), we are not convinced that such damages were included in the award. The jury was instructed properly as to what to include in their award and punitive damages were not an element. We will not upset the trial court’s decision on the mere speculation that the trial court disregarded the curative instruction.
Affirmed. Costs to appellee.
Wahls, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:36.725661+00 ===

R. R. Lamb, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. The trial court permitted the plaintiff to introduce as rebuttal evidence a new theory of liability against the defendant after the plaintiff rested his case. In doing so, the jury was permitted to ponder whether an automobile manufacturer should be held liable for a defect which was neither alleged nor proved by plaintiff during plaintiff’s case in chief.
The lead opinion states:
"Ford alleges that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting rebuttal testimony. Our review of the *350record reveals that decedent’s contributory negligence was at issue. Defendant [i.e., Ford] introduced evidence and testimony to show that decedent was at fault for the accident. Plaintiff then produced a rebuttal witness to testify that steering problems were common to the type of car in question and to introduce the possibility of a defect as the cause of the accident.
"While this testimony might have been more properly presented in plaintiff’s case in chief, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting such testimony. As the jury did deduct ten percent of the award for decedent’s negligence, we believe any error was harmless, GCR 1963, 529.1, and that no manifest injustice occurred.”
I disagree.
The witness whose testimony is in question was Officer Tom Freeman of the Inkster Police Department. That department had owned six, seven, or perhaps even eight Mercury Montegos. The deceased, Timothy Kirk, purchased Cruiser No. 110 from the department at an auction. This vehicle was a 1975 Mercury Montego and had over 88,000 miles on it at the time of the purchase.
On Spetember 22, 1977, at approximately 5:00 p.m., Mr. Kirk was driving westbound on Outer Drive. As he neared the 1-94 overpass in Allen Park, his vehicle left the road, swerved, and eventually crashed into the median bridge abutment supporting the 1-94 overpass. The vehicle was then struck from behind by an oncoming Chevrolet sedan. Mr. Kirk’s vehicle then burst into flames and he died as a result.
On September 12, 1978, plaintiff filed a four-count complaint against defendant for wrongful death alleging (1) negligence, (2) gross negligence, (3) breach of warranty, and (4) product liability. The bases of all four claims were the improper *351placement of the vehicle’s fuel tank, the failure of defendant to install a flexible bladder liner in the fuel tank, and defendant’s failure to adequately perform crash-worthiness tests in relation to the proper placement of the fuel tank.
Plaintiff’s claim throughout the trial was that the automobile’s fuel system was defectively designed and installed by defendant. At no time during his case in chief did plaintiff introduce evidence or a theory of liability that the deceased’s automobile contained other possible defects.
Following plaintiff’s case in chief, defendant introduced evidence to support its theory that the deceased had been driving his automobile at an excessive rate of speed which, in turn, not only caused the automobile to crash into the bridge abutment, but also caused him to be struck from behind by the Chevrolet automobile. Defendant contended that it was the combination of these two impacts which actually compromised the integrity of the fuel system, thereby causing the gasoline leakage and subsequent fire.
Plaintiff then called Officer Freeman to the witness stand as a "rebuttal witness”. Defense counsel questioned the proposed rebuttal witness and the following testimony was elicited:
"Q [Defense counsel:] Good morning, officer. I’m George Steel. How are you?
"A /Officer Freeman:] Okay.
”Q You and I talked the other day on the telephone. Do you recall?
"A Right.
"Q Officer Freeman, you mentioned to me, did you not, on the telephone that you did have some occasions of some steering difficulties with some of the police cruisers; is that correct?
"A Yes, sir, I did.
*352”Q This particular vehicle was apparently Cruiser Number 110. Are you familiar with that?
"A No, sir.
”Q Do you know of any specific problems you had with this steering of this particular vehicle, Cruiser 110, while you were driving that particular vehicle for the Inkster Police Department?
"A I can’t be specific about that particular vehicle.
"Q So any testimony you would give regarding any handling characteristics of this particular vehicle would be speculation?
"A It may have been the vehicle that I had problems with, and it may not have. I don’t recall. It’s been quite some time.
"Q [Defense Counsel:] Your Honor, I would submit under those questions and answers, that any testimony on the part of Officer Freeman would be speculative.”
Plaintiffs counsel was then permitted to elicit further testimony from Officer Freeman that Freeman had experienced some steering problems with all of the department’s 1975 Montegos, but Freeman indicated that the degree and nature of those problems differed with each vehicle. In fact, he only experienced great difficulty three times and it was unknown whether this difficulty occurred in the same vehicle or whether it occurred in three different vehicles. More importantly, Freeman could not say whether he had experienced a great deal of steering problems in Cruiser No. 110.
Defense counsel argued that Freeman’s testimony was not rebuttal evidence, that it was not probative, and that it opened up a completely new issue and theory in the case. As I review the proposed testimony, I agree with defense counsel’s contentions.
In People v Utter, 217 Mich 74, 83; 185 NW 830 (1921), the Supreme Court defined what constitutes rebuttal evidence as follows:
*353"Rebuttal evidence is broadly defined as that given by one party to contradict, repel, explain or disprove evidence produced by the other party and tending directly to weaken or impeach the same. In practical application the line of demarcation between rebuttal evidence and that which should properly be given in chief before the prosecution rests is frequently more or less obscure, and it is a general rule that whether evidence which could have been offered before resting may be given in rebuttal is a matter within the discretion of the trial court.”
As I read Freeman’s testimony, it fails to contradict, repel, explain or even disprove defendant’s proffered evidence of excessive speed as the claimed cause of the accident. It served only to introduce a totally new issue in the case; namely, whether the cause of plaintiffs decedent’s accident was a defective steering mechanism. Such a theory belonged in plaintiffs case in chief, not in rebuttal. This theory caught defendant entirely by surprise. Plaintiff never alleged, much less tried to prove during its case in chief, that the deceased’s 1975 Mercury Montego had a defective steering assembly. I find that the introduction of this evidence was highly prejudicial. To further highlight the degree of this prejudice, I refer to portions of plaintiffs closing argument:
"We knew [the decedent] was only going 50 miles an hour, maybe a little more. Why did he hit the curb?
"And I told you in my opening statement, I just, I didn’t know.
"The only witness I had at that time was Iola Coleman, who said, T saw that car go back and forth real funny and I never saw a car do that before.’ And I knew she was going to say that.
"And I said to you folks, I said, 'There was something wrong with that car.’ And I didn’t know where it was going to come from but I knew, I just knew in my heart that there was something wrong with that car because I had — * * *.
*354"We kept working and working and working, trying to find out what was wrong with the car. And the steering elements of that car had been removed long before it came into our possession by persons unknown to us.
"And Mr. Murphy kept working on it. And finally we said, 'Look. Maybe the guys in Inkster know something about this car.’ It was like a last gasp. But it just made sense to us.
"And Tom Freeman, Officer Freeman said, 'Yeah. I had a problem with this car.’
"Do you remember Officer Freeman’s testimony?
"And I say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that Officer Freeman has told you and told us very likely what happened to Tim Kirk that day on Outer Drive Highway. Because it makes sense — * * *.
"And what makes sense about what happened that day out on Outer Drive Highway? What makes sense? The same thing that happened to Officer Freeman on many, many occasions with all of these cars — And Tim Kirk only had the car since June, and you remember his sister said it had been on blocks for several weeks at her house. He was in the process of changing tires. And he’s going down the highway at 50 or 55 miles an hour.
"I’d like to just read you briefly from Officer Freeman’s testimony where he asid [sic]: T encountered the steering problem in all the vehicles intermittently at different times. A lot of times when you turn corners or went to turn back you wouldn’t have the power steering. It would be manual, real hard, harder than if you didn’t have any. And the same thing is true sometimes if you’re going straight and you want to change lanes or make any adjustments in your steering it would be as though you didn’t have it. It would go from being easy to hard; intermittently.[’]
" 'It occurred at different times without any reason that I know of.’
*355"Here’s Officer Freeman, who’s a trained police officer, trained in the art, among other things, of driving cars. He’s a patrolman and has to chase criminals. He had had it happen to him several times and at least he was on his guard for it.
"I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to consider what happened to Tim Kirk in the last four seconds or five seconds that he had, trying to figure out what was happening to him as he went down Outer Drive at 50 or 55 miles an hour. He suddenly thought he had no steering and he jerked it and hit the curb and he hit that six-inch curb and he bounced off it. He bounced up. Can you imagine what he’s thinking? What is happening? What happened to that steering?
"[A]nd if we had not been able to find Officer Freeman you would have been left without an explanation. But fortunately, you have an explanation and I think it’s a good one because it makes sense.”
This closing argument illustrates not only how plaintiff intended to use Freeman’s testimony, it explains why I cannot find the erroneous admission of this testimony to be harmless.
The purpose of pleadings is to give parties adequate notice of issues that are to be met and to assure that issues raised may be tried fairly by eliminating traps and surprises. Amendments to pleadings are liberally allowed, even to conform the pleadings to the proofs; however, a party may not submit its case to a trier of fact on an entirely different theory. The introduction of this testimony and theory of liability coupled with the arguments based thereon violated these principles.
In addition, I do not believe that Officer Freeman’s testimony was probative of a point in issue because he was unable to tie his experiences with some of the police department’s six, seven, or eight Mercury Montegos to the automobile being driven by plaintiff’s decedent at the time of the accident. *356Thus, the testimony lacked any tendency to make the existence of any fact in consequence more probable or less probable than it would have been without the evidence. The evidence was therefore irrelevant and should not have been admitted. MRE 401, 402.
Moreover, even if somehow this evidence could be found to be relevant, its probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial impact on the jury. MRE 403. Freeman testified that he had experienced three near accidents while driving a patrol vehicle and that during two of these near accidents the tires blew out from hitting the curb. Once he almost hit a restaurant building. He explained that this steering problem occurred at slow speeds immediately after making a turn. It was something he could not get used to other than to be careful when driving the vehicle. He said that when the power steering unit would fail, the steering became so difficult that "it was too hard to control”, and that when the steering mechanism would suddenly start working again, "it would make you change lanes or go out of your lane, lose control a little bit”.
There was no testimony introduced by plaintiff that would indicate that the deceased had been driving at a low rate of speed or that he was making a turn immediately before the accident occurred. On the contrary, the evidence tended to show that the deceased had been driving at a high rate of speed; therefore, the value of Freeman’s testimony was substantially diminished. But, at the same time, the jury was allowed to speculate about whether the deceased’s vehicle and Freeman’s problem vehicle were one and the same. Because Freeman could not identify the deceased’s vehicle as the vehicle, or at least one of the vehicles in which he experienced loss of control, I *357believe that the jury was confused by the issues and misled by Freeman’s testimony. The jury was permitted to decide the case on a theory never alleged or presented by the plaintiff until after plaintiff rested his case. Defendant was not aware of this new theory until it was too late to conduct discovery or to investigate Freeman’s claims.
The lead opinion suggests that the jury’s ten percent compromise is evidence that the error was harmless. I cannot agree. In fact, it demonstrates that the jury may have accepted at least part of defendant’s theory that the deceased had been driving at an excessive rate of speed which, in turn, caused the accident and subsequent fire. Therefore, but for the prejudicial impact of Freeman’s testimony, we are left to speculate about what the verdict would have been absent this evidence.
For these reasons, I vote to reverse.

=== CASE 2226659 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.379128+00 ===

207 Wis. 2d 51 (1997)
557 N.W.2d 412
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Anthony HICKS, Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner.
No. 94-2542-CR.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs September 24, 1996.
Decided January 24, 1997.
*52 For the defendant-respondent-petitioner the cause was submitted on the briefs of Robert R. Henak and Shellow, Shellow & Glynn, S.C., Milwaukee.
For the plaintiff-appellant the cause was submitted on the brief of Stephen W. Kleinmaier, assistant attorney general, and James E. Doyle, attorney general.
¶ 1. DONALD W. STEINMETZ, J.
This is a review of a decision of the court of appeals reversing an order of the circuit court for Milwaukee County, Stanley A. Miller, Judge, dismissing one count of a criminal complaint charging Anthony Hicks with a violation of the controlled substance tax statute. The defendant, Hicks, argues that he has standing to raise a Fifth Amendment constitutional challenge[1] to Wis. Stats. §§ 139.87-139.96, the drug tax statutes, because he faces a criminal conviction for violation of these statutes.
[1]
¶ 2. In State v. Hall, 207 Wis. 2d 54, 557 N.W.2d 778 (1997), this court held that the drug tax stamp statute is unconstitutional. Thus, we do not reach the standing issue presented in this case, because the defendant cannot be prosecuted for being in possession of cocaine without a tax stamp. Instead, we reverse and *53 remand to the circuit court with directions to dismiss with prejudice the drug tax stamp charge.
By the Court.Reversed and cause remanded with directions.
NOTES
[1]  The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides, in relevant part, that "[n]o person. . .shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself...without due process of law. . . ." U.S. Const. Amend. V. This amendment is applied to the states by U.S. Const. Amend. XIV, which states that "[n]o State shall. . .deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law. . . ."

=== CASE 2226661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.459421+00 ===

205 Wis. 2d 510 (1996)
557 N.W.2d 84
IN RE the PATERNITY OF AMBER J.F.:
AMBER J.F., Petitioner-Respondent,
v.
RICHARD B., Respondent-Appellant.[]
No. 95-2656.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs September 6, 1996.
Decided October 17, 1996.
*513 For the respondent-appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of David J. O'Leary of O'Leary Law Office of Janesville.
For the petitioner-respondent the cause was submitted on the brief of John R. Dade of Dade & Brellenthin of Whitewater.
Before Vergeront, Roggensack, and Deininger, JJ.
ROGGENSACK, J.
Richard B. appeals an order reinstating a paternity action filed against him by Amber J.F. Richard asserts that res judicata and collateral estoppel[1] bar Amber's action, because an earlier paternity action brought by Amber's mother, Lynn M., resulted in a jury finding that Richard was not Amber's father. However, because Amber was not a *514 party to, nor in privity with the petitioner in, the earlier action, we conclude that claim preclusion does not apply. We also conclude that policies of fundamental fairness and due process proscribe the application of issue preclusion; therefore, we affirm the order of the trial court, allowing Amber to proceed.
BACKGROUND
On December 6, 1984, Lynn, the mother of Amber, commenced a paternity action against Richard in Jefferson County, alleging Richard was the father of her unborn child. Richard contested the allegation of paternity and requested a jury trial on the issue.
A trial was held on October 14, 1985. Amber was not named as a party and no guardian ad litem or attorney was appointed to represent her interests. Blood tests were admitted into evidence, which indicated a 99.97% probability that Richard was Amber's father. At the trial's conclusion, the jury was asked, "Is the Respondent, Richard . . . the father of the Petitioner's child, Amber, born on the third day of March, 1985?" The jury unanimously answered that question "no." Thereafter, the action was dismissed.
On February 18, 1994, a second petition[2] alleging Richard's paternity of Amber was filed by Amber, *515 through John R. Dade, her guardian ad litem. Based on the 1985 jury verdict and subsequent judgment, Richard moved to dismiss the petition, alleging claim preclusion and issue preclusion barred the action. On February 3, 1995, the trial court applied claim preclusion and dismissed the petition.
On May 22, 1995, the Court of Appeals for the State of Wisconsin decided Chad M.G. v. Kenneth J.A., 194 Wis. 2d 690, 535 N.W.2d 97 (Ct. App. 1995), holding that a mother and a child do not stand in privity with one another for the purposes of a paternity action; and therefore, the doctrine of claim preclusion does not bar a subsequent action brought by a child who was not a party to the first proceeding. Thereafter, Amber moved the trial court for reconsideration. After briefing and oral argument, the trial court reversed its earlier decision and, based on Chad M.G., reinstated the paternity action. Richard petitioned for leave to appeal this non-final order, pursuant to § 809.50, STATS., and we granted his petition.
DISCUSSION
Scope of Review.
[1]
Whether claim preclusion and/or issue preclusion apply to an undisputed set of facts is a question of law which this court reviews de novo, without deference to the trial court. Lindas v. Cady, 183 Wis. 2d 547, 552, 515 N.W.2d 458, 460 (1994).
Claim Preclusion (Res Judicata).
*516 [2]
Claim preclusion has as its underpinning policy considerations of fairness to the victor and judicial efficiency. Northern States Power Co. v. Bugher, 189 Wis. 2d 541, 549, 525 N.W.2d 723, 727 (1995). It is "`designed to draw a line between the meritorious claim on one hand and the vexatious, repetitious and needless claim on the other hand.'" Id. at 550, 525 N.W.2d at 727 (quoting Purter v. Heckler, 771 F.2d 682, 689-90 (3rd Cir. 1985)).
[3]
Claim preclusion establishes that a final judgment between parties is conclusive for all subsequent actions between those same parties, as to all matters which were, or which could have been, litigated in the proceeding from which the judgment arose. Munchow v. Goding, 198 Wis. 2d 609, 544 N.W.2d 218, 223 (Ct. App. 1995). Claim preclusion generally requires an identity of parties, but it can be applied to privies of parties as well. Id. (citing Universal Die & Stampings, Inc. v. Justus, 174 Wis. 2d 556, 562, 497 N.W.2d 797, 800 (Ct. App. 1993)).
[4]
In the case at hand, Amber seeks to prove that Richard is her father, just as Lynn did in the earlier action. However, privity is not established merely because mother and child are interested in the same question or in proving the same facts. In order to be in privity with a party to a judgment, one must have such absolute identity of interests that the party to the earlier action represented the same legal interest as the non-party to that first action. Mayonia M.M. v. Keith N., 202 Wis. 2d 461, 551 N.W.2d 31, 34 (Ct. App. 1996); Chad M.G., 194 Wis. 2d at 696, 535 N.W.2d at 99-100; see also Marsh v. Rogers, 659 N.E.2d 171 (Ind. *517 Ct. App. 1995); B.M.L. v. Cooper, 919 S.W.2d 855 (Tx. Ct. App. 1996).
[5]
Lynn sought a determination of paternity to receive child support and expenses for Amber's birth. While Amber does have an interest in child support, that is not the limit of the potential financial benefits which could accrue to her if Richard were adjudicated as her father. For example, she may benefit from inheritance rights, social security survivor benefits, employee death benefits, life insurance proceeds and health insurance. Amber also has an interest in establishing familial bonds, gaining knowledge of Richard's medical history and an awareness of his cultural heritage. Lynn was not Amber's privy in the earlier action. Therefore, we conclude that under the holding of Chad M.G. claim preclusion does not bar Amber's paternity action because there was neither an identity of parties in the prior action, nor privity bottomed on an absolute identity of interests between Amber and her mother.
Issue Preclusion (Collateral Estoppel).
[6-8]
Issue preclusion "has the dual purpose of protecting litigants from the burden of relitigating an identical issue, in certain circumstances, and of promoting judicial economy by preventing needless litigation." Parklane Hosiery Co. v. Shore, 439 U.S. 322, 326 (1979). As a threshold matter, issue preclusion, unlike claim preclusion, requires more than a judgment on the merits. It requires actual litigation of an issue necessary to the outcome of the first action. Northern States Power, 189 Wis. 2d at 550, 525 N.W.2d at 727. Therefore, judgments based on pleas of no *518 contest, which pass directly to disposition and avoid adjudication of contested issues, do not prevent future litigations of those same issues in other lawsuits. Crowall v. Heritage Mut. Ins. Co., 118 Wis. 2d 120, 122, n.2, 346 N.W.2d 327, 329, n.2 (Ct. App. 1984). Additionally, issue preclusion can prevent relitigation of issues actually litigated and determined in a prior lawsuit, even if the cause of action in the second lawsuit is different from the first. Id. at 121, n.1, 346 N.W.2d at 329, n.1. Throughout the evolution of issue preclusion, the burden of establishing that it should be applied in a given instance is on the party seeking its benefit. Flowers v. DHSS, 81 Wis. 2d 376, 389, 260 N.W.2d 727, 734-35 (1978).
[9, 10]
Initially, issue preclusion was applied only when there was an identity of parties, all of whom were mutually bound by the first court's judgment. 31 A.L.R. 3rd 1044, § 1(b) at 1047-49 (1970). However, more recent decisions have discarded the mutuality requirement and adopted a more flexible approach based on a "fundamental fairness" analysis. Northern States Power, 189 Wis. 2d at 551, 525 N.W.2d at 727; see also Blonder-Tongue Lab., Inc. v. University of Ill. Found., 402 U.S. 313 (1971). Therefore, unlike claim preclusion, issue preclusion does not require an identity of parties. Michelle T. v. Crozier, 173 Wis. 2d 681, 687, 495 N.W.2d 327, 330 (1993).
[11]
Issue preclusion is now applied in contexts where only one party to the current action was a party to the prior action. It may be applied offensively or defensively, against one who was a party to the earlier action. See Michelle T., 173 Wis. 2d at 696, 495 N.W.2d at 333 (applying issue preclusion offensively against *519 the defendant to prevent relitigating the fact of defendant's sexual assault of the plaintiff in a civil action, when that fact had been adjudicated against the defendant in a prior criminal action) and Crowall, 118 Wis. 2d at 122, 346 N.W.2d at 329 (applying issue preclusion defensively to preclude an insured from relitigating facts in an insurance claim which had already been determined against him, in a prior criminal action).
A recent case of this court has also applied issue preclusion defensively against a non-party, where the nexus between the interest sought to be vindicated by the former party was extremely close to that of the nonparty, and only financial interests were at stake. Jensen v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., No. 95-2042 (Wis. Ct. App. Aug. 28, 1996). In Jensen, after analyzing five fairness factors, we allowed the defendant to use issue preclusion against a plaintiff who had not been a party to the prior action in which the defendant had been found not causally negligent in a traffic context. However, in Mayonia, we held that due process considerations prevented the use of issue preclusion by a respondent in a paternity action brought by a child, even though the respondent had been previously found not to be the father of the child in an action brought by the child's mother. These holdings, while producing different results, are not contradictory. Application of the fundamental fairness concerns reflected in the five-part test identified by the Wisconsin Supreme Court in Michelle T. and applied by this court in Jensen, focuses a court's consideration on the specific factors presented by each case.
[12]
Michelle T. sets forth the test as follows:
*520 (1) could the party against whom preclusion is sought, as a matter of law, have obtained a review of the judgment;
(2) is the question one of law that involves two distinct claims or intervening contextual shifts in the law;
(3) do significant differences in the quality or extensiveness of proceedings between the two courts warrant relitigation of the issue;
(4) have the burdens of persuasion shifted such that a party seeking preclusion had a lower burden of persuasion in the first trial than in the second; or
(5) are matters of public policy and individual circumstances involved that would render the application of collateral estoppel to be fundamentally unfair, including inadequate opportunity or incentive to obtain a full and fair adjudication in the initial action.
Michelle T. at 689, 495 N.W.2d at 330-31.
This five-part fundamental fairness test is bottomed in guarantees of due process which require that a person must have had a fair opportunity procedurally, substantively and evidentially to pursue the claim before a second litigation will be precluded. Michelle T., 173 Wis. 2d at 695, 495 N.W.2d at 333; Blonder-Tongue, 402 U.S. at 333. The weight given to each factor and the ultimate determination of whether issue preclusion should be applied must be done on a case-by-case basis. Michelle T., 173 Wis. 2d at 692 and 495 N.W.2d at 332.
In the case at hand, application of the fundamental fairness test results in our concluding that the doctrine of issue preclusion does not bar Amber from proceeding with her claim, just as this court concluded in Mayonia. First, Amber could not have obtained a review of the *521 1985 judgment. She was not a party; no guardian ad litem or attorney was appointed to represent her; and as a child, she did not possess the ability to hire a representative who could have intervened to protect her interests. This factor favors allowing Amber to proceed.
Second, what is at issue here is a finding of fact made by a jury in 1985. A finding in regard to the same fact, i.e., whether Richard is Amber's father, will be required in the present action. However, the law bearing on that finding changed with the enactment of § 767.48(1m), STATS.,[3] which presumes that if the blood tests show the putative father is not excluded and that there is a statistical probability of paternity of 99.0% or greater, the putative father is rebuttably presumed to be the child's father. Presumably this change in the law will result in a different jury instruction than was used in 1985 because the statistical probability that Richard is Amber's father is 99.97% and he apparently was not excluded as a potential father in 1985. This factor also favors allowing Amber to proceed.
Third, there has been no showing that the quality or extensiveness of the first trial was defective in any way. The question of whether Amber was fathered by Richard was tried before a jury and the jury found, as a fact, that he was not her father. This factor favors applying issue preclusion to bar Amber's attempt to relitigate a fact already determined.
Fourth, the burden of proof is the same now, as it was in the earlier paternity action. This factor favors preclusion of a second action.
*522 Fifth, public policies, grounded in the guaranties of due process,[4] which the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution require, bear on Amber's rights. However, Amber did not receive procedural, substantive or evidentiary protections for her interests, in the first trial. She was not a party; she had no legal representation to protect her interests; and her mother's interests were not identical to her own. It would be fundamentally unfair to forever preclude her from an opportunity to legally establish her paternity. While this court is mindful that a second trial will cause expense and inconvenience to Richard and use additional judicial resources which are always at a premium, Amber's interest in having the opportunity to identify her father far outweighs those inconveniences to Richard and the State. Therefore, this factor also favors allowing Amber to proceed.
[13]
Because we conclude that the burden on Richard and the State of proceeding with a second action involves money and time, but the potential benefits to Amber, if she is successful, will affect her personal status throughout her lifetime, we hold that fundamental fairness bars the use of issue preclusion to prevent Amber from proceeding. The order of the trial court reinstating Amber's claim to determine whether Richard is her father is affirmed.
*523 CONCLUSION
By the Court.Order affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  Recently, the Wisconsin Supreme Court has clarified the doctrine of res judicata, which it renamed "claim preclusion," and the doctrine of collateral estoppel, which it renamed "issue preclusion." Northern States Power Co. v. Bugher, 189 Wis. 2d 541, 549, 525 N.W.2d 723, 727 (1995). Therefore, in this opinion, we adopt the nomenclature established by the supreme court.
[2]  The caption of the petition lists only Amber as a petitioner, but the petition itself states: "Now comes your petitioners, A.J.F., by John R. Dade, Guardian ad Litem for A.J.F., and Lynn M. . . ., mother of A.J.F. who state as follows. . .", thereby drawing into question whether Lynn is seeking relief in a second action. Because the issue of Lynn's ability, or lack thereof, to proceed with a second action was not addressed by the parties in their briefs, we do not decide that question. See Waushara County v. Graf, 166 Wis. 2d 442, 451, 480 N.W.2d 16, 19 (1992).
[3]  1987 Act 27, § 2137s, eff. Oct. 1, 1987.
[4]  Due process requires that a child be given notice of, and an opportunity to be heard at, any proceeding which determines the child's status vis-a-vis the alleged father. In Re Cogan's Estate, 267 Wis. 20, 26, 64 N.W.2d 454, 457 (1954); see also RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF JUDGMENTS, § 31(2)(a).

=== CASE 2226662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.499715+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 651 (1997)
251 Neb. 380
Erik OLSON, Appellant,
v.
SANITARY & IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT NO. 177, a Political Subdivision, et al., Appellees.
No. 95-080.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 3, 1997.
*653 Timothy K. Kelso, of Rasmussen Mitchell & Kelso, and James E. Harris, of Harris, Feldman, Stumpf Law Offices, Omaha, for appellant.
Patrick G. Vipond and Raymond E. Walden, of Kennedy Holland DeLacy & Svoboda, Omaha, for appellee SID No. 177.
Terry K. Gutierrez, of Gast, Ratz & Gutierrez, P.C., Omaha, for appellee Riverside Lakes Recreational Cooperative Assn.
Milton A. Katskee, of Katskee, Henatsch & Suing, Omaha, for appellee Larry Tighe.
Thomas A. Otepka and Susan E. Fieber, of Gross & Welch, P.C., Omaha, for appellee Charles Varvel.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
WRIGHT, Justice.
The plaintiff dove off a dock into shallow water and broke his neck. The trial court entered summary judgment in favor of the defendants. The Nebraska Court of Appeals affirmed, and we granted the plaintiff's petition for further review.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996).
When reviewing a question of law, an appellate court reaches a conclusion independent of the lower court's ruling. Nelson v. Metropolitan Utilities Dist., 249 Neb. 956, 547 N.W.2d 133 (1996).
FACTS
On July 4, 1992, the plaintiff, Erik Olson, and his friend Scott Weidner went to Scott's grandparents' house at Riverside Lakes. Weidner's grandparents, Stanley and Myrtle Miller, lived in a townhome consisting of four private units. Each unit had its own section of beach, and every two units shared a stairway to the beach and a boat dock.
The dock located between the Millers and their closest neighbor, Jim Twiss, was for the use of those two units. The defendants Larry Tighe and Charles Varvel owned the two west units, and they, likewise, shared a dock. It was the residents' understanding that these docks were privately owned by the two units to which they corresponded and that one needed explicit permission to use another's dock.
The lake on which the Millers lived was owned by the defendant Sanitary & Improvement District No. 177 (SID 177). The lake was guarded by a gate which had a "no trespassing" sign stating that the lake was for the use of residents only. The residents of the lake were not required to pay a fee for use of the lake, but they paid real estate taxes to SID 177 which were used for the maintenance of the lake. The rules and regulations promulgated by SID 177 provided that persons who were neither residents nor guests of residents were to pay a fee to use the lake.
Olson, who was 21 years old at the time of the accident, had been going to the Millers' townhome since he was about 10 years old. He lived across the street from two of the Millers' grandchildren, Scott and Ted Weidner, and had been at the lake more times than he could count. On July 4, 1992, Olson, the Weidner brothers, and other friends went to the Millers' townhome to eat and enjoy the summer, lake activities.
Throughout the afternoon, Olson and other guests played volleyball, and in between games, Olson and the Weidner brothers dove off the Tighe-Varvel dock. Before doing so, however, Olson and Scott Weidner, in accordance with their customary practice, had tested the depth of the water to see where it was safe for diving. Olson testified he knew that there were some areas around the dock which were unsafe. For instance, Olson was aware that it was unsafe to dive directly off the end of the dock or to dive to the east of the dock.
*654 Olson and Scott Weidner were able to locate a "target area" off the southwest corner of the Tighe-Varvel dock. Olson estimated that this area of greater depth was approximately 8 to 12 feet in diameter, but the precise parameters of the diving area were not clearly defined. Olson attributed this area of greater depth alongside the dock to "propwash," an area where the sand has been moved by a boat starting from a dead stop.
Olson successfully dove off the dock approximately five times that day. On the sixth dive, however, Olson dove somewhat east of the target area in an attempt to miss Scott and Ted Weidner, who had immediately preceded him. Olson hit his head on the bottom of the lake and broke his neck. He now suffers permanent quadriplegia.
At the time of the accident, Tighe was out of town and unaware that the Millers' grandchildren and their guests were planning to use the dock. Although Tighe had once granted permission for the Millers' granddaughters to use the dock for sunbathing, Tighe testified that he had never given the Millers "blanket permission" for their guests to use the dock. Tighe testified at his deposition that he had never seen anyone swimming or diving near his dock.
Varvel had also given the Millers' guests permission, on occasion, to use the Tighe-Varvel dock for sunbathing. However, Varvel did not give anyone blanket permission to use the dock, nor was there any evidence that he had given the Millers permission to use the dock on the day of the accident. Varvel testified he was unaware that anyone had ever used the dock for diving or jumping. He did not see Olson and the others using the dock on July 4, 1992, because he was inside preparing for his guests, who were to arrive late in the afternoon.
Following the accident, Olson sued the owners of the units corresponding to the Tighe-Varvel dock and, in addition, sued SID 177 and the defendant Riverside Lakes Recreation Association, an unincorporated homeowners' association. Olson alleged that the defendants were, jointly and severally, negligent in failing to ascertain and maintain sufficient and safe water depth; in failing to warn users of the lake, in general, and the dock, in particular, of the dangerous and shallow condition of the lake surrounding the end of the dock; and in constructing or allowing to be constructed a hazardous, dangerous structure on or in the lake in the form of a dock without providing for protection from or warning of the dangers of use thereof.
Olson further alleged that Riverside Lakes Recreation Association, Tighe, and Varvel were jointly and severally negligent (1) in failing to enforce reasonably safe rules and regulations relating to the use of the lake and the docks; (2) in failing to promulgate and publish rules relating to jumping or diving from the docks; (3) in failing to warn users of the docks of the dangers of diving therefrom by conspicuously posting reasonably safe safety rules and regulations pertaining to diving; and (4) in adopting, publishing, and posting safety rules and regulations which did not include warnings for the protection of swimmers and divers.
Summary judgment was granted against Olson as to all of the defendants. The trial court held, inter alia, that at best, Olson had presented evidence that he was a licensee and that the only duty of the occupier to a licensee is to give notice of traps and concealed dangers, which a body of water is not. The trial court also held that Olson's assumption of risk and contributory negligence in the amount of more than 50 percent barred recovery as a matter of law.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Olson appealed the trial court's judgment to the Court of Appeals, where he made four assignments of error: The trial court erred (1) in sustaining the defendants' motions for summary judgment, (2) in finding Olson to be a mere licensee, (3) in finding that Olson had assumed the risk of his activities, and (4) in finding that Olson had been contributorily negligent in an amount greater than 50 percent. The Court of Appeals affirmed, and we granted Olson's petition for further review.
In his petition for further review, Olson argues that McIntosh v. Omaha Public Schools, 249 Neb. 529, 544 N.W.2d 502 *655 (1996), in which we held that a student attending a school-sponsored football clinic was an invitee, dictates that Olson be deemed an invitee and not merely a licensee. Therefore, Olson contends that the Court of Appeals necessarily applied the wrong standard of care and did not make a proper determination of comparative fault. In addition, Olson asserts that the Court of Appeals erred in finding that there was no issue of material fact as to whether Olson assumed the risk of diving into the lake.
ANALYSIS
The determination of whether Olson had the status of an invitee or a licensee is governed by our decisions in McIntosh v. Omaha Public Schools, supra, and Heins v. Webster County, 250 Neb. 750, 552 N.W.2d 51 (1996). For the reasons stated herein, we hold that Olson was, as a matter of law, no more than a licensee, and we affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
In order to succeed in an action based on negligence, a plaintiff must establish the defendant's duty not to injure the plaintiff, a breach of that duty, proximate causation, and damages. Hill v. City of Lincoln, 249 Neb. 88, 541 N.W.2d 655 (1996). The question of whether a legal duty exists for actionable negligence is a question of law dependent on the facts in a particular situation. Anderson/Couvillon v. Nebraska Dept. of Soc. Servs., 248 Neb. 651, 538 N.W.2d 732 (1995).
We first address whether our decision in Heins applies to the case at bar. In Heins, we abrogated the distinction between a licensee and an invitee. However, we did so only prospectively, stating: "Considering that other litigants may have relied on our previous rule and incurred time and expense in prosecuting or defending their claims, we conclude, with the exception of the instant case, that the rule announced today shall be applied only to all causes of action arising after this date." Heins, 250 Neb. at 762, 552 N.W.2d at 57. Olson's cause of action arose before Heins, and thus, Heins is without effect in the instant case. See Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996). Therefore, this case is governed by the premise that a landowner's duty of care depends upon whether the plaintiff is classified as a licensee, invitee, or trespasser.
The trial court determined that Olson was at most a licensee. A licensee is a person who is privileged to enter or remain upon the premises of another by virtue of the possessor's express or implied consent, but who is not a business visitor. McIntosh v. Omaha Public Schools, supra. If an invitation to enter onto the premises relates to the business of the one who gives it or for the mutual advantage of both parties of a business nature, the party receiving the invitation is an invitee, but if the invitation is for the convenience, pleasure, or benefit of the person enjoying the privilege, it is only a license, and the person receiving it is a licensee. See id.
As to the defendants Tighe, Varvel, and Riverside Lakes Recreation Association, no argument is made, other than the public policy argument adopted by Heins, that Olson could be anything more than a licensee. Olson paid no fee. Rather, Olson was a social guest whose presence was in no way related to a business purpose or advantage of his hosts.
However, Olson makes the argument that there is evidence from which a fact finder could determine that he was not a mere licensee, but, rather, was in fact an invitee with regard to SID 177. He argues that such an issue of fact is found in the evidence that the residents of the lake pay an annual real estate tax to SID 177. Residents paying such tax and their guests are entitled to use of the lake free of charge. In contrast, the general public is at least theoretically required to pay a fee for use of the lake.
In making the argument that he was an invitee, Olson relies upon Ginn v. Lamp, 234 Neb. 198, 450 N.W.2d 388 (1990); Palmtag v. Gartner Constr. Co., 245 Neb. 405, 513 N.W.2d 495 (1994); and McIntosh v. Omaha Public Schools, 249 Neb. 529, 544 N.W.2d 502 (1996). In Ginn, we reversed a directed verdict against the son of a tenant in a lakeshore development who was injured falling into shallow water while water skiing. In *656 so doing, we limited our review to determining whether there was evidence from which a jury could find that the defendant acted as landlord over the property. We held that the evidence of the defendant's control over the property established a prima facie case of liability under a custodial agent theory. In Ginn, we did not determine whether the plaintiff was a licensee or an invitee. Therefore, Ginn is clearly not applicable to this case.
In Palmtag, we upheld the trial court's determination that the plaintiff, who was injured in the course of an arranged meeting with a contractor to review the progress of her house, was an invitee. We noted that the distinction between a licensee and an invitee rested on an "economic benefit" test. Under this test, one who enters upon the land of another is not entitled to the status of an invitee unless the visit is directly or indirectly connected to business dealings between them. We concluded that because the plaintiff had control over the construction work being done, her visit to the jobsite served the defendant's economic interest. Olson would clearly fail to establish an invitee relationship under the Palmtag economic benefit test because there were no business dealings between Olson and SID 177. Therefore, Palmtag also fails to have any application to the case at bar.
In McIntosh, the injured boy was participating in a football clinic on school property when he was hurt allegedly because of the condition of the field. The participants paid no fee and used no school equipment, but school officials admitted that the clinic was run by the school's varsity coaches, was a school-related function of the physical education program, and was a part of its football program. Recognizing that public schools are in the business of providing academic and physical fitness, the injured party was found to be an invitee because the invitation to participate in the clinic was mutually beneficial to both the student and the school.
In this case, Olson did not participate in any program or event offered by SID 177. SID 177, through taxation of real property, constructed and maintained two lakes for the recreational use of the residents. It charged no fee to the residents or their guests for use of the lakes. Olson was a guest of two of the residents, and there is no evidence that SID 177 was even aware of Olson's presence. Olson admitted he did not pay any money to enter the premises, to use the lake, or to use the dock.
It could be argued that SID 177 was in the business of providing recreation to its residents and their guests and that it benefited from Olson's presence through his participation in such recreation and through tax revenues collected from the homeowners. However, we hold that any mutually beneficial relationship of a business nature between Olson and SID 177 is too remote to create an invitor-invitee relationship. We cannot further blur the distinction between invitees and licensees without effectively abrogating the distinction altogether. Such a retroactive abrogation was specifically rejected by this court in Heins.
Olson further argues that summary judgment is improper because there exists an issue of fact as to whether Olson was a licensee or a trespasser, because Tighe, Varvel, and Stanley Miller testified that Miller's grandchildren and their guests did not have the requisite permission to use the Tighe-Varvel dock. This may be an issue of fact, but it is not material to the case because the trial court correctly concluded that even if Olson were determined to be a licensee, he could not recover.
Under Nebraska law as it existed at the time of this accident, the owner or occupant of a premises owed only the duty to refrain from injuring a licensee by willful or wanton negligence or designed injury, or to warn the licensee of a hidden danger or peril known to the owner or occupant but unknown or unobservable by the licensee in the exercise of ordinary care. See Young v. Eriksen Constr. Co., 250 Neb. 798, 553 N.W.2d 143 (1996). In order for an action to be willful or wanton, the evidence must prove that the defendant had actual knowledge that a danger existed and that the defendant had a constructive intention as to the likely consequence. See Guenther v. Allgire, 228 Neb. 425, 422 N.W.2d 782 (1988). Olson did not *657 present evidence from which it could be inferred that any of the defendants acted willfully or wantonly.
It is also clear that the danger of missing the target area and diving into shallow water was not a hidden danger of which the defendants would have a duty to warn. We have repeatedly held that a body of water, natural or artificial, does not constitute a concealed, dangerous condition. See, Haden v. Hockenberger & Chambers Co., 193 Neb. 713, 228 N.W.2d 883 (1975); Cortes v. State, 191 Neb. 795, 218 N.W.2d 214 (1974); Lindelow v. Peter Kiewit Sons', Inc., 174 Neb. 1, 115 N.W.2d 776 (1962). In Cortes, we noted, "It can be stated as a matter of fact that the public recognizes that bodies of water vary in depth and that sharp changes in the bottom may be expected." 191 Neb. at 799, 218 N.W.2d at 216-17.
Moreover, it is clear that Olson knew the lake varied in depth and was aware of the danger of diving into shallow water. Specifically, Olson knew that there were shallow areas near the Tighe-Varvel dock. However, he proceeded with Scott Weidner to locate a relatively small target area of deeper water. Olson knew that the precise parameters of the target area were not clearly defined. In fact, Olson testified he knew that the area directly south of the dock, toward which he dove on his final dive, was too shallow. As such, SID 177 did not breach its duty to Olson to warn of hidden dangers.
Having determined that Heins v. Webster County, 250 Neb. 750, 552 N.W.2d 51 (1996), and McIntosh v. Omaha Public Schools, 249 Neb. 529, 544 N.W.2d 502 (1996), are not applicable, we affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
AFFIRMED.
LANPHIER, J., participating on briefs.
FAHRNBRUCH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2226663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.541024+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 582 (1997)
NORTHWEST RACQUET SWIM & HEALTH CLUBS, INC., Relator,
v.
COUNTY OF DAKOTA, Respondent.
No. C8-96-1444.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
January 23, 1997.
*583 Faegre and Benson LLP, Michael F. Kelly, Jr., Jason D. Topp, Minneapolis, for relator.
Kenneth A. Malvey, Asst. Dakota County Atty., Hastings, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
STRINGER, Justice.
Appellant Northwest Racquet, Swim and Health Clubs, Inc. ("Northwest") petitioned the tax court for review of the Dakota County Assessor's assessment that the market value of its Burnsville Racquet, Swim and Health Club (the "Burnsville Club"), as of January 2, 1993, was $6,298,700. After a three-day trial, the tax court found the fair market value of the Burnsville Club to be $7,190,000. In reaching its result, the tax court rejected Northwest's appraisal of the club based on an income allocation model and relied exclusively on the cost approach; further, it rejected Northwest's assertion that the club suffered from 50% economic obsolescence for purposes of applying the cost approach. On Northwest's petition for review, we hold that the tax court did not commit clear error in concluding that there was insufficient financial data relating specifically to the Burnsville Club to accurately determine its value through an income allocation approach or to objectively measure its economic obsolescence. We affirm.
The Burnsville Club is a health and fitness center located at 14600 Burnhaven Drive in Burnsville, Minnesota. It is one of 12 health and fitness centers in the Twin City Metropolitan Area owned and operated by Northwest. The club consists of a 174,551 square foot structure situated on a 631,184 square foot lot in one of the Twin Cities' more affluent and rapidly growing suburbs. The club facilities include nine tennis courts, 22 racquetball courts, aerobic dance studios, exercise areas, basketball courts, an indoor pool, locker rooms, a pro shop, a child care *584 area and a party room. The parties agree that the property is a single or special use property.
When the Burnsville Club was built in the late 1970s and early 1980s, racquetball was at its peak in terms of popularity. The club was built primarily as a racquetball facility, with 26 racquetball courts. The Burnsville Club is therefore substantially larger than all but one other Northwest health club in the Twin Cities area. Since that time, racquet sports have declined in popularity and sports facilities built more recently are focused on fitness such as aerobics rooms, weights, running tracks, and swimming pools. Despite the fact that the club has only nominal competition in the Burnsville area, competition from these smaller, more space efficient fitness clubs has forced Northwest to offer discounts and engage in aggressive marketing campaigns, thereby increasing its costs of attracting new members.
A customer joining Northwest becomes a member of all the clubs in its network. Northwest does not consider the number of people who join at a particular club to be an indicator of the sales that a particular facility is going to generate because many members use more than one facility. Club-specific receipts are kept on many revenue items, such as court times and pro shop sales, but club-specific revenues from other sources of income  including membership dues, the single largest source of income  cannot be precisely determined because the members belong to all the Northwest clubs. Therefore, Northwest allocates those total corporate revenues based on the number of visits that members make to each facility. Club-specific records are kept for some expenses, most notably the salaries of the workers at each club, but several of the largest expense items, such as advertising costs, promotional discounts, central purchases, and corporate salaries, are recorded only on a network-wide basis. This "corporate overhead" is allocated to the individual clubs based on visits in the same manner as membership revenues.
The Dakota County tax assessor estimated the market value of the Burnsville Club, as of January 2, 1993, at $6,298,700. Northwest petitioned the Minnesota Tax Court for review of the assessment, alleging that the value assigned to the property by the assessor exceeded the actual market value of the property and discriminated against the property in favor of comparable properties.
Evaluation testimony at trial consisted largely of two expert witness appraisers: on behalf of Northwest, Lawrence Geisler ("Geisler") of the property valuation firm of Kramer, Geisler and Strand; on behalf of Dakota County, Jason Messner ("Messner") of Peter J. Patchin and Associates. Both experts agreed that, because the Burnsville Club is so much larger than the other health clubs in the area, there were no comparable sales or rentals of other clubs in the local market that would enable the court to accurately determine the value of the club through a market comparison approach. The appraisers similarly agreed that a lack of comparable market rent data from other Twin Cities health clubs rendered the traditional income capitalization approach, in which the value of a property is determined by capitalizing the market rents of comparable properties, unreliable in appraising the Burnsville Club. Both Geisler and Messner did, however, calculate the value of the club by using the remaining traditional approach to determining real estate value  the cost approach. Both appraisers also estimated the value of the property through an "income allocation approach," a version of the income approach in which the estimated value of an income producing property is derived by discounting the subject property's revenue stream from all sources into a present worth figure through a capitalization process. Geisler's income allocation approach consisted of estimating the total net operating income of the Burnsville Club, subtracting out estimates of the income attributable to the club's furniture, fixtures and equipment ("FF & E") and, of contention here, its "business value." It then capitalized the resulting income figure to arrive at a final determination of the value of the real estate.[1] Messner *585 similarly estimated the net operating income of the club, subtracted out the expected return on FF & E, and capitalized the result to arrive at an estimated value of the club's real estate.[2] Messner did not, however, deduct any return on business value from the net operating income prior to applying the capitalization rate but instead stated that "it is unlikely that the subject has any business value because its revenue streams are not sufficient to pay an adequate return to tangible assets."
The tax court agreed with the parties that there was insufficient sales and rental data from comparable health clubs to make a reliable market value estimate using the market comparison approach or the traditional income capitalization approach. It also rejected Northwest's income allocation approach, stating that "it is impossible to separate business income from income on the real estate" and that "there is no evidence that goodwill value calculated with reference to health club start up costs equals market value." The court similarly dismissed Messner's income allocation approach because there was insufficient supporting market data. Therefore, the tax court determined that only the cost approach would provide a reliable estimate of the value of the Burnsville Club.
Finding both Geisler's and Messner's estimation of the property's land value to be credible, the court concluded that the land was worth $1,565,000, a figure halfway between the estimates of the two appraisers. Next, the court proceeded to estimate the replacement cost of the club's building and yard improvements, independent of fixtures, furniture, equipment and business start up costs, stating that such costs are not indirect costs of the real estate. It determined that the replacement cost new of the Burnsville Club improvements was $12,000,000, again, a figure roughly halfway between the closely correlating estimates of Geisler and Messner. The court then included an additional 10% of the replacement cost new as indirect costs to reflect legal expenses, miscellaneous taxes and insurance, pre-development holding costs and a five percent entrepreneurial profit, resulting in a total replacement cost new of $13,200,000.
After calculating an estimate of the total replacement cost new, the tax court then estimated the depreciation of the Burnsville Club. While both appraisers agreed that the club had an effective age of 12 years at the time of the assessment, the court accepted Messner's estimate of the useful life of the building at 45 years over Geisler's estimate *586 of a 40-year useful life.[3] It therefore applied a physical depreciation deduction of 27%. Similarly, the court accepted Messner's estimate of functional obsolescence due to "super-adequacies" in construction[4] and excess racquetball court space, noting that Messner's 10% figure was very close to Geisler's percentage estimate of functional obsolescence.[5] The court then turned to the major area of dispute in its cost approach analysis, the economic obsolescence of the Burnsville Club.
Geisler calculated the economic obsolescence of the club by comparing his estimate of the expected annual return on an investment in the real estate with the rate of return that he concluded the club was producing using his income allocation approach. He concluded that, because his estimate of the actual rate of return on Northwest's investment in the club was only half of his reasonably expected rate of return, the Burnsville Club suffered from 50% economic obsolescence. The tax court rejected Geisler's purportedly objective estimate of 50% economic obsolescence however because the lack of comparable market rent data made suspect his calculations. Therefore the court engaged in its own subjective analysis, considering the factors raised by both sides. The court recognized that the Burnsville Club suffered from a significant degree of economic obsolescence due to the decline in popularity of racquet sports and the fact that most new health clubs are oriented more towards less space-consuming fitness activities. While the court noted these industry trends, it also credited Messner's testimony that the Burnsville Club's location in the rapidly growing Burnsville area and its relative lack of competition countered much of the economic obsolescence caused by its outdated facilities. The court therefore chose a compromise value between Messner's estimate of 15% economic obsolescence and Northwest's 50% figure  and concluded that a 25% economic obsolescence deduction was warranted, as well as a 100% deduction of depreciated entrepreneurial profit. After including these deductions in its depreciation analysis, the court arrived at a final estimate of the Burnsville Club's value of $7,190,000.
Northwest argues that the tax court erred as a matter of law by relying exclusively on the cost approach and failing to give consideration to the income allocation analysis calculated by Geisler, a version of the income approach. This claim presents a legal issue which is reviewed de novo. Equitable Life Assurance Soc'y v. Ramsey County, 530 N.W.2d 544, 552 (Minn.1995). The burden of proof is on the taxpayer to show that the valuation reached by the assessor is excessive, and the tax court's valuation of a property for tax purposes will not be disturbed unless it is clearly erroneous. Id.
Minnesota law requires that all real property be assessed at its market value. Minn.Stat. § 273.11 (1996).
This court recognizes the three basic approaches to determining the market value of real estate: (1) the market comparison approach, which is based on prices paid in actual market transactions involving comparable properties; (2) the cost approach, which is founded on the proposition that an informed buyer would pay no more for the property than the cost of constructing new property having the same utility as the subject property; and (3) the income approach, which is predicated on the capitalization *587 of the income the property is expected to generate.
Equitable Life, 530 N.W.2d at 552 (citing Lewis & Harris v. County of Hennepin, 516 N.W.2d 177, 178 (Minn.1994); Montgomery Ward v. County of Hennepin, 450 N.W.2d 299, 302 (Minn.1990); Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis v. County of Hennepin, 372 N.W.2d 699, 700 (Minn.1985)). The law further requires every assessor, "in estimating and determining the value of lands for the purpose of taxation, to consider and give due weight to every element and factor affecting the market value thereof." Minn.Stat. § 273.12 (1996). Accordingly, we have stated that, "[w]henever possible, appraisers should apply at least two approaches to market value because the alternative value indications derived can serve as useful checks on each other." Equitable Life, 530 N.W.2d at 553. However, the three valuation approaches are neither exclusive nor mandatory and the quantity and quality of available data ultimately determines which approaches are useful and how much weight each is given. Id. at 553-54 (citing Alstores Realty, Inc. v. State, 286 Minn. 343, 352, 176 N.W.2d 112, 118 (1970) (additional citations omitted)). Under appropriate circumstances, the tax court may rely on a single approach in determining the market value, provided the court clearly explains the weaknesses of the rejected approaches. Id. at 554 (citing In re McCannel, 301 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1980); Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis v. State, 313 N.W.2d 619, 624 (Minn.1981)).
This court has stated that special purpose properties, such as the Burnsville Club, are most reliably valued using the cost approach  calculating the value of the land plus the cost of reproducing its improvements, less depreciation. In re McCannel, 301 N.W.2d 910, 924 (Minn.1980). Consequently, in cases where there was insufficient market or income data to make the other approaches reliable, we have upheld tax court decisions that were based on the cost approach and gave little or no weight to the income approach or market approach. See, e.g., Lewis & Harris v. County of Hennepin, 516 N.W.2d 177 (Minn.1994) (holding that where there was limited market and income data, tax court did not err in giving other approaches minimal weight and relying on the cost approach); Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis v. State, 313 N.W.2d 619 (Minn. 1981) (holding that, because federal reserve bank building was a special purpose building, it was not clearly erroneous to rely exclusively on the cost approach to the exclusion of the income and market approaches).
We have also recognized the usefulness of the income approach in valuing income producing properties. For example, in Equitable Life we upheld the tax court's reliance on a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis, a version of the income approach, in estimating the value of a shopping center. 530 N.W.2d at 545. In so doing however, we stated that, while we found the income approach to be appropriate in that case, we did not intend to give the method universal approval. Id. Rather, we cautioned:
We recognize that accurate forecasting is a crucial part of any income capitalization method, and that income and expense projections that are not warranted by market evidence can result in unsupported market values. A DCF analysis can only provide accurate results if the forecasts are based on accurate, reliable information.
Id. (citations omitted).
An income allocation approach would have been useful in determining the market value of a special use property such as the Burnsville Club but only if supported by accurate and reliable revenue and expense data. Here Northwest submitted four sets of financial statements to the County and only one of the statements, produced on the day of the trial, contained revenue and expense information specific to the Burnsville Club. No club-specific data was available for the single largest item of club revenue, membership dues, or for several of the club's largest expense items. Given these omissions, the tax court stated that "it was impossible to determine actual Burnsville Racquet income and expense figures" and rejected both parties' income approach valuations. The court further rejected Geisler's income allocation approach because there was no evidence establishing that the goodwill value calculated by reference to health club start up costs was *588 equal to the market value and relied upon the cost approach in calculating the value of the club. We conclude that the tax court did not commit clear error by rejecting the income allocation approach and relying entirely on the cost approach.[6]
Northwest also challenges the tax court's computations of obsolescence for purposes of the cost approach, arguing that the court improperly refused to accept Geisler's "objective" determination of 50% economic obsolescence. We have held however, that a court confronted with conflicting appraisals may conclude that a compromise in valuation is required, provided it has evidentiary support and is not unreasonable or clearly erroneous. Halla v. County of Hennepin, 306 Minn. 533, 534, 237 N.W.2d 348, 349-50 (1975).
Since Northwest's objective calculation of 50% economic obsolescence is based upon the net return on the real estate calculated by Geisler in his application of the income allocation approach, the accuracy of Northwest's economic obsolescence figure is no better than the accuracy of the income allocation approach  rejected by the court because of lack of reliable supporting data. In the absence of such data, the court made its own subjective determination, based on factors the parties acknowledged relating to changing trends in health fitness facilities and the prime location of the Burnsville Club, and chose a compromise value between Messner's estimate of 15% economic obsolescence and Northwest's 50% figure, estimating the economic obsolescence of the Burnsville Club at 25%. The court's determination cannot be said to have been clearly erroneous. We therefore affirm the decision of the tax court.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Geisler estimated the club's total net income by using club-specific income and expense data, where available, and allocating membership income and corporate expense data for those items for which club specific data did not exist. In analyzing the allocated income and expense data, Geisler used the combined financial records of only 11 of the 13 Northwest clubs then in existence. The "business value" that Geisler deducted from the net operating income was his estimate of the amortized start up expenses for the business. These start up costs included estimates of the cost of obtaining memberships, the cost of organizing the enterprise, the operating deficit necessary to break even at start-up, and the estimated business value created by belonging to the Northwest network of clubs attributable to efficiencies in marketing, management and purchasing. The deduction of this "business value" from the net operating income was based on the theory that such start up costs represent the going concern value of the club, rather than part of the value of the real estate, because if a buyer were to take over the facility they would have to either pay these start up costs again or pay a higher purchase price for a club with such items already in place.
[2]  Unlike Geisler, however, Messner did not use any club specific income and expense data in calculating the net operating income of the Burnsville Club. Messner's calculation of the net operating income was instead based primarily on the total Northwest revenues and expenses allocated to the Burnsville Club based on member visits. The reason for this difference in approach was that, while Northwest provided the County with three different sets of financial statements prior to the trial date, it did not provide any club-specific revenue and expense reports until the day of the trial. Thus, prior to explaining his income allocation approach, Messner stated in his appraisal:
The appraisers have been unable to reconcile these three accounting systems. None of the accounting information reviewed has been audited, and we have been informed by the plaintiff's attorney that audited financial statements do not exist. Not withstanding the multiple formats and somewhat conflicting data provided, we will reconstruct the subject's operating statement for use in this analysis. The reader should be aware, however, that this analysis is only as reliable as the data on which it is based.
[3]  Messner's figure was based upon life expectancy tables in the Marshall and Swift Valuation Service Manual which listed the typical economic life of a racquetball or fitness club at 45 years. Geisler's appraisal did not specify where he obtained his 40-year economic life estimate.
[4]  Messner defined "incurable functional obsolescence" as: "a defect caused by a deficiency or super-adequacy in the structure, materials, or design, which cannot be practically or economically corrected." The "super-adequacies" in construction of the Burnsville Club included the club's high quality building materials, such as its all brick exterior, and its finished ceilings and wall coverings. Messner stated that other recently constructed clubs were made of lower quality building materials and had a lower degree of finish, yet competed with the Burnsville Club in terms of function and programs. He therefore concluded that the cost of the club's high quality construction and finishes would not necessarily translate into real estate value and instead constituted incurable functional obsolescence.
[5]  Geisler estimated incurable functional obsolescence at 7%.
[6]  Northwest argues that the Massachusetts case General Dynamics Corp. v. Board of Assessors, 388 Mass. 24, 444 N.E.2d 1266 (1983), establishes that the income allocation approach employed by Geisler is the most accurate technique for valuing properties where the business and the real estate it occupies are virtually inseparable. In General Dynamics, the Massachusetts Supreme Court upheld the lower court's use of an income allocation approach similar to that advocated by Northwest against the county's assertion that the cost approach was the only appropriate method by which to value such a special purpose property. Id. 444 N.E.2d at 1271. However, far from establishing that an income allocation analysis is always the best approach for determining the value of such a property, General Dynamics stands only for the proposition that it is not clear error to use the approach when the cost approach would be highly unreliable:
We should not be understood to say that the judge would have been wrong, as a matter of law, if he had determined to use the [cost approach] and had made appropriate adjustments, largely judgmental, properly to reflect obsolescence. We simply conclude that his finding that the [cost approach] was inappropriate for use in these circumstances was not clearly erroneous.
Id. at 1271.

=== CASE 9741232 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:04.408893+00 ===

JUSTICE BRESLIN delivered the opinion of the court: The plaintiff, Curtis Investment Firm, Ltd. Partnership (Curtis Investment), brought an action against the defendants, Robert and Susan Schuch, alleging failure to disclose a defective water supply line. The trial court entered judgment for Curtis Investment in the amount of $1,532.50, plus costs. On appeal, the Schuches claim that Curtis Investment waived any right to recovery under the Residential Real Property Disclosure Act (Act) (765 ILCS 77/1 et seq. (West 1998)) by failing to demand a disclosure report prior to closing. The Schuches also argue that the judgment was erroneous because they had no actual knowledge of the defect at the time of sale. We determine that the Act is mandatory and cannot be waived. In addition, we defer to the trial court’s finding of actual knowledge in that it was not against the manifest weight of the evidence. FACTS Curtis Investment entered into a contract to purchase a piece of residential property owned by the Schuches. Approximately six weeks prior to the closing, Curtis Investment requested a real property disclosure report. The Schuches did not provide the report. The closing proceeded without any written contingencies and Curtis Investment purchased the home. Prior to the sale, the Schuches had the home’s water supply turned off at the curb box rather than at the interior meter. When Curtis Investment attempted to reinitiate the water supply, it discovered that the supply line between the curb box and the house was faulty. The interior water system needed repair as well. Curtis Investment repaired the water supply system at its own expense. At the time of trial, the repairs totaled $1,532.50. Curtis Investment filed a small claims suit against the Schuches seeking to recover the cost to replace the water supply system. During the trial, Robert Schuch denied any knowledge of a problem with the supply line or the residential system. The trial court held that under the Act, a buyer cannot waive its right to receive a disclosure report. The court found that the Schuches knew the water supply line was defective and entered judgment for Curtis Investment for the cost to repair the system. The Schuches appeal. ANALYSIS On appeal, the Schuches first argue that, contrary to the trial court’s holding, a buyer can waive its right to receive a real property disclosure statement if the buyer signs a contract for purchase without receiving a residential disclosure statement.  The primary rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the legislature. Miller v. Bizzell, 311 Ill. App. 3d 971, 726 N.E.2d 175 (2000). The court should first consider the statutory language itself. When the language of the statute is clear, it should be given effect without resorting to other aids of construction. People ex rel. Baker v. Cowlin, 154 Ill. 2d 193, 607 N.E.2d 1251 (1992). Legislative use of the word “shall” is generally considered to express an intent that the provision be mandatory. Hoffman Estates Professional Firefighters Ass’n v. Village of Hoffman Estates, 305 Ill. App. 3d 242, 711 N.E.2d 1109 (1999). Section 20 of the Act provides: We find the use of the word “shall” in this section requires a mandatory reading of the provision. The plain language of the statute mandates that the buyer be provided a disclosure statement before closing on a residential sale. The statute does not list any exceptions. We therefore hold that a buyer cannot waive the seller’s responsibility to disclose certain defects by signing a contract without receipt of a written disclosure statement. “A seller of residential real property shall complete all applicable items in the disclosure document described in Section 35 of this Act. The seller shall deliver to the prospective buyer the written disclosure statement required by this Act before the signing of a written agreement by the seller and prospective buyer that would, subject to the satisfaction of any negotiated contingencies, require the prospective buyer to accept a transfer of the residential real property.” (Emphasis added.) 765 ILCS 77/20 (West 1998).  We reject the Schuches’ assertion that the language of section 20 gives the buyer the option to waive receipt of the report. The Schuches maintain that section 20 provides that the disclosure report is “subject to the satisfaction of any negotiated contingencies.” 765 ILCS 77/20 (West 1998). They claim that one such negotiation could be the waiver of the disclosure statement. However, a reading of the entire section clearly demonstrates that the “subject to” language relates to the written agreement to purchase the property, not the seller’s disclosure statement. Accordingly, the trial court’s determination that a buyer cannot waive receipt of a real property disclosure report was correct. Other provisions of the Act require a mandatory reading of the statute as well. Section 55 provides that “[a] person who knowingly violates or fails to perform any duty prescribed by any provision of this Act or who discloses any information on the Residential Real Property Disclosure Report that he knows to be false shall be liable in the amount of actual damages and court costs.” 765 ILCS 77/55 (West 1998). The language in this provision demonstrates that the legislature intended mandatory liability in the event the seller fails to comply with the Act. Consequently, a seller cannot fail or refuse to provide a disclosure report with impunity.1  Finally, consideration of the objective of the statute supports our conclusion that a buyer’s right to receive a disclosure statement prior to closing cannot be waived. The primary purpose of the statute is to provide a remedy for aggrieved buyers of residential real property. See 90th 111. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, May 20, 1997, at 6. To allow a seller to ignore his obligation under the Act and avoid reporting a material defect, thereby defeating a buyer’s subsequent claim, would only encourage the evils the legislature sought to remedy. See People v. Peters, 180 Ill. App. 3d 850, 536 N.E.2d 465 (1989) (court should consider objective of the statute and evils legislature sought to remedy and arrive at a construction that is founded in common sense). Since the Schuches failed to perform their duty under the Act, they are responsible for the damages incurred to replace the water supply system.  In the alternative, the Schuches argue that even if a disclosure report must be provided, they should not be held liable for the damage sustained. Under section 25 of the Act, a seller is not hable for any error, inaccuracy, or omission of information if the seller had no knowledge of the error, inaccuracy, or omission. 765 ILCS 77/25(a) (West 1998). The Schuches claim that the trial court’s finding that they knew the water supply fine was faulty was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Whether the Schuches knew the line was leaking prior to the closing is a question of fact to be determined by the trial court. See Woods v. Pence, 303 Ill. App. 3d 573, 708 N.E.2d 563 (1999) (whether seller knew of material defect is a question of fact). A trier of fact need not accept a party’s testimony that he had no knowledge of a particular fact in question if the evidence shows to the contrary. Erickson v. Muskin Corp., 180 Ill. App. 3d 117, 535 N.E.2d 475 (1989), overruled on other grounds, Blagg v. Illinois F.W.D. Truck & Equipment Co., 143 Ill. 2d 188, 201, 572 N.E.2d 920 (1991). When reviewing a question of fact, we defer to the trial court’s finding unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. King v. Ashbrook, 313 Ill. App. 3d 1040, 732 N.E.2d 621 (2000). A trial court’s judgment is against the manifest weight of the evidence only if an opposite conclusion is clearly evident. Fletcher v. Marshall, 260 Ill. App. 3d 673, 632 N.E.2d 1105 (1994). The record in the present case is scant. Robert Schuch denied any knowledge that the water supply line to the residence or the interior system was faulty. However, he admitted that he had the residential water supply turned off at the curb box, rather than the meter inside the house. We recognize that the evidence that the Schuches knew a problem existed is less than overwhelming. However, we cannot say that an opposite conclusion to that reached by the trial court is clearly evident. We therefore affirm the trial court’s finding that the Schuches had knowledge of the defect at the time of the sale. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Rock Island County is affirmed. Affirmed. LYTTON, J., concurs.  The dissent claims that Curtis Investment waived its right to receive the report because it proceeded to purchase the home rather than terminate the contract. Section 55 provides, in part, that “the buyer shall have the right to terminate the contract.” 765 ILCS 77/55 (West 1998). It does not state that termination is the buyer’s only right or remedy if the seller fails to produce a disclosure report. Indeed, in addition to termination, section 55 allows the buyer to sue the seller to recover actual damages and costs—the remedy sought by Curtis Investment. 765 ILCS 77/55 (West 1998).

=== CASE 9741233 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:04.41299+00 ===

JUSTICE HOLDRIDGE, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. While the majority is correct in finding that the seller must provide the real property disclosure report to the buyer, I believe they err in finding that this obligation to the buyer cannot be waived by the buyer. “Waiver” is defined as “the intentional relinquishment of a known right.” Illinois Valley Electric Co-Operative, Inc. v. City of Princeton, 229 Ill. App. 3d 631, 638 (1992). A waiver may be made by express agreement or implied from the conduct of the party who allegedly waived the right. Ryder v. Bank of Hickory Hills, 146 Ill. 2d 98, 105 (1991). Waiver will be implied when a party’s conduct is inconsistent with an intention to assert the right. A waiver may be made by express agreement or implied from the conduct of the party who allegedly waived the right. Ryder, 146 Ill. 2d at 105. Here, the buyers requested the real property disclosure report approximately six weeks prior to the anticipated closing date. The sellers did not provide the report, yet the buyers elected to proceed with the closing despite the lack of the report. The statutory remedy available to a buyer who has not received a disclosure report is clear: “If the seller fails or refuses to provide the disclosure document prior to the conveyance of the residential real property, the buyer shall have the right to terminate the contract.” (Emphasis added.) 765 ILCS 77/55 (1998). It is clear that the buyers had a right to terminate the contract due to the sellers’ failure to provide the disclosure report. Yet they elected not to terminate and proceeded with the transaction. This conduct clearly indicated an intention to waive the right to receive the report. I would find that the buyers waived the right to recovery under the Act and I would reverse the judgment of the circuit court and remand for entry of judgment for the defendants.

=== CASE 2226675 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.819302+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 608 (1997)
Robert BAUER, Respondent,
v.
GANNETT CO., INC. (KARE 11), et al., Appellants,
Margaret Bichsel, et al., Defendants.
No. C9-96-1694.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
January 14, 1997.
*609 Dorothy J. Buhr, Sisam & Associates, P.A., Minneapolis, for Respondent.
Thomas Tinkham, Edward B. Magarian, Leslie J. Anderson, Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, for Appellants.
John P. Borger, Eric E. Jorstad, Faegre & Benson LLP, Minneapolis, for amici curiae.
Considered and decided by LANSING, P.J., TOUSSAINT, C.J., and HUSPENI, J.
OPINION
LANSING, Judge.
A reporter and media organization, defendants in a defamation action brought by a public official, appeal from a discovery order requiring them to disclose the identities of confidential sources interviewed for an investigative report. Because we conclude that the district court did not address all of the factors relevant to a disclosure order, we reverse and remand.
FACTS
KARE 11 aired an investigative report on the administration and management of the Ramsey County Special Courts and the courts' administrator, Robert Bauer, in November 1994. The segment was researched and reported by Gail Plewacki and was critical of the courts and Bauer. It included, for example, video footage of Bauer repeatedly leaving his work area to take smoking breaks and also showed him golfing during hours that he would normally be scheduled to work. Over the images Plewacki says, "[T]his is what Bauer does for an average of five hours a week. That would mean more than eight thousand dollars, in taxpayer money, * * * going up in smoke every year."
Bauer brought a defamation action against KARE 11 and some of the identified sources in the report. It is undisputed that Bauer, as court administrator, was a public official and needs to prove actual malice to prevail in his defamation action. See New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 279, 84 S. Ct. 710, 726, 11 L. Ed. 2d 686 (1964).
In a deposition Plewacki was asked who told her what Bauer's schedule and work hours were. Plewacki refused to answer the questions, asserting privilege under the Minnesota reporters' shield law and the First Amendment.
Bauer then moved to compel disclosure of the confidential source. Specifically, the two questions before the district court on the motion to compel were: (1) Who told you what time Mr. Bauer's work hours were? and (2) Is the person who disclosed Mr. Bauer's work hours someone other than Dawn Palmer, Margaret Bichsel, Judy Dicks, Michelle Barrette, or Alf Sivertson?
The district court granted the motion, but broadened it by ruling that all of Plewacki's confidential sources were subject to disclosure, not just the source of the work hours information. KARE 11 appeals.
ISSUE
In a defamation action against a news organization, when must the media's qualified constitutional privilege codified at Minn.Stat. § 595.021-.025 (1994) yield to allow disclosure of a reporter's confidential source?
ANALYSIS
This appeal points up the tension between two equally fundamental principles: the freedom and independence of the press, and the right to protect and vindicate one's reputation.
The First Amendment protects the fundamental value of a free and independent press. The protection afforded the press includes a reporter's limited right not to disclose his or her confidential sources. See, e.g., Miller v. Transamerican Press, 621 F.2d 721, 725 (5th Cir.) (Miller I), modified, 628 F.2d 932 (5th Cir.1980) (Miller II), cert. denied, 450 U.S. 1041, 101 S. Ct. 1759, 68 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1981); *610 J.J.C. v. Fridell, 165 F.R.D. 513, 516 (D.Minn.1995); PPM Am., Inc. v. Marriott Corp., 152 F.R.D. 32, 35 (S.D.N.Y.1993); 23 Charles Alan Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Federal Practice and Procedure, § 5426 at 716 (1980); William Penner, Note, Cohen v. Cowles Media Co.: Upsetting the First Amendment Scales, 26 U.S.F. L.Rev. 753, 758-63 (1992). The Minnesota Supreme Court recently analyzed the qualified constitutional privilege afforded reporters. State v. Turner, 550 N.W.2d 622, 629 (Minn.1996) (holding that constitutional privilege requires in camera review of journalist's unpublished photos before disclosure compelled). The protections of the reporter's privilege are the same under the Minnesota and federal constitutions. Id. at 628.
The media's qualified constitutional privilege is rooted in the desire to promote effective newsgathering and to preserve the free flow of public information. News reporters frequently rely on informants to gather news, and the offer of confidentiality is often a prerequisite to an informant's cooperation. Compelling a reporter to disclose the identity of a confidential source may significantly interfere with the press's ability to gather news. See Minn.Stat. § 595.022 (1994); Zerilli v. Smith, 656 F.2d 705, 710-11 (D.C.Cir.1981); Miller I, 621 F.2d at 725; Cervantes v. Time, Inc., 464 F.2d 986, 992 n. 9 (8th Cir.1972), cert. denied, 409 U.S. 1125, 93 S. Ct. 939, 35 L. Ed. 2d 257 (1973); John B. Kuhns, Note, Reporters and Their Sources: The Constitutional Right to a Confidential Relationship, 80 Yale L.J. 317, 329-34 (1970). When the media are reporting a matter of public concern the interest in fostering effective newsgathering is particularly strong. Miller I, 621 F.2d at 726. The activities of public figures are matters of public concern. Id. at 725-26.
Also of great importance to a just and fair society is the right of individuals to protect and defend their reputations. The tort of defamation as well as the constitutional protection afforded individuals to control the use and dissemination of personal information both reflect the value of reputation. See Herbert v. Lando 441 U.S. 153, 169, 99 S. Ct. 1635, 1645, 60 L. Ed. 2d 115 (1979) ("[T]he individual's interest in his reputation is * * * a basic concern."); Lawrence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law §§ 12-12 (defamation), 15-16 (personal information) (2d ed. 1988). Basic as well is the judicial interest in obtaining the truth through full disclosure of relevant evidence and testimony. "The concept that it is the duty of a witness to testify in a court of law has roots fully as deep in our history as does the guarantee of a free press." Garland v. Torre, 259 F.2d 545, 548 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 358 U.S. 910, 79 S. Ct. 237, 3 L. Ed. 2d 231 (1958).
The Minnesota Free Flow of Information Act, Minn.Stat. § 595.021-.025 (1994), like the reporter's qualified constitutional privilege, seeks to mediate the tension between these competing values. The stated purpose of the Act reads:
In order to protect the public interest and the free flow of information, the news media should have the benefit of a substantial privilege not to reveal sources of information or to disclose unpublished information. To this end, the freedom of the press requires protection of the confidential relationship between the news gatherer and the source of information. The purpose of sections 595.021 to 595.025 is to insure and perpetuate, consistent with the public interest, the confidential relationship between the news media and [their] sources.
Minn.Stat. § 595.022.
The Act was passed in 1973, one year after the United States Supreme Court's decision in Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665, 92 S. Ct. 2646, 33 L. Ed. 2d 626 (1972), which refused to excuse news reporters from the obligation to appear and testify before federal and state grand juries. The Act provides general protection to reporters from compelled disclosure of their sources: "No [reporter] shall be required by any court * * * to disclose in any proceeding the person or means from or through which information was obtained * * * ." Minn.Stat. § 595.023. But an exception is made if clear and convincing evidence shows that (1) there is probable cause to believe that the source has clearly relevant information, (2) the information is not available through any alternative means, and (3) a compelling interest requires disclosure to *611 prevent injustice. See Minn.Stat. § 595.024, subd. 2. This court and the Minnesota Supreme Court have held that the protections of the Act apply only to confidential sources and information leading to their identity. Turner, 550 N.W.2d at 631; State v. Knutson (Knutson II), 539 N.W.2d 254, 257 (Minn. App.1995); Heaslip v. Freeman, 511 N.W.2d 21, 23-24 (Minn.App.1994), review denied (Minn. Feb. 24, 1994).
The statute includes a specific section covering cases which allege defamation:
Subdivision 1. Disclosure; application. The prohibition of disclosure provided in section 595.023 shall not apply in any defamation action where the person seeking disclosure can demonstrate that the identity of the source will lead to relevant evidence on the issue of actual malice.
Subdivision 2. Disclosure allowed; conditions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision 1, the identity of the source of information shall not be ordered disclosed unless the following conditions are met:
(a) that there is probable cause to believe that the source has information clearly relevant to the issue of defamation;
(b) that the information cannot be obtained by any alternative means or remedy less destructive of first amendment rights.
Minn.Stat. § 595.025.
The Minnesota appellate courts have not yet considered the extent to which the requirements of the Minnesota Free Flow of Information Act comport with constitutional standards. We must construe statutes so as to uphold their constitutionality if possible. Minnesota Higher Educ. Facilities Auth. v. Hawk, 305 Minn. 97, 103, 232 N.W.2d 106, 110 (1975); State v. Minnesota Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 218 Minn. 229, 243, 15 N.W.2d 568, 575 (1944). Therefore, we interpret the Act in light of the constitutional imperatives of the reporter's qualified privilege. We believe the scope of the reporter's privilege in each particular case depends on the consideration and weighing of a number of interrelated factors. Because we believe that preserving the media's First Amendment rights requires a balancing of the factors discussed below, we incorporate these factors into any consideration of cases arising under the Act.
First, the determination of whether the privilege applies is influenced by the nature of the litigation and whether the reporter or news organization from whom disclosure is sought is a party to the litigation. When the reporter is a party to the litigation, the balance may tip more in favor of disclosure than when the reporter is not a party. This is particularly true in a suit alleging the defamation of a public official or public figure because plaintiffs in those cases must prove that the defamatory publication was made with "actual malice." The disclosure of a confidential source may be essential to the proof of actual malice if a plaintiff must demonstrate that the reporter's source was unreliable. See, e.g., Zerilli, 656 F.2d at 714. We stress, however, that this consideration is not dispositive, but rather one of multiple factors to be weighed in the district court's decision. See id.
Second, the party seeking disclosure of a confidential source must demonstrate that the source's identity is clearly relevant to the action. Several courts have described the relevance standard as requiring a showing that the information goes to "the heart" of the plaintiffs claim. Id. at 713; Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 563 F.2d 433, 438 (10th Cir.1977); Carey v. Hume, 492 F.2d 631, 634 (D.C.Cir.), cert. dismissed, 417 U.S. 938, 94 S. Ct. 2654, 41 L. Ed. 2d 661 (1974); Garland, 259 F.2d at 550. We believe that when the district court has "probable cause to believe that the source has information clearly relevant to defamation," Minn.Stat. § 595.025, subd. 2(a), the "heart of the claim" standard is satisfied.
The constitutional standard, as well as the plain meaning of the statutory text, however, require the district court to perform an exacting analysis of each individual request for disclosure of a confidential source or information leading to his or her identity to determine if that particular source or that particular information is clearly relevant to the claim. A blanket order compelling disclosure of all confidential sources used to compile a report without inquiry into the relevance of *612 each individual request will not satisfy this standard. See Mitchell v. Superior Court, 37 Cal. 3d 268, 208 Cal. Rptr. 152, 160, 690 P.2d 625, 633 (1984) ("Discovery of the [reporters'] sources, and information derived from such sources, may be essential to proving actual malice, and thus goes to `the heart' of plaintiffs' claim against these defendants. The discovery sought by plaintiffs, however, is quite broad, and is not limited to sources whose information relates to the alleged libelous statements."). Ordering the disclosure of all confidential sources is not a permissible means of sanctioning uncooperative discovery tactics if it runs afoul of the Constitution. Other important considerations in evaluating relevance in this context are whether the allegedly defamatory publication referred to confidential sources and whether the information gained from those sources was used directly in the publication. See Sierra Life Ins. Co. v. Magic Valley Newspapers, Inc., 101 Idaho 795, 623 P.2d 103, 109 (1980).
A third factor in the balance is the efforts made by the party seeking disclosure to obtain the information from alternative sources. The Act allows for disclosure only when the moving party has demonstrated that "the information cannot be obtained by any alternative means or remedy less destructive of first amendment rights." Minn.Stat. § 595.025, subd. 2(b) (emphasis supplied). We are certain that this requirement meets the corresponding constitutional imperative. Most courts have required that the movant show an exhaustion of all reasonable alternative means of obtaining the information. Shoen v. Shoen (Shoen II), 48 F.3d 412, 416 (9th Cir.1995); Zerilli, 656 F.2d at 713; J.J.C., 165 F.R.D. at 516; Mitchell, 208 Cal. Rptr. at 161, 690 P.2d at 634. We decline to endorse any formulaic approach relying, for example, on numbers of potential sources interviewed or deposed to determine whether the "any alternative means" condition has been satisfied. But we note that this requirement places a burden on the movant to demonstrate that substantial efforts have been made to obtain the information through other means  what constitutes substantial efforts will necessarily vary from case to case. See Zerilli, 656 F.2d at 714 (stating in case involving third-party subpoena that "the obligation is clearly very substantial").
Fourth, the court must consider whether there is a compelling interest in the information or source. Miller I, 621 F.2d at 726 (citing Garland). Thus, the court should consider not only the relevance but also the necessity of any information a confidential source might have. There may be no need to disclose the identity of relevant confidential sources: evidence of malice may be available from nonconfidential sources, or the defendant may have sufficient evidence of truth and prudence in publishing to prevail on a motion for summary judgment. Id.; Cervantes, 464 F.2d at 992. A compelling interest might also keep the court from disclosing the identity of a confidential source despite demonstrated relevance and necessity. See Mitchell, 208 Cal.Rptr. at 161, 690 P.2d at 634 ("[W]hen the information relates to matters of great public importance, and when the risk of harm to the source is a substantial one, the court may refuse to require disclosure even though the plaintiff has no other way of obtaining essential information.").
Finally, we agree with a number of courts which have determined that, when the circumstances merit, the court may first require the plaintiff to make a prima facie showing that the alleged defamatory statements are false. See Bruno & Stillman, Inc. v. Globe Newspaper Co., 633 F.2d 583, 597 (1st Cir. 1980); Miller II, 628 F.2d at 932; Mitchell, 208 Cal.Rptr. at 161, 690 P.2d at 634; Hopewell v. Midcontinent Broadcasting Corp., 538 N.W.2d 780, 782 (S.D.1995), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 117 S. Ct. 69, 136 L. Ed. 2d 30 (1996); Dallas Morning News Co. v. Garcia, 822 S.W.2d 675, 680 (Tex.Ct. App.1991); see also Cervantes, 464 F.2d at 994 (applying related principle: "The point of principal importance is that there must be a showing of cognizable prejudice before the failure to permit examination of anonymous news sources can rise to the level of error.").
Because compelled disclosure impinges on the basic right of a free and unfettered press, it is not an unreasonable requirement that a defamation plaintiff first present enough evidence to permit a fact-finder to believe the published statements were false. The burden *613 is on the plaintiff in a defamation action to prove that the published statements are false. Philadelphia Newspapers, Inc. v. Hepps, 475 U.S. 767, 776-77, 106 S. Ct. 1558, 1564, 89 L. Ed. 2d 783 (1986). Proof of actual malice is an additional requirement and does not affect the showing of falsity. See Masson v. New Yorker Magazine, Inc., 501 U.S. 496, 517, 111 S. Ct. 2419, 2433, 115 L. Ed. 2d 447 (1991) (substantially true statements cannot provide foundation for finding of actual malice). Stated differently, if the court would grant summary judgment for the defendant on the grounds that the plaintiff, regardless of the identity of the confidential sources, would be unable to establish falsity or malice, then there is no need for disclosure. See Cervantes, 464 F.2d at 994. Again we stress that this, like the other factors enumerated above, is a consideration for the district court to weigh in its decision. We agree with the California Supreme Court that "[a] showing of falsity is not a prerequisite to discovery, but it may be essential to tip the balance in favor of discovery." Mitchell, 208 Cal.Rptr. at 161, 690 P.2d at 634.
The court's obligation to protect the First Amendment rights of the press does not end with completion of the careful weighing of these factors. The court has the duty, where applicable, to review in camera any evidence to determine its actual relevance before ordering it to be disclosed. Turner, 550 N.W.2d at 629. Further, we believe the court has a duty to take reasonable measures to protect informants from harmful consequences when it orders their identities disclosed. See Miller I, 621 F.2d at 727 (requiring district court to restrict access to informant's identity to counsel).
DECISION
Because the district court did not address all of the relevant factors or separately analyze each individual request in imposing its disclosure order, we remand for further consideration consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 2226677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.855276+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 552 (1996)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Kelvin NMN JACKSON, Appellant.
No. C4-95-2404.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
December 30, 1996.
ORDER
Based upon all the files, records and proceedings herein,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the petitions of Kelvin Jackson for further review of the decision of the Court of Appeals filed September 3, 1996 be, and the same are, granted for the limited purpose of making it clear that Jackson is entitled to an extra day of jail credit against his prison sentence. The precise issue is whether he is entitled to receive credit for the first and last day of any noncontinuous period of confinement in jail. We hold that he is entitled to credit for both the first and last day of the period in question.
Petitioner is entitled to 98 rather than 97 days of jail credit.
BY THE COURT:
/s/ Alexander M. Keith
A.M. Keith
Chief Justice
MEMORANDUM
Minnesota Statute § 645.15 sets forth the general approach to computing time with respect to filing papers, etc.:
Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment, or thing is ordered or directed, and the period of time or duration for the performance or doing thereof is prescribed and fixed by law, the time, except as otherwise provided in sections 645.13 and 645.14, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation.
(Emphasis added). See also Minn.R.Civ. App.P. 126.01. As we noted in Nelson v. Sandkamp, 227 Minn. 177, 179-80, 34 N.W.2d 640, 642 (1948), this computation-of-time provision is expressive only of the general common-law rule and does not abrogate certain common-law exceptions.
Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure 27.03, subd. 4(B) provides that when the trial court imposes sentence the trial court:
Shall assure that the record accurately reflects all time spent in custody in connection with the offense or behavioral incident for which sentence is imposed.
That rule further provides:
Such time shall be automatically deducted from the sentence and the term of imprisonment including time spent in custody as a condition of probation from a prior stay of imposition or execution of sentence.
Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines III.C. provides:
Pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 609.145, subd. 2, and Minn.R.Crim.P. 27.03, subd. 4(b), when a convicted felon is committed to the custody of the Commissioner of Corrections, *553 the court shall assure that the record accurately reflects all time spent in custody between arrest and sentencing, including examinations under Minn.R.Crim.P. 20 or 27.03, subd. 1(A), for the offense or behavioral incident for which the person is sentenced, which time shall be deducted by the Commissioner of Corrections from the sentence imposed.
In a series of cases interpreting Minn.Stat. § 609.145, Minn.R.Crim.P. 27.03, subd. 4(B), and III.C. of the Sentencing Guidelines, this court has dealt with the issue of jail credit in a number of different contexts, generally trying to ensure that the amount of jail credit the defendant receives does not turn on issues that are subject to manipulation by the prosecutor or on irrelevant matters, such as whether the defendant pleads guilty or insists on a right to jury trial or on whether the defendant is indigent and is unable to post bail. See, e.g., State v. Folley, 438 N.W.2d 372, 374-75 (Minn.1989), (held, for various reasons, defendant was entitled to jail credit against his sentence for first-degree criminal sexual conduct from time of his arrest on driving-related charge, rather than from later date on which he was arrested and formally charged with sex crimes). Interestingly, at common law the rule expressed in section 645.15 applied where the word "from" in a statute refers to the time within which an act is required or permitted to be done, in which case the first day is excluded. On the other hand, an exception is made in the case of a statute or contract where the words "from the date" or "from" a day named are used in connection with a creation of an estate or interest and it is not contrary to the expressed intention of the parties; in such a case, the date named from which the estate or interest is to exist is to be included, and the estate or interest vests on that day. See Budds v. Frey, 104 Minn. 481, 483-86, 117 N.W. 158, 159-60 (1908). As stated in Budds, whether the word "from" shall be construed as inclusive or exclusive depends on the context or subject matter as well as on the expressed intention of the parties. Id. at 484, 117 N.W. at 159.
If a defendant is arrested on June 2 and is given credit "from" June 2, then under the common-law approach, the defendant gets credit for a full day with respect to June 2, even though the defendant may have actually been in jail on June 2 for only a few hours. Similarly, if the defendant is released on July 16, the defendant gets credit for a full day with respect to July 16, even if he is released in the middle of the day. This is because at common law any fraction of a day is deemed a day. See 86 CJS Time § 16 (1954), see also, e.g., Olson v. Rushfeldt, 81 Minn. 381, 383, 84 N.W. 123, 124 (1900) (in entering judgment for personal services, the day of employment and the day of discharge will be considered as entire days, since courts cannot take notice of integral parts of a day in the absence of an agreement by the parties to that effect).
In the area of sentence credit for time spent in jail under the Huber work-release law, the Sentencing Guidelines Commission has gotten somewhat specific in its approach. In 1983 this court was confronted with the issue of how much credit, if any, a defendant should get for nights in jail under the Huber law. That question at that time was not answered by the Sentencing Guidelines. This court concluded that although the defendant was not entitled to full credit for the days he was required to spend the nights in jail, he should be given credit for the number of hours that he was required to actually spend in jail each day, 12 hours. That case, of course, did not speak to the issue that we are presented with in this case. Subsequently, the Sentencing Guidelines Commission amended section III.C. to read as follows: "Time spent in confinement under Huber law (Minn.Stat. § 631.425) shall be awarded at the rate of one day for each day served." Comment III.C.02. provides:
Jail credit for time spent in confinement under the conditions of Huber Law (Minn. Stat. § 631.425) should be awarded at the rate of one day for each day served. When a condition of jail time is that it be served on weekends, the actual time spent in jail rounded to the nearest whole day, should be credited. For example, if an offender arrives at jail at 6:00 p.m. Friday and leaves at 8:00 p.m. Sunday, 50 hours have been served and that time would be rounded to two days of jail credit if the *554 stay were later revoked and the sentence executed.
One could use the comment as the basis for an argument that in the matter of jail credit generally, the defendant should receive precise credit in terms of hours for the day of arrest, for example, or that the defendant in such a situation should receive a day of credit only if the number of hours in jail for that day were 12 or more.
We are inclined to think, however, that if a defendant spends part of a day on the day of arrest, and part of a day in jail on the day of release, he should receive a full credit for each day. That apparently is the approach the court of appeals took in an unpublished decision in Kaliszewski v. State, No. C5-87-2043, 1988 W.L. 15869, at *1-*2 (Minn.App., Mar. 1, 1988). There the court stated as follows:
In computing jail time credit, each day in jail should be counted. Rule 27.03 and the sentencing guidelines both require credit for all "time spent in custody." Minn.R.Crim.P. 27.03, subd. 4(b); Sentencing Guidelines III.C.
Counting the first as well as last day of each period spent in jail, appellant is entitled to 178 days credit for December 18 to March 8 and March 8 to June 6, 1986 (counting March 8 once), and for January 30 to February 6, 1987.
In this case the court of appeals did not apply Kaliszewski because Jackson did not raise the issue first in the trial court. Rather than remand to give the trial court an opportunity to consider the request, we herewith grant Jackson the extra day of credit, meaning he is entitled to 98 rather than 97 days of jail credit. While not a factor in our decision, we note that Jackson's attorney on appeal estimates that a uniform departure from the approach followed in Kaliszewski could result in considerable cost to the taxpayers. The savings represented by one day by itself may not be much but when the figure of one day is multiplied by the total number of inmates in prison, one more readily can see the cost of a different approach.
In any event, petitioner is entitled to 98 rather than 97 days of jail credit.

=== CASE 9741234 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:09.868375+00 ===

OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Plaintiff, State of Indiana (State), appeals the trial court's interlocutory order granting Appellee-Defendant Brian W. Downey's (Downey) motion to dismiss the State's habitual substance offender information.
We affirm.
ISSUE
The State raises the following issue on interlocutory appeal: whether the trial court properly dismissed the State's habitual substance offender count against Dow-ney.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On December 6, 1999, the State charged Downey with Count I, possession of marijuana, as a Class A misdemeanor, Ind. Code § 35-48-4-11; Count II, possession of marijuana while having a prior marijuana conviction, as a Class D felony, Ind. Code § 35-48-4-11; Count III, reckless possession of paraphernalia, a Class A misdemeanor, Ind.Code § 35-48-4-8.3; and Count IV, information of habitual substance offender, Ind.Code § 85-50-2-10. Specifically, the information for Count II, possession of marijuana with a prior marijuana conviction, a Class D felony, reads in pertinent part as follows:
On or about the 18th day of November, 1999, in Tippecanoe County, State of Indiana, Brian W. Downey did knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana, pure or adulterated, while having a prior conviction involving marijuana, to wit: Possession of Marijuana, in the White Superior Court (91D01-9308-CM-410), White County, State of Indiana, on or about the 19th day of October, 1998. ...
(R. 9). Additionally, the information for Count IV, habitual substance offender reads in pertinent part as follows:
Brian W. Downey, having committed a substance offense as alleged in Counts I and II, is an Habitual Substance Offender for the reason that said Brian W. Downey has accumulated at least two *376prior unrelated substance offense con-viections, to wit:
On or about the 20th day of April, 1990, the said Brian W. Downey was convicted in the Newton Superior Court, Newton County, State of Indiana, of the offense of operating While Intoxicated, a substance offense, committed in Newton County, State of Indiana, on or about the 13th day of April, 1990, for which conviction the said Brian W. Downey was sentenced on or about the 20th day of April, 1991;
Further, on or about the 19th day of October, 1998, the said Brian W. Dow-ney was convicted in the White Superior Court, White County, State of Indiana, of the offense of Possession of Marijuana, a substance offense. Committed in White County, State of Indiana, on or about the 14th day of August, 1998, for which conviction the said Brian W. Dow-ney was sentenced on or about the 19th day of October, 19983;
Further, on or about the 25th day of September, 1995, the said Brian W. Downey was convicted in the Tippecanoe County Court, Tippecanoe County, State of Indiana, of the offense of Operating While Intoxicated While Having a Prior Conviction for Operating While Intoxicated, a substance offense, committed in Tippecanoe County, State of Indiana, on or about the 8th day of July, 1994, for which conviction the said Brian W. Dow-ney was sentenced on or about the 25th day of September, 1995. ...
(R. 12).
On July 14, 2000, Downey filed a Motion to Dismiss Information of Habitual Substance Offender, claiming that the underlying information for possession of marijuana, as a Class A misdemeanor, once elevated to a Class D felony due to a prior marijuana conviction, cannot again be enhanced under the general Habitual Substance Offender statute.
The trial court conducted a hearing on Downey' motion to dismiss on August 1, 2000. At the hearing, the State orally moved to amend the Habitual Substance Offender information to strike the White County conviction for possession of marijuana from the allegation, but the trial court denied that motion. Following the hearing, the trial court granted Downey's motion and dismissed the Habitual Substance Offender count.
On August 2, 2000, the State filed a praecipe for the transcript of the hearing on Downey's motion to dismiss. On August 16, 2000, the State filed a Motion to Correct Errors and a Motion to Certify Questions for Interlocutory Appeal. On August 24, 2000, the trial court granted the State's Motion to Certify Questions for Interlocutory Appeal.
On October 23, 2000, this court granted the State's Petition for Interlocutory Appeal, and accepted jurisdiction of this appeal.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
The State argues that the trial court improperly dismissed the habitual substance offender information prior to trial because the legislature intended to permit double enhancement for marijuana possession: onee to a Class D felony for a prior marijuana conviction, and an additional enhancement under the habitual substance offender statute. On the other hand, Dow-ney argues that the trial court properly dismissed the habitual substance offender count because the State was prohibited from enhancing Downey's marijuana possession charge a second time under the habitual substance offender statute. Specifically, Downey contends that the State could only enhance his charge onee to a Class D felony, under the more specific *377marijuana possession statute, rather than once again, under the more general habitual substance offender statute. We agree.
A person commits the crime of possession of marijuana when:
A person who: (1) knowingly or intentionally possesses (pure or adulterated) marijuana, hash oil, or hashish; (2) knowingly or intentionally grows or cultivates marijuana; or (8) knowing that marijuana is growing on his premises, fails to destroy the marijuana plants; commits possession of marijuana, hash oil, or hashish, a Class A misdemeanor. However, the offense is a Class D felony (i) if the amount involved is more than thirty (80) grams of marijuana or two (2) grams of hash oil or hashish, or (i) if the person has a prior conviction of an offense involving marijuana, hash oil, or hashish.
Ind.Code § 35-48-4-11. Additionally, the State may seek an habitual substance offender determination for any substance offense "by alleging ... that the person has accumulated two (2) prior unrelated substance offense convictions." Ind.Code § 35-50-2-10(b). A person is an habitual substance offender if the State proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person has accumulated two (2) prior unrelated substance offense convictions. Ind.Code § 35-50-2-10(e).
Here, the State charged Downey with possession of marijuana as a Class D felony because Downey had a prior unrelated conviction involving marijuana including his present charge of marijuana possession, as a Class A misdemeanor. The State also charged Downey with being a habitual substance offender because Dow-ney had accumulated at least two prior unrelated substance offense convictions.
Downey relies on our supreme court's decision in Ross v. State, 729 N.E.2d 113 (Ind.2000), for the proposition that a conviction enhanced under its own specific enhancement scheme may not be further enhanced under the habitual substance offender statute. In that case, the defendant was convicted of a misdemeanor violation of Indiana's handgun statute. Id. at 114. Further, because the defendant had an earlier felony conviction, his misdemeanor conviction was enhanced to a Class C felony. Id. Finally, the trial court found that the defendant was an habitual offender and added a penalty under the general habitual offender statute. Id. The defendant argued that it was improper to sentence him under two different sentence enbancement schemes, and our supreme court agreed, holding that:
In light of the statutory construction favoring more specific statutes as opposed to more general ones ... a misdemeanor conviction under the handgun statute, onee elevated to a felony due to a prior felony conviction, should not be enhanced again under the general habitual offender statute.
Id. at 117.
In Ross, our supreme court determined that the issue was whether a conviction once enhanced by the specific sentencing scheme of the handgun statute can be enhanced again by the general habitual offender statute. Id. at 116. Further, the court found that the habitual offender statute can be viewed as being as broad as the habitual substance offender statute because "[elnhancement possibilities under each statute can be based on any kind of felony, or any kind of substance offense." Id. The court in Ross reasoned that the handgun statute can be viewed as the more specific statute while the general habitual offender statute remains a general prohibition on repeat offenses regardless of the activity involved. Id. (citation omitted).
*378As a result, the court in Ross held that when faced with a general statute and a specific statute on the same subject, the more specific one should be applied, and therefore, the trial court should not have used an already enhanced handgun conviction as the basis for further enhancement under the general habitual offender statute. Id. (citation omitted).
Using the analysis employed by Ross, the marijuana possession statute can be viewed as the more detailed and specific statute while the general habitual substance offender statute is a general prohibition on repeat offenses encompassing al-eohol and drugs. Specifically, possession of marijuana as a Class A misdemeanor can only be enhanced to a Class D felony if the person has a prior marijuana possession conviction. On the other hand, a person can be found to be a habitual substance offender if the State proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person has accumulated two prior unrelated substance offense convictions of any nature. Further, the court in Ross found that the habitual offender statute can be viewed as being as broad as the habitual substance offender statute. Id.
Therefore, based upon our supreme court's holding in Ross, we hold that in light of the statutory construction favoring more specific statutes as opposed to more general ones, a misdemeanor charge under the marijuana possession statute, once elevated to a Class D felony due to a prior marijuana possession conviction, should not be enhanced again under the general habitual substance offender statute.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, the trial court properly dismissed the State's habitual substance offender count against Downey.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., concurs.
ROBB, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9741235 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:09.872451+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's conclusion that the trial court properly dismissed the habitual substance offender information against Downey as an improper second enhancement.
The majority relies upon the supreme court's decision in Ross v. State I acknowledge that Ross held that a handgun conviction already enhanced from a Class A misdemeanor to a Class D felony could not be further enhanced by the general habitual offender statute. 729 N.E.2d at 115. However, both the facts of Ross and the statutes at issue therein are distinguishable from the facts and statutes presented here. Ross involved the general habitual offender statute, Ind.Code § 35-50-2-8, whereas here, the habitual substance offender statute is implicated. Ind. Code § 35-50-2-10. The distinction is significant.
In Freeman v. State, our supreme court held that the legislature did not intend for a defendant to be punished under both the statute enhancing operating while intoxicated to a Class D felony and the habitual substance offender statute. 658 N.E.2d 68, 71 (Ind.1995). The habitual substance offender statute provides that a defendant who commits two unrelated substance offenses is subject to a sentence enhancement of up to eight years upon conviction for his third unrelated substance offense. At the time Freeman was decided, the habitual substance offender statute defined "substance offense" to be any "Class A misdemeanor or Class D felony involving the possession, use, abuse, delivery, transportation, or manufacture of alcohol or drugs." Because there was no clear legislative intent to include OWI offenses in the *379definition of a "substance offense," double enhancement was not permitted. Id. See also Devore v. State, 657 N.E.2d 740, 742 (Ind.1995). Thereafter, the legislature amended section 385-50-2-10 to add more specific language to the statutory definition of a "substance offense": the term now specifically includes "an offense under IC 9-30-5. ..." The new, amended definition encompasses all offenses listed in Indiana Code chapter 9-30-5, including the Class D felony enhancement. In Weida v. State, this court held that the amendment expressed the clear legislative language found to be absent in Freeman and Devore. 693 N.E.2d 598, 601 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. Therefore, under the amended statute, double enhancement of an OWI conviction both as a Class D felony and as an habitual substance offender was proper. Id. See also Roberts v. State, 725 N.E.2d 441, 446 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. denied, Weaver v. State, 702 N.E.2d 750, 752 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). Ross held that the general habitual offender statute "can be viewed as being as broad as the [pre-amendment] habitual substance offender statute in Freeman." 729 N.E.2d at 116. The general habitual offender statute has not been amended in this respect. Thus, Ross is not the appropriate test by which to judge Downey's charges.
The Freeman/Weide lines of cases are not directly applicable here, as Downey was charged with possession of marijuana enhanced to a Class D felony and also with being an habitual substance offender. However, in a similar vein to the operating while intoxicated cases, it appears that the habitual substance offender statute has been amended in relation to possession offenses as well. An earlier version of the statute defined a substance offense to be "a Class A misdemeanor or Class D felony in which the use, abuse, delivery, transportation, or manufacture of aleohol or drugs is a material element of the crime." Ind. Code § 35-50-2-10(a) (1983). In Marshall v. State, this court noted that its face this statutory definition of the term 'substance offense' does not include the crime of possession of aleohol or drugs although 'use, abuse, delivery, transportation, or manufacture' can not exist without possession. But possession, also a crime, is not mentioned." 493 N.E.2d 1317, 1318-19 (Ind.Ct.App.1986). Because the statutory definition of a "substance offense" did not specifically include "possession" offenses, and because the predicate offense relied upon in charging the defendant as an habitual substance offender were possession offenses, we held that the defendant's sentence could not be enhanced pursuant to the statute. Subsequently,1 the statutory definition of a "substance offense" was amended to specifically include offenses in which the possession of a drug was a material element. Ind.Code § 385-50-2-10(a) (1985).
Because the habitual substance offender statute now specifically references "possession" in the definition of a "substance offense," and because the statute had been amended to so say, there is a clear indication of legislative intent to impose double punishment pursuant to the habitual substance offender statute for any offense alleging possession of a drug. Thus, the State properly charged Downey with being an habitual substance offender, and the *380trial court improperly dismissed the information. , I would reverse and remand for further proceedings.
. The statute was actually amended some time prior to the decision in Marshall, but after Marshall's trial and conviction. The court was constrained to apply the statute in effect at the time of Marshall's trial in determining whether he was subject to the habitual substance offender enhancement. The Mar shall court referenced the amendment and cited it as further support for its holding that the statute, as originally written, did not include possession offenses.

=== CASE 9741236 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:10.817406+00 ===

McCown, J.
In this habeas corpus case the unmarried parents of a minor child sought to regain custody of the minor child from a licensed child placement agency. The District Court denied the writ and the parents have appealed.
Kassandra Kellie is the daughter of the relators, Kathleen Ann Kellie and Alan Shields. She was born on September 24, 1973. Her parents were then and are now unmarried. The mother, Kathleen, counseled with a social worker of the respondent, Lutheran Family and Social Service of Nebraska, Inc., at the *768time Kassandra was born and ultimately decided to raise the child as a single parent.
On May 10, 1974, the District Court for Lancaster County entered a decree ordering Alan Shields to pay $90 per month child support for Kassandra and giving him reasonable rights of visitation. Kathleen maintained custody of the child from her birth until late in 1978 when the events material to this controversy arose.
During the early years of Kassandra’s life Alan paid the child support required but visited his daughter only a few times. Beginning in June 1978 he voluntarily increased his child support payments to $200 per month and began visiting Kassandra much more frequently in an effort to establish a closer relationship with his daughter since he was then working in Lincoln.
Kathleen has occasionally had psychiatric treatment for depression. In the fall of 1978 she began to feel that she was not providing a suitable home for Kassandra and that her daughter would be better off if she lived in a home with both a mother and a father.
On November 2, 1978, Kathleen telephoned Steven Bryant, a social worker at the Lincoln office of Lutheran Family Service, who had previously given her advice, and told him she wanted to discuss the possibility of placing Kassandra for adoption. On November 6, 1978, she met with Bryant at his office, told him that she felt incapable of caring for the child and that someone else might do a better job, and on November 8 she reviewed the files of prospective adoptive families. She selected a tentative adoptive family, Larry and Patricia Randolph, who lived in Bridgeport, Nebraska, and asked to meet them.
On November 11, 1978, a meeting took place at Bryant’s office between Kathleen and the Randolphs. Bryant and the Randolphs’ son were also present. Adoption and adoption procedures were discussed. On November 17, 1978, the Randolphs returned to *769Lincoln with their young son and Kathleen and Kassandra went to dinner with them. The next morning, November 18, 1978, the Randolphs returned and took Kassandra out for a drive because Kathleen felt she needed to know Kassandra’s reaction to the Randolphs when her mother was not present. The Randolphs returned about noon with Kassandra.
Kathleen and Kassandra went to Bryant’s office on the afternoon of Saturday, November 18, 1978. At that time Kathleen began to express some uncertainty about her own feelings. Bryant told her that she was going to have to make a decision as to the Randolphs as an adoptive family on that day and Kathleen then decided to place the child for adoption.
Bryant explained the nature of the relinquishment and told Kathleen that the relinquishment was irrevocable. Kathleen then signed the relinquishment and consent to adoption. The acceptance of the relinquishment was not signed. The child was delivered to Lutheran Family and Social Service of Nebraska, Inc., and later placed with the Randolphs.
The father, Alan Shields, never talked to Bryant or anyone else from Lutheran Family Service. Bryant knew that Shields was Kassandra’s father and told Kathleen that he wanted a relinquishment from Shields but no relinquishment from Shields was ever obtained.
Three days after signing the relinquishment Kathleen called Bryant and told him that she had made a mistake and wanted Kassandra back. Bryant advised her that she could not get Kassandra back. Kathleen called Bryant again on Thanksgiving Day and went to Bryant’s office twice thereafter trying to obtain Kassandra’s return. On December 26, 1978, Kathleen telephoned the Randolphs and asked them to voluntarily return Kassandra and they refused.
On December 27, 1978, Kathleen personally delivered a written and notarized revocation of relinquishment to Lutheran Family and Social Service *770of Nebraska, Inc., at their Lincoln office. At that time Kathleen asked to see the relinquishment and requested a copy. At that time neither copy of the relinquishment had been signed by Lutheran Family and Social Service of Nebraska, Inc. The parties have stipulated that the acceptance of the relinquishment was not signed by Lutheran Family and Social Service of Nebraska, Inc., until January 12, 1979.
On January 2, 1979, the natural parents filed this action to regain custody of Kassandra. Alan testified that he desired Kathleen to have sole physical custody of the child, but that if she failed to obtain custody he desired custody himself. At the conclusion of the trial the District Court found that Kathleen freely and voluntarily signed the relinquishment but had revoked it prior to acceptance by the respondent and that Kathleen and the Randolphs were all fit and proper persons to have custody of the child. The court also found that because Kathleen had set in motion the events which resulted in the legal proceedings by executing the relinquishment, she had forfeited her superior parental rights and that it was in the best interests of the child to remain with the Randolphs. The court made no finding as to the parental rights or fitness of Alan Shields. The District Court then denied the petition for a writ of habeas corpus and this appeal followed.
The critical section of the Nebraska adoption statutes involved here is Neb. Rev. Stat. § 43-106.01 (Reissue 1978). That section provides in part: “When a child shall have been relinquished by written instrument, as provided by sections 43-104 and 43-106, to the Department of Public Welfare or to a licensed child placement agency and the agency has, in writing, accepted full responsibility for the child, the person so relinquishing shall be relieved of all parental duties toward and all responsibilities for such child and have no rights over such child.”
*771In the case at bar Lutheran Family Service has two executive directors and only an executive director is authorized to sign the acceptance of a relinquishment. No one signed the acceptance here on behalf of Lutheran Family Service until January 12, 1979, approximately 2 weeks after the relinquishment had been revoked by Kathleen and more than a week after this action had been commenced.
Lutheran takes the position that the statutory requirement of written acceptance is only a technical requirement and that they accepted in fact when they accepted the child at the time the relinquishment was signed.
Courts have traditionally required substantial if not strict compliance with all statutory requirements with respect to the formalities of execution of a parent’s consent to adoption or relinquishment of parental rights. A consent or relinquishment which fails to meet statutory requirements cannot be given legal effect. See 2 Am. Jur. Adoption § 43 (1962). In this state we have followed the rule that strict compliance with the adoption statutes is required. In McCauley v. Stewart, 177 Neb. 759, 131 N.W.2d 174 (1964), this court affirmed the vacation of an adoption decree previously entered in the county court on the ground that the signatures on the relinquishments had not been acknowledged before a notary public at the time the relinquishments were signed. The matter of adoption is statutory, and the manner of procedure and terms are all specifically prescribed and must be followed. In re Petition of Ritchie, 155 Neb. 824, 53 N.W.2d 753 (1952).
This court has noted that a licensed child placement agency is required to accept responsibility for the child, in writing, under § 43-106.01. See Kane v. United Catholic Social Services, 187 Neb. 467, 191 N.W.2d 824 (1971).
The respondent contends that to require strict compliance with the statute will place an undue burden *772upon a licensed child placement agency and create uncertainty during the time period between execution of a relinquishment and its acceptance. We disagree. Arrangements for prompt and strict compliance with the statute can obviously be made by proper administrative procedures.
A duly executed revocation of a relinquishment and consent to adoption delivered to a licensed child placement agency within a reasonable time after execution of the relinquishment and before the agency has, in writing, accepted full responsibility for the child, as required by statute, is effective to invalidate the original relinquishment and consent. Basic principles of offer and acceptance, as well as the statute, dictate that result. In the present case Kathleen attempted to revoke within 3 days after execution of the relinquishment, continued her efforts repeatedly, and delivered the duly executed revocation less than 6 weeks after the original relinquishment was signed. Under the circumstances here it was within a reasonable time.
In the case at bar the District Court quite properly found that Kathleen had the right to revoke the relinquishment and consent to adoption and that she revoked it before Lutheran had accepted, in writing, full responsibility for the child. That determination was also determinative of the habeas corpus proceeding here. Under the rules set out in McCauley, once the invalidity of the relinquishment and consent to adoption was established, the fitness of the natural or prospective adoptive parents, and which of them could best provide for the child, was not in issue.
It should also be pointed out that since the very recent case of Cox v. Hendricks, ante p. 23, 302 N.W.2d 35 (1981), an unmarried father may well have parental rights. In this case it is clear that Alan Shields has neither waived nor relinquished any parental rights but, instead, has joined with Kathleen in the petition for writ of habeas corpus.
*773The petition of the relators for a writ of habeas corpus should have been granted and the legal custody of Kassandra should have been returned to Kathleen Kellie.
Reversed and remanded with directions to ISSUE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS OPINION.
White, J., participating on briefs.
Brodkey, J., concurs in result.

=== CASE 9741237 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:10.82145+00 ===

Hastings, J.,
dissenting.
The result of the majority opinion ignores the fundamental question which is present in every habeas corpus case involving child custody. That is, what is in the best interests of the child.
The opinion relies heavily upon McCauley v. Stewart, 177 Neb. 759, 131 N.W.2d 174 (1964), a proceeding in an adoption case which involved a consent and relinquishment which was void because it had not been acknowledged. The trial court had held that the suitability of the natural parents to have custody of the child would not be an issue if the adoption were invalid and there had been no abandonment. Although this court held the decree of adoption was invalid, the judgment was modified and that portion of the decree which awarded custody of the minor child to the natural parents was not affirmed.
In Gray v. Maxwell, 206 Neb. 385, 293 N.W.2d 90 (1980), we determined that a relinquishment to a private party was invalid, but went further and held that under the circumstances there must be an independent determination of the fitness of the natural parent and that an award of custody was to be founded upon the best interests of the child.
The majority today has determined that the relinquishment to an agency, if found invalid, will be treated differently than an invalid relinquishment to a private party. The fate of a child should not be *774subject to such a fine distinction. The cause should be remanded for a determination of custody based upon the best interests of the child.
Boslaugh, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741238 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:10.824811+00 ===

White, J.,
concurring.
While I concur in the result reached by the majority in this case, I do so on the basis of the plain wording of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 43-106.01 (Reissue 1978) which requires written acceptance of responsibility for the child by the agency as well as written relinquishment by the parent in order to result in loss of parental rights. The relinquishment document itself does not operate to terminate parental rights, and the Legislature itself has determined that any time prior to written acceptance by the agency constitutes a reasonable time within which to revoke a relinquishment in favor of an agency. However, the majority is attempting to second-guess the Legislature by its statement that, even in the absence of a signed acceptance by the agency, the parent has only a “reasonable time” within which to validly revoke a relinquishment document. This gratuitous injection of a separate “reasonable time” requirement for revocation is an act not within the power of this court, since “[i]t is not within the province of a court to read a meaning into a statute that is not warranted by legislative language. Neither is it within the province of a court to read anything plain, direct, and unambiguous out of a statute.” City of Lincoln v. Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, ante p. 630, 634, 304 N.W.2d 922, 925 (1981).
Krivosha, C.J., and Clinton, J., join in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9741239 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:11.105717+00 ===

JUSTICE GALLAGHER delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant Kathleen Sullivan and her husband, John Sullivan, were married on July 23, 1966. On May 19, 1972, Kathleen and John Sullivan purchased a home in Wilmette, Illinois, for $58,000. On October 29, 1996, plaintiff, Judgment Services Corporation (JSC), obtained a sheriffs deed to the property. The sheriffs deed conveyed John’s interest in his residence to JSC. On October 20, 1997, JSC filed its complaint for partition asking to apportion the interests of JSC and Kathleen Sullivan. On May 6, 1999, after a bench trial, the trial court held that John Sullivan never held an ownership interest in the property. In so doing, the trial court found in favor of Kathleen Sullivan, who had argued that, even though the deed to the property states that title was conveyed to John and Kathleen Sullivan as joint tenants, at the time she acquired title, a resulting trust was created by her parents, the Kanes. JSC now appeals. We reverse and remand. In 1972, the Sullivans purchased the subject property from Lawrence and Alvera Hass for $58,000. The deed states that title was conveyed to John and Kathleen Sullivan as joint tenants. At the time of the purchase, the Sullivans took out a purchase money mortgage in the original principal amount of $22,000. Although no documentary evidence was presented, at trial, both Sullivans testified that Kathleen’s father, William Kane, gave them a check for approximately $36,000. Kathleen Sullivan testified that her father wanted her and her children to have a house and he wanted to buy it for them. She also testified that she took title as a joint tenant with her husband, John Sullivan, and she wanted John’s name on the deed. She also testified that it was not a condition of her receiving the funds from her father that title be only in her name. The property continued to be the Sullivans’ residence from May 19, 1972, through the date of trial. In 1991, a judgment was entered against John Sullivan in favor of the estate of Marie Barrett. A memorandum of judgment was recorded against the subject property. In addition, hens were also recorded by the Internal Revenue Service for a joint income tax liability of John and Kathleen Sullivan. John Sullivan testified that the amount of the lien was $54,118.27. This amount represented the federal taxes owed on their income for certain years. On November 24, 1992, the Sullivans took out their current mortgage with Centennial Mortgage. The loan proceeds were used to pay off the Internal Revenue Service hen, as well as a prior mortgage and a judgment hen obligation of John Sullivan to La Salle Management. No payment was made to satisfy the judgment hen of the estate of Marie Barrett. On October 23, 1993, another judgment was entered against John Sullivan in favor of Marijo Murphy for $123,181.50. A memorandum of judgment was recorded on October 27, 1993, and created a hen on the interest of John Sullivan in the subject property. John Sullivan was a practicing attorney and testified that his area of practice included estates and trusts. John Sullivan was disbarred on May 19, 1994, based in part on his conversion of client funds. The Sullivans maintained title to the subject property in both their own names until July 15, 1994, at which time John Sullivan recorded a quitclaim deed conveying his interest in the property to Kathleen Sullivan. Sometime during 1994, John Sullivan filed for bankruptcy protection and received a discharge of all debts, with the exception of perfected hens. On November 30, 1995, the estate of Marie Barrett caused the sheriff of Cook County to record a certificate of levy for the purpose of conducting a levy sale to satisfy its judgment. The levy sale occurred on October 29, 1996; the certificate of sale was recorded on November 6, 1999. Pursuant to section 12—132 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12—132 (West 1996)), which governs enforcement of judgments and redemption by creditors, Beneficial Systems, Inc., as assignee of Marijo Murphy, on April 11, 1997, redeemed the subject property from the estate of Marie Barrett levy sale; the redemption was confirmed on April 28, 1997. Beneficial Systems, Inc., caused a new certificate of levy to be recorded and noticed a new levy sale. On July 2, 1997, the new levy sale occurred. JSC, which is owned by the same two individuals who own Beneficial Systems, Inc., was the successful purchaser. A sheriff’s deed was recorded on September 16, 1997. On October 20, 1997, JSC filed the complaint for partition asking to apportion the interests in the subject property of JSC and Kathleen Sullivan, which led to the judgment of May 6, 1999, that is the subject of this appeal. The standard of review we apply when a challenge is made to the trial court’s ruling following a bench trial is whether the trial court’s judgment is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Bazydlo v. Volant, 164 Ill. 2d 207, 215, 647 N.E.2d 273, 277 (1995). A judgment is against the manifest weight of the evidence only when an opposite conclusion is apparent or when findings appear to be unreasonable, arbitrary, or not based on evidence. Leonardi v. Loyola University, 168 Ill. 2d 83, 106, 658 N.E.2d 450 (1995); Rhodes v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R., 172 Ill. 2d 213, 242, 665 N.E.2d 1260, 1274 (1996); Bazydlo, 164 Ill. 2d at 215, 647 N.E.2d at 277.  A resulting trust is created by operation of law and has its roots in the presumed intention of the parties. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d 349, 355, 410 N.E.2d 23, 26 (1980). A resulting trust generally arises where one person purchases property with his own funds and allows title to be taken in the name of another. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 355, 410 N.E.2d at 26. The burden of proof is upon the party seeking to establish a resulting trust, and the evidence must be clear, convincing and unmistakable. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 356, 410 N.E.2d at 26.  Since the law surrounding resulting trusts was created to enforce the intent of the parties, certain rebuttable presumptions have evolved based on the relationship of the parties. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 356, 410 N.E.2d at 26. For example, when property is transferred from one family member to another, a presumption arises in favor of a gift which will negate a resulting trust. In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d 163, 168-69, 634 N.E.2d 341, 345 (1994). A rebuttable presumption of a gift arises where a husband purchases property and (1) title is taken in the name of his spouse or (2) ownership is taken in joint tenancy with his wife. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 356, 410 N.E.2d at 26. The rationale is that it is deemed to have been intended by the husband that the wife should have the right to half the benefits for the life of each and, if she survives him, she should be the full owner. In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 356, 410 N.E.2d at 27. Illinois law also presumes a valid gift when a parent places title in a child, and the party seeking to rebut this presumption bears the burden of producing evidence to the contrary. In re Estate of Defilippis, 289 Ill. App. 3d 695, 701, 683 N.E.2d 453, 458 (1997); In re Marriage of Wesselhoft, 228 Ill. App. 3d 269, 591 N.E.2d 928 (1992); In re Marriage of Rosen, 126 Ill. App. 3d 766, 467 N.E.2d 962 (1984). The presumption of a gift arises, where a son or daughter is the transferee, because the transferee is the natural object of the bounty of the person paying the purchase price. In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d at 168, 634 N.E.2d at 345. Again, in all instances, the burden is upon one questioning the gift to overcome the presumption by clear, convincing, unequivocal and unmistakable evidence. See, e.g., In re Estate of Wilson, 81 Ill. 2d at 356, 410 N.E.2d at 27; In re Estate of Koch, 297 Ill. App. 3d 786, 788, 697 N.E.2d 931, 933 (1998). A resulting trust wifi not be sustained where the transaction can be construed in any other reasonable fashion. In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d at 168, 634 N.E.2d at 345.  The dissent ignores these well-settled principles when, citing dicta from Hofferkamp v. Brehm, 273 Ill. App. 3d 263 (1995), it states that “the mere payment of the consideration raises a prima facie presumption of a resulting trust.” 321 Ill. App. 3d at 160. While we agree with this statement generally, it is an incomplete statement of the law and inapplicable to situations where, as here, the parties have a relationship. Indeed, the Hofferkamp court, in the sentence immediately following this statement, further explained: “Where a husband purchases property and title is taken in his and his wife’s names, as joint tenants, there is a presumption of gift and not a presumption of resulting trust.” Hofferkamp, 273 Ill. App. 3d at 272. The court then went on to decide that, as between parties who are “only engaged and not actually married” there is no gift presumption. Hofferkamp, 273 Ill. App. 3d at 272. Hofferkamp is totally inapposite. Because the presumption that applies to the facts of this case is that the conveyance was a gift, the sole issue on appeal is whether Kathleen Sullivan presented clear and convincing evidence that a resulting trust in her father’s favor should be imposed on John and Kathleen Sullivan’s residence, the subject property. Although factual determinations in this type of case are best left to the trier of fact, such determinations may be overturned when they are against the manifest weight of the evidence or where there is clear and palpable error in some other respect. In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d at 168, 634 N.E.2d at 345. Applying the foregoing standards, we agree with JSC that the trial court’s decision was against the manifest weight of the evidence. JSC notes that the Sullivans failed to produce any documentary evidence to support their claims of payments made by the Kanes. The testimony offered by the Sullivans to rebut the presumption of a gift was, at times, contradictory and, arguably, was secondary evidence, hearsay and self-serving. Credibility determinations, however, are the province of the trial court. Zeitz v. Village of Glenview, 304 Ill. App. 3d 586, 592, 710 N.E.2d 849, 854 (1999). With its ruling, the trial court apparently resolved any questions pertaining to the credibility of the Sullivans as against JSC, as is within its province to do as trier of fact. Nonetheless, the trial court’s judgment that John Sullivan never had an ownership interest in the subject property, with its implicit determination that Kathleen Sullivan rebutted the presumption of a gift by clear and convincing evidence, was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. From our examination of the record, as a matter of law, Kathleen Sullivan failed to establish her burden by clear, convincing, unequivocal and unmistakable evidence that a resulting trust was intended. This is a heavy burden. As our supreme court has explained: “Courts have defined ‘clear and convincing’ evidence most often as the quantum of proof that leaves no reasonable doubt in the mind of the fact finder as to the truth of the proposition in question. Although stated in terms of reasonable doubt, courts consider clear and convincing evidence to be more than a preponderance while not quite approaching the degree of proof necessary to convict a person of a criminal offense.” Bazydlo v. Volant, 164 Ill. 2d 207, 213, 647 N.E.2d 273, 276 (1995).1  Kathleen Sullivan contended at trial that a resulting trust in favor of Kathleen Sullivan’s father or Kathleen Sullivan’s parents, now both deceased, was created in 1972 at the time the Sullivans purchased the subject property. In finding in Kathleen Sullivan’s favor, the trial court apparently agreed. John Sullivan testified that Kathleen’s parents, the Kanes, provided $35,800 to apply toward the property’s purchase price of $58,000. Kathleen Sullivan concurred with this testimony. As JSC correctly notes, even the most generous interpretation of this testimony shows that only a portion of the funds to purchase the property was acquired through the Kanes and the balance jointly by the Sullivans. The rule is: “ ‘[Wjhere two persons together advance the price, and title is taken in the name of one of them, a trust results in favor of the other to such proportion of the property as is equal to the proportion of the consideration contributed by him.’ [Citation.]” Caudill v. Beil, 127 Ill. App. 3d 847, 852, 469 N.E.2d 257, 261 (1984). Here, however, there is no evidence that Mr. Kane intended that his daughter act as a trustee of his resulting trust when he contributed the initial payment for the property. There was no documentary evidence to support an inference that such a trust was intended. The testimony is devoid of any express direction that a trust was intended. There was no evidence to show that the payment was anything more than a gift to his daughter, at the least, and a gift to his daughter and his son-in-law at the most. Although there was evidence that the Kanes stayed in the residence when they visited the Sullivans, there is nothing in the record which remotely suggests that the Kanes at any time overtly expressed any ownership in the property, which both Sullivans unequivocally testified was intended for Kathleen and the children. Furthermore, although the testimony indicated that the Sullivans received money from the Kanes throughout their entire marriage, there was no evidence that the Kanes paid for utilities, improvements or the variety of other expenses that would demonstrate an ownership interest in the property. Even if such evidence had been introduced, it would still fall short of establishing the burden required to be met by one claiming a resulting trust exists. It was long ago explained, and is still the law today, that where, by or at the direction of a parent, a deed is executed to his child, the facts that the parent occupied the premises, paid taxes and made improvements, although some evidence of the absence of an intention to make a gift, are neither sufficient to overcome the presumption of a gift nor inconsistent with the theory of an advancement. Moore v. Moore, 9 Ill. 2d 556, 138 N.E.2d 562 (1956); McCabe v. Hebner, 410 Ill. 557, 102 N.E.2d 794 (1951); Houdek v. Ehrenberger, 397 Ill. 62, 72 N.E.2d 837 (1947); Hartley v. Hartley, 279 Ill. 593, 117 N.E. 69 (1917); Dorman v. Dorman, 187 Ill. 154, 58 N.E. 235 (1900); Pool v. Phillips, 167 Ill. 432, 47 N.E. 758 (1897); In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d 163, 168-69, 634 N.E.2d 341, 345 (1994). It was undisputed that, at the time the Sullivans purchased the property, Kathleen Sullivan and John Sullivan were both named as joint tenants. Kathleen Sullivan admitted that there were no conditions made upon her as to the manner in which title would be held for the property. The fact that John Sullivan would be made a co-owner of the property was of no consequence to the Kanes. This statement is consistent with the understanding that the funds were provided as a gift and the Kanes did not intend to have residual ownership rights to the property. Kathleen’s testimony that it was she who wanted John’s name on the deed does not rebut the presumption of her parents’ gift to her. With respect to the gift presumption that arises when a parent purchases property and title is taken in the name of the child, Illinois case law is not as unequivocal with respect to the gift presumption in the case of a daughter-in-law or son-in-law. See, e.g., McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d at 170, 634 N.E.2d at 346 (refusing to find a resulting trust was created since a gift reasonably could be inferred at least with respect to the son, and further noting that there was no evidence tending to negate a gift to son’s wife where the conveyance was in joint tenancy); but cf. Varap v. Varap, 76 Ill. App. 2d 402, 413, 222 N.E.2d 77 (1966) (no presumption of gift to daughter-in-law and evidence of gift was insufficient). We think the better rule was stated in the Texas case of Somer v. Bogart, 749 S.W.2d 202 (Tex. Ct. App. 1988). There the court held that the gift presumption arises in a transfer of property between a father-in-law as payor and a son-in-law as payee. Somer v. Bogart, 749 S.W.2d at 204. The court explained that, in such a transfer, it could “perceive no reason why under normal circumstances a son-in-law should not be treated as the natural object of his father-in-law’s bounty so as to take by gift.” Somer v. Bogart, 749 S.W.2d at 204; accord Amador v. Berrospe, 961 S.W.2d 205, 207-08 (Tex. Ct. App. 1996). Nonetheless, it was Kathleen Sullivan’s theory at trial that the Kanes did not intend to give a gift to John Sullivan, and since the property was held in joint tenancy from 1972 until the time of the quitclaim deed, she introduced evidence to negate a gift to John from the Kanes. But, at best, the evidence shows a gift to John from his wife, rather than a gift from his in-laws. Again, none of the evidence shows that the Kanes intended to create a resulting trust. The evidence and testimony showed only that the Kanes made a gift to their daughter in 1972. Whether the Kanes originally or actually also intended a gift to John has no bearing upon the fact that the Kanes intended a gift for Kathleen, rather than a resulting trust for themselves. Kathleen, in receiving her gift, in turn made a gift to her husband. Whether John’s gift came from his in-laws or from his wife is also irrelevant to the issue of whether the Kanes intended to create a resulting trust. John received the gift. John was named as a joint tenant at the time of the gift. Indeed, he remained a joint tenant for 27 years until he quitclaimed his interest to Kathleen prior to his filing bankruptcy. This undisputed evidence, combined with the undisputed evidence that John accepted and retained the homestead exemption on the property, only strengthens the presumption that he had a beneficial interest in the property and indeed was an owner. Thus, John Sullivan clearly had an ownership interest, as well as his beneficial interest. If a reasonable explanation of the evidence adduced may be made upon any theory other than the existence of a resulting trust, that evidence is insufficient to establish a resulting trust. Fender v. Yagemann, 29 Ill. 2d 205, 193 N.E.2d 794 (1963). The evidence here is capable of a reasonable explanation. From her testimony, Kathleen Sullivan expected, and in fact directed, John Sullivan to have an ownership interest in the property. The testimony imputed to the Kanes expresses only a desire that the money be used for the benefit of Kathleen Sullivan and her children, not the Kanes. That is exactly how the money was used. Using the monetary gift she received, Kathleen Sullivan purchased the subject property and intended that she and her husband be put on the title as joint tenants. There was no testimony or any other evidence that Kathleen Sullivan intended her gift to be used as a resulting trust for her benefit or anyone else’s in the subject property. There was no evidence that she believed she was a trustee on behalf of her parents. The unrebutted presumption is that Kathleen Sullivan received a gift from her parents which was used for her benefit and was, in turn, a gift to her spouse, John Sullivan, which was also used for his benefit. We reach our conclusion, not, as the dissent asserts by “improperly reWeigh[ing] the evidence” (321 Ill. App. 3d at 160), but instead by properly concluding that the trial court’s determination that John Sullivan did not have and never did have any ownership interest in the subject property was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Because Kathleen Sullivan failed to present clear and convincing evidence to rebut the gift presumption, the trial court erred in concluding that a resulting trust existed. For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the decision of the trial court and remand for additional proceedings relating to any equitable lien that may exist on the part of Kathleen Sullivan. Reversed and remanded with directions. O’BRIEN, J., concurs.  We also note that shortly after Bazydlo was decided the Illinois Supreme Court Committee on Pattern Jury Instructions defined the phrase “clear and convincing evidence,” in the context óf the insanity defense in a criminal prosecution, as “that degree of proof which, considering all the evidence in the case, produces the firm and abiding belief that it is highly probable that the proposition on which the defendant has the burden of proof is true.” Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 4.19 (3d ed. Supp. 1996); see also In re Timothy H., 301 Ill. App. 3d 1008, 704 N.E.2d 943 (1998).

=== CASE 9741240 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:11.109994+00 ===

JUSTICE BUCKLEY, dissenting: In determining whether a resulting trust exists under these circumstances, courts must ascertain the payor’s intent from the facts and circumstances shown by the record. In re Estate of McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d 163, 168 (1994). Such a factual determination is best left to the trial court and should not be disturbed unless it contradicts the manifest weight of the evidence. McCormick, 262 Ill. App. 3d at 168. The trial court’s factual determinations are due great deference and contradict the manifest weight of the evidence only if an opposite conclusion is clearly evident. Robbins v. Board of Trustees of the Carbondale Police Pension Fund, 177 Ill. 2d 533, 538 (1997). Sufficient evidence exists to support the trial court’s finding and, therefore, an opposite conclusion is not clearly evident. First, the mere payment of the consideration raises a prima facie presumption of a resulting trust. Hofferkamp v. Brehm, 273 Ill. App. 3d 263, 272 (1995). JSC does not dispute that the Kanes provided the consideration for the purchase. Further, Kathleen testified that the Kanes continued to provide money for the monthly payments. Kathleen’s testimony indicated that William Kane wanted to use this money to provide for his family (“his” meaning himself, his wife, his daughter and his grandchildren). Kathleen’s testimony also indicated that the Kanes provided money for the property, in part, so that they would have a place to stay when they visited their daughter and grandchildren. JSC simply failed to present evidence sufficiently persuasive to reject the trial court’s factual findings. The majority improperly reweighs the evidence to reach a conclusion opposite to that reached by the trial court. We cannot reweigh the evidence or substitute our judgment for that of the trial court, even if we may have ruled differently. See In re Marriage of Koberlein, 281 Ill. App. 3d 880, 885 (1996); Case v. Forloine, 266 Ill. App. 3d 120, 125 (1993). The evidence in this case was almost entirely testimonial. The trial court sat in a superior position to listen to that testimony, observe the witnesses’ demeanor, and judge their credibility. People v. Gonzalez, 184 Ill. 2d 402, 412 (1998). Because sufficient evidence exists in the record to support the trial court’s factual findings, we should affirm.

=== CASE 2226684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:16.00118+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 354 (1981)
208 Neb. 639
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Wesley H. PEERY, Appellant.
No. 43643.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 24, 1981.
Stanley D. Cohen, Lincoln, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Terry R. Schaaf, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
McCOWN, Justice.
The defendant filed a motion for post conviction relief seeking to vacate and set aside a sentence of death on the ground that the judgment was void or voidable under the Constitution of this state or of the United States. The District Court denied defendant's request for an evidentiary hearing, and found that the motion and the files and records of the case show that the defendant is entitled to no relief, and overruled the motion.
The defendant was found guilty by a jury on two counts, murder in the first degree and robbery. A three-judge sentencing panel sentenced the defendant to death on the murder count and the trial judge sentenced the defendant to a term of not less than 16 nor more than 50 years' imprisonment on the robbery count, the sentences to run consecutively. The convictions and sentences were affirmed on direct appeal to this court in State v. Peery, 199 Neb. 656, 261 N.W.2d 95 (1977). Following an unsuccessful attempt to appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States the defendant filed the motion for post conviction relief in this case.
In this post conviction action the defendant essentially contends that the death sentence has been arbitrarily and unconstitutionally imposed in this case and requests that we alter or overrule our holdings in previous death sentence cases. The defendant also contends that Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S. 420, 100 S. Ct. 1759, 64 L. Ed. 2d 398 (1980), raises new and additional constitutional issues which are applicable in this case.
We have recently held that the death penalty, when properly imposed, does not violate either the U.S. or Nebraska Constitution. State v. Anderson and Hochstein, 207 Neb. 51, 296 N.W.2d 440 (1980). The holding in Godfrey is not applicable in this case for the reasons set out in the very recent case of State v. Harper, 208 Neb. 568, 304 N.W.2d 663 (1981).
*355 The remaining issues and contentions of the defendant have been presented, considered, and determined in the direct appeal of the convictions involved here.
A motion to vacate a judgment and sentence under the Post Conviction Act cannot be used as a substitute for an appeal or to secure a further review of issues already litigated. State v. Svoboda, 199 Neb. 452, 259 N.W.2d 609 (1977); State v. Holtan, 205 Neb. 314, 287 N.W.2d 671 (1980).
The judgment of the District Court was correct and is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9741241 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:14.368537+00 ===

McCown, J.
This is an action for damages for mental or emotional disturbance resulting from alleged negligence of the defendant in connection with a termite inspection of *685plaintiffs’ home. The District Court sustained defendant’s motion for summary judgment and plaintiffs have appealed.
In February 1978 the plaintiffs, a young couple with two small children, were in the process of purchasing a new home. As a part of an offer to purchase the house plaintiffs requested a termite inspection and requested that it be done by the defendant. The defendant made the termite inspection and a written report was prepared and delivered. The report stated that there was termite tubing in two described areas and gave an estimated cost of treatment. The plaintiffs interpreted the report to mean that there was evidence of termite. activity at one time but that there was no damage present and that defendant recommended treatment. Plaintiffs then employed Mid-State Pest Control, which treated the house for termites. The sale was then closed and plaintiffs moved into the house on March 28, 1978.
In May or June 1978 plaintiff Susan Fournell, in tearing up carpet in the living room, discovered extensive termite damage in the flooring. Plaintiffs called Mid-State and later the defendant, and defendant found active termites in the house and recommended that the house be treated. Plaintiffs then removed the siding and discovered termite activity running all the way to the roof, involving mud sills, plates, windows, doors, casings, and siding. A structural engineer examined the house and estimated the extent and cost of the necessary repairs. Work began in the latter part of June and plaintiffs did much of it themselves.
On July 3,1978, Susan Fournell consulted a physician because she was constantly crying, could not sleep, and was deeply depressed. On July 19, 1978, she was hospitalized under the care of a psychiatrist who treated her for reactive depression. She was discharged from the hospital on August 6, 1978. She was again hospitalized on September 13, 1978, and discharged *686on September 21, 1978. She was again hospitalized on October 10, 1978, and discharged on October 18, 1978, as still depressed but no longer actively suicidal. She has continued to be treated by psychiatrists since October of 1978, and the evidence is that her mental and emotional disturbance was caused by the discovery of the termite infestation and damage to her home.
Plaintiffs brought separate actions against the defendant involving Susan’s claim for damages for emotional disturbance and David’s claim for medical expenses incident to that claim, and a cause of action for property damage. Mid-State Pest Control was joined as a third-party defendant. After the taking and filing of various depositions and answers to interrogatories, the defendant filed motions for summary judgment as to all the causes of action. The District Court overruled defendant’s motion for summary judgment with respect to plaintiffs’ claim for property damage, and that cause of action remains pending in the District Court.
The District Court found from the evidence adduced that two elements essential to a recovery under Nebraska law for the negligent infliction of emotional trauma were not present: (1) That physical injury resulted from the emotional trauma; and (2) That defendant’s negligence placed the injured party, Susan Fournell, in fear of peril for her own safety. The court therefore found that there was no genuine issue as to any material fact and that defendant was entitled to judgment as a matter of law, and dismissed plaintiffs’ remaining petitions. This appeal followed.
In the present case there are many genuine issues of fact, including the facts necessary to determine whether either the defendant or the third-party defendant was negligent and whether the plaintiff Susan Fournell suffered severe emotional disturbance with resulting physical disability. However, unless *687we were to recognize the right of a plaintiff to recover under the circumstances here, none of the facts are material because even if the factfinder resolved every factual dispute in favor of the plaintiff, as we are required to assume would be done, she still would have failed to state a cause of action for negligent infliction of emotional trauma.
Traditionally, recovery for the negligent infliction of emotional trauma was viewed with disfavor by the courts, and the older cases generally rested on broad statements that there was no duty to refrain from the negligent infliction of mental distress. See Spade v. Lynn & Boston Railroad, 172 Mass. 488, 52 N.E. 747 (1899). Modern cases have developed various rules circumscribing defendant’s liability in such cases. Basically, such rules rest on policy considerations and there have been few modern cases in Nebraska upon which to base a formulation of current policy.
In the case of Owens v. Childrens Memorial Hospital, Omaha, Nebraska, 347 F. Supp. 663 (D. Neb. 1972), the federal district court interpreted the position of this court at that time and determined that even though Nebraska had abrogated the “impact” rule there was still a requirement that some type of physical injury result from the negligently inflicted suffering and that recovery for emotional disturbance must be limited by at least requiring the plaintiff to have been within the “zone of danger or actually put in fear for his own safety.” That interpretation was correct.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 436 A (1965) provides: “If the actor’s conduct is negligent as creating an unreasonable risk of causing either bodily harm or emotional disturbance to another, and it results in such emotional disturbance alone, without bodily harm or other compensable damage, the actor is not liable for such emotional disturbance.”
In the case at bar, when the termite damage was discovered by the plaintiffs no physical injury resulted *688to anyone, nor was Susan Fournell placed in fear of bodily harm to herself or anyone else. The plaintiffs’ claim for damages here rests on mental and emotional disturbance and distress alone.
It should be noted also that under the Restatement rules relative to liability for the negligent infliction of emotional distress or disturbance, §§ 313, 436, and 436 A, liability is predicated on conduct deemed negligent because it involves an unreasonable risk of causing bodily harm to a person, not damage to property. On the evidence in this case it is evident that conduct involving the failure of the defendant to discover termite damage to plaintiffs’ house did not create an unreasonable risk of causing bodily harm to Susan Fournell as a matter of law.
Plaintiffs assert that the case of Rasmussen v. Benson, 135 Neb. 232, 280 N.W. 890 (1938), fully supports plaintiffs’ position in the case at bar. We disagree. Rasmussen is distinguishable on the basis pointed out in the Owens case. It is also apparent that the court in Rasmussen regarded the defendant’s conduct in disposing of a poison label and selling bran with a tremendous amount of arsenic in it at a public sale without warning or labeling of any sort as creating such an unreasonable risk of harm to persons as to be reckless and wanton to such a degree that it approached intentional injury. In any event, the case at bar is no current version of Rasmussen.
Policy considerations primarily determine whether a particular plaintiff is entitled to redress for a particular wrong or that a defendant is entitled to restrictions limiting liability. Be that as it may, the law must also recognize that not every human loss arising out of another’s conduct constitutes a legal injury for which compensation will be available. See Prosser, Law of Torts 1 (4th ed. 1971).
The judgment of the District Court was correct and is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741242 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:14.373567+00 ===

*689Krivosha, C.J.,
dissenting.
I find that I must respectfully dissent from the majority in this case.
At the outset, I think it important to keep in mind that only a limited question is before us. Simply stated, it is whether the defendant is entitled to a summary judgment because, as a matter of law, Mrs. Fournell has failed to state a cause of action and failed to raise a genuine issue of fact. In contrast, we have in essence decided this case as if a demurrer had been filed by the defendant. It could very well be that, upon trial, Mrs. Fournell would be unable to prove the essential elements of her claim or the jury would be unwilling to find in her favor. That is not the issue before us. The sole and only issue before us is whether Mrs. Fournell is entitled to have her day in court.
The matter of granting summary judgment is not to be lightly taken and is never to be a substitute for trial. In Ingersoll v. Montgomery Ward & Co., Inc., 171 Neb. 297, 300, 106 N.W.2d 197, 199 (1960), we said: “In considering a motion for summary judgment the court should view the evidence in the light most favorable to the party against whom it is directed, giving to that party the benefit of all favorable inferences that may be reasonably drawn therefrom.” And in Hiram Scott College v. Insurance Co. of North America, 187 Neb. 290, 295, 188 N.W.2d 688, 691 (1971), we said: “Summary judgment is an extreme remedy and should be awarded only when the issue is clear beyond all doubt. Any reasonable doubt touching the existence of a genuine issue of material fact must be resolved against the moving party.” In McDowell v. Rural Water Dist. No. 2, 204 Neb. 401, 282 N.W.2d 594 (1979), we further said: “Before a summary judgment may be granted, the moving party must establish that there exists no genuine issue as to any material fact in the case, and that under the facts he is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Even where there are no conflicting evidentiary *690facts, a summary judgment is not appropriate if the ultimate inferences to be drawn from those facts are not clear. In considering such a motion, the trial judge must take that view of the evidence most favorable to the party against whom summary judgment is directed, giving to that party the benefit of all favorable inferences that may reasonably be drawn from the evidence.” (Syllabus of the court.) And in Blue v. Champion International Corp., 204 Neb. 781, 285 N.W.2d 511 (1979), we said: “Where reasonable minds may differ as to whether an inference supporting the ultimate conclusion sought can be drawn, summary judgment should not be granted.” (Syllabus of the court.) And, finally, in State ex rel. Schuler v. Bd. of County Commissioners, 205 Neb. 647, 649, 289 N.W.2d 514, 515 (1980), we said: “The burden is upon the party moving for summary judgment to show that no issue of fact exists, and unless he can conclusively do so, the motion must be overruled.”
The majority in this case has concluded that Mrs. Fournell cannot, as a matter of law, recover because of two reasons. The first reason given by the majority is that one may not recover for emotional disturbances without there being a concurrent bodily injury; and, secondly, because “as a matter of law” a woman cannot reasonably become emotionally distressed because her home is destroyed by termites. I shall attempt to address both matters in this dissent.
The majority’s conclusion that one may not recover for emotional disturbance without bodily harm is based, in part, upon the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 436 A (1965), set out in full in the majority opinion. I believe that the rule is outmoded and should be rejected. While the Restatement rule quoted may reduce the number of claims made, it is totally out of step with modern medical knowledge. To suggest that a psychological injury is not as grievous as a physical injury is to ignore reality. And to further suggest that if one can be sufficiently mentally dis*691turbed so as to suffer a coronary occlusion, he or she may recover in tort, but if he or she simply becomes an emotionally distressed person, reduced to sniveling and crying and attempting suicide, he or she may not recover, does not seem to me to be founded upon any rational basis.
It is interesting to note that while the American common law rule, exemplified by the Restatement, is based at least in part upon early English law, England has long since abandoned that requirement.
The case which was frequently relied upon by American courts as authority for denying recovery for negligently inflicting mental anguish, absent physical injury, was Victorian Railways Comm. v. Coultas, 13 App. Cas. 222, 57 L.J.P.C. 69 (1888). In Coultas, the plaintiff was severely frightened when the gatekeeper at a railway crossing negligently allowed her to cross the track in front of an approaching train. There was no impact or immediate physical injury. However, she suffered severe nervous shock, fainted, and experienced impairment of her eyesight and memory. The trial court sustained a verdict for the plaintiff. However, on appeal, the Privy Council held that damages arising from mere terror, without any physical injury, could not be considered as a foreseeable consequence of the negligence of the defendant, and the verdict was set aside. For a further discussion, see Smith, Relation of Emotions to Injury and Disease: Legal Liability for Psychic Stimuli, 30 Va. L. Rev. 193 at 196-97 (1944); Campbell, Injury Without Impact, 1951 Ins. L.J. 654.
Within 2 years, however, another English court had taken a conflicting view of the issue and thus was born the controversy which remains with us today. A case arising in Ireland, Bell v. Great Northern Railway Co., 26 L.R. Ir. 428 (1890), totally repudiated the reasoning of Coultas. The opinion of Baron Palles is often quoted: “In conclusion, then, I am of the opinion that, as the relation between fright and injury to the *692nerve and brain structures of the body is a matter which depends entirely upon scientific and medical testimony, it is impossible for any Court to lay down, as a matter of law, that if negligence cause fright, and such fright, in its turn, so affects such structures as to cause injury to health, such injury cannot be ‘a consequence which, in the ordinary course of things would flow from the’ negligence, unless such injury ‘accompany such negligence in point of time.”’ Id. at 442. It is of passing interest to note that, in 1890, a court with limited medical knowledge concluded that one could not, as a matter of law, resolve such an issue. Yet in 1981 we conclude, as a matter of law, that absent bodily harm, one may not recover for emotional disturbance.
In 1901 the King’s Bench abandoned the rule laid down in Coultas. In the case of Dulieu v. White & Sons, [1901] 2 K.B. 669, a woman who was frightened into giving premature birth, when the defendants drove a pair-horse van into the main room of her husband’s pub while she was standing behind the bar, sued for damages. The nervous shock which she suffered from the incident made her ill and gave rise to premature birth of her child. Relying largely upon the Bell case, Justice Kennedy overruled the demurrer, commenting upon the remoteness objection which had led courts to deny recovery in such action. He said that remoteness refers not to relations in time but to the continuity of causation. He further commented that nonliability for negligent invasion of another’s mental tranquility is generally explained by the practical difficulties of proving the injury and not by the lack of any legal wrong. Justice Kennedy concluded in Dulieu by holding that where a physical disability is caused by fright or mental disturbance, the subject of the requested compensation may be objectively evaluated and no logical reason remains for denying recovery. After Dulieu, English law became settled that actual injury or *693disability negligently caused by psychic stimuli was actionable, whether or not the plaintiff suffered an impact or contemporaneous injury. ■
The present English rule has been recognized by some of the American courts, though the specific theories upon which such recovery has been permitted have varied from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Louisiana, which has adopted the French civil code, has historically recognized the right to recover such damages without any physical harm. See, Romero v. Town of Welsh, 370 So. 2d 1286 (La. App. 1979); J. B. Lahaye Farms v. La. Dept. of Highways, 377 So. 2d 1286 (La. App. 1979); Elston v. Valley Electric Membership Corp., 381 So. 2d 554 (La. App. 1980). Further, see Cooks, Mental Anguish Arising from Property Damage, 3 So. U.L. Rev. 17 (1976).
A similar approach has been taken by the Texas courts. In Cactus Drilling Co. v. McGinty, 580 S.W.2d 609 (Tex. Civ. App. 1979), a drilling company improperly used the plaintiffs land. The court held that recovery for mental anguish arising from that act was recoverable, saying: “Given an injury to property which is actionable independently and separately from mental anguish, compensation for mental anguish which proximately results from the wrongful injury is one element of actual damages.” Id. at 610. For other cases to the same effect, see Hendry v. United States, 280 F. Supp. 27 (S.D.N.Y. 1968), aff’d 418 F.2d 774 (2d Cir. 1969); Petition of United States, 418 F.2d 264 (1st Cir. 1969). At least five jurisdictions have held that an independent cause of action for negligently inflicted mental distress exists.
In 1970 two states at opposite ends of the nation’s geographic boundaries (Maine and Hawaii) adopted new rules allowing recovery for negligently inflicted mental distress, absent any physical injury. In the Maine decision, Wallace v. Coca-Cola Bottling Plants, Inc., 269 A.2d 117 (Me. 1970), the Supreme Judicial Court had for consideration an action arising against a *694soft-drink bottler for injuries allegedly resulting to plaintiff who drank from a bottle containing an unpackaged prophylactic. The plaintiff became ill after he returned home and began to think about his experience. In sustaining a jury verdict, the Maine court said: “In the light of advances which have been made by medical science and the improvement in investigatory techniques since this Court decided Herrick in 1921 [Herrick v. Publishing Co., 120 Me. 138, 113 A. 16 (1921)], we decline to follow it any longer. Instead, we adopt the rule that in those cases where it is established by a fair preponderance of the evidence there is a proximate causal relationship between an act of negligence and reasonably forseeable [sic] mental and emotional suffering by a reasonably forseeable [sic] plaintiff, such proven damages are compensable even though there is no discernable [sic] trauma from external causes. The mental and emotional suffering, to be compensable, must be substantial and manifested by objective symptomatology.” Id. at 121. In its decision, the Supreme Judicial Court of Maine noted that the reasoning in Spade v. Lynn & Boston Railroad, 172 Mass. 488, 52 N.E. 747 (1899), noted by the majority in this case, has been the object of much critical comment in legal periodicals and cases and has been rejected by the New Hampshire court.
During the same year, the Supreme Court of Hawaii was presented the case of Rodrigues v. State, 52 Hawaii 156, 472 P.2d 509 (1970). In the Rodrigues case the plaintiffs’ home was flooded during a rainstorm because the state highway workers negligently blocked a drain culvert. The plaintiffs were not present at the time of the flooding so they suffered no impact or physical injury. The court noted: “The traditional rule, based upon considerations of policy we discuss herein, is that there is no recovery for the negligent infliction of mental distress alone.” Id. at 169.
*695The Supreme Court of Hawaii then rejected that notion and upheld the award for the mental anguish, absent physical injury. The primary consideration, said the Hawaii court, should be to assure the genuineness of such claims. The court then adopted standards to guarantee genuineness as well as require that the mental anguish is indeed serious. With those requirements present, the court then declared that normal tort principles are to be applied to determine the right of recovery.
The State of Washington, likewise, appears to have aligned itself with those courts which now recognize what I believe to be the more realistic approach to mental distress. In Hunsley v. Giard, 87 Wash. 2d 424, 435, 553 P.2d 1096, 1102-03 (1976), the Washington court held: “Balancing those interests and subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, we conclude that the plaintiff who suffers mental distress has a cause of action; that is to say, the defendant has a duty to avoid the negligent infliction of mental distress. It is not necessary that there be any physical impact or the threat of an immediate physical invasion of the plaintiffs personal security.” See, also, Corrigal v. Ball & Dodd Funeral Home, 89 Wash. 2d 959, 577 P.2d 580 (1978).
In 1980 the California Supreme Court adopted the more modern view in the case of Molien v. Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, 27 Cal. 3d 916, 616 P.2d 813, 167 Cal. Rptr. 831 (1980). The Molien case involved the question of whether the plaintiff husband could recover for the mental distress he suffered as a result of the defendants’ negligent and incorrect diagnosis that his wife had syphilis. The California court reversed the trial court’s sustaining of the defendants’ demurrers and ordered the case to trial. In so doing it created an independent cause of action in California, saying: “In our view of the attempted distinction between physical and psychological injury [it] merely clouds the issue. The essential question is one of *696proof; whether the plaintiff has suffered a serious and compensable injury should not turn on this artificial and often arbitrary classification scheme. We thus agree with the view of the Rodrigues court: ‘In cases other than where proof of mental distress is of a medically significant nature, [citations] the general standard of proof required to support a claim of mental distress is some guarantee of genuineness in the circumstances of the case. [Citation.]’ (472 P.2d at p. 520.) This standard is not as difficult to apply as it may seem in the abstract. . . . [T]he jurors are best situated to determine whether and to what extent the defendant’s conduct caused emotional distress, by referring to their own experience.” Id. at -, 616 P.2d at 821, 167 Cal. Rptr. at 839.
And finally we find, on March 25,1981, the Supreme Court of South Carolina deciding the case of Ford v. Hutson, 49 U.S.L.W. 2663. In permitting recovery for mental and emotional injury, absent physical injury, the South Carolina court noted that numerous jurisdictions today have recognized that infliction of mental suffering is in fact a cause of action in itself. This new tort is commonly denominated, appropriately, “infliction of emotional distress” or “outrage.” In upholding the cause of action, the South Carolina court noted that it had earlier permitted a plaintiff to sue upon a claim in which she alleged she suffered a nervous breakdown after defendant had used vile, profane, and abusive language.
One need not think very long on the matter before one recognizes and concludes that an emotional injury is as serious as, and often more serious than, a physical injury. The damages caused by emotional injuries oftentimes take much longer to heal than a physical injury would.
Cases are legion supporting a cause of action for situations where one becomes ill by reason of finding a foreign object in food, even though the foreign *697object is not consumed and does not cause illness. See, Opelika Coca-Cola Bottling Company v. Johnson, 46 Ala. App. 298, 241 So. 2d 327 (1970); Jasper Coca-Cola Bottling Company v. Roberts, 47 Ala. App. 219, 252 So. 2d 428 (1971); Way v. Tampa Coca Cola Bottling Company, 260. So. 2d 288 (Fla. App. 1972); Paul v. Hardware Mut. Ins. Co., 254 So. 2d 690 (La. App. 1971); Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of Plainview v. White, 545 S.W.2d 279 (Tex. Civ. App. 1976); Miller v. Atlantic Bottling Corp., 259 S.C. 278, 191 S.E.2d 518 (1972); Shoshone Coca-Cola v. Dolinski, 82 Nev. 439, 420 P.2d 855 (1966).
In all of the above-cited cases, and they are but an example of the many that can be found, recovery was permitted because an individual became ill at the thought of the contamination being in the food or drink. One who is so affected by the thought process is mentally injured. It is that clear. To therefore require that, before one who is mentally injured may recover, he must at least regurgitate once seems to me to be imposing upon the law a requirement that makes little or no sense. As I indicated at the outset, I would join with those jurisdictions which have adopted what I perceive to be the more modern view and would permit a cause of action to exist for mental anguish, absent bodily harm or other compensable damage.
Setting aside for the moment my view that one should be permitted to recover for mental anguish, absent bodily harm or other compensable damages, I do not believe that we need reach that issue in this case. An examination of the cases decided by this court on previous occasions should lead one to the conclusion that summary judgment was not appropriate in this case, and the granting of that summary judgment by the trial court should be reversed.
To properly understand what has in fact taken place, one must note all of the evidence presented in opposition to the motion for summary judgment, in-*698eluding the deposition of Mrs. Fournell and her treating psychiatrist.
The record presented to us on the motion for summary judgment discloses that in January of 1978 marital difficulties existing between Mr. and Mrs. Fournell resulted in their obtaining a decree of divorce. This was then set aside in February of 1978 when they reconciled. Part of the reconciliation process was the purchase of a new home located at 3772 Everett Street in the city of Lincoln, Nebraska, the previous home having been sold in connection with the divorce. The Fournells borrowed $35,000 for the purchase of the house, though between them they had a total monthly income of only $1,200.
As noted by the majority, in May or June of 1978 Mrs. Fournell discovered extensive termite damage in the flooring even though a termite inspection had been performed by the defendant. The cost of repair was in excess of $15,000. The Fournells did not have that money and had to borrow the $15,000 in addition to the $35,000 they had already borrowed for the house in the first instance. Only one contractor was even willing to bid on the repair project, and it was necessary to discharge him when it appeared he was unable to do the job adequately for the bid price. Mr. Fournell wound up making the repairs himself by working weekends and after his job. The $15,000, however, proved to be inadequate for the materials necessary to repair the damage and the Fournells were unable to complete the repairs. Left uncompleted at their home were the repairs to the garage, additional insulation, and certain drywall work.
The record further discloses that beginning in July of 1978, as the repair was underway, the contractor was not doing what he was hired to do and the family was having unusual strain put upon it by reason of all these difficulties. Mrs. Fournell found it necessary to consult Dr. Glen Lau. At the time she was constantly *699crying, could not sleep, was shaking, and, in general, was depressed. Things got worse, and on July 19, 1978, Mrs. Fournell was hospitalized by Dr. Whitla, a psychiatrist. The hospitalization covered the period from July 19, 1978, to August 6, 1978. Mrs. Fournell was next hospitalized on September 13, 1978, and remained in the hospital until September 21, 1978. On October 10, 1978, she was again hospitalized when she took an overdose of Thorazine in an attempt to commit suicide. She was discharged on October 18, 1978, when, according to Dr. Whitla, she was still depressed but no longer actively suicidal. She remains, according to the record, under medical care.
By reason of her mental and physical condition, she was unable to maintain active employment. As a result, the Fournells and their two children were trying to live on $300 per month after their $500-per-month house and construction loans were paid.
The deposition of Dr. Whitla establishes that Mrs. Fournell had suffered a “psychic injury” as a result of discovering the termites. He defined a “psychic injury” as basically reactive depression demonstrated by physiological consequences. By definition, physiological consequences must relate to some injury to the body. The evidence as presented to us at this point on the motion for summary judgment, then, is to the effect that, as a result of the negligence of the defendant, Mrs. Fournell suffered a mental breakdown, evidenced by shaking, crying, depression, inability to sleep, and an attempt to commit suicide. That does not significantly differ from those cases in which we have heretofore permitted recovery.
In the case of Hanford v. Omaha & C.B. Street R. Co., 113 Neb. 423, 203 N.W. 643 (1925), we held that where a woman standing at a street intersection within a few feet of the track upon which two streetcars collided was greatly frightened thereby, and *700jumped back and immediately felt sick and 3 days later suffered a miscarriage, the reasonableness of her fright and subsequent conduct were questions for the jury. We further held in Hanford that where a pregnant woman is placed in a position of reasonably apprehended peril by the negligence of one owing her a legal duty, and suffers a miscarriage as a proximate result of shock and fright produced by such negligence, she may recover damages from the wrongdoer. Hanford did not require any immediate physical injury but only that any ultimate physical injury be proximately caused by the mental injury occasioned by the negligence of the defendant.
In LaSalle Extension University v. Fogarty, 126 Neb. 457, 253 N.W. 424 (1934), we specifically held that threats to sue and to appeal to one’s employer, made willfully and intentionally, for the purpose of producing mental pain and anguish in attempting to collect a debt, authorizes recovery for mental pain and suffering though no physical injury results. Admittedly, the LaSalle Extension University case involved an intentional tort, but the concern about the reliability of proof of the injury is no less or different whether committed by an intentional act or by a negligent act.
In Rasmussen v. Benson, 133 Neb. 449, 275 N.W. 674 (1937), on rehearing 135 Neb. 232, 280 N.W. 890 (1938), noted by the majority, we permitted recovery to a dairy farmer who bought a sack of bran at a farm sale and later discovered that the bran contained lethal levels of arsenic which destroyed his dairy herd and ruined his business. Plaintiff suffered great mental anguish as a result of the loss and his concern about whether others might have consumed the poisonous milk. Within a year he suffered a heart attack and died. Again, there was no immediate physical injury. The majority suggests that Rasmussen was an intentional tort case or at least reckless and wanton behavior. The case, however, *701was tried on a traditional theory of negligence.
I find it difficult to rationally distinguish why a mental injury which ultimately results in a breakdown of one’s arterial system is compensable but a mental injury resulting in an ultimate breakdown of one’s nervous system is not. This court at least implied that such distinction should not exist when, in the earlier Rasmussen case, it said at 458, 275 N.W. at 679: “A mental shock or disturbance sometimes causes injury or illness to the body, especially to the nervous system. Now, if the shock or fright was a natural consequence of what was brought about by the circumstances . of the loss of Rasmussen’s business, — the death of his live stock, — then such nervous shock was the proximate cause of Rasmussen’s physical and mental condition that led to his death.” And on rehearing in Rasmussen, we said: “Damages for actual injury resulting from fright and shock are recoverable, although not accompanied by a contemporaneous injury.” (Syllabus of the court.) Yet we are now saying as a matter of law that crying, shaking, withdrawing, experiencing depression, and attempting to commit suicide are not sufficiently physical in nature to constitute subsequent physical injury entitling one to recover if believed by a jury.
I am unable to determine how we can find, as a matter of law, that Mrs. Fournell has not suffered bodily harm sufficient to bring her within the Restatement rule announced by the majority and thereby entitle her to a trial on the merits.
For that reason, I believe that the majority is in error and I must dissent.
I make but brief comment on the majority’s second point to the effect that “under the circumstances here, conduct involving the failure of the defendant to discover termite damage to plaintiffs’ house did not create an unreasonable risk of causing bodily harm as a matter of law.” I gather that it is the position of the majority of the court that an owner of *702real estate may not be so distressed by serious damage to his or her property which cannot be easily repaired that the owner may suffer serious mental distress. And it appears that the majority also believes, as a matter of law, that one in the termite business should not recognize that an owner of property may be seriously affected emotionally by the failure to find termites in the property before a purchase. The basis for the business itself appears, as advanced by the exterminators, to be to permit one to be at rest, knowing that termites are not at work while owners are at sleep. The majority may declare that such cannot happen, but both the facts of this case and the realities of life dispute that conclusion. It is no accident that one’s home is considered one’s castle. I am at a loss to understand how we may conclude, as we have here, that “under the circumstances” (as a matter of fact) there was not an unreasonable risk “as a matter of law,” but at the same time acknowledge that there is or may be an unreasonable risk of causing bodily harm if two trolley cars come together in the presence of a pregnant woman or a dairy farmer feeds his cattle contaminated bran.
Whether we choose to adopt the more modern view concerning the right to recover for mental injury or simply acknowledge that Mrs. Fournell has indeed suffered a bodily injury from an emotional disturbance, the granting of a summary judgment in this case is in error. I would have reversed and remanded for further proceedings.
White, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741243 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:16.304784+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice.
This appeal is from an order dismissing several consolidated complaints. The dismissed actions were brought for recovery of taxes paid under protest. We affirm.
The order of dismissal was made on the face of the plaintiffs’ pleadings, and rests on the record and the decision of this Court in Knodel v. Board of County Commissioners, 269 N.W.2d 386 (S.D.1978) (Knodel).
In 1975, the Pennington County Commissioners engaged the services of a professional appraisal company to develop a formula for the assessment of agricultural land in that county. The resulting assessment method utilized soil classes and crop production factors. The taxpayers complained to their local equalization boards and before the Pennington County Board of Equalization pursuant to SDCL 10-11-16 through 10-11-27. They appealed from the adverse rulings of the County Board of Equalization to the Circuit Court. The Circuit Court agreed with the taxpayers and entered a judgment voiding the assessment as to agricultural land. By this time, the 1976 assessment had been completed in the same manner as the 1975 assessment, and a similar judgment on the 1976 assessment was entered.
The two judgments were consolidated for appeal to this Court and culminated with our decision in Knodel, supra. Appellants refrained from paying their taxes pending the outcome of that appeal. After Knodel was decided in August, 1978, they paid their taxes under protest for the years 1975 through 1977 pursuant to SDCL 10-27-2. *922In the meantime, the 1977 tax assessment had been conducted in substantially the same manner as the 1975 and the 1976 assessments. The issue before us now is whether the trial court was correct in deciding that plaintiffs are barred by the doctrines of res judicata or collateral estoppel from prosecuting this action because of their connection with Knodel. In Knodel, we said:
There being no findings the director of equalization did not substantially comply with statutory mandates; that the land was assessed in excess of its true and full value; lacked uniformity; was discriminatory or that the tax levied was unjust or inequitable; the court could not reach the conclusion as a matter of law that the assessment was void. Noncompliance with mandatory statutes and excessive valuations are not sufficient findings to grant a taxpayer relief. Findings must specifically show that if there was noncompliance with statutory mandates, the tax levied was unjust and inequitable; if excessive, the value is in excess of true and full value, lacked uniformity in the same class or was discriminatory.
These appeals fall within our scope of review. Wrong standards were applied by the trial court. The findings are not sufficient to support the conclusions on the judgments.
269 N.W.2d at 390.
The doctrines of res judicata and collateral estoppel are very close in nature, but quite different in effect. In Keith v. Willers Truck Service, 64 S.D. 274, 276, 266 N.W. 256, 257-58 (1936), we discussed those distinctions:
First, a final judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction upon the merits is a bar to any future action between the same parties or their privies upon the same cause of action so long as it remains unreversed; and, second, a point which was actually and directly in issue in a former action and was there judicially passed upon and determined by a domestic court of competent jurisdiction cannot be drawn in question in any future action between the same parties or their privies whether the cause of action in the two actions be identical or different. (Citation omitted.) Under the first rule the res which is judicata is the cause of action. Under the second, the res which may be judicata is the particular issue or fact common to both actions.
In Gottschalk v. South Dakota State Real Estate Commission, 264 N.W.2d 905 (S.D.1978), we pointed out that the second test for res judicata as set forth in Keith v. Willers Truck Service, supra, was actually related to collateral estoppel.
While res judicata prevents the reliti-gation of an issue of ultimate fact actually litigated or which could have been properly raised and determined therein, collateral estoppel only prevents the relit-igation of issues actually litigated and determined in the prior proceedings.
264 N.W.2d at 908-09 (emphasis in original).
Identity of parties is not a mere matter of form, but of substance. Parties nominally the same may be, in legal effect, different, and parties nominally different may be, in legal effect, the same. In deciding who are parties for the purpose of determining the conclusiveness of prior judgments, the courts look beyond the nominal parties, and treat all those whose interests are involved in the litigation and who conduct and control the action or defense as real parties, and hold them concluded by any judgment that may be rendered. Keith v. Willers Truck Service, supra; Carlock v. Loyd, 43 S.D. 611, 181 N.W. 835 (1921).
It appears that most, if not all, of the appellants were also parties to the appeals in Knodel. Their interests were involved in both matters as rural Pennington County taxpayers seeking relief from the taxing authority. If not nominally the same, they are in legal effect the same parties.
It is settled in this state that for purposes of res judicata, a cause of action is comprised of the facts which establish or give rise to the right a party seeks to en*923force. Golden v. Oahe Enterprises, Inc., 90 S.D. 263, 240 N.W.2d 102 (1976); Carr v. Preslar, 73 S.D. 610, 47 N.W.2d 497 (1951); Jerome v. Rust, 23 S.D. 409, 122 N.W. 344 (1909). In Golden, 90 S.D. at 276, 240 N.W .2d at 109, we noted with approval that a test employed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Hanson v. Hunt Oil Co., 505 F.2d 1237 (8th Cir. 1974), for determining whether a cause of action is the same for purposes of applying the res judicata doctrine is “ ‘whether the wrong for which redress is sought is the same in both actions.’ ” Hanson, supra, at 1280, quoting Woodbury v. Porter, 158 F.2d 194, 195 (8th Cir. 1946); See Melbourn v. Benham, 292 N.W.2d 335 (S.D.1980).
The trial court compared the petition for appeal to Circuit Court in Knodel with the complaints underlying the instant actions and correctly concluded that they sought redress for the same alleged wrong. Likewise, the facts giving rise to the rights the parties seek to enforce are the same. Accordingly, for purposes of res judicata, the Knodel appeals and these complaints involve the same cause of action. When appellants paid the taxes under protest based on the assessments determined valid in Knodel and brought the present complaints, they were actually attempting to continue the original litigation. It follows that the Knodel judgments constitute an absolute bar against the prosecution, not only of every claim or demand therein in controversy, but also of all other admissible matters that might have been offered to sustain or defeat such claims or demands. Golden v. Oahe Enterprises, Inc., supra; Chicago and North Western Ry. v. Gillis, 80 S.D. 617, 129 N.W.2d 532 (1964); Keith v. Willers Truck Service, supra; Ramsey Tp., McCook County v. Lake County, 68 S.D. 67, 298 N.W. 356 (1941). Although the 1977 assessment was not specifically involved in Knodel, it was, as noted above, conducted similarly to the 1975 and 1976 assessments, and the facts that give rise to the rights the parties seek to enforce are likewise similar.
Appellants contend, however, that their complaints in this action contain allegations not determined in Knodel. In response, appellee undertakes to document from the Knodel record where each of such claimed allegations were therein litigated. We are satisfied that if all of such allegations were not actually litigated in Knodel, they were nevertheless issues which could have been properly raised and determined therein. We conclude that the judgment in Knodel is res judicata with respect to these complaints.
The order of dismissal is affirmed.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and DUNN and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.

=== CASE 9741244 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:16.308799+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
I was not a member of this Court when the Knodel decision was handed down. I must confess that I have great misgivings concerning the precedential language used in Knodel. Therefore, I cannot, carte blanche, accept the language of Knodel which is approved by this decision. The particular language that I find repugnant in Knodel is this statement: “Noncompliance with mandatory statutes and excessive valuations are not sufficient findings to grant a taxpayer relief.” I believe that statement to be a dangerous recitation of law. It is an open sesame to administrative wrongdoing by a director of equalization. The findings of fact in Knodel were weak and this led to a demise of the taxpayer’s cause. As I read Knodel, had the findings of fact been more explicit a different result might have prevailed.
As uncomfortable as I am with the language of Knodel, I join my colleagues in affirming the trial court feeling compelled to do so by the application of the doctrine of res judicata. In the instant suits, both the facts which establish the right the taxpayers seek to enforce and the wrongs they are seeking to redress are the same as those underlying Knodel.

=== CASE 9741245 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:17.771597+00 ===

White, J.
Defendants Hudson and Maeberry appeal from a judgment of conviction in the District Court for Douglas County, Nebraska, for the crime of first degree sexual assault. Defendant Hudson was sentenced to a term of 1% to 3 years’ imprisonment, and defendant Maeberry to a term of 1 to 2 years’ imprisonment with credit for time served prior to trial. Defendants appeal their convictions. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
The evidence established that on September 26, 1979, at about 2 p.m., the prosecutrix was walking from her job to her home on South 27th Street in Omaha, Nebraska. Near 24th and Farnam Streets she was approached by defendant Hudson and asked if she “wanted to party” and “smoke some angel dust.” Defendant Maeberry was in a nearby drugstore and joined Hudson and the prosecutrix while they were *651talking. It was agreed that all three would go to the prosecutrix’s apartment. They did so, with the prosecutrix unlocking the apartment door so they could enter. She did not lock the door from the inside once they were all in the apartment but did notice later that it had been locked. In a pretrial deposition she stated that defendant Hudson locked the door from the inside, but at trial she testified that “the last person in” locked it and that she could not remember which defendant that was.
The apartment contained a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, dressing room-closet combination, and a Murphy bed which pulled down out of the wall into the living room. The prosecutrix supplied the defendants with drinking glasses for wine which defendant Maeberry had brought in, and all three sat down on a couch in the living room. Defendant Hudson then lit a rolled cigarette and passed it to the other parties. He then attempted to kiss the prosecutrix.
The prosecutrix’s version of the next-recited incidents are to a large degree contradicted by the testimony of the defendant Maeberry, who was the only defendant to testify at trial.
According to the prosecutrix, Hudson asked her to accompany him into the bathroom to snort some cocaine. As she entered the bathroom, Hudson shut the door and ordered, “Take off your clothes, bitch.” The prosecutrix rolled over into the corner of the bathroom and began crying, and Hudson threatened that he would hurt her if she did not keep quiet. He then began to choke her and she lost consciousness. When she regained consciousness, Hudson was removing her slacks. He then took her into the dressing room from the bathroom and forced her to perform fellatio. Next he ordered her to pull down the Murphy bed in the living room and lie on it and Hudson then had vaginal intercourse with her. Defendant Maeberry was on the couch during all these events. After Hudson engaged in intercourse with the prosecutrix on the bed, Mae-*652berry disrobed and also engaged in vaginal intercourse with her. Thereafter the defendants forced her to bathe, and each had vaginal intercourse with her after the bath. While Maeberry was engaging in intercourse with her this second time, Hudson again forced her to perform fellatio. Hudson then ransacked the apartment and she later found that a flute, some jewelry, and $100 cash was missing. At no time during the intercourse on the bed did she resist the defendants because she was afraid they would hurt or kill her.
Following the above-described events, defendants then insisted that the prosecutrix accompany them to California to work as a prostitute. As the three were walking down the steps to leave her apartment building, she jumped behind a young man in the hallway and began to cry that she had been raped. Hudson immediately left the building. Maeberry stayed behind to deny to the young man that he had raped the prosecutrix, but left when the young man suggested he do so. The young man then assisted the prosecutrix in telephoning a friend who took her to Lutheran Hospital. Police were summoned. The examination of the prosecutrix at the hospital established that she had engaged in sexual relations and had marks on her throat. Police made an investigation and defendants were subsequently arrested and charged.
Defendant Maeberry’s testimony was that, while the prosecutrix and Hudson were in the bathroom, the door was open and that he neither saw nor heard evidence of violence or threats upon the prosecutrix by Hudson. He maintained his belief that all the sexual acts which occurred were consensual, that the prosecutrix had asked defendants if she could go to California with them, and that the personal property was taken in order to get money for her bus ticket. On the way down the steps, according to Maeberry, Hudson then told the prosecutrix she could not accompany them to California and just after that she jumped behind *653the young man and began crying that she had been raped.
Defendants assign a number of errors, but we shall discuss only one: Whether the District Court committed reversible error in overruling both defendants’ objections to consolidation of their cases for trial.
Defendants were represented by two staff attorneys from the Douglas County Public Defender’s office. Each attorney participated actively in the trial and it is apparent that each was representing both defendants. Before trial, counsel for the defendants objected to the State’s motion to consolidate the cases for trial, but there is no indication from the record that arguments were heard on the motion or the objection. At no time before, during, or after the trial did counsel ask the trial court that separate counsel working independently of one another be appointed for the defendants, although, under the above-mentioned assignment of error, they argue strenuously in their brief that a conflict of interest existed between the two defendants. We treat the above assignment as one dealing with appointment of separate counsel, and agree with the defendants.
The prosecutrix’s testimony showed that the threats and violence which accompanied the sexual penetration, thereby making it a forcible assault, were all made or perpetrated by defendant Hudson out of Maeberry’s presence. It is defense counsel’s argument on appeal that the jury could have found Maeberry innocent of any knowledge of threats or violence accompanying the incidents, and thus innocent of forcible penetration. However, defense counsel now argue that, in order to maintain a full defense of consent for both defendants, it was necessary for them to ignore elements of the prosecutrix’s testimony which could have helped Maeberry to the detriment of Hudson. They argue that they could have impeached her more vigorously on the disparity of her deposition and trial statements as to who locked the apartment *654door from the inside in order to exonerate Maeberry had it not been so perilous to Hudson’s consent defense. Also, the prosecutrix testified that, while the threats and violence were occurring in the bathroom, .the door from that room to the living room was closed. Maeberry testified that it was open and that he heard no threats or violence. It would have been to Maeberry’s advantage, but not Hudson’s, if counsel could have stressed that the bathroom door was closed and that Maeberry had no knowledge of the threats and violence undertaken by Hudson. Counsel argue that they were forced to forego this opportunity to rehabilitate Maeberry at the expense of Hudson in order to protect Hudson’s interests.
We agree that there was a conflict between the interests of the defendants at trial which called for separate representation. However, defense counsel never brought the issue to the trial court’s attention. The question for decision then becomes: If defense counsel do not raise the conflict issue at trial, is the trial court under a duty in a multiple representation case to initiate any inquiry along those lines on its own motion?
The most recent statement of the U.S. Supreme Court on this question appears in Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 100 S. Ct. 1708, 64 L. Ed. 2d 333 (1980). In Cuyler, three defendants, all charged with the murder of two people, were represented by two attorneys at separate trials. Sullivan was convicted after resting his defense at the end of the state’s case. The other two defendants were subsequently acquitted at their trials. During none of the trials did any defendant suggest to the court that a possible conflict of interest existed which would prohibit multiple representation. The Supreme Court held that “[ujnless the trial court knows or reasonably should know that a particular conflict exists, the court need not initiate an inquiry.” The court went on to hold that, without special circumstances which would create a *655duty of inquiry, “a defendant who raised no objection at trial must demonstrate that an actual conflict of interest adversely affected his lawyer’s performance” in order to gain reversal of a conviction. Cuyler at 347-48.
The record in the present case does not demonstrate that defense counsel ever raised the conflict issue with the trial court. Thus, we must decide whether “special circumstances” existed which should have alerted the trial court to a possibility of a conflict arising between the interests of the defendants.
In finding that no special circumstances existed in Cuyler which would have put the trial court on notice of a possible conflict, Mr. Justice Powell noted that there were separate trials; no objections were made to the multiple representation; that defense counsel’s “opening argument . . . outlined a defense compatible with the view that none of the defendants was connected with the murders”; and that defense counsel’s decision to rest at the end of the state’s case was a legitimate trial tactic based on the weakness of the state’s case against Sullivan and not a red flag to the trial court of a possibility of conflict. Cuyler at 347.
In the present case, the record shows only an objection to the State’s motion to consolidate, without more. Nothing in the record indicates that the possibility of conflicting interests was brought to the trial court’s attention by defense counsel. At a pretrial hearing on another matter, the following colloquy between the court and defense counsel took place: “THE COURT: I would assume that — and I’m only assuming because no one’s made it a matter of record yet — that consent is a defense in this?
“MR. FRANK [defense counsel]: Yes, Your Honor.
“THE COURT: All right.
“MR. SIGLER [State’s attorney]: And that’s as to both?
“MR. FRANK: Yes. . . .”
*656Counsel made no mention of conflict either in this hearing or in any of the in camera hearings during the course of the trial. Defense counsel’s treatment of trial testimony referred to above, both as to the prosecutrix’s testimony and to Maeberry’s, would not of itself rise to the level of “special circumstances” sufficient to impose a duty of inquiry on the trial court as to conflict, since both represent legitimate trial tactics based on a mutual defense of consent.
However, after the jury was instructed, retired, and began deliberating, the trial court requested it to stop its deliberation and return to the courtroom for further instruction. At that time the court gave an aider and abettor instruction, even though it had earlier informed all counsel that it would not honor the State’s request to give that instruction. The instruction emphasized the difference between the respective roles played by Hudson and by Maeberry in the alleged assault, and the resulting peril of their being represented by the same counsel.
The Cuyler opinion places significant emphasis on the fact that there were separate trials for the co-defendants in finding that no special circumstances existed. “The provision of separate trials for Sullivan and his codefendants significantly reduced the potential for a divergence in their interests.” Cuyler at 347. In the present case, however, the trial was consolidated and, in fact, the court specifically denied a defense request for separate trials. While an objection to consolidation, without more, does not of itself bring about the requirement of an inquiry into conflict, we think that it should place the trial court slightly more on its guard to inquire when divergence between the defendants’ interests becomes apparent as it did here when the trial court recalled the jury to give the aider and abettor instruction. Although the' primary responsibility of watching for conflict remains on the bar, the trial court must still be “watchful for indicia of conflict during the trial.” United States v. Mandell, 525 F.2d *657671, 677 (7th Cir. 1975).
As noted in United States v. Carrigan, 543 F.2d 1053, 1055 (2nd Cir. 1976): “When a potential conflict of interest arises . . . the proper course of action for the trial judge is to conduct a hearing to determine whether a conflict exists to the degree that a defendant may be prevented from receiving advice and assistance sufficient to afford him the quality of representation guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.” In light of Cuyler, this hearing must take place when the requisite “special circumstances” arise. At the time, then, when the trial court in the present case gave the aider and abettor instruction, it should have held this type of hearing since it apparently had recognized a divergence in the respective levels of participation in the alleged assault of each defendant, indicating a possible conflict in their interests. See Wood v. Georgia, 49 U.S.L.W. 4218, decided March 4, 1981. Since this hearing was not held, we reverse and remand for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded for new trial.
Clinton, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9741247 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:19.280891+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court: On March 23, 1995, this court rendered its opinion in Northern Illinois Home Builders Ass’n v. County of Du Page, 165 Ill. 2d 25 (1995) (hereinafter referred to as NIHBA), holding unconstitutional the first of two state enabling statutes, and Du Page County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, which, respectively, authorized and imposed transportation impact fees on new development. In the context of that case, this court stated, “monies collected thereunder should be returned.” NIHBA, 165 Ill. 2d at 35-36, 50. The appellants in this case, fee payers who were not parties in NIHBA, who waited more than five years after they had paid the impact fees in question to file for a refund, and who indeed filed almost a full year after NIHBA was decided, now seek, by various procedural means legal and equitable, a refund of fees they paid under the invalidated statute and ordinances. Although there are several facets to the issue, their right to a refund is the central question before the court. We set forth hereafter facts necessary to an understanding of our disposition. In 1987, the Illinois legislature enacted former section 5 — 608(a) of the Illinois Highway Code (the enabling act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 121, par. 5 — 608(a), repealed by Pub. Act 86 — 97, § 2, eff. July 26, 1989). The 1987 enabling act allowed counties with populations between 400,000 and 1 million inhabitants to establish transportation impact districts and collect transportation impact fees from persons constructing new developments in those districts. Pursuant to the enabling act, Du Page County passed several ordinances creating transportation impact districts and providing for the collection of road impact fees from builders (Du Page County Ordinances ODT— 016 — 88, ODT — 021—89, ODT — 21A—89, ODT — 021B— 89). The plaintiff, Sundance Homes, Inc. (Sundance), is a development company which constructs new residences in Du Page County. Between November 22, 1988, and July 25, 1990, the county collected road impact fees from the plaintiff and other homebuilders. On July 26, 1989, the legislature repealed the enabling act and passed the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law (605 ILCS 5/5 — 901 et seq. (West 1992)). As a result of that legislation, the county enacted a new ordinance effective July 25, 1990, authorizing the collection of road impact fees pursuant to the new law. The instant case concerns only those impact fees collected by the county prior to July 25, 1990. Between January 17, 1989, and July 25, 1990, plaintiff paid a total of $63,580 in road impact fees to the county. The plaintiff submitted each payment under protest. In 1988, the plaintiff and several other home-builders filed a lawsuit against the county in the circuit court of Du Page County. Home Builders Ass’n of Greater Chicago v. County of Du Page, No. 88 — MR—683 (Circuit Court of Du Page County). In that case, the plaintiff requested a declaration that the enabling act and the Du Page County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto were unconstitutional. The plaintiff also sought the entry of an order requiring the county to refund all road impact fees paid by the plaintiff and the other named home-builders. Although the plaintiff moved for judgment on the pleadings in that case on June 15, 1990, no judgment was ever entered on the merits and the case was voluntarily dismissed in November 1990. The constitutionality of the enabling act of 1987, and the Du Page County implementing ordinances, was again attacked in a separate lawsuit brought by different home-builders in NIHBA. As previously noted, on March 23, 1995, this court filed an opinion in NIHBA, holding unconstitutional the enabling act of 1987, and the Du Page County implementing ordinances, and stating that “the monies collected thereunder should be returned.” NIHBA, 165 Ill. 2d at 35-36, 50. The appellants in the instant case were not parties in NIHBA. Following this court’s holding in NIHBA, the plaintiff requested that the county return the $63,580 in road impact fees it had paid between January 17, 1989, and July 25, 1990. The county refused the plaintiffs request for a refund. Plaintiff filed the instant class action suit on February 8, 1996, requesting that the county be ordered to return all of the road impact fees paid between November 22, 1998, and July 25, 1990. The plaintiff alleged that, during this period, the county had collected an aggregate amount of $6,194,056.22 in impact fees from the members of the class. As subsequently amended, the plaintiffs complaint consisted of three counts. Count I was entitled “mandamus” and sought an order requiring the county to immediately return the impact fees paid by each class member. Count II was entitled “declaratory judgment” and sought an order declaring that the county was indebted to each class member in an amount equal to the total road impact fees paid by that class member. Count III was entitled “restitution, assumpsit, unjust enrichment, and recovery of payment” and sought an order that the county be required to deposit all of the collected road impact fees into a common fund for the benefit of the members of the class. On July 10, 1996, the county filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Code) (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619 (West 1996)). In its motion, the county argued that plaintiffs complaint was time-barred by section 13 — 205 of the Code, which imposes a five-year limitation period on “all civil actions not otherwise provided for.” 735 ILCS 5/13 — 205 (West 1996). The county argued that the plaintiff had failed to file its complaint within five years from the date its cause of action accrued, according to the county, the date it had actually paid the road impact fees. Alternatively, the county argued that the plaintiffs complaint should be barred under the doctrine of laches. In response to the motion, the plaintiff argued that its cause of action did not accrue until this court filed its opinion in NIHBA on March 23, 1995. The plaintiff contended that, prior to the ruling in NIHBA, it had no right to a refund of the impact fees. The plaintiff therefore concluded that the instant class action was a timely attempt to “enforce” this court’s ruling in NIHBA that the monies collected pursuant to the invalidated ordinances “be returned.” On November 5, 1996, the trial court denied the county’s motion to dismiss. On March 4, 1997, the circuit court entered an order certifying as a class “[a]ll persons or entities who paid impact fees to the [County] and/or claim a refund pursuant to *** Ordinance Nos. [ODT] — 016—88; ODT — 021— 89; ODT — 021A—89; and ODT — 02IB—89 during the period of the effective enforcement of said ordinance[s] which was from November 22, 1988, through July 25, 1990, which ordinance[s] w[ere] declared to be unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.” The trial court also identified as a subclass those homebuyers who were entitled to a refund because their developer/builder had incorporated the charge for the road impact fees into the purchase price of their homes. On September 22, 1997, the plaintiff filed a motion for summary judgment as to each count of its complaint. The plaintiff argued that there existed no genuine issue as to the county’s obligation to return the road impact fees and as to the amount of the refund due. The plaintiff therefore concluded that it was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. On November 24, 1997, the trial court entered an order granting the motion for summary judgment. The county filed a notice of appeal from that order, but the appellate court dismissed the appeal. Sundance Homes, Inc. v. County of Du Page, No. 2 — 97—1232 (February 6, 1998) (unpublished order of dismissal). On March 13, 1998, the circuit court entered an order creating a common fund for the benefit of the class and directing the Du Page County treasurer to transfer $6,194,056.22 into the fund. Also in March of 1998, the court-approved “Notice of Class Action and Hearing on Attorneys’ Fees” was sent to all ascertainable members of the class by first class mail and was published in certain newspapers. Accompanying the notice was a copy of the plaintiffs petition for attorney fees. The notice advised the class members that they could either register their claims for a refund out of the common fund or “opt-out” of the class. By the end of the registration period, class members representing claims totaling $68,000 had chosen to “opt-out” of the class. Class and subclass members representing claims totaling $2,406,745 registered to participate in the distribution of the common fund. Of those claims, there were several dual registrations by homebuilders and home buyers claiming a refund to the same $37,800 in impact fees. On September 3, 1998, the circuit court entered various orders providing that (1) the county had no standing to be heard on the plaintiffs petition for attorney fees; (2) attorney fees would be calculated based upon the entire common fund and not just the claimed portion of the fund; (3) attorney fees would be paid from the unclaimed portion of the fund; (4) an additional $37,800 would be paid out of the unclaimed fund in order to satisfy all of the dual claims; and (5) the class would receive prejudgment interest at a rate of 5% from the date the action was filed. On June 8, 1998, Fifield Companies, Inc., Cambridge Homes, Inc., Cambridge Properties, Lexington Homes, L.L.C., Prentiss Properties Acquisition Partners, L.P., Kingsport Development, Inc., Strategic Realty Advisors, Inc., Catellus Development Corporation, Plitt Theatres, Inc., and Toys “R” Us, Inc. (collectively referred to as the intervenors), filed motions pursuant to section 2 — 804(a) of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2 — 804(a) (West 1998)) to intervene in the class action in order to challenge the class certification and the plaintiffs petition for attorney fees. Each of these entities had paid road impact fees under the invalidated ordinances and were members of the class. Although the circuit court did not rule on the motions to intervene, the movants did participate in all aspects of the lawsuit after June 8, 1998. On November 4, 1998, the circuit court conducted a hearing on the plaintiffs petition for attorney fees. At the hearing, plaintiffs counsel presented a detailed summary of the legal services performed on behalf of the class and the expenses incurred in prosecuting the case. Plaintiffs counsel also provided the testimony of two expert witnesses who had experience in class action litigation. Both witnesses outlined the benefits and results achieved for the class and concluded that an award of attorney fees in an amount equal to one-third of the common fund would be appropriate. On January 15, 1999, the circuit court entered an order awarding 21.289% of the common fund as attorney fees. The common fund, including prejudgment interest, totaled $7,045,720. Applying the trial court’s percentage award to the common fund resulted in a fee award of $1.5 million. Also on January 15, 1999, the trial court entered a final dispositional order, providing that (1) $2,737,672 (claims of $2,406,745 plus prejudgment interest of $330,927) be paid out of the common fund to satisfy all of the registered claims of the class; (2) $1.5 million be paid out of the remaining unclaimed portion of the common fund to satisfy the award of attorney fees; (3) $68,000 of the unclaimed portion of the common fund be returned to the county to satisfy the potential claims of class members who had “opted-out”; (4) $37,800 be paid out of the unclaimed portion of the common fund to satisfy all of the dual claims made by homebuilders and homeowners; (5) the remainder of the unclaimed portion of the fund be returned to the county’s general fund subject to the county’s reduction of its next real estate tax levy on all county taxpayers by that amount; and (6) enforcement of the order would be stayed pending an appeal. At the time the trial court entered its final dispositional order, the intervenors renewed their request for a ruling on their still-pending motions to intervene. The intervenors sought a ruling on their motions for the express purpose of protecting their rights and interests in any appeal from the circuit court’s judgment. Over the objection of the attorney representing the class, the circuit court granted the motions to intervene. The county did not object to the intervenors’ motions. Following entry of the circuit court’s final dispositional order, the county filed a timely notice of appeal. The appellate court reversed, rejecting plaintiffs assertion that the instant litigation merely represents an attempt to “enforce” this court’s judgment in NIHBA, and holding both that the statute of limitation set forth in section 13 — 205 of the Code barred this action and that the doctrine of laches would have barred the action in any event. No. 2 — 99—0125 (unpublished order under Rule 23). We subsequently allowed timely filed petitions for leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 315 (177 Ill. 2d R. 315), and now affirm the judgment of the appellate court. We begin our analysis with observations on the nature of time limitations applicable to legal and equitable actions by way of statutes of limitation and the equitable doctrine of laches, respectively, focusing specifically on refund litigation. The purpose of a statute of limitation is to discourage the presentation of stale claims and to encourage diligence in the bringing of actions. Tom Olesker’s Exciting World of Fashion, Inc. v. Dun & Bradstreet, Inc., 61 Ill. 2d 129, 137 (1975). Statutes of limitation and repose represent society’s recognition that predictability and finality are desirable, indeed indispensable, elements of the orderly administration of justice (Sepmeyer v. Holman, 162 Ill. 2d 249, 256 (1994)) that must be balanced against the right of every citizen to seek redress for a legally recognized wrong. In achieving this accommodation of interests, it is first necessary to determine when a given cause of action “accrues,” so as to commence the running of the relevant statutory period. Courts of this state have held that a statute of limitation begins to run when the party to be barred has the right to invoke the aid of the court to enforce his remedy. Milnes v. Hunt, 311 Ill. App. 3d 977, 980 (2000); Rohter v. Passarella, 246 Ill. App. 3d 860, 869 (1993). Stated another way, a limitation period begins “when facts exist which authorize one party to maintain an action against another.” Davis v. Munie, 235 Ill. 620, 622 (1908); Bank of Ravenswood v. City of Chicago, 307 Ill. App. 3d 161, 167 (1999). It has been accurately noted that a limitation period will not await commencement until a plaintiff has assurance of the success of an action. Weger v. Shell Oil Co., 966 F.2d 216, 219 (7th Cir. 1992) citing Nendza v. Board of Review of the Department of Labor, 105 Ill. App. 3d 437, 442 (1982) (discovery rule not applicable where a plaintiff waits to file suit or a claim until he has some assurance he will be successful on the merits of his claim). Although an impact fee is not a tax (see NIHBA, 165 Ill. 2d at 42), the similarities between payment of a tax, and payment of an impact fee, are sufficient to render instructive tax cases addressing the issue of accrual. One such example in the federal system is the United States Supreme Court’s decision in United States v. Dalm, 494 U.S. 596, 108 L. Ed. 2d 548, 110 S. Ct. 1361 (1990). In Dalm,, the Supreme Court held that a federal limitation period, applicable to tax refund claims for overpayment, began to run when a taxpayer tendered payment of a tax to the government, not when the taxpayer discovered that the payment was erroneous. In so holding, the Court noted: “The very purpose of statutes of limitations in the tax context is to bar the assertion of a refund claim after a certain period of time has passed, without regard to whether the claim would otherwise he meritorious. That a taxpayer does not learn until after the limitations period has run that a tax was paid in error, and that he or she has a ground upon which to claim a refund, does not operate to lift the statutory bar.” Dalm,, 494 U.S. at 609 n.7, 108 L. Ed. 2d at 562 n.7, 110 S. Ct. at 1369 n.7. Limitation provisions in our state revenue statutes indicate that the time period for a claim runs from either the time a return is filed or the time the tax is paid. Section 911(a)(1) of the Illinois Income Tax Act (35 ILCS 5/911 (a)(1) (West 1998)), for example, provides as follows: “A claim for refund shall be filed not later than 3 years after the date the return was filed (in the case of returns required under Article 7 of this Act respecting any amounts withheld as tax, not later than 3 years after the 15th day of the 4th month following the close of the calendar year in which such withholding was made), or one year after the date the tax was paid, whichever is the later[.]” As section 911(a)(1) indicates, and as other tax limitation statutes discussed hereafter will show, our legislature intended, subject to established equitable “principles” of tolling, such as the appropriate application of the discovery rule, that the right to request a refund commence and terminate on dates certain. The date of accrual is generally the date that the tax is paid. Consistent with the need for certainty and finality, it is a principle of long standing in this state that once a statute of limitation has expired, a defendant has a right to invoke the bar of the limitation period as a defense to a cause of action. M.E.H. v. L.H., 177 Ill. 2d 207, 214-15 (1997). As this court recently stated in Clay v. Kuhl, 189 Ill. 2d 603, 609 (2000), “under Illinois law, the barring of an action by a statute of limitation creates a *** right in favor of the defendant, and the action cannot later be revived.” If, as this court stated in Clay, subsequent legislative action cannot revive a cause of action already barred by a rule of limitation, it would seem to follow that subsequent court decisions cannot revive a civil cause of action not timely filed, at least in those instances where a plaintiff was fully aware of the basis for his claim, or should have been, he did not suffer from a legal disability, and the facts do not demonstrate other recognized grounds for equitable tolling. Federal decisions appear to sanction strict application of statutes of limitation in the area of tax litigation, even where the law has been altered by judicial decision. “[Ljegal principles, even when applied retroactively, do not apply to cases already closed.” Hernandez-Rodriguez v. Pasquarell, 118 F.3d 1034, 1042 (5th Cir. 1997), citing Reynoldsville Casket Co. v. Hyde, 514 U.S. 749, 758, 131 L. Ed. 2d 820, 830, 115 S. Ct. 1745, 1751 (1995). The Supreme Court in Hyde considered “tax examples” that presented “different, remedial problems.” Considering one such example, the Court stated: “Suppose a State collects taxes under a taxing statute that this Court later holds unconstitutional. Taxpayers then sue for a refund of the unconstitutionally collected taxes. Retroactive application of the Court’s holding would seem to entitle the taxpayers to a refund of taxes. But what if a pre-existing, separate, independent rule of state law, having nothing to do with retroactivity — a rule containing certain procedural requirements for any refund suit— nonetheless barred the taxpayers’ refund suit? [Citations.] Depending upon whether or not this independent rule satisfied other provisions of the Constitution, it could independently bar the taxpayers’ refund claim.” Hyde, 514 U.S. at 756, 131 L. Ed. 2d at 828-29, 115 S. Ct. at 1750. In James B. Beam Distilling Co. v. Georgia, 501 U.S. 529, 535, 541-42, 544, 115 L. Ed. 2d 481, 488, 492-93, 111 S. Ct. 2439, 2443, 2446-48 (1991), a tax refund case, Justice Souter, announcing the judgment of the Court, made clear that court decisions cannot be applied retroactively to civil causes already barred by statutes of limitation or res judicata. The Supreme Court has repeatedly affirmed the notion that a statute of limitation may bar a tax refund action, notwithstanding the Court’s ruling that the state’s taxing statute is unconstitutional, and irrespective of the Court’s retroactive application of that ruling. See McKesson Corp. v. Division of Alcoholic Beverages & Tobacco, Department of Business Regulation, 496 U.S. 18, 27, 45, 110 L. Ed. 2d 17, 29, 41, 110 S. Ct. 2238, 2245, 2254-55 (1990) (acknowledging that statutes of limitation may be dispositive in such cases); Ward v. Board of County Commissioners, 253 U.S. 17, 25, 64 L. Ed. 751, 759, 40 S. Ct. 419, 422 (1920) (recognizing refund claim could be barred if there was “any valid local [limitations] law in force when the claim was filed”). See also United States v. Estate of Donnelly, 397 U.S. 286, 296, 25 L. Ed. 2d 312, 319-20, 90 S. Ct. 1033, 1039 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring, noting that, at some point a “transaction has acquired such a degree of finality that the rights of the parties should be considered frozen. *** [I]n the civil area that moment should be when the transaction is beyond challenge either because the statute of limitations has run or the rights of the parties have been fixed by litigation and have become res judicata”). It would make no sense for the Court to consistently reaffirm this principle if the cause of action for a refund did not begin to run until the Court held a state taxing statute unconstitutional. A statute of limitation would not be implicated. Clearly, the action accrues when the tax is paid. Undoubtedly, statutes of limitation are valid procedural restrictions which may be invoked to bar an otherwise meritorious claim for a refund, even when that claim is based upon a tax statute that has been held unconstitutional. We turn now from our discussion of statutes of limitation to address the related equitable doctrine of laches. This court has defined “laches” as “a neglect or omission to assert a right, taken in conjunction with a lapse of time of more or less duration, and other circumstances causing prejudice to an adverse party, as will operate to bar relief in equity.” Meyers v. Kissner, 149 Ill. 2d 1, 12 (1992). For laches to apply, a plaintiff must have knowledge of his right, yet fail to assert it in a timely manner. Bremer v. Bremer, 411 Ill. 454, 468 (1952). Although statutes of limitation, applicable in legal actions, are not directly controlling in suits seeking equitable relief, courts ordinarily follow statutes of limitation as convenient measures for determining the length of time that ought to operate as a bar to an equitable cause of action. Meyers, 149 Ill. 2d at 12. However, depending upon the particular circumstances before the court, equitable relief may be refused although the time fixed by the statute of limitations has not expired, or conversely, relief may be granted even though the limitation period has long since elapsed. Meyers, 149 Ill. 2d at 12. Thus, for better or worse, depending upon one’s view of the importance and continuing relevance of the law-equity dichotomy, how we categorize various actions tends to control the limitation schemes applied to them: generally, statutes of limitation apply to actions at law; laches is the doctrine of limitation applied to actions in equity. Obviously, the shrewd advocate, faced with a limitation problem, will attempt to manipulate the outcome by casting his action as one in equity in order to take advantage of the amorphous quality of laches analysis. However, laches analysis is no longer mechanically applied to all actions denominated equitable, particularly where such an application would frustrate the intent of the legislature. For example, although a constructive trust is considered to be an equitable remedy imposed by a court to prevent “unjust enrichment” (In re Liquidation of Security Casualty Co., 127 Ill. 2d 434, 447 (1989)), this court has held the five-year statute of limitation of section 13 — 205 applicable to an action for constructive trusts. Hagney v. Lopeman, 147 Ill. 2d 458, 462 (1992); Chicago Park District v. Kenroy, Inc., 78 Ill. 2d 555, 560-61 (1980). The same five-year statute of limitation has been applied to an action seeking restitution of taxes erroneously paid, based upon the same theory of “unjust enrichment,” an action “at law” (Burns Philp Food, Inc. v. Cavalea Continental Freight, Inc., 135 F.3d 526, 527-28 (7th Cir. 1998), citing, inter alia, Partipilo v. Hallman, 156 Ill. App. 3d 806 (1987)) governed by “principles of equity” (Burns, 135 F.3d at 528, citing Board of Highway Commissioners v. City of Bloomington, 253 Ill. 164, 174 (1911)). In so holding, the Bums court commented on the “decreasingly important (and therefore increasingly hazy) line between law and equity.” Burns, 135 F.3d at 528. While we need not comment on the propriety of that observation, we do note the inclination of courts to circumscribe the reach of equity in revenue cases and the apparent intent of our legislature to impose shorter limitation periods, and thus greater certainty, in the area of tax refund litigation. The federal government, like Illinois, imposes detailed statutes of limitation on tax refund claims. Section 6511(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 requires an aggrieved taxpayer to file any claim for refund within three years from the time the tax return was filed or two years from the time the tax was paid, whichever period expires later. 26 U.S.C. § 6511(a) (1994). We have previously referred to the application of that statute in our discussion of Dalm. We note that the same statute of limitation was at issue in United States v. Brockamp, 519 U.S. 347, 136 L. Ed. 2d 818, 117 S. Ct. 849 (1997), wherein the taxpayers seeking a refund argued that the statute was subject to equitable tolling for nonstatutory equitable reasons. The Supreme Court concluded that Congress did not intend the equitable tolling doctrine to apply beyond the provisions of the statute. Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Breyer stated: “Tax law, after all, is not normally characterized by case-specific exceptions reflecting individualized equities. The nature of the underlying subject matter — tax collection — underscores the linguistic point. *** To read an ‘equitable tolling’ exception into § 6511 could create serious administrative problems by forcing the IRS to respond to, and perhaps litigate, large numbers of late claims, accompanied by requests for ‘equitable tolling’ which, upon close inspection, might turn out to lack sufficient equitable justification. [Citation.] The nature and potential magnitude of the administrative problem suggest that Congress decided to pay the price of occasional unfairness in individual cases (penalizing a taxpayer whose claim is unavoidably delayed) in order to maintain a more workable tax enforcement system. At the least it tells us that Congress would likely have wanted to decide explicitly whether, or just where and when, to expand the statute’s limitations periods, rather than delegate to the courts a generalized power to do so wherever a court concludes that equity so requires.” Brockamp, 519 U.S. at 352-53, 136 L. Ed. 2d at 823-24, 117 S. Ct. at 852. Liké section 1611(a) of the. Internal Revenue Code, our own state statutes of limitation, applicable to claims for tax refunds or credits, generally apply a maximum three-year limitation to such claims. See 35 ILCS 5/911(a)(l) (West 1998) (Illinois Income Tax Act); 35 ILCS 105/21 (West 1998) (Use Tax Act); 35 ILCS 115/19 (West 1998) (Service Occupation Tax Act); 35 ILCS 120/6 (West 1998) (Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act); 35 ILCS 610/6 (West 1998) (Messages Tax Act); 35 ILCS 615/6 (West 1998) (Gas Revenue Tax Act); 35 ILCS 620/6 (West 1998) (Public Utilities Revenue Act); 35 ILCS 630/10 (West 1998) (Telecommunications Excise Tax Act). These statutes contain few, if any, exceptions to their terms. The original 1987 enabling act for the collection of impact fees contained no provisions specifically addressing refund claims or procedures for challenging the collection of impact fees. However, effective July 26, 1989, the legislature enacted the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law and, with it, a very limited provision pertaining specifically to the refund of unencumbered impact fees and a separate “appeals process” apparently intended to cover every other conceivable challenge to the collection of impact fees. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 121, pars. 5 — 916, 5 — 917. The former provision (now 605 ILCS 5/5 — 916 (West 1998)) provided as follows: “All impact fees collected by a unit of local government shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee or to that person’s successor in interest whenever the unit of local government fails to encumber by contract impact fees collected within 5 years of the date on which such impact fees were due to be paid.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 121, par. 5 — 916. The statute requires that the person claiming a refund file “a petition with the unit of local government imposing the impact fee, seeking a refund within one year from the date that such fees were required to be encumbered by contract.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 121, par. 5 — 916. Section 5 — 916 pertains only to refunds based upon the local governmental entity’s failure to encumber the fees by contract within the five-year period. All other claims would appear to fall under the umbrella of section 5 — 917, which contains no limitation provision of its own. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 121, par. 5 — 917. Neither section was in effect when the impact fees at issue in this case were collected; however, section 5 — 918 of .the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law, a transition clause, does purport to affect funds previously collected, stating, “Nothing in this Section shall require the refund of impact fees previously collected *** provided that such impact fees are encumbered as provided in Section 5 — 916.” 605 ILCS 5/5 — 918(c) (West 1998). Section 5 — 918 places the onus on counties to use or lose fees collected and earmarked for road improvement under the prior enabling act and implementing ordinances. With these observations and authorities in mind, we turn now to the specific issues raised by the appellants (plaintiff and interveners) in this case, beginning with the appellants’ suggestion that they are entitled to “enforce” this court’s judgment in NIHBA. A judgment has been traditionally defined as “a determination by the court on the issues presented by the pleadings which ascertains and fixes absolutely and finally the rights of the parties in the lawsuit.” (Emphasis added.) Towns v. Yellow Cab Co., 73 Ill. 2d 113, 119 (1978), citing 49 C.J.S. Judgments § 5 (1947). Generally speaking, persons not parties are not affected by a judgment (50 C.J.S. Judgments § 538 (1997)), they are not bound by it (Richards v. Jefferson County, Alabama, 517 U.S. 793, 798, 135 L. Ed. 2d 76, 83, 116 S. Ct. 1761, 1765-66 (1996)), and they may not enforce it (50 C.J.S. Judgments § 693 (1997)). As the county points out, the Code of Civil Procedure provides the means by which additional parties may be joined in a pending action (735 ILCS 5/2 — 404 (West 1998)), those interested in the outcome may intervene (735 ILCS 5/2 — 408 (West 1998)), and a single party may represent a class of litigants (735 ILCS 5/2 — 801 et seq. (West 1998)). Plaintiff and interveners are obviously aware of those procedures: they have employed them. Plaintiff was evidently aware that a basis existed for challenging the constitutionality of the statute and ordinances at issue: it did so in 1988, subsequently dismissing its action voluntarily. Although appellants take issue with the appellate court’s consideration of that case as a matter not of record here, we note that a court of review may take judicial notice of prior litigation. See In re Estate of Gebis, 186 Ill. 2d 188, 196 (1999). The point is the plaintiff and intervenors could have joined in the NIHBA case; they did not. Notwithstanding their inaction, they might still have tasted the fruit of the NIHBA ruling first-hand had they timely filed within the statute of limitation applicable to them. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 501 U.S. at 542, 115 L. Ed. 2d at 492-93, 111 S. Ct. at 2447. They did not. This court’s statement in NIHBA regarding the return of monies collected under the statute and ordinances evinced our view of the proper disposition of funds as between the parties then before the court, the parties over whom this court had jurisdiction. We did not state, nor did we intend to imply, that our judgment requires the County of Du Page to refund impact fees paid by nonparties. Next, the appellants argue that their action was timely filed because their right to a refund accrued, and a refund became “recoverably certain” only upon this court’s decision in NIHBA. Appellants, variously, support their contention that a court decision can “create” a cause of action with citations to People v. Meyerowitz, 61 Ill. 2d 200 (1975), Kelly v. Chicago Park District, 409 Ill. 91, 98 (1951), People ex rel. Foreman v. Village of Round Lake, 171 Ill. App. 3d 443, 456 (1988), Neely v. United States, 546 F.2d 1059, 1068 (3d Cir. 1976), and United States v. One 1961 Chevrolet Impala Sedan, 457 F.2d 1353, 1358 (5th Cir. 1972). Although we believe the authorities we have heretofore cited are sufficient to demonstrate the fallacy of appellants’ reasoning, we will briefly address appellants’ authorities which merit comment. Appellants argue that Kelly supports their position insofar as the Kelly court held that a statute of limitation did not begin to run upon employees’ salary claims, and indeed the cause of action on same did not even accrue, until the employees established their rights of employment through a separate mandamus action. Assuming, without addressing, the continued vitality of the holding in Kelly, we do not believe it applies to the facts and circumstances of the present case. It is obviously not only permissible, but desirable, to bring related claims at once in a single action. Plaintiffs in NIHBA joined constitutional challenges and refund claims in their successful lawsuit. On the basis of the authorities we have previously discussed, we reject without further comment the contention that Kelly controls in the context of fee or tax refund litigation. Although we are always open to consideration of cases from other jurisdictions in order that we might glean wisdom found therein, and while federal court decisions interpreting a federal act are actually binding upon our Illinois courts (Busch v. Graphic Color Corp., 169 Ill. 2d 325, 335 (1996); Hilst v. General Motors Corp., 305 Ill. App. 3d 792, 795 (1999)), we are not bound by those decisions insofar as their applicability is argued on issues relating solely to state law. Hanrahan v. Williams, 174 Ill. 2d 268, 277 (1996). With respect to the federal circuit court cases upon which appellants rely, we acknowledge that they do indeed purport to address accrual of an action; however, the significance that appellants accord their analysis in this context is misplaced. The decisions relate to the effect of subsequent changes in the decisional law on prior criminal convictions and ancillary fines, penalties and costs paid pursuant thereto, not collected taxes or fees and claims for refunds; they deal with federal, not state, statutes; and, although they couch their analyses in terms of “accrual” of an action, in substance they invoke “discovery” principles and involve retroactive application of the United States Supreme Court’s decisions in Marchetti v. United States, 390 U.S. 39, 19 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 697 (1968), and Grosso v. United States, 390 U.S. 62, 19 L. Ed. 2d 906, 88 S. Ct. 709 (1968), which were accorded “full” retroactivity in United States v. United States Coin & Currency, 401 U.S. 715, 724, 28 L. Ed. 2d 434, 441, 91 S. Ct. 1041, 1046 (1971), to causes which had already accrued. It seems to us these circuit court cases unnecessarily pervert and distort concepts of accrual in order to bring their facts squarely within the realm of retroactive application. If the cause of action had not already accrued, it would seem there would have been no need for the Neely court to state that the statute of limitation was “suspended” until the date of the Marchetti and Grosso decisions. Neely, 546 F.2d at 1068. Moreover, a closer reading of these cases reveals that the courts were in fact applying a discovery rule (appropriately or not) to already accrued causes, as evinced by the Neely court’s statement that “federal courts have sometimes postponed the running of the limitations period in actions against the United States where the claimant did not know, and in the exercise of reasonable diligence could not learn, that a cause of action had accrued.” (Emphasis added.) Neely, 546 F.2d at 1068. By application of the Neely and Chevrolet Impala analyses, a cause of action would not accrue on a constitutional claim until the first challenge succeeded, an event which could conceivably take place decades after final judgment was entered. This absurd analysis, which defies accepted notions of finality, is patently contrary to the reasoning of numerous federal decisions previously cited and is inconsistent with principles expressed in our own statutory schemes. It seems clear to us that accrual was really not the issue; the federal decisions upon which appellants rely were apparently grounded upon a hybrid analysis merging elements of the discovery rule and retroactive application of Marchetti and Grosso. Whatever the federal circuit courts’ views may have been on those issues, we are not, as we have stated, bound by them. We address here state questions in the context of a civil case. In Meyerowitz, also cited by appellants, this court considered an issue similar to those presented in the federal cases appellants have cited. Like Neely and Chevrolet Impala, Meyerowitz was a criminal case; unlike those cases, this court unequivocally founded its decision on principles of retroactive application. In Meyerowitz, with Justices Underwood and Ryan dissenting, this court accorded its decision in People v. McCabe, 49 Ill. 2d 338 (1971) “complete retroactive application,” discussing and relying on the decisions in Marchetti, Grosso, and United States Coin & Currency. Meyerowitz, 61 Ill. 2d at 208-11. Based on the application of McCabe, this court held that “money, having been received in payment of fines imposed as an incident to judgments of conviction, should be ordered refunded as an incident to the vacation of the judgments under which it was ordered paid.” Meyerowitz, 61 Ill. 2d at 213-14. Nothing was said in Meyerowitz regarding the time that the defendants’ actions accrued. The State did not contend that the defendants’ actions were untimely; indeed, it acquiesced in the retroactive application of McCabe to terminate the probation of defendant Meyerowitz and to vacate the judgments of conviction of all the defendants, arguing only that Mc-Cabe should not be given retroactive effect to the extent of requiring refunds of fines paid as punishment for preMcCabe marijuana convictions. The State essentially conceded that the actions could properly be brought by various procedural means. Meyerowitz, 61 Ill. 2d at 204-05. We also emphasize that the decision of this court in Meyerowitz was grounded upon the United States Supreme Court’s decision in United States Coin & Currency, wherein Justice Harlan, writing for the majority, differentiated between forfeitures and fines paid pursuant to criminal convictions and the collection of taxes in a civil action. United States Coin & Currency, 401 U.S. at 718, 28 L. Ed. 2d at 437, 91 S. Ct. at 1043. It is within our inherent power, as the highest court of this state, to give a decision prospective or retroactive application. Castaneda v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n, 132 Ill. 2d 304, 328 (1989). Analysis of that question in civil cases is governed by the test set forth in Chevron Oil Co. v. Huson, 404 U.S. 97, 30 L. Ed. 2d 296, 92 S. Ct. 349 (1971). Aleckson v. Village of Round Lake Park, 176 Ill. 2d 82, 88 (1997). Different considerations apply in criminal cases. See People v. Dean, 175 Ill. 2d 244, 252-53 (1997). We are concerned here, however, strictly with civil application, and certainly in that context we may “declin[e] to give [a] previous opinion retroactive effect, at least with respect to the parties *** before the *** court.” Aleckson, 176 Ill. 2d at 86. In this case, our analysis does not even reach that point because the statute of limitation applies and has elapsed. The sound reasoning of the United States Supreme Court in James B. Beam Distilling Co. expresses our view in this refund matter. As Justice Souter stated in James B. Beam Distilling Co., without objection from his colleagues, “retroactivity in civil cases must be limited by the need for finality [citation]; once suit is barred by res judicata or by statutes of limitation or repose, a new rule cannot reopen the door already closed.” James B. Beam Distilling Co., 501 U.S. at 541, 115 L. Ed. 2d at 492, 111 S. Ct. at 2446. The door is closed in this instance. Section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure sets forth a catchall statute of limitation for “all civil actions not otherwise provided for.” 735 ILCS 5/13 — 205 (West 1998). This court has previously acknowledged the applicability of section 13 — 205 to tax refund cases in which the claimants challenged a municipal sales tax, stating that aggrieved “taxpayers cannot recover disputed taxes if their suit is barred by the statute of limitations.” Geary v. Dominick’s Finer Foods, Inc., 129 Ill. 2d 389, 407 (1989). Section 13 — 205 was actually applied to an action seeking refund of impact fees in Raintree Homes, Inc. v. Village of Kildeer, 302 Ill. App. 3d 304, 307-08 (1999). Appellants acknowledge the holding of Raintree, but point out that there was no indication in that case whether the refund claim sounded in law or equity and no argument or discussion as to which time-bar principle should apply. We could make the same observation with respect to Ross v. City of Geneva, 71 Ill. 2d 27 (1978), upon which appellants rely. In Ross, the plaintiff class prosecuted a refund action seeking the return of fees collected, pursuant to ordinance, over a 13-year period. The fees in Ross were initially hidden and not shown on electric bills. See Ross v. City of Geneva, 43 Ill. App. 3d 976, 977-78 (1976). However, the ordinance imposing the surcharge was “publicly debated, passed and published in the local newspapers.” Ross, 71 Ill. 2d at 37 (Underwood, J., dissenting). In any event, when the city first specified the nature of the fee, and identified it as a separate charge on a bill, the representative plaintiff immediately filed suit. In Ross, this court affirmed the judgment of the appellate court, which had held that the claims were not barred. Ross, 43 Ill. App. 3d at 985 (noting that plaintiff sought “equitable relief’ by way of “the imposition of a constructive trust on, and the restitution of, funds collected without statutory authority over a period of 13 years”). The appellate court held that the statute of limitations did not apply to plaintiffs “equitable claim.” In Ross, this court did not discuss or decide whether legal or equitable time-bar principles applied, apparently because defendant raised only the applicability of laches. See Ross, 71 Ill. 2d at 34. We note that this court’s rather abbreviated analysis of the laches issue in Ross might as easily accommodate application of the discovery rule within the framework of a statute of limitation analysis. In essence, the majority believed that the plaintiff did not have all the relevant facts necessary for recognizing and prosecuting his claim, and he was not remiss in failing to acquire them. Therefore, the discovery rule would have salvaged plaintiffs claim even under a statute of limitation analysis. We are not, of course, confronted with similar facts in this case. Appellants were well aware of the character of the fee they were paying. The relevant facts were hardly “unknown and inherently unknowable.” See Clay, 189 Ill. 2d at 612 (discussing application of the discovery rule). Moreover, the legal basis for a successful constitutional challenge of the statute was readily ascertainable by reference to a well-established precedent: Pioneer Trust & Savings Bank v. Village of Mount Prospect, 22 Ill. 2d 375, 380 (1961) (applying the “specific and uniquely attributable” test). That a basis for constitutional challenge existed was readily recognized by Sun-dance when it filed its action (subsequently dismissed) in 1988. In short, the facts of Ross are not comparable to those at issue in this case. Beyond that distinction, this court in Ross neither considered nor decided which of the two time-bar principles should be applied. That issue was decided, albeit incorrectly, by the appellate court. In Ross, the appellate court appears to have rejected applicability of the statute of limitation, in favor of a laches analysis, at least in part because the plaintiff clothed his remedial prayer in the guise of a request for imposition of a constructive trust. As previously noted, this court has applied a statute of limitation to an action for constructive trust. Hagney, 147 Ill. 2d at 462. Why should choice of legal nomenclature dictate the result where the claim, no matter what we call it, is in essence simply a claim for refund? The potential for arbitrary and manipulative pleading in this area is obvious from a cursory examination of Sundance’s complaint, wherein theories which Sundance now admits are both legal and equitable are advanced in an attempt to obtain essentially the same relief, i.e., return of fees paid. In addition to counts I and II of plaintiffs complaint, which sought a writ of mandamus and a declaratory judgment respectively, count III of plaintiff’s complaint in this case was entitled “restitution, assumpsit, unjust enrichment, and recovery of payments.” These are the theories which Sundance now concedes are “at law.” It would appear, therefore, to the extent that such a distinction retains significance — and under the facts and circumstances of this refund action we find that it retains none — at least some of the bases of plaintiffs action are ones “at law,” subject to a statute of limitation. We deem refund actions such as the one before us “civil actions,” subject to the statute of limitation set forth in section 13 — 205 of the Code, irrespective of any artful pleading designed to cloak the cause in the attire of equity. Claimants should not be able to manipulate the result by the turn of a phrase, thereby avoiding the relevant statute of limitation which we believe the legislature meant to apply in this context. Although we believe that the plain and unequivocal language of section 13 — 205 alone would render it applicable to appellants’ cause of action, we find further support for that view in the more stringent statutes of limitation the legislature has seen fit to apply to tax refund litigation. As we observed in McNamee v. Federated Equipment & Supply Co., 181 Ill. 2d 415 (1998), reference to another statute by analogy is a common method of interpretation and has been relied upon by this court on many occasions. In McNamee, we quoted from a learned treatise on the subject: “ ‘On the basis of analogy the interpretation of a doubtful statute may be influenced by language of other statutes which are not specifically related, but which apply to similar persons, things, or relationships. By referring to other similar legislation, a court is able to learn the purpose and course of legislation in general, and by transposing the clear intent expressed in one or several statutes to a similar statute of doubtful meaning, the court not only is able to give effect to the probable intent of the legislature, but also to establish a more uniform and harmonious system of law.’ 2B N. Singer, Sutherland on Statutory Construction § 53.03, at 233 (5th ed. 1992).” McNamee, 181 Ill. 2d at 424. The question here, of course, is whether the legislature intended the catchall statute of limitation in section 13— 205 to apply to a fee refund action based upon the grounds stated in plaintiff’s complaint. In this respect, we note again the three-year statutes of limitation contained in the Illinois income tax (35 ILCS 5/911 (a)(1) (West 1998)), the use tax (35 ILCS 105/21 (West 1998)), the service occupation tax (35 ILCS 115/19 (West 1998)), the retailer’s occupation tax (35 ILCS 120/6 (West 1998)), the messages tax (35 ILCS 610/6 (West 1998)), the gas revenue tax (35 ILCS 615/6 (West 1998)), exactions on public utilities (35 ILCS 620/6 (West 1998)), and telecommunications excise taxes (35 ILCS 630/10 (West 1998)), which seem to evince a legislative intent to impose relatively short and certain limitation periods for refund actions. Further support for this view can be found in the legislature’s recent enactment of the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights (Pub. Act 91 — 920, eff. January 1, 2001). Although not controlling in this case, section 65 of that enactment allows local governments to impose statutes of limitation of four years or less on actions for refund of “taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error.” We also note with interest the following provision: “No units of local government are required to refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a local government tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.” Pub. Act 91 — 920, § 65, eff. January 1, 2001. This provision, which seems to take account of principles espoused in cases such as S.A.S. Co. v. Kucharski, 53 Ill. 2d 139, 142 (1972) (“It is well settled that in the absence of fraud taxes *** paid [voluntarily and not under duress] cannot be recovered, even though they are illegal because laid under an unconstitutional law, where there is no statute authorizing such recovery”), further evinces the legislature’s intent to restrict the circumstances under which refund actions may be brought. Under this provision, those taxpayers who do not protest payment or, presumably, who do and subsequently waive their protest by failing to properly pursue their claim to conclusion (City of Springfield v. Allphin, 74 Ill. 2d 117, 124-25, 127 (1978)) cannot recover. We believe the legislature intended that a uniform and harmonious system of law apply to refund cases, and the maintenance of two time-bar standards for simple refund cases is inconsistent with that intent. Therefore, subject to the special limitation period applicable to the limited refund action allowed in section 5 — 916 of the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law (605 ILCS 5/5 — 916 (West 1998)), the five-year statute of limitation set forth in section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure applies to refund actions in' which the claimants essentially seek nothing more than a return of money. We note two patently meritless arguments appellants advanced to excuse their failure to file actions in a timely manner. First, Sundance claims they would have risked the imposition of sanctions pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 137 (155 Ill. 2d R. 137) had they earlier filed an action challenging the constitutionality of the 1987 enabling act. Sundance posits that the presumption of constitutionality which a statute enjoys prohibited them from challenging the statute. Additionally, Sundance argues that once the appellate court in Northern Illinois Home Builders Ass’n v. County of Du Page, 251 Ill. App. 3d 494 (1993), found the 1987 enabling act and the implementing ordinances constitutional, fee payers were then prohibited by precedent from bringing a constitutional challenge. This contention is baseless. The presumption of constitutionality a statute enjoys is a feature of litigation over that very issue. In other words, it would not be necessary to accord a statute the presumption in the absence of litigation challenging the statute in question. The party challenging the constitutionality of a statute, of course, bears the burden of rebutting this presumption and clearly establishing a constitutional violation. Arangold Corp. v. Zehnder, 187 Ill. 2d 341, 351 (1999). However, the presumption is obviously not a prohibition against constitutional challenge. If it were, no statute could ever be challenged without fear of sanctions. The preposterous nature of this proposition can be revealed by reference to the language of Rule 137 itself. Here, “good faith” is the operative term. Rule 137 allows for “good-faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law *** that it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation.” 155 Ill. 2d R. 137. The purpose of Rule 137 is to prevent abuse of the judicial process by penalizing claimants who bring vexatious and harassing actions (Senese v. Climatemp, Inc., 289 Ill. App. 3d 570, 581 (1997)), not to stifle good-faith arguments for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law. Without such arguments, the law could not change and evolve as indeed it must. Had the plaintiffs in NIHBA not made such an argument, appellants would now have no argument at all. Sundance cannot utilize Rule 137 as an excuse for its failure to timely file. Finally, we address the intervenors’ argument that it is unfair to apply a five-year statute of limitation under the circumstances because “builders, even with knowledge that certain [impact] fees are or may be illegal, are pressured into paying them in order to conduct their business, because refusal to pay the fees will have adverse consequences on the completion of the development.” According to the intervenors, it would be “nothing short of fool-hearty [szc] for a developer to initiate litigation of any sort *** if the builder wants to complete the development.” This is so, intervenors submit, because through the course of development the builder routinely needs various municipal approvals. Intervenors suggest that builders are justified in assuming that municipalities would retaliate, if refunds were sought, by stalling or denying necessary approvals and permits. Ignoring for present purposes the troubling tone of intervenors’ rhetoric in this respect, much of which we have chosen to omit because it is as unsubstantiated as it is vitriolic, we must express our basic disagreement with the assumption that local governmental officials, from the executive office to the local building inspector, would likely conspire to penalize fee payers who seek to assert their rights by filing actions challenging the collection of impact fees. We reject this suggestion first, because we believe it is as likely that officials, even those of questionable character, would respect those who display a willingness to aggressively assert their interests. Those who are to be reckoned with are unlikely to be victimized. Beyond that observation, we assume that public officials will properly perform their duties (Moser v. Highway Commissioner, 114 Ill. App. 3d 137, 139 (1983)), at least in the absence of evidence to the contrary. Moreover, the specter of retaliation, even if it embodies in some instances regrettable elements of substance, cannot coalesce to form the basis of a legal excuse for ignoring the statute of limitation. Myriad litigants in diverse circumstances could use the same excuse for failure to timely file actions. Who, for instance, would ever risk suing the city or village in which he lives or does business? The list of litigants who could assert this excuse might be long indeed. Intervenors cite no authority supporting their argument on this point. We are aware of none. We reject the intervenors’ argument. Based upon the foregoing authorities, and for all the reasons stated above, we find the appellants’ action barred by the five-year statute of limitation set forth in section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and we thus affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Affirmed. JUSTICE GARMAN took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741248 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:19.287511+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring: I agree with the majority that the five-year limitations period of section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/13 — 205 (West 1996)) applies to this case. However, I believe that this result is best reached through a straightforward application of long-settled legal principles. The majority opinion fails to do this. Rather, in the course of its “observations” on time limitations in legal and equitable actions, the majority opinion needlessly attacks well-established distinctions between cases at law and in equity. 195 Ill. 2d at 265-74. The opinion also engages in an extended and unnecessary discussion of when actions such as these accrue. 195 Ill. 2d at 266-70, 275-85. Most disturbingly, the majority opinion also implies the impropriety on the part of attorneys who invoke principles of equity. 195 Ill. 2d at 270, 281-82. These discussions are not necessary to resolve this case. Accordingly, I concur in the judgment of the court, but not in its opinion. Count III of plaintiff’s complaint, as ultimately amended, pled “restitution, assumpsit, unjust enrichment and recovery of payment.” This count describes an action at law governed by principles of equity. Board of Highway Commissioners v. City of Bloomington, 253 Ill. 164, 173-74 (1911). The controlling principles are quite settled: “It is an elemental principle of law, applied in both law and equity courts, that where one person has received money or its equivalent, which belongs to another, under such circumstances that in equity and good conscience he ought not to retain it, recovery will be allowed. [Citations.] In equity, the theory of recovery is predicated on the imposition of a constructive trust, [citations] and at law, on the basis of a quasi-contract, or contract implied in law. [Citations.]” Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund v. Village of Glen Ellyn, 337 Ill. App. 183, 194-95 (1949). See generally 1 D. Dobbs, Remedies § 4.2(3), at 579-82, § 4.3(2), at 590-91 (2d ed. 1993). These theories of recovery are parallel. “Both quasi-contract and constructive trust aim at restitution of something that in good conscience belongs to the plaintiff.” 1 D. Dobbs, Remedies § 4.3(2), at 590 (2d ed. 1993). It is equally established: “Where both a court of equity and a court of law have concurrent jurisdiction, the bar of the statute of limitations has been held to be as binding in equity as at law.” Dean v. Kellogg, 394 Ill. 495, 504 (1946); accord Rakstiene v. Kroulaidis, 33 Ill. App. 3d 1067, 1072-73 (1975); 7 Ill. L. & Prac. Chancery § 124, at 347 (1954). Specifically, courts have applied the limitations bar of section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure and its predecessor provisions to constructive trust cases sounding in equity (see, e.g., Hagney v. Lopeman, 147 Ill. 2d 458, 462 (1992), citing Chicago Park District v. Kenroy, Inc., 78 Ill. 2d 555, 560-61 (1980)), as well as to implied contract or assumpsit actions at law (see, e.g., Rohter v. Passarella, 246 Ill. App. 3d 860, 868 (1993); Partipilo v. Hallman, 156 Ill. App. 3d 806, 811 (1987); see Burns Philp Food, Inc. v. Cavalea Continental Freight, Inc., 135 F.3d 526, 527-28 (7th Cir. 1998)(apply-ing Illinois law)). Therefore, section 13 — 205 of the Code applies here. Further, it is long settled when this type of action accrues, so as to start the running of section 13 — 205 of the Code of Civil Procedure. “Illinois case law firmly establishes that in such actions the statute of limitations begins running when the payment is made.” Pennwalt Corp. v. Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, 368 F. Supp. 972, 980 (N.D. Ill. 1973)(collecting cases); Rath v. City of Chicago, 207 Ill. App. 117, 121 (1917), quoting 2 A. Jacobs, Cooley on Taxation 1508 (3d ed. 1903). The present case is resolved based on settled law. However, the majority opinion proceeds to state what the appellate court said in Rath via lengthy discussion of tax collection cases. 195 Ill. 2d at 266-70, 275-85. Also, the majority opinion, stressing the need for certainty and finality, needlessly attacks the applicability of the equitable defense of laches to tax collection cases. 195 Ill. 2d at 270-74. As the above-cited cases, particularly Dean and Rath, show, the majority opinion’s lengthy discussion of tax cases, and especially the opinion’s attack on equity jurisprudence, are unnecessary to decide this case. Even more disturbing, the majority opinion needlessly impugns the integrity of attorneys who invoke principles sounding in equity. The majority opinion characterizes such attorneys as “shrewd” advocates, who attempt to “manipulate the outcome” of cases. 195 Ill. 2d at 270. The majority opinion characterizes the pleading of equitable principles as potentially “arbitrary and manipulative.” 195 Ill. 2d at 282. The majority opinion exhorts: “Claimants should not be able to manipulate the result by the turn of a phrase, thereby avoiding the relevant statute of limitation ***.” 195 Ill. 2d at 282. Not only is such rhetoric unnecessary to decide this case, it impugns the integrity of attorneys who do nothing more than invoke principles of equity. “An action for money had and received will lie whenever one person has received money which, in justice, belongs to another, and which, in justice and right, should be returned.” Wilson v. Turner, 164 Ill. 398, 403 (1896). This court recognized that the action “ ‘embraces a great variety of cases.’ ” Wilson, 164 Ill. at 403, quoting Allen v. Stenger, 74 Ill. 119, 121 (1874). In providing for this action, Illinois courts long ago resolved issues that the law-equity dichotomy presents. The majority opinion’s extended discussion and rhetoric do not add to that accomplishment. I concur in the judgment. JUSTICE McMORROW joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 2226707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:16.814744+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 871 (1981)
SOLIDIFICATION, INC., Appellant,
v.
Michael S. MINTER et al., Respondents.
No. 51042.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
May 29, 1981.
*872 Edward M. Cohen and David L. Olson, St. Louis Park, for appellant.
Schiefelbein & Greenberg and Alan G. Greenberg, Minneapolis, for respondents.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
SIMONETT, Justice.
Plaintiff Solidification, Inc., sued defendant Michael S. Minter on an unpaid bill for repairing a warehouse floor. Minter counterclaimed, alleging the work had been done negligently. The trial court found in favor of defendant Minter, awarding him $6,500 damages. Solidification appeals, claiming the evidence is insufficient to support a finding of causal negligence, that in any event an exculpatory clause in the contract exonerates it from liability, and, if liable, the unpaid contract price should have been offset against the $6,500 damage award. We modify and affirm.
1. Plaintiff was hired to raise the concrete slab floor in an old warehouse by pumping grout (a viscous cement slurry) *873 under the floor. After the job was done, it was discovered all the sewer pipes under the floor were clogged with grout and defendant Minter had to make substantial repairs. The trial court found that Solidification "was negligent in failing to flush water through the system while performing the grouting procedure" and that Minter was thereby damaged.
Solidification claims it did flush water through the pipes while grouting. Minter testified it did not. The parties even disagreed if the grout found in the pipes was plaintiff's grout. The liability issue is close, but the trial court saw and heard the witnesses and there is evidence to support the verdict. We cannot say the finding was clearly erroneous.
2. There were many unknowns involved in the grouting procedure: an old building with a sagging floor, wet subsoil, and plumbing which had been shut off for several years and was in an unknown condition. Consequently, Solidification added a clause to the work contract as follows: "We will avoid all possible pumping grout into sewer, however, cannot accept responsibility should this occur." Solidification claims the clause is a valid exoneration from liability. Minter claims the clause does not include negligence, and, in any event, it contains a prefatory promise of due care.
We have upheld exculpatory clauses between private parties as valid. Independent School Dist. No. 877 v. Loberg Plumbing & Heating Co., 266 Minn. 426, 123 N.W.2d 793 (1963); Pettit Grain & Potato Co. v. Northern Pacific Ry. Co., 227 Minn. 225, 235, 35 N.W.2d 127, 132 (1948). Since Farmington Plumbing v. Fischer Sand, 281 N.W.2d 838 (Minn.1979), we have held that indemnity clauses are to be strictly construed. The same rule of construction applies to exculpatory clauses. Here, Solidification's clause is ambiguous. Does it mean that the contractor promises to be careful but, if not, it will not be responsible for its own fault? Or does it mean that the contractor promises to be careful, but even if it is, there may be an unsatisfactory result for which it will not be responsible? Construing the clause strictly against its author, the party seeking exoneration, we cannot say Solidification is relieved from its own negligence.
3. The trial court found liability but granted a new trial on damages. At the second trial on damages before a different judge, the trial court found Minter was damaged in the amount of $6,500 needed to replace and repair the sewer lines. Minter's evidence on damages was weak and undocumented but, we believe, sufficient to support the trial court's finding. The trial court, however, did not deduct from the damages the amount remaining unpaid on the contract price. This set-off should have been made. Gess v. Sill, 312 Minn. 288, 251 N.W.2d 650 (1977); C. McCormick, Hand-book on the Law of Damages § 168 at 649 (1935); Restatement of Contracts § 346 (1932). Therefore, Minter's damages of $6,500 are to be reduced by $2,877.10.
Affirmed as modified, with judgment to be entered in favor of respondent Michael S. Minter in the amount of $3,622.90.

=== CASE 9741249 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:21.917295+00 ===

COFFEY, J.
This is a review of a decision of the court of appeals refusing to accept jurisdiction and dismissing an appeal from a judgment of conviction on the ground that the notice of appeal was untimely filed.
*548The defendant challenges the procedure in the circuit court for Douglas county, the Hon. ARTHUR A. CIRIL-LI, presiding, in advising him of his right to appeal and therefore claims that the appellate court should have taken jurisdiction of the case despite the late filing of his notice of appeal some nine and one-half months after the statutory time limit had expired.
On April 26, 1979, the defendant, Carlos R. Argiz, was convicted of the crime of robbery, contrary to sec. 943.32 (1) (b), Stats., on his plea of guilty, and sentenced to an indeterminate term of six years, less 77 days. At the time of sentencing, the trial judge, when advising the defendant of his right to appeal, in the presence of his defense counsel, stated:
“Now ... I think it is understood that these — the rights of appeal will be discussed with your client and he will be given a copy of his rights of appeal, and I would expect that he sign this before he leaves the courtroom. Is that understood ?”
After the trial judge requested the defense counsel to advise the defendant of his appeal rights, the defense counsel agreed and the court handed the attorney a form entitled “Instructions to be Given Upon Pronouncing Judgment of Conviction and Sentence” and directed that Argiz sign the form before he left the courtroom or the court would reconvene and read the instructions to him. Following this colloquy, the defendant signed and dated this form, (see fn. 1) noting and acknowledging the receipt of a copy of the instructions regarding his right to appeal and post conviction remedies and specifically that the defendant “had an opportunity to go over this matter with my attorney today.” This form was also signed and dated by the defense counsel and returned to the court with counsel's certification that he had received a copy of the appeal instructions and explained the same to *549the defendant. This copy of the appeal instructions was made a part of the record.1
Shortly after the April 26, 1979 trial, according to the defendant’s statement of facts attached to his appeal he requested a transcript of the entire proceeding, including *550his guilty plea, sentencing and appellate instructions. Within twelve days after the trial (May 8, 1979), a copy of this transcript was served on Argiz at the Wisconsin State Prison, Waupun. Some ten and one-half months later, on March 27, 1980, he filed notices of appeal pro se with both the sentencing court and the court of appeals.
On appeal, after a preliminary review of the record, the court of appeals determined that the notices of appeal were not filed within thirty days of service of the transcript as required in sec. 809.30, Stats, (felony appellate rule),2 and sua sponte ordered briefs on the *551question of the court’s jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The defendant, in response to this order, submitted a statement alleging that the trial court failed to comply *552with sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats.,3 in that the presiding judge failed to properly advise him of his statutory right of appeal and thus he was not aware of the notice of appeal time limitation set forth in sec. 809.30(1) (f) (within 30 days of the service of the transcript) .4 Argiz, however, admitted that he had signed an appeal instruction form at the time of sentencing and that this form “might have” given him an “indication” of his appeal rights “but no explication of the proceedings were provided.”
In this statement, Argiz also asserted the fact that he ordered a transcript of the guilty plea and sentencing hearing shortly after that proceeding does not show that he was aware of the provisions of sec. 809.30(1) (f), Stats., requiring that a notice of appeal be filed within 30 days of the receipt of the transcript.5 He further attempted to explain the reason for his delay in filing the notices of appeal stating he was “waiting to receive legal advice” from his appellate counsel (public defender) who was appointed prior to June 19, 19796 and that he had not received such advice as of the date his notices of appeal were filed. It should be noted that the record contains a copy of a communication from Argiz to his appellate counsel dated May 29, 1980 wherein the defendant *553points out a difference of opinion sometime earlier in the proceeding between himself and the appellate counsel concerning his appeal and that counsel’s advice did not meet with his approval.
The state, in its reply to the appellate court’s order for additional briefs, objected to the jurisdiction of the court on the grounds that the notice of appeal was not timely filed within thirty days of the service of the transcript as required under sec. 809.30(1) (f), Stats.
Upon review, the court of appeals issued a Per Curiam order dismissing Argiz’ appeal stating:
“On March 27, 1980, the appellant filed a notice of appeal purporting to appeal from a judgment of conviction and unspecified order entered April 26, 1979. The transcript of the defendant’s trial and sentencing were filed on May 8, 1979. Under Rule 809.30 (1) (f) the notice of appeal or a motion seeking postconviction relief must be filed within thirty days of the service of transcript. The appellant did not file a notice of appeal or postconviction motion during that thirty day period. Therefore, this appeal must be dismissed.
“The appellant argues that he was not informed of his right to appeal or seek other postconviction relief as required under Rule 809.80(1) (b). The appellant admits, however, that he received written instructions at the time of his sentencing informing him of his rights on appeal. The court concludes that the written instructions adequately informed the defendant of his right to appeal, and the procedures required to initiate an appeal. The written instructions specifically notified the defendant of the time limitations imposed by the rules of appellate procedure.
“The filing of a timely notice of appeal is necessary to give the court jurisdiction over the appeal.7 The court concludes that the notice of appeal in this case was not timely filed, and that the court lacks jurisdiction over the appeal.”
*554It is to be noted that the appellate court expressly rejected the defendant’s claim that a trial judge is personally required to read and explain a defendant’s appellate rights to him on the ground that the written instructions, signed and dated by both the defendant and his counsel, were adequate to inform him of his right to appeal and the time limitations.
It is obvious that Argiz’ notice of appeal, filed on March 27, 1980, in relation to the date of the receipt of the transcript on May 8, 1979, was not filed within the statutory time limits, and thus the issue presented is: Did the court of appeals abuse its discretion in refusing to allow the defendant to pursue a late appeal? The defendant asserts that this query should be answered in the affirmative, alleging he was not informed of the time limits on his right to appeal as required in sec. 809.-30(1) (b), Stats. This rule of appellate procedure provides :
“(b) The trial judge shall inform the defendant at the time of sentencing or imposition of a fine or probation of the right to appeal or seek other postconviction relief, the time limits on seeking the relief and, if indigent, the right to publicly compensated counsel in those proceedings.”
In this court, Argiz admits that he was given a copy of the appeal instructions form and that he signed it, but contends that he did not have sufficient time to read *555the instructions while in the courtroom,8 and his counsel neither instructed him as to the contents of the form nor apprised him of what he was signing. The record is clear that the defendant’s allegation is directly contradicted by his trial counsel’s certification that “I certify that I have received a copy of this written instruction and have explained it to the defendant” as well as Argiz’ signed acknowledgment that “I acknowledge that I have received a copy of this written instruction by the court on my rights to appeal or move the court for postconviction remedy and I have had opportunity to go over this matter with my attorney today.” The defendant does not argue that we should require the trial court to make a record of what is said between a defendant and his trial counsel after the court hands the defense counsel the appellate instruction form. It should be noted that the defendant’s petition to review informs this court that during the ten and one-half month hiatus between the date he received the transcript (May 8, 1979) and the date he filed his notices of appeal (March 27, 1980) he pursued a writ of habeas corpus and did not file the notices of appeal until such time as this writ had been denied (March 21, 1980).
The felony appeal rule set forth in sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats., follows this court’s decisions in Peterson v. State, 54 Wis.2d 370, 195 N.W.2d 837 (1972), and Whitmore v. State, 56 Wis.2d 706, 203 N.W.2d 56 (1973). In Peterson, supra, this court, following the lead of the 7th Circuit in U.S. ex rel. Singleton v. Woods, 440 F.2d 835 (7th Cir. 1971), held that “The trial court is obliged in all cases to inform the defendant of his right to appeal from the conviction — whether after a plea of guilty or after trial,” and cited the Wisconsin Jury Instructions — Crimi*556nal, Special Materials, §33 as providing- the information that should be given to criminal defendants with respect to their appeal rights. Peterson, supra at 382.
Since sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats., is a codification of the rule set forth in Peterson, if a trial judge fails to inform a convicted defendant of his appeal rights as required, the defendant will be permitted to pursue a late appeal. Peterson, supra at 382; In re Applications of Maroney and Kunz, 54 Wis.2d 638, 196 N.W.2d 712 (1972) (making the rules regarding a defendant’s appeal rights set forth in Peterson prospective). See also: the 1979 Judicial Committee’s Note to sec. 809.30, Stats., sec. 809.82 (2), and Martineau & Malmgren, Wisconsin Appellate Practice, §2703 at 168.
In Whitmore, supra, this court prescribed additional procedures for trial courts to follow in order to make a defendant’s right to appeal meaningful. This court made it obligatory upon trial courts “not only to inform the defendant of his right to appeal, but also to advise the defendant and his attorney of the obligation of trial counsel to continue his representations until the decision of whether to take an appeal is made and until such time as appellate counsel is appointed. . . .” Id. at 719.9
*557The appeal instruction form given by Judge Cirilli to the defendant at the time of sentencing complied with the requirements of sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats., as well as our decisions in Peterson and Whitmore, including the information that defendants who wish to prosecute a direct appeal must file a notice of appeal within thirty days of the service of the transcript upon them or they may lose their right to appeal. However, neither sec. 809.-30(1) (b), nor our prior decisions in Peterson and Whitmore10 delineate the specific manner in which the appeal right information is required to be conveyed to defendants, but it is obvious the court’s specific intent requires that a defendant be effectively advised of his rights of appeal, either orally or in writing. Since Argiz admits having signed and received a copy of the appeal instructions advising him of the time limitations on his right to appeal and the instruction form returned to the court contained his signed acknowledgment of having had an opportunity to discuss his rights to appeal and postcon-viction remedies with his attorney as well as his counsel’s certification that he had explained the instructions to the defendant, this case thus presents the very narrow issue of: Did the trial court fulfill its obligation to inform the defendant of his appeal rights in providing the defendant and his counsel with an appeal instruction form and thereafter securing the return of that form with the defendant’s above-stated signed acknowledgment together with the attorney’s noted certification?
In this case, the trial court gave the defense counsel a form reciting that it contained the defendant’s rights of appeal and instructed counsel that he must obtain the defendant’s signature thereon or the court would reconvene for the purpose of reading the instructions to the defendant.
*558A copy of the appeal instruction form was returned to the court with the defendant’s signed acknowledgment as well as his attorney’s certification that he had explained the appeal procedure to Argiz. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the appeal instruction form, together with the trial judge’s statement that the form contained the defendant’s appeal rights demonstrates that the trial court and Argiz’ trial counsel conformed with the requirements of Peterson, Whitmore and sec. 809.30 (1) (b), Stats., and thus the court of appeals did not abuse its discretion in refusing to accept jurisdiction of this appeal and rejecting the defendant’s claim that the trial judge had failed to adequately advise him of his appeal rights. Therefore, a defendant has the burden of coming forward with more than an unsubstantiated assertion that he was uninformed of his appeal rights in order to demonstrate a showing of exceptional circumstances sufficient to support a finding of abuse of discretion on the part of the appellate court in refusing to accept jurisdiction of the appeal.
Argiz’ sole explanation as to why his failure to file a timely notice of appeal should not constitute a bar to his appeal is that he was not properly informed of his appeal rights and specifically the time limits on taking an appeal. Although he admits having been given a copy of the appeal instructions form and having signed the same, he claims that his counsel “did not instruct him as to the rules of appellate procedure” and that he was not advised of the nature of the form that he signed.
The defendant’s claims are refuted by the record. First, Argiz was expressly advised of the nature of the form that he signed when the trial judge described the information contained in the document he handed to defense counsel as the “rights of appeal.” Second, Argiz signed a form entitled “Instructions to be Given Upon Pronouncing Judgment of Conviction and Sentence” not*559ing and acknowledging that he had received a copy of the instructions and discussed them with his attorney. Third, the defendant’s signed acknowledgment was corroborated by his trial attorney’s certification that he had received a copy of the appeal instructions and explained them to the defendant. The written instruction form included the following appellate right information: (1) that the defendant has a right to appeal; (2) the time limitations on that right — requesting a transcript within 45 days of the date of entry of judgment and filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the service of the transcript; (3) the fact that if a defendant failed to comply with the time limitations he could lose his right to appeal; (4) that the defendant should discuss his appeal and postconviction remedies with his attorney; and (5) in the event the. defendant decides to appeal, the defense counsel has the duty to prepare and file the notice of appeal. Argiz does not claim that he was unable to read or comprehend the written appeal instructions and indeed, his pro se brief in this court belies any such argument. Additionally, one of the defendant’s trial counsel referred to him as being intelligent and sophisticated. Further, it is to be noted that following his sentencing, Argiz requested and received a copy of his trial transcript (including conviction and sentencing) within 12 days after that proceeding and petitioned for and received appointment of appellate counsel prior to June 19, 1979. Moreover, Argiz also sought postconviction relief with a petition for a writ of habeas corpus and did not file his notices of appeal herein until after his petition was denied. All of Argiz’ postconviction actions demonstrate that he had knowledge of his postconviction rights and remedies, and thus, are inconsistent with his claim that he was not informed of his appeal rights. Indeed, the requirement of ordering a transcript within 45 days of sentencing as well as the right to appellate *560counsel were specifically set forth in the written appeal instructions that the defendant claims were not explained to him and which he asserts he did not have time to read. Argiz asserts that he did not “learn” of his postconviction rights until performing independent research in the prison library after receiving his trial transcript, yet the appeal instructions form with his signed acknowledgment and his trial counsel’s certification to the contrary, together with his ordering and receipt of the transcript within 12 days of the trial and sentencing belie this claim. Reduced to its simplest terms, Argiz’ claim that he was neither informed of nor had knowledge of his appeal rights, in particular, the time limitations, amounts to a bald and totally unsupported accusation against the defense counsel that he simply directed Ar-giz to sign the instruction form, and thus made a false representation when he certified that the appeal rights instructions had been explained to the defendant.
The record demonstrates that the trial court expressly informed the defendant that the document he signed contained instructions as to his appeal rights, “Now, I think it is understood that these — the rights of appeal will be discussed. . . .” The defendant signed the form entitled “Instructions to be Given Upon Pronouncing Judgment of Conviction and Sentence” and thereby on his own represented to the court that he had discussed the instructions with his attorney, “I acknowledge that I have received a copy of this written instruction by the court on my rights to appeal . . . and I have had an opportunity to go over this matter with my attorney today.” Argiz’ trial counsel certified that he had explained the appeal rights instructions to Argiz, “I certify that I have received a copy of this written instruction and explained it to the defendant.” Considering the trial court’s description of the information contained in the form handed to *561defense counsel after the pronouncement of sentence as “rights of appeal,” and the noted signed representations of both the defendant and his attorney, together with Ar-giz’ postconviction actions (requesting and receiving a copy of the trial transcript shortly after trial, petitioning for and receiving appointment of appellate counsel prior to June 19, 1979, seeking a writ of habeas corpus and not filing the notices of appeal herein until after his petition for that writ was denied), we conclude that the defendant’s explanation of his failure to file a timely notice of appeal is implausible, and we therefore hold that the defendant has failed to establish any “exceptional circumstances,” which would warrant this court’s allowing him to proceed with a late appeal. Hence, we further hold that the appellate court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to allow the defendant to pursue a late appeal.
Additionally, we note that the defendant would have us ignore his signed and dated acknowledgment that he had discussed the subject of his appeal rights with his attorney and foist the blame for his failure to file a timely notice of appeal upon the trial court. Acceptance of the defendant’s claim would in effect be equivalent to allowing him to benefit from misleading the court with the noted signed acknowledgment and we decline to do so.
Since this court has not heretofore expressly delineated the specific manner in which trial courts are required to convey the appeal right information to convicted defendants represented by counsel at the time of sentencing, we now direct that at the time of sentencing, trial courts are to give a defendant two copies of his appeal rights as set forth in the Wisconsin Jury Instructions — Criminal, Special Materials, §33: one to be retained by the defendant and the other to be returned and filed with the court with the defendant’s signed and dated acknowledgment that he has received a copy of *562the instructions, discussed them with his attorney, and that he has read and understands the same, combined with the defense counsel’s certification that he has discussed the subject of appeal with the defendant and has explained the appellate procedure and requirements to the defendant. The appeal instruction form and the return of the same, signed and acknowledged in the presence of defense counsel, are to be filed in open court. We do not require a trial judge to personally read the instructions to the defendant as frequently the defendant is in a state of shock, confused and distraught at the time of sentencing and thus might not be able to comprehend and remember the specific details of the appeal instructions. Should, however, a defendant have any questions regarding the appeal instructions, the defendant and his counsel shall present them to the court and the court shall answer them. This rule is to be applied prospectively to convictions obtained after the date of the filing of this opinion.
By the Court. — The decision of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
There is nothing in the record to indicate the amount of time the attorney spent with the defendant, 5, 10, 15 minutes or a half hour in explaining the appeal instruction form.
The signed appeal instruction form reads as follows:
“The trial court informs you that upon the entry of judgment in a criminal case certain remedies are available to you. You have the right to appeal your conviction to the Wisconsin Court of Appeals. You may do so directly under certain circumstances; however, you must first bring a motion in this trial court before you may appeal if you are asking for any of the following: (1) that your conviction be set aside and that you be granted a new trial on some ground not already considered and decided by this trial court; (2) that you be allowed to withdraw your plea of guilty (no contest); (3) that your sentence be reduced or otherwise modified.
“There are time limitations within which you must act to preserve these rights.
“If you wish to pursue any remedy, you must, within 45 days of today, the date of entry of judgment, request from the reporter, a transcript of the notes of the proceedings in your case. In some cases a total transcript is not necessary, but you must request a transcript of such part of the reporter’s notes as is necessary to support your motion or your appeal.
“The reporter has 40 days from the date of your request to serve such transcript upon you. Next you have 30 days from the date the transcript is served upon you within which to file a notice of appeal or a motion in this court. If you fail to do so you may lose your right to appeal or make a motion in this court. Such motion in this trial court must be determined within 60 days of the filing of the motion. If it is not decided within 60 days the motion is automatically denied and the clerk of the trial court must immediately enter an order denying the motion. The court of appeals may extend the time for cause. When the motion has been determined you then have 10 days from the entry of the order on the motion within which to file an appeal from the judgment of conviction and sentence and any denial of the motions you have brought.
*550“(IF YOU ARE REPRESENTED BY COUNSEL, THIS APPLIES)
“You and your attorney should discuss these remedies. Your attorney has the duty to continue to represent you until a decision is made to accept the judgment or to appeal to the Court of Appeals or to file motions. Your attorney has the duty to continue to represent you in presenting motions to this trial court.
“If you decide to appeal to the Court of Appeals your attorney has the duty to prepare and file your notice of appeals.
“If your present attorney cannot continue to represent you on the appeal and if you are indigent, you yourself may write to the State Public Defender at the State Capitol in Madison requesting appointment of a different attorney to represent you on the appeal. In your letter tell (1) the date of your conviction; (2) the court in which you were convicted; and, (3) the offense, or offenses, of which you were convicted. You may request your attorney to help you write this letter. The attorney appointed by the State Public Defender will be your attorney for the appeal and will contact you.
“I acknowledge that I have received a copy of this written instruction by the court on my rights to appeal or move the court for postconviction remedy and I have had opportunity to go over this matter with my attorney today.
“Dated April 26, 1979
/s/ (Defendant’s Signature)_
“I certify that I have received a copy of this written instruction and have explained it to the defendant.
“Dated April 26, 1979
/s/ (Defense Counsel's Signature)”
Sec. 809.30(1), Stats., provides in part:
“Rule (Appeals in. felony cases).
*551“(1) Appeal OR postconviction motion by dependant, (a) An appeal or motion for postconviction relief by a defendant in a felony case must be taken in accordance with this subsection.
“(d) A defendant who desires to appeal or seek other post-conviction relief without counsel or with retained counsel shall order a transcript of the reporter’s notes within 45 days of sentencing or imposition of a fine or probation.
“(e) The court reporter shall serve the transcript on the defendant within 40 days of the ordering of the transcript. The reporter may seek an extension under Rule 809.16(4) for serving the transcript.
“ (f) The defendant shall file a notice of appeal or motion seeking postconviction relief within 30 days of the service of the transcript.
In its order for additional briefs, the court noted that the appeal did not appear to fall within the parameters of sec. (Rule) 809.-30(1) (g) and (h), Stats., which provide for different time limitations as well as procedures when the defendant moves for postconviction relief other than that authorized under sec. 974.06, and then appeals from the order denying that motion as well as from the judgment of conviction. See: Martineau & Malmgren, Wisconsin Appellate Practice, §2706C. See also: the 1978 Judicial Council’s Committee Note to Rule 809.30, Stats., providing in part, “The term ‘postconviction relief’ as used in this rule, includes new trial, reduction of sentence and any other type of relief which the trial court is authorized to give other than under s. 974.06.” It must be noted, however, that the defendant in the statement of the case attached to his brief in the court of appeals claims he made a postconviction motion within 30 days of the receipt of the transcript, but that this motion was deemed denied after 60 days under sec. (Rule) 809.30(1) (g). This motion and the denial of the same are not contained in the record. If the defendant did file a postconviction motion within 30 days of the receipt of the transcript, he was nevertheless also required to file notices of appeal within, at most, 110 days of the service of the transcript, see: sec. (Rule) 809.30(1) (g) and (h). This •he failed to do as the notices of appeal were filed some ten and one-half months after the date of the service of the transcript, *552and thus, we would still be presented with a case where the notices of appeal were untimely filed.
Sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats., provides:
“(b) The trial judge shall inform the defendant at the time of sentencing or imposition of a fine or probation of the right to appeal or seek other postconviction relief, the time limits on seeking the relief and, if indigent, the right to publicly compensated counsel in those proceedings.”
See: n. 2, supra at 550, 551.
See: n. 2, supra at 550, 551.
The record does not reflect the exact date of appointment of appellate counsel but a letter from one of Argiz’ three attorneys referred to in the record, Michael Lucci, to the defendant dated July 13, 1979, states that appellate counsel had been appointed prior to June 19,1979.
See: See. 809.10, Stats., which provides:
“Rule (Initiating the appeal). (1) Notice op Appeal, (a) Filing. A person shall initiate an appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the trial court in which the judgment *554or order appealed from was entered and shall specify in the notice of appeal the judgment or order appealed from. The person at the same time shall notify the court of appeals of the filing of the appeal by sending a copy of the notice of appeal to the clerk of the court.
“(b) Time for filing. The notice of appeal must be filed within the time specified by law. The filing of a timely notice of appeal is necessary to give the court jurisdiction over the appeal.”
As previously stated in n. 1, supra at 549, the record does not reflect how much time defense counsel spent with the defendant in explaining the appeal instructions.
This requirement was complied with in this case as a letter from one of the defendant’s trial counsel (Michael Lucci) to the defendant, dated July 13, 1979, indicates that Lucci remained as Argiz’ attorney until the appointment of appellate counsel, Ruth Downs:
“I wish to acknowledge receipt of your letter of June 19, 1979, and to advise that I have also been informed that you have had an attorney appointed from the Public Defender’s office in Madison, Wisconsin, by the name of Ruth Downs. It is now clear between my office and their office that Ms. Downs will be representing you in any further matters in the above action, including the filing of motions to modify the sentence. I would certainly urge you to brief her on all of the background in this case and those factors considered by you in making your decision to enter a plea of guilty.”
See also: Thiesen v. State, 86 Wis.2d 562, 273 N.W.2d 314 (1979).

=== CASE 9741250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:21.924289+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(concurring). I write separately to express my disagreement with the prospective rule the majority sets forth directing the manner in which the trial courts are to convey the appeal right information to convicted defendants represented by counsel at the time of sentencing. As I understand the requirements of the majority’s rule, the circuit court, on the record, will give the defendant two copies of the SM-33 instruction form; will direct the attorney to “discuss the subject of appeal with the defendant and [explain] the appellate procedure and requirements to the defendant;” will direct the attorney to have the instruction form signed and dated by the defendant and the attorney; will direct that the executed instruction form *563be filed with the court; and will explain to both defendant and counsel that if the defendant has any questions regarding the instruction, the defendant and his counsel shall present them to the circuit court and the circuit court shall answer them. Supra, pp. 561, 562.
This court has said previously that the trial judge should inform the defendant of “the right to appeal or seek other postconviction relief, the time limits on seeking the relief and, if indigent, the right to publicly compensated counsel in those proceedings,” and should inform the trial counsel of his or her obligation to continue representation during the post conviction stage of the proceedings. Sec. 809.30(1) (b), Stats. 1979-80; Peterson v. State, 54 Wis.2d 370, 195 N.W.2d 837 (1972); Whitmore v. State, 56 Wis.2d 706, 203 N.W.2d 56 (1973); Thiesen v. State, 86 Wis.2d 562, 273 N.W.2d 314 (1979). Wis. J I — Criminal SM-33 was drafted to aid the j udge in complying with this obligation.
In view of the critical nature of the appeal right to a defendant and in light of the high potential for misunderstanding in advising a defendant of appeal rights at sentencing, I favor requiring the circuit judge to read, on the record, the relevant parts of Wis. J I — Criminal SM-33 (or its equivalent) to the defendant and to the attorney and to state, on the record, that the judge is at that time furnishing to the defendant and the attorney a copy of the parts of SM-33 which the judge has read.
If the purposes of the prospective rule are to save the trial court’s time and give the defendant a better opportunity to understand appeal rights, I do not think the rule will accomplish these ends. I do not think the defense counsel is better able than the trial court to communicate appellate rights to the defendant who, as the majority notes, may be distraught.
I fear that a number of practical problems are likely to result from the majority’s procedure. What does the *564court expect the attorney to tell the defendant in order for the attorney to certify that he or she has discussed the subject of appeal with the defendant and has explained the appellate procedure and requirements to the defendant? How long does the attorney have to wait before he or she starts to discuss the subject of appeal with the distraught defendant? Is there a quiet place available in the courthouse for the attorney and defendant to talk? What if the attorney has another obligation to meet and cannot immediately after sentencing spend the ten minutes, half-hour, or one hour or more it might take to discuss with the defendant the subject of appeal and appellate procedure and requirements and get his signature? What happens if the judge is in the midst of another case or has left for the day and the defendant has a question? What if the defendant refuses to sign the form ? Who has the responsibility of filing the copy with the court? Can the signed form be made part of the record if it is not “filed in open court” ? How is the executed copy filed with the court? How is it filed in open court? By giving it to the judge, to the court reporter, the bailiff or clerk of circuit court? What if the signed copy is not filed at all ?
The most serious problem I see with the majority’s procedure is that it is likely to engender misunderstanding as to whether the postsentencing discussion between the attorney and the defendant fulfills the attorney’s duty to the defendant which SM-33 sets forth as follows :
“You and your attorney should discuss these remedies. Your attorney has the duty to continue to represent you until a decision is made to accept the judgment or to appeal to the court of appeals or to file motions. Your attorney has the duty to continue to represent you in presenting motions to this trial court.
“If you decide to appeal to the court of appeals, your attorney has the duty to prepare and file your notice of appeal.
*565“If your present attorney cannot continue to represent you on the appeal and if you are indigent, you yourself may write to the State Public Defender . . . .”
I do not believe the majority opinion intended that the postsentencing discussion conference between the defendant and attorney fulfill the attorney’s responsibilities set forth in SM-33.

=== CASE 9741251 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:22.49451+00 ===

TODD, Justice.
Anoka-Hennepin Education Association (AHEA) is the exclusive representative of teachers in the Anoka-Hennepin Independent School District No. 11 (District). Ano-ka-Hennepin Federation of Teachers (AHFT) represents a minority of the teachers in the District. The District has been permitting an automatic payroll deduction of dues for AHEA and AHFT. AHEA brought an action challenging the authority of the District under applicable statutory provisions to permit dues check off1 for AHFT, a minority association. The trial court held that the statute was clear and precluded District’s practice of permitting dues check off for AHFT. We affirm.
The relevant stipulated facts may be summarized as follows:
1. AHEA is a non-profit employee organization composed of teachers in the District and affiliated with MEA, a nonprofit employee organization. Teachers in the District selected AHEA as their *328exclusive bargaining representative pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota’s Public Employee Labor Relations Act of 1971 (PELRA).
2. AHEA and District entered into a collective bargaining agreement (Working Agreement) for the time period 1977-1979.
3. Prior to August 20, 1973, and as required by the 1971 version of Minn. Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 and the contract between AHEA and District for the time period 1972-1974, District permitted dues check off for any employee organization that a teacher designated.
4. On August 20, 1973, District’s School Board amended the Working Agreement at AHEA’s request to read:
Teachers shall have the right to have their membership dues deducted for the Exclusive Representative on a payroll deduction plan.
5. For 3 contract periods (1974-75, 1975-77, and 1977-79), AHEA never requested to insert language in the Working Agreement to specifically restrict dues check off to AHEA. The relevant provision for all 3 periods stated:
“Teachers shall have the right to have their membership dues deducted for the Exclusive Representative on a payroll deduction plan. Upon receipt of a dues deduction authorization for a teacher, the District shall continue such deductions in succeeding years until notified by the Association to cease. In addition, all teachers as defined in PELRA-71 as amended who are not members of the Association may be required by said Association to contribute a fair share fee as defined in PEL-RA-71 as amended. The employer, upon notification by the Association of such employees shall be obligated to check off said fee from the earnings of the employee and transmit the same to the Association. The notification for ‘fair share’ fee must be given to the District at least thirty (30) calendar days before it will be implemented.”
6. Moreover, AHEA never proposed to alter the provisions reprinted in paragraph 5 for the 1979-81 contract period.
7. AHFT made three requests to District from July 29, 1974, to February 8, 1978, asking District to permit dues check off for AHFT.
8. District failed to act on AHFT’s first request and denied AHFT’s second and third request.
9. On March 13,1978, District’s School Board (Board) requested a legal opinion from Board’s attorney regarding dues check off. Board’s attorney rendered an opinion indicating that:
[I]t is discretionary with the School District whether it wishes to deduct dues for a noncertified union.
10. AHFT is a noncertified minority union.
11. On or about September 22, 1978, District began dues check off for AHFT pursuant to Board’s resolution authorizing dues check off for AHFT members.
The issue presented is whether Minn. Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980), prohibits check off of dues for minority teacher associations when an exclusive representative exists.
The relevant statute, Minn.Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980) provides:
Public employees shall have the right to request and be allowed dues check off for the exclusive representative. In the absence of an exclusive representative, public employees shall have the right to request and be allowed dues check off for the organization of their choice. [Emphasis added.]
The district court’s order granting summary judgment in favor of AHEA contained a memorandum which stated:
It appears to the Court that this statute is completely clear and unambiguous and requires no interpretation. There is an exclusive representative. Therefore, none of the teachers have the right to request a check-off for some other organization. Since the legislation is clear and since the Court possesses no legislative power, the Court has no power to rule otherwise, nor can past conduct or con*329tracts of this or any other school district change the clear will of the Legislature.
We agree. Clearly, this court possesses the responsibility to interpret and construe uncertain language. However, no room for judicial construction exists when the statute speaks for itself. Arlandson v. Humphrey, 224 Minn. 49, 27 N.W.2d 819 (1947). Minn. Stat. § 645.16 (1980) codifies this principle and states in pertinent part that:
When the words of a law in their application to an existing situation are clear and free from all ambiguity, the letter of the law shall not be disregarded under the pretext of pursuing the spirit.
In Peterson v. Halvorson, 200 Minn. 253, 273 N.W. 812 (1937), this court refused to engage in statutory interpretation when the statute involved plainly manifested one view. The court stated:
A statute is to be enforced literally as it reads, if its language embodies a definite meaning which involves no absurdity or contradiction. In such a case the statute is its own best expositor. 6 Dunnell, Minn.Dig. (2 ed. & Supps. 1932, 1934) § 8938, and cases cited under notes 2 and 3.
Id. at 256, 273 N.W. at 813.
The legislative intent in Minn.Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980), is quite specific. The language of a 1973 amending act reveals the strongest indication of legislative intent. Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 635, § 12, 1973 Minn.Laws 1526, 1529, provides:
Public employees shall have the right to request and be allowed dues check off for the employee organization of their selection, provided that dues check off and the proceeds thereof shall not be allowed any employee organization that has lost its right to dues check- off pursuant to sections 1-79.64 to 179.75 exclusive representative. In the absence of an exclusive representative, public employees shall have the right to request and be allowed dues check off for the organization of their choice. [Changes indicated by underline, deletions by strikeout.]
Prior to this 1973 amendment, employees had the option of requesting dues check off for the employee association of their selection. The amended act allows employees to request dues check off for the exclusive representative only. We find no ambiguity in the statute. Any change for the benefit of minority employee association is appropriately a legislative decision.
We note that AHFT cites an opinion of the attorney general in support of its argument that the District may permit dues check off for minority employee associations. The pertinent portion of the attorney general’s opinion states:
There is no indication in that section, however, of an intent to prohibit an exclusive representative. and a public employer from agreeing to allow dues check off for any employee organization which an employee selects, nor does that section reveal an intent to alter the conditions of existing contracts. [Emphasis added.]
Minn.Op.Att’y Gen.No. 270 D (September 28, 1973).
We find no conflict between our decision and the attorney general’s opinion. We hold that Minn.Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980), prohibits the District from permitting dues check off in favor of a minority employee association when an exclusive representative exists. .However, as the attorney general’s opinion indicates, the District and AHEA, the exclusive representative, may contractually agree to permit the practice of dues check off for a minority employee association.
AHFT and the District argue that AHEA’s failure to negotiate a restrictive contract provision permitting dues check off for AHEA exclusively constitutes a waiver of the employees’ statutory rights. This court has previously stated that “any waiver of a statutory right to bargain over a mandatory subject of bargaining must be in clear and unmistakable language.” General Drivers Union Local 346 v. Independent School District No. 704, 283 N.W.2d 524, 527 (Minn.1979). Such a waiver should be strictly construed.
The relevant provision in the contract between AHEA and the District read:
*330Teachers shall have the right to have their membership dues deducted for the Exclusive Representative on a payroll deduction plan. Upon receipt of a dues deduction authorization for a teacher, the District shall continue such deductions in succeeding years until notified by the Association to cease.
This contract language does not constitute a waiver in “clear and unmistakable language.” Moreover, this contract language manifests the parties’ intention with respect to dues check off. We must give greater weight to the parties’ express language than any prior course of dealing. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 229 (Tent.Draft No. 5, 1970).
It is argued that an employee can, by contract, authorize an employer to make payroll deductions under Minn.Stat. § 181.-06, subd. 2 (1980), and that Minn.Stat. § 181.063 (1980) specifically grants this contractual right to school district employees. These statutes are irreconcilable with Minn. Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980). It is a longstanding rule of statutory construction that when two provisions are irreconcilable, “the special provision shall prevail and shall be construed as an exception to the general provision * * Minn.Stat. § 645.26," subd. 1 (1980). Moreover, “the law 'latest in date of final enactment shall prevail.” Minn. Stat. § 645.26, subd. 4 (1980). Applying these rules of statutory construction, we are compelled to give effect to the prohibition contained in Minn.Stat. § 179.65, subd. 5 (1980). The legislature enacted this PEL-RA provision more recently than the other statutory provisions and this provision is particular in nature.
Affirmed.
. “Dues check off’ indicates a payroll procedure whereby a teacher instructs the school district to deduct dues from the teacher’s paycheck automatically and remit such membership dues to the designated employee organization.

=== CASE 9741328 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:43.817628+00 ===

Wilkins, J.
We granted the defendant’s application for further appellate review following the Appeals Court’s issuance of its opinion in Mulford v. Mangano, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 800 (1994). The defendant Mangano argues that, as a coemployee of the plaintiff, he is immune from liability in this case.
The plaintiff argues that the Appeals Court erred in applying the traditional workers’ compensation “course of employment” standard in determining whether Mangano as a coemployee was immune from tort liability under the workers’ compensation act. G. L. c. 152 (1992 ed.). We shall also consider whether the Appeals Court applied the proper rule of law in determining whether the defendant was acting in the course of his employment, where arguably he.was acting either for a job-related purpose or for a personal reason, or perhaps both, when the plaintiff was injured. We conclude that the Appeals Court properly reversed the summary judgment entered for the defendant.
The Appeals Court opinion correctly summarizes the evidence presented on the summary judgment record as follows:
“The plaintiff [Mulford] and the defendant [Mangano] were employed at a Papa Gino’s restaurant in Stoneham. On April 23, 1987, Mulford worked his regular shift as a dishwasher. Mangano, employed as a cook, was not scheduled to work that day but came to the restaurant around 9:00 p.m. for two reasons, according to his deposition testimony. He came to observe the cashing-out procedure followed by the managers at the end of the day, in the hope of learning skills to become in time a manager himself, and also to watch the end of a Boston Celtics playoff game, on a television that had been installed by employees, for the playoffs, in a back room of the restaurant. He had watched an earlier part of the telecast at home.
*409“Mangano was to give Mulford a ride home; both left the restaurant around 11:00 p.m. and proceeded to the restaurant parking lot. There, in circumstances that are disputed, Mulford fell from the hood of Mangano’s automobile as Mangano backed it from its space.” Mulford v. Mangano, supra at 800-801.
The Appeals Court assumed, and no party has objected, “that Mangano was not scheduled to work the evening of the accident, that he had not been encouraged by the employer to learn managers’ skills, that cashing out was no part of his duties as a cook, that he did not punch the time clock on coming or leaving, and that he did not expect to be paid or otherwise credited for his presence that evening.” Id. at 802.
The plaintiff brought this action to recover for his injuries. Mangano moved for summary judgment on the ground that he was a coemployee entitled to immunity under the workers’ compensation act. A Superior Court judge allowed summary judgment for the defendant.1 As we have said, we agree with the Appeals Court’s conclusion that summary judgment was inappropriately entered.
First we state that the coemployee immunity rule under G. L. c. 152 involves the same “course of employment” standard that determines whether an employee is acting in the course of employment and thus is entitled workers’ compensation.2 Compensation is available, pursuant to G. L. c. 152, *410§ 26 (1992 ed.), to an employee (who has not preserved his common law rights) who receives a personal injury “arising out of and in the course of his employment.” If “compensation benefits are available under G. L. c. 152, an employee injured in the course of his employment by the negligence of a fellow employee may not recover from that fellow employee if he also was acting in the course of his employment.” Saharceski v. Marcure, 373 Mass. 304, 306 (1977). See G. L. c. 152, § 15 (next to last sentence).
The plaintiff wants us to conclude that a defendant may rely on the coemployee immunity rule only when the defendant, as a fellow servant, was acting within the scope of his employment, a tort principle applied to determine whether a master is liable for the negligence of a servant. See Wang Laboratories, Inc. v. Business Incentives, Inc., 398 Mass. 854, 859-860 (1986); L. Locke, Workmen’s Compensation § 211, at 228 (2d ed. 1981). Our cases have implicitly rejected this rule of narrower range and have used the course of employment standard in dealing with coemployee immunity claims. See Mendes v. Tin Kee Ng, 400 Mass. 131, 134-135 (1987); Saharceski v. Marcure, supra. Cf. Bresnahan v. Barre, 286 Mass. 593, 597 (1934).3 The rule which we apply and which the Appeals Court applied is the majority rule in *411this country among States providing tort immunity for coemployees. See 2A A. Larson, Workmen’s Compensation § 72.23, at 14-171 — 14-174 (1993) (“The more satisfactory test, unless expressly ruled out by statute, . . . simply use[s] the regular workmen’s compensation course of employment standard”); Annot., 21 A.L.R. 3d 845, 876-879 (1968 & Supp. 1993). The use of a course of employment rule provides a ready source of law for deciding claims of coemployee immunity. It also protects a coemployee to the same degree as the employer from common law liability for the coemployee’s negligence, thereby not leaving the coemployee standing alone to face a common law claim. This protection for the coemployee is part of the exchange for the employee’s surrender of common law rights.
In what we have just said, we have expressed no disagreement with what the Appeals Court stated on the same subject (except for our emphasis that the phrase “course of employment” should be used and not “scope of employment”). In fact, we agree with the Appeals Court on a number of points: (1) the plaintiff, as a matter of law, was injured in the course of his employment in his employer’s parking lot as he was leaving work, Mulford v. Mangano, supra at 801; (2) the question in this case is whether the defendant Mangano was acting in the course of his employment, id. at 801-802; (3) in deciding that question “[i]t is enough if he is upon his employer’s premises occupying himself consistently with his contract of hire in some manner pertaining to or incidental to his employment,” id. at 802, quoting Souza’s Case, 316 Mass. 332, 335 (1944); (4) if Mangano had gone to his place of employment solely to watch a basketball game and he did only that, he would not have qualified for coemployee immunity, id.', and (5) if he had been there solely with the bona fide and reasonable job-related purpose of upgrading his job skills and his employer knowing of it did not discourage such activity, he would have been acting within the course of his employment and entitled to coemployee immunity, id. at 803.
*412The issue here is what to do when it appears that there may have been or were two purposes, one that would make the injury compensable and one that would not. “While an employee may have more than one motive for performing an act, as long as one significant purpose is related to the employment the employee will be considered to be acting in the course of her employment.” Mendes v. Tin Kee Ng, supra at 134-135. See Locke, supra at § 247. The question then becomes what proof is required to demonstrate that the job-related purpose was a “significant” one. The Appeals Court’s opinion correctly did not say that, where an employee acts for two purposes, one that would make the injury compensable and another that would not, the employee’s testimony is controlling as to whether a particular purpose was or was not a significant reason for his action. See Mulford v. Mangano, supra at 803-804. Such an exclusively subjective source for determining the presence or absence of a job-related purpose for an employee’s action would be inappropriate. It would involve a difficult factual inquiry and might well be unreliable because circumstances may tend to lead the employee to opt for the answer, which, in an after-the-fact assessment, appears more likely to benefit him financially. We thus reject any test that looks solely to an employee’s state of mind to see if the job-related purpose was so significant that he would have acted on that motive even if the private purpose had not existed. If we were to adopt such a test, summary judgment in this case would likely be inappropriate in any event because Mangano’s motive, intent, or state of mind and his credibility would be the major issues. See Flesner v. Technical Communications Corp., 410 Mass. 805, 809 (1991), and cases cited.
We favor a more objective test which assesses what the employee did and other facts in order to determine whether he acted at least in part for a job-related purpose. See Mandell’s Case, 322 Mass. 328, 330 (1948). An employee’s state of mind at the time he acted is relevant, but, as we have said, it is not controlling. In determining whether Mangano was acting in the course of his employment, evidence of what he *413did at the restaurant that night and at any other time concerning the learning of the cashing-out process would be relevant. We agree with the Appeals Court that the employer’s encouragement or discouragement, if any, of employees’ attempts to learn the cashing-out process and other similar job skills bears on the question whether the defendant was acting in the course of his employment. Mulford v. Mangano, supra at 803. What employees knew about management’s attitude toward such training would also be relevant.
The absence of any evidence of what Mangano actually did that night and had done previously concerning the cashing-out process and the absence of evidence of his employer’s attitude toward such job-skills training make the award of summary judgment inappropriate. Mangano’s uncontroverted testimony that one of his reasons for going to the restaurant that evening was job related, although relevant to the question, does not establish for summary judgment purposes that his job-related purpose was a significant reason for his presence at the restaurant. Objective evidence might warrant a contrary finding, and the summary judgment record does not foreclose the possibility that objective evidence would do so. Hence, because there is a genuine issue of material fact on the question whether he was acting within the course of his employment, Mangano was not entitled to summary judgment.
Judgment reversed.
In fairness to the motion judge, we should note that the distinction between “scope of employment” and “course of employment” asserted by the plaintiff on appeal was not advanced in the memoranda submitted to her on the summary judgment question. Mangano’s deposition which provides the facts on which, by assent of both parties, the issues on appeal are argued apparently was not presented to the judge until the plaintiff moved for reconsideration of the order allowing summary judgment for the defendant. The defendant did not argue, and does not now argue, that issues of mixed purpose coemployee activity were not properly before the Appeals Court.
The plaintiff strenuously argues to the contrary in his supplemental brief to this court filed after we allowed further appellate review in this case. The point was presented less clearly in the plaintiffs original appellate brief. The Appeals Court opinion does not analyze the point but cor*410rectly applies the rule we now expressly recognize. See Mulford v. Mangano, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 800, 801-802 (1994).
It is true that from time to time opinions (as did the Appeals Court opinion in this case) have used the phrases “scope of employment” and “course of employment” interchangeably, but never with any suggestion that the correct test for purposes of the coemployee immunity rule, “course of employment” meant anything different from “course of employment” for workers’ compensation coverage purposes. See, e.g., O'Connell v. Chasdi, 400 Mass. 686, 690-691 (1987); Mendes v. Tin Kee Ng, 400 Mass. 131, 134-135 (1987); Murphy v. Miettinen, 317 Mass. 633, 635 (1945).
The very name of the analogous common law “fellow servant rule” suggests that the tort law “scope of employment” principle applies because it applies only to those agents who were servants acting in the scope of their employment. This case does not involve the common law fellow servant rule. General Laws c. 152, § 15, refers to the “insured person’s employees.”

=== CASE 9741329 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:43.82151+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(concurring). The plaintiff and the defendant were employed at a Papa Gino’s restaurant. The defendant was employed as a cook. When the plaintiff was injured in the restaurant parking lot, the defendant was also in the lot. However, the defendant had not been scheduled to work and had not worked that day. Instead, according to his deposition testimony, his reasons for being at the restaurant were to watch television and to observe the cashing-out procedure followed by the restaurant managers. His purpose in observ*414ing the cashing-out procedure was to gain knowledge that might help him to become a manager some day.
I agree with the court that the defendant is not entitled to summary judgment and that the judgment must be reversed. The defendant’s purpose for being at the restaurant when the plaintiff was injured is an essential component of his coemployee immunity defense, and the plaintiff cannot properly be foreclosed from litigating that matter. As the Appeals Court said, 35 Mass. App. Ct. 800, 804 (1994), “Where a party’s motive or state of mind is at issue, summary judgment is rarely appropriate.”
I write separately only to express my disagreement with the court in one important respect. The court states its agreement with the Appeals Court that, if the defendant had been on the restaurant property “solely with the bona fide and reasonable job-related purpose of upgrading his job skills and his .employer knowing of it did not discourage such activity, he would have been acting within the course of his employment and entitled to coemployee immunity.” Ante at 411. It is obvious from the context that the “job-related purpose of upgrading his job skills” to which the court refers is the defendant’s objective of acquiring familiarity with a managerial job, a job other than the one he was employed to do. There is, of course, no suggestion by anyone that the defendant’s objective also was to upgrade his cooking skills. It is clear, then, that the court is of the view that an employee, who goes onto his employer’s property for the sole purpose of preparing himself for a job which he has not been employed to do, is acting in the course of his employment for workers’ compensation benefit purposes, in addition to coemployee immunity purposes, if his employer failed to discourage the practice after learning of it. The result is that an employee who is injured in such circumstances may be entitled to workers’ compensation benefits despite the fact that the employee was serving his own interests and none of his employer’s.
I would agree that an employee, who goes onto his employer’s property with his employer’s permission to make observations for the purpose of improving his performance of *415the job he was employed to do, would be acting in the course of his employment. I would agree, too, that an employee, who acts in response to his employer’s express or implicit encouragement to go onto the property to acquire information about other jobs, would be acting in the course of his employment. It is a very different proposition, however, and one with which I do not agree, to say that an employee acts in the course of his employment if he goes onto his employer’s property to serve an interest of the employee alone and the employer, aware of the employee’s interest but not sharing it, fails to discourage that conduct. The court cites no case, and I am aware of none, that supports such an unfair proposition.
The defendant’s deposition testimony establishes, favorably to the plaintiff, that neither of the defendant’s purposes for being on his employer’s property was related to cooking, which was the job he was employed to do. Furthermore, the defendant has not established for summary judgment purposes that he was explicitly or implicitly encouraged by his employer to be on the employer’s premises to observe cashing-out procedures. In my view, that is a second reason why the summary judgment for the defendant that was entered in the Superior Court should be reversed.

=== CASE 2226921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:22.438518+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1060 (1994)
264 Ill. App. 3d 447
201 Ill. Dec. 628
Mark H. STEIN, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
The COOK COUNTY OFFICERS ELECTORAL BOARD, and its members, Daniel P. Madden, Donald A. Mizerk, and Kelly Peters; David D. Orr, in his official capacity as Cook County Clerk; Wilma Baker; and Edward R. Jordan, Respondents-Appellees.
No. 1-94-0556.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
June 10, 1994.
Odelson & Sterk, Ltd., Evergreen Park (Mathias W. Delort and Burton S. Odelson, of counsel), for petitioner and appellant.
Paul Stralka, Chicago, for respondents-appellees.
*1061 Justice RAKOWSKI delivered the opinion of the court:
On December 6, 1993, Edward R. Jordan filed nomination papers with the State Board of Elections to become a candidate for the nomination of the Republican Party for the office of Judge of the Circuit Court, Additional Judgeship "A", Twelfth Judicial Subcircuit, Cook County Judicial Circuit, to be elected at the March 15, 1994, primary election.
On December 20, 1993, Mark H. Stein and Wilma Baker filed objectors' petitions to Jordan's nomination papers. Baker subsequently withdrew her petition, and Stein filed a motion to amend his petition to include the objection to signatures found in Baker's petition.
The Cook County Officers Electoral Board (Board) denied Stein's motion, finding that Jordan had more than the minimum number of signatures required. On judicial review, the decision of the Board was affirmed, and Stein brings this appeal. The sole issue on appeal is whether the electoral board abused its discretion by refusing to permit objector Stein to amend his petition after the statutory deadline had passed. We affirm.
After Jordan filed nomination papers with the State Board of Elections, Stein and Baker filed separate objectors' petitions. Both petitions were filed on December 20, 1993, which was the final day on which objections could be submitted. Stein's petition was assigned case number 93 COEB J 24 and Baker's petition was assigned case number 93 COEB J 33. At a December 28, 1993, status call proceeding, Stein filed a motion to consolidate Baker's objections with his objections. The Board ruled that the binder checks would be computed simultaneously, but that the results of the binder checks were to be separately tallied. After the binder check was completed but before the Board ruled on the findings, both Stein and Baker subsequently filed motions for further hearings on some of the signatures. However, on January 14, 1993, Baker filed a motion to withdraw her objections. Stein then filed motions to strike Baker's withdrawal of her objections and to amend his objector's petition to include the Baker objections. On January 28, 1993, the Board granted Baker's withdrawl of objections without ruling on them.
Stein contends that the Board abused its discretion by refusing to permit him to amend his objector's petition to incorporate objections to certain signatures already found to be invalid in the simultaneous binder check. Section 10-8 of the Election Code states in relevant part that:
"Certificates of nomination and nomination papers * * * being filed as required by this Code, and being in apparent conformity with the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed valid unless objection thereto is duly made in writing within 5 business days after the last day for the filing of the certificate of nomination or nomination papers * * *." (10 ILCS 5/10-8 (1992 West).)
The Stein and Baker objector's petitions were filed on the final day for filing objections. Accordingly, when Baker's motion to withdraw her objections was approved by the Board on January 28, 1993, the time for filing further objections had expired. Therefore, Stein's motion to amend his petition was untimely. We further note that Stein had ample opportunity to include in his initial petition the objections he later tried to incorporate in an amended one, where Jordan filed his nomination papers on December 6, 1993, and Stein had until December 20, 1993, to file objections.
Stein argues that he should be able to raise the objections included in Baker's petition because both cases were consolidated at the Board's status call. However, what the Board stated at the proceeding on December 28, 1993, and reiterated at the hearing on January 28, 1993, was that it only ordered a simultaneous binder check with a separate tallying of results. Stein relies on Canter v. Cook County Officers Electoral Board (1988), 170 Ill.App.3d 364, 120 Ill. Dec. 388, 523 N.E.2d 1299; Huskey v. Municipal Officers Electoral Board (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 201, 108 Ill. Dec. 859, 509 N.E.2d 555; and Fortas v. Dixon (1984), 122 Ill.App.3d 697, 78 Ill. Dec. 496, 462 N.E.2d 615 in support of his position that the Board erred in denying his *1062 motion to amend his petition to include some of Baker's objections. In these cases the court allowed the Board to go beyond specific objections listed where there was a pattern of fraud, false swearing, and a disregard for the election law. In Fortas, the court stated:
"[W]hen in the course of hearing objections to nominating papers, evidence beyond specific objections comes to the electoral board's attention, it cannot close its eyes and ears if evidence is relevant to the protection of the electoral process." (122 Ill.App.3d at 701, 78 Ill. Dec. 496, 462 N.E.2d 615.)
However, in the case sub judice, the Board considered the evidence and stated that it did not find pattern of fraud. Therefore, these cases are distinguishable. We also note that while the court in these cases held that the Board was required to go beyond the specific objections in the case of fraud, it did not address the obligation of the Board where there was no finding of fraud.
Stein also argues, as he did before the Board, that the signatures that he sought to incorporate into his petition were already found invalid at the binder check. However, the Election Code requires that the Board hear and pass upon objections. (See 10 ILCS 5/10-9.) Rule 8, one of the rules adopted by the Board which adheres to the requirements of Section 10-9 of the Election Code, states that the Board will rule on the findings of the binder check examination. At the hearing on January 28, 1993, one of the Board members reiterated the requirements of the statute and rule as follows:
"In essence of it beingas to there being any findings, there are no findings until the Board makes them. Everything that goes in the binder check is tentative. It's a species of discovery. * * * They are not findings until the Board makes them. And I think it is clear that the Board made no findings in 33 (93 COEB J 33, the case number of Baker's withdrawn petition).
For the aforementioned reasons, we conclude that the Board did not abuse its discretion in refusing to permit Stein to amend his petition.
Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
EGAN, P.J., and GIANNIS, J., concur.

=== CASE 2226925 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:22.524062+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 71 (1994)
263 Ill. App. 3d 495
200 Ill. Dec. 880
In re MARRIAGE OF Brenda BURRIS, n/k/a Brenda Will, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Randy Burris, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 5-93-0600.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
June 21, 1994.
*72 John D. Alleman, R. Courtney Hughes & Associates, Carbondale, for appellant.
John R. Clemons, Clemons & Hood, Carbondale, for appellee.
Justice CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal involves the determination of child support obligations on behalf of Brenda and Randy Burris for the periods of time since their divorce during which each of the parties has had custody of their minor child, Robyn. We affirm.
On November 21, 1989, Brenda was awarded custody of Robyn, and Randy was ordered to pay Brenda rehabilitative maintenance for 30 months and child support of $550 per month. Brenda maintained physical custody of Robyn until about March 1, 1992, when Robyn began residing with her maternal grandparents, Lacey and Norma Dunn. On April 16, 1992, the judgment of dissolution was modified so that Randy's child support payments would thereafter be paid to Norma Dunn.
On or about February 7, 1993, Robyn moved in with her father, who continued to pay child support to Norma Dunn. Dunn returned the money to Randy each month. Based upon the change in circumstances of *73 the parties, Randy filed a petition to modify which prayed for custody of Robyn and child support from Brenda. On June 4, 1993, before the petition to modify was heard, Robyn returned to live with her mother.
On June 3, 1993, Randy's union, the United Mine Workers of America, went on strike. Randy began receiving strike benefits of $150 per week. At the hearing on July 20, 1993, Randy testified that after 60 days into the strike he expected to receive benefits of $175 per week and after 120 days into the strike, $200 per week. On June 14, 1993, he filed a second count to his petition to modify and requested a decrease in his original child support obligation of $550 per month. In response to Randy's petition to modify, Brenda filed a petition to modify, which requested child support payments to be sent to her instead of Norma Dunn. Following a hearing on the petitions, the court ordered Brenda to pay Randy $25 per month as child support for the four-month period that Robyn resided with him. The court further found that Randy's gross income for 1992 was $55,520.27, and that he currently receives strike benefits of $150 per week. As the court found that there was no evidence as to when the strike would be resolved, it reduced Randy's child support to $150 per month. The court further ordered that when Randy's strike benefits increased to $200 per week, his support obligation would automatically increase to 20% of $200 per week.
The first issue on appeal is whether the trial court abused its discretion in determining that Brenda owed only $25-per-month child support for the four months that Randy had custody of Robyn. Randy argues that because Brenda was earning approximately $12,000 annually during the four months he had custody, the $25 child support award was grossly inadequate. Section 505(a)(1) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (the Act) sets the minimum statutory amount of support for one child at 20% of the supporting party's net income. (750 ILCS 5/505(a)(1) (West 1992).) Only if the court imposes more or less than the minimum standard required under section 505(a)(1) is it required to consider the relevant factors of section 505(a)(2). In re Marriage of Tatham (1988), 173 Ill.App.3d 1072, 1093, 123 Ill. Dec. 576, 588, 527 N.E.2d 1351, 1363.
The relevant factors to be considered under section 505(a)(2) are the child's financial resources, the financial resources and needs of the custodial parent, the standard of living the child would have enjoyed had the parents remained married, the physical, emotional, and educational needs of the child, and the financial resources and needs of the noncustodial parent. 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(2); In re Marriage of Baptist (1992), 232 Ill.App.3d 906, 917, 174 Ill. Dec. 81, 88, 598 N.E.2d 278, 285.
Robyn attends public school. During the four-month period in which Randy had custody of Robyn, he earned an annual gross wage of $55,520. Brenda earned a gross income of approximately $15,000 a year. Brenda testified that while Robyn was living with her father, she stayed at Brenda's house on most weekends. Randy agreed that Robyn spent perhaps three weekends at his home in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, during this four months. Brenda testified that with the exception of two weekends when Robyn stayed with her, Brenda would drive from her job in Carbondale, Illinois, to Cape Girardeau, Missouri, to get Robyn, then on to Brenda's home in Pinckneyville, Illinois. Randy did not reimburse Brenda for mileage for these trips. During this four-month period Brenda continued to pay for Robyn's clothing and personal items and purchased Robyn's prom dress.
Modification of child support payments lies within the sound discretion of the trial court, and its decision will not be disturbed on appeal absent an abuse of discretion. (People ex rel. Hines v. Hines (1992), 236 Ill.App.3d 739, 744, 177 Ill. Dec. 7, 11, 602 N.E.2d 902, 906; In re Marriage of Flemming (1986), 143 Ill.App.3d 592, 599, 97 Ill. Dec. 859, 864, 493 N.E.2d 666, 671.) Section 505(a)(2) of the Act provides that the court may deviate from the established child support guidelines only after considering all of the relevant factors set forth in the statute. The record indicates that the trial court complied with this mandate. The court heard *74 evidence as to Robyn's needs and the parties' income and needs. It is apparent from the court's decision that the court considered the disparity in the parties' incomes and the facts that Robyn continued to spend most weekends with her mother and that Brenda continued to pay for Robyn's clothing, doctor's expenses, and personal needs. We cannot find that the trial court's award of $25-per-month child support was an abuse of discretion.
Randy next argues that the trial court abused its discretion by failing to make express findings as to its reasons for setting Brenda's child support obligation below the minimum statutory guideline. Section 505(a)(2) of the Act states:
"If the court deviates from the guidelines, based on consideration of the factors in paragraphs (2)(a) through (2)(e) of subsection (a) of this Section, or any other relevant factor, it shall make express findings as to its reason for doing so. * * *" (750 ILCS 5/505(a)(2) (West 1992).)
The requirement that the court make "express findings" does not mandate that the findings be written or incorporated into the court's order. In re Marriage of Kern (1993), 245 Ill.App.3d 575, 577, 185 Ill. Dec. 843, 845, 615 N.E.2d 402, 404; In re Marriage of Fahy (1991), 208 Ill.App.3d 677, 153 Ill. Dec. 594, 567 N.E.2d 552.
At one instance the trial court stated, "But, what we have to look at, is what is for the best interest of the child in so far as maintaining as much as possible the standard of living that she is entitled to, if the parties were living together." In addition, the court mentioned the financial resources of the parties: "Now, talking about what Mrs. Will owes for the four months. Now, I look at the disparity between the two incomes. One was making $55,000 a year, and the other is making about $12,000 a year. During that period of time, I am not moved to allow great sums of money for that support." We find the court's statements sufficient to satisfy the statutory requirement for express findings.
The next issue for our review is whether the trial court abused its discretion in determining the amount of child support Randy was ordered to pay.
At trial Randy testified that since going on strike he received strike benefits of $150 per week. He testified that his strike benefits were due to increase to $175 per week 60 days into the strike and $200 per week 120 days into the strike. Randy testified that he has no investments, but he does have approximately $4,500 in a checking account and $7,000 in a money management account, which he accumulated through savings and from the proceeds of the sale of the marital residence following his divorce. While on strike Randy relies on the money management account to meet his expenses.
Randy testified that he is not engaged in any employment while on strike, and he is unable to meet his monthly living expenses on the money he receives from the strike fund. Since he remarried in February 1992, his new wife has paid the mortgage, taxes, and insurance on their residence. She is employed and her wages are used to meet expenses. Randy pays the utilities, the telephone bill, his car payment of $310 per month, car insurance for both he and his wife, and other living expenses. Although his income is considerably less than it was a year ago, his living expenses have not dramatically decreased.
Randy contends that the court erroneously ordered him to pay 20% of his net income without consideration of the relevant factors enumerated by section 505(a)(2). Section 510(a) of the Act provides that the provisions of any judgment respecting maintenance or support may be modified only upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances. (750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1992).) Generally, the trial court's decision regarding modification proceedings will not be disturbed on review unless an abuse of discretion is shown. In re Marriage of Webber (1989), 191 Ill.App.3d 327, 330, 138 Ill. Dec. 582, 584, 547 N.E.2d 749, 751; Cohn v. Cohn (1984), 122 Ill.App.3d 763, 78 Ill. Dec. 194, 461 N.E.2d 1028.
In a proceeding for modification of support, relevant factors the court may consider include, but are not limited to, those *75 found in section 505(a)(2). Randy's income dropped from an annual gross salary of $55,520 to a net income of $150 per week. Randy testified that the length of the strike is indefinite and he is not certain whether he will in fact be called back to work even if the strike is resolved. Randy testified that he is unable to meet his monthly living expenses on the strike benefits he receives, yet his monthly expenses have not decreased. At the hearing below the trial court queried, "[I]f he is not going to have to reduce his standard of living any, then why should he reduce the standard of living of his daughter at $550 a month?" The trial court modified Randy's support obligation, setting his obligation at 20% of his net income, or $150 per month. The court also ruled that Randy may retain the child exemption/deduction for State and Federal income tax purposes.
The decision to modify child support payments rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. (Webber, 191 Ill.App.3d at 330, 138 Ill. Dec. at 584, 547 N.E.2d at 751.) The record indicates that the trial court was concerned that although Randy's income had drastically diminished, his standard of living had not. It is apparent from the court's comments that the court was apprehensive about reducing Randy's $550-per-month support obligation where Randy had not seen fit to reduce his discretionary expenses. Randy argues that the court failed to consider all relevant factors in making its decision regarding modification of support. Without reiterating the evidence, we find that the court did consider the relevant factors of section 505(a)(2). We conclude that the trial court's determination that Randy should pay support according to the statutory minimum support guideline (see 750 ILCS 505(a)(1)) was not an abuse of discretion.
Randy next argues that the trial court failed to apply the statutory definition of net income when determining his income for purposes of child support. Randy contends that he must pay taxes on the strike benefits he receives. He is also paying $41.81 per month for Robyn's health insurance and $35 per month for life insurance on himself. Randy argues that not only were these figures not considered by the court in calculating Randy's support obligation, but they were deliberately disregarded.
Section 505(a)(3) of the Act defines net income as the total of all income from all sources, minus the deductions listed therein. (750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3) (West 1992).) The $35 per month Randy pays for life insurance is not one of the allowable deductions under section 505(a)(3). As for Randy's claim that he must pay taxes on the strike benefits, there is no evidence of this in the record. Randy attempted to introduce evidence of a discussion he had with his accountant regarding the possibility of having to pay taxes on the benefits, but the court sustained an objection to that testimony. Furthermore, Randy testified that the strike benefits come from a fund upon which taxes have already been paid.
Regarding Randy's payment of Robyn's health insurance premiums, however, this is an allowable deduction in determining net income. (See 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3)(f) (West 1992).) Randy points out the following colloquy in support of his argument that the court intentionally refused to deduct the health insurance premiums in calculating Randy's net income.
"MR. ALLEMAN: Judge, have you considered the amount he is paying in mandatory health insurance and life insurance out of this money he is receiving?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. ALLEMAN: It doesn't seem like he's got a deducting [sic] for it. If he is making $750 a month and he is paying 20% or $150.
THE COURT: I know. But it has dropped from $550 a month to $150 a month right now in child support. He can go on paying that.
MR. ALLEMAN: Okay.
THE COURT: Then we are going to let him claim the benefit of the child on his income tax returns."
It is apparent from this excerpt that the trial court was aware that the health insurance premiums were not deducted from Randy's income in calculating net income. We find the court's seemingly deliberate omission of *76 the health insurance deduction harmless, however, in view of the court's award of the income tax deduction to Randy.
The final issue is whether the trial court's order violates section 510(a) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act. The modification order provides in pertinent part:
"1. That beginning July 1, 1993 the defendant, Randy Burris, shall pay $150 per month as and for child support.
2. That when the defendant's strike benefits increase to $200 per week, he shall pay 20% of said amount as and for child support."
Randy argues that this automatic escalator clause deprives him of the statutory protection the Act provides by requiring the party seeking an increase in support to show a substantial change in circumstances. (See 750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1992).) We disagree.
Section 505(a)(5) of the Act states that the "final order in all cases shall state the support level in dollar amounts." (750 ILCS 505(a)(5) (West 1992).) Courts have construed this section to invalidate those support orders that automatically increase with age. In re Marriage of Moore (1983), 117 Ill.App.3d 206, 208, 72 Ill. Dec. 797, 799, 453 N.E.2d 102, 104; McManus v. McManus (1976), 38 Ill.App.3d 645, 647, 348 N.E.2d 507, 509.
In Moore the respondent was ordered to pay child support that increased every year as the child grew older. (Moore, 117 Ill. App.3d at 206, 72 Ill. Dec. at 799, 453 N.E.2d at 104.) The court compared the escalator clause it had before it with those that were upheld in the past and held that the clause in its case was improper. The court stated:
"Petitioner cites several cases in which courts have `approved' automatic increases in the amount of support payable by the father. Unlike the present case, however, those cases do not involve an arbitrarily fixed increase triggered by nothing more than the passage of a year's time." Moore, 117 Ill.App.3d at 209, 72 Ill. Dec. at 800, 453 N.E.2d at 105.
In McManus, the trial court ordered the defendant to pay child support in steadily increasing amounts based on the age of the child. (McManus, 38 Ill.App.3d at 646, 348 N.E.2d at 508.) The court held that the child support order was improper:
"In ordering the payment of child support, a circuit court must consider the needs of the child, the separate income of the wife, and the income of the husband. Because changes in these facts cannot be anticipated with accuracy, a circuit court should ordinarily not try to anticipate such changes by making its award of child support to increase automatically with the child's age. The self adjusting aspect of child support must, therefore, be reversed." McManus, 38 Ill.App.3d at 647, 348 N.E.2d at 509.
The amount of increase in support for Robyn is not dependent on her age. Rather it increases along with the periodic increases in strike benefits that the appellant will receive. These increases are not speculative, and the specific dates of the increases are in the record. The court's order reflects that the increase in Randy's child support payments correspond exactly with the actual strike-benefit increase that he will receive. This is a matter of certainty and not speculation.
Randy's argument that the automatic increase in child support payments will deprive him of the statutory protection, which requires Brenda to show a substantial change in circumstances before the judgment could be modified, is not applicable to the facts of this case. Randy was originally ordered to pay $550 per month in child support, before his support payments were lowered to $150 per month because of the strike. The amount of child support payments that the court ordered Randy to pay when it modified the original judgment was not based on any decrease in the amount of child support the child needs. Rather, it was based on the fact that Randy was out of work and only receiving strike-assistance benefits. There is no evidence in the record that Robyn's expenses have decreased. This is not the case where the future payments are based on the child's age or a possible cost-of-living increase. *77 Rather, this order is based on a known specific increase in income that Randy will receive. The trial court's order that the child support payments will increase along with the known increase in Randy's strike benefits was not improper and did not violate section 505(a)(5) of the Act.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
RARICK and WELCH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741332 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:48.058022+00 ===

UHLENHOPP, Justice.
This appeal presents the issue of the constitutionality of inventorying the contents of a motor vehicle which Woodbury County sheriff’s personnel impounded.
Deputy Sheriff David Amick testified:
Q. In reference to your routine investigations, what is the standard operating procedure for a sheriff or a deputy in Woodbury County in a situation where a motor vehicle is to be transported back to the station after an arrest has been made? A. Anytime a vehicle is left in our custody for any time whatsoever, for the purposes of towing or whatever the purpose may be, when the vehicle is our responsibility, we inventory the vehicle for any content that may be of value in the vehicle, and this is signed by whoever receives it from us, usually the wrecker service. Therefore, any valuables are recorded and signed for should anything come up missing at a later date that we’ll know what was in the vehicle at the time it was towed.
Q. Do you do this as a matter of course in every investigation that you make that involves a motor vehicle? A. *503Anytime the vehicle is seized or towed by our department, it’s the department policy that it will be inventoried.
Q. And is your inventory limited to items that are in plain view, or do you go beyond that? A. We go beyond that. We look anywhere that we think there could be anything of value placed. Many times we’ll find a billfold containing money under the seat, or tools in the trunk or whatever. Anywhere we think that someone would have access to, say a wrecker driver or anybody else, we check for value.
Q. And do you list those items that you find on a form? A. Anything that’s of value we do.
At about 3:00 a. m. on April 11, 1979, Deputy Sheriff Royce G. McGuire was on duty in a patrol car in a rural area. After observing a ear containing two occupants, he “pulled it over” and stopped it. He testified at the subsequent suppression hearing:
Q. And what were your reasons for pulling the vehicle over? A. Okay. As I approached the City of Sloan from the east — I was westbound — I noted the vehicle coming from the Interstate going east on 75 — or Highway 141. It approached the intersection of Highway 75, stopped at the stop sign, made a right turn, went approximately fifty to a hundred yards and made a U-turn, came back to the intersection and went east on 141, went approximately fifty to a hundred yards again, made another U-turn, came back to the Intersection and went north on Highway 75 through the city of Sloan.
Q. What were your reasons for pulling this car over? A. As I approached Highway 75 and started north, the vehicle was approximately 150 to 200 yards in front of me. As I followed it through the city of Sloan, it crossed over the center line, driving left of center approximately three times. And on the north edge of Sloan when it made corrective action to bring itself back into the north-bound lane, it went completely off of the traveled portion of the road onto the right-hand shoulder of the road.
Q. And what did that indicate to you, if anything? A. That the driver was either tired and sleepy, or possibly intoxicated.
Q. You then commenced to pull the vehicle over? A. That’s correct.
McGuire observed and talked with the driver, administered field tests for intoxication, concluded that the driver was intoxicated, arrested him for driving while intoxicated, and placed him in the patrol car. McGuire then saw and talked with defendant Gary Joseph Roth, who was a passenger in and the owner of the car, smelled his breath, observed his eyes and balance, concluded that he also was intoxicated, arrested him for public intoxication, and placed him too in the patrol car. McGuire saw a partially empty bottle of whisky on the car seat, took possession of it, and later deposited it with the “I.D. Bureau” when he escorted the arrested men to the station.
McGuire testified further:
Q. And would it be a standard operating procedure in a factual situation as the one that we have here for your office to tow the vehicle in? A. Yes, it is. Anytime we make an arrest and we’re unable to release the vehicle to somebody at the scene, then we’re responsible for the vehicle and we have it towed for safekeeping.
Accordingly, McGuire radioed for a wrecker and for help. Deputy Amick responded to the call for assistance. McGuire told him to inventory the contents of the car and stand by it until the wrecker arrived.
Amick followed usual procedure in looking through the car for valuables, under the seat, on the floor, in the glove compartment, and in the trunk. Apparently the trunk lid on this car, like those on cars generally, automatically locks when latched, and is opened by a key rather than by a handle. Amick obtained the key for the trunk from the ignition where the occupants had left it. He testified:
Q. Deputy, would it be a correct statement, then, that at the time that you proceeded to check the trunk of the vehi*504cle out, that at that time you were not searching for criminal evidence? Would that be correct so far? A. That’s correct.
Q. And that your search — your inventory was being performed merely to catalog and secure the contents of that vehicle? A. That’s correct.
In taking inventory, Amick found nothing of value to list in the passenger compartment of the car. In the trunk he observed two items. One was a Craftsman tool box containing miscellaneous tools; he so listed it. The other was a paper sack to the right of the wheel well, containing about two pounds of marijuana. He took possession of this item and made a written report of it.
Amick stood by the car to protect it until the wrecker arrived. After turning the car over to the towing firm personnel, he delivered the marijuana together with the whis-ky to the I.D. Bureau.
The county attorney . subsequently charged defendant with possession of marijuana with intent to deliver. Defendant moved to suppress the marijuana, contending that Amick conducted an unconstitutional search and seizure. After a hearing, the district court overruled the motion.
Defendant sought discretionary review of the district court order, which we granted. § 814.6(2), The Code 1979. We later transferred the case to the Court of Appeals, which reversed the district court order by a vote of three-to-two. The State applied to us for further review, and we granted the application. Our review of the district court order, like that of the Court of Appeals, is de novo. Bettuo v. Pelton, 260 N.W.2d 423, 425 (Iowa 1977).
I. The Constitutional clause. This search — and we will assume it was a search — was conducted without a warrant. Under the exclusionary rule, evidence obtained by law officers in violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution is inadmissible in evidence in state as well as federal criminal trials. Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 655, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 1691, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081, 1090 (1961). That Amendment states:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Warrantless searches are unconstitutional if they are unreasonable and reasonableness depends upon the circumstances of the particular case. Cooper v. California, 386 U.S. 58, 59, 87 S.Ct. 788, 790, 17 L.Ed.2d 730, 732 (1967). They are per se unreasonable unless they fall within carefully drawn exceptions to the warrant requirement. Camara v. Municipal Court, 387 U.S. 523, 528-29, 87 S.Ct. 1727, 1731, 18 L.Ed.2d 930, 935 (1967).
II. Motor vehicle inventory exception. The State does not seek to justify the present inventory of the contents of the vehicle on the ground that probable cause existed. Neither the deputies nor the Attorney General claims probable cause existed to search for contraband; on the contrary, the officers disclaim any intent to look for drugs. See State v. Holderness, 301 N.W.2d 733 (Iowa 1981). Nor is this a case in which an officer opened locked personal luggage without a warrant although he had time and opportunity to obtain one. See State v. Schrier, 283 N.W.2d 338 (Iowa 1979). This case is presented by the State as coming within the motor vehicle inventory exception.
Differing from the probable cause and personal luggage cases, the impounded motor vehicle situation presents a practical problem for law officers. As in this case, officers must frequently remove occupants from vehicles at night on criminal charges. The vehicles can hardly be left unattended; they may be broken into or stripped. If the officers call third parties to tow in the vehicles, they run the risk that contents of the passenger and trunk compartments may disappear in the process, or even after the *505vehicles are stored. They also run the risk of claims that they themselves stole items from the compartments. The officers thus have the problem of how to protect themselves and their governmental units from civil liability. The former days are no more when the officers and their governmental units could interpose an absolute defense simply from the performance of a governmental function. See Franks v. Kohl, 286 N.W.2d 663, 666-71 (Iowa 1979) (liability of public officers); chs. 25A, 613A, The Code (governmental tort liability).
The United States Supreme Court took a practical approach to this problem in Cady v. Dombrowski, 413 U.S. 433, 93 S.Ct. 2523, 37 L.Ed.2d 706 (1973), and South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364, 96 S.Ct. 3092, 49 L.Ed.2d 1000 (1976). In both cases the Court brought out the practical problems we have described and found the particular searches to be reasonable under the circumstances. Dombrowski involved a variation of the situation; the officer believed the vehicle might contain a handgun which some third person might obtain and use. Opperman involved an inventory of the contents of a car which was twice ticketed for overparking within a single period. An officer observed a watch and other articles in the car. He thereupon had the car unlocked, and he inventoried its contents. In so doing, the officer came across marijuana in the unlocked glove compartment. The language used by the Court is quite broad, at least for the case in which officers follow standard procedures in taking inventory of the contents of impounded vehicles. Thus see id. at 373, 96 S.Ct. at 3099, 49 L.Ed.2d at 1007: “In applying the reasonableness standard adopted by the Framers, this Court has consistently sustained police intrusions into automobiles impounded or otherwise in lawful police custody where the process is aimed at securing or protecting the car and its contents.”
Justice Powell was one of the five-justice majority in Opperman. He filed a concurring opinion. We do not understand, however, that he questioned the Court’s opinion. Rather, he gave additionai reasons for the result. His introductory statement was this: “While I join the opinion of the Court, I add this opinion to express additional views as to why the search conducted in this case is valid under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.” Id. at 376, 96 S.Ct. at 3101, 49 L.Ed.2d at 1009. We thus have an opinion joined in by five justices upholding an inventory search of an impounded motor vehicle.
III. Circumstances here. This appears to be a classic case of a proper inventory of a car. The sheriff had an established policy requiring an inventory of valuables if the car was impounded and not released to relatives or others of responsibility. This car was operated erratically, and Deputy McGuire properly stopped it. He properly took charge of the car after he arrested the occupants for intoxication. He properly directed, and Deputy Amick properly executed, an inventory of the contents of the car. The inventory was not taken to search for contraband or other incriminating evidence, but for self-protection before the car was delivered into the hands of a third person.
Defendant endeavors to distinguish Dom-browski and Opperman by their details, but the present facts fall well within the principle of those decisions. We do not regard the circumstance of the locked trunk to be a distinguishing factor of substance. The same reasons which impel officers to look through a locked or unlocked passenger compartment of a car — on the floor, beneath the seat, in the glove compartment— also impel them to inventory the contents of the trunk. Locked trunks are not impenetrable by third persons, and officers should be allowed to seek some protection against future lawsuits equally in the cases of the trunk and the passenger compartments. Moreover, the potential for lawsuits is not only on allegations that third persons stole from the trunk, but also on allegations that the police themselves did so. An inventory of personal property in the parts of the car where such property would be carried should afford the police some protection against spurious claims.
*506We agree with the statement of the Wisconsin Supreme Court regarding locked and unlocked car trunks, glove compartments, and other compartments where personal effects may be placed, in State v. Prober, 98 Wis.2d 345, 354-355, 297 N.W.2d 1, 6-7 (1980):
To exclude these kinds of compartments from the scope of inventory searches would clearly thwart the first stated objective of protecting the property itself while it is in custody. It is a meritless argument to say that the owner of the car was satisfied with the security offered by these compartments because the storage of a vehicle at a police storage yard for an indeterminate length of time was not likely to be the sort of circumstances the owner had in mind in storing valuables in the car. Even more clearly, the second purpose for these searches, protection of the police against claims of loss, is not served if police do not inventory the entire contents of the vehicle. Police cannot reasonably be expected to defend against claims of loss, whether legitimate or false, reasonable or unreasonable, if they are not permitted to catalog what they took into custody. Moreover, a car owner inclined to make a false claim could be expected to base the claim on property missing from an area the police were not permitted to search. Finally, the third purpose, protection of the police from potential danger, can only be served by allowing police to inventory the contents of automobile trunks and other compartments. Whether the potential danger is a weapon which, if stolen, could pose a serious safety threat, explosives or even a leaking spare gasoline container threatening to ignite the vehicle, it can be averted only by permitting police to discover these before the potential harm materializes.
Some decisions disapprove inventory trunk searches. Illustrative are United States v. Wilson, 636 F.2d 1161, 1165 (8th Cir. 1980); United States v. Lawson, 487 F.2d 468, 475 (8th Cir. 1973) (predates Opperman); State v. Hatfield, 364 So.2d 578, 580-81 (La.1978); Manalansan v. State, 45 Md.App. 667, 670-74, 415 A.2d 308, 310-12 (1980); State v. Goff, W.Va., 272 S.E.2d 457, 459-62 (1980). On the other hand, a number of decisions approve inventory searches of the trunks of impounded vehicles made under standing rules. Among them, in addition to Prober, are United States v. Staller, 616 F.2d 1284, 1288-90 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, - U.S. -, 101 S.Ct. 207, 66 L.Ed.2d 89 (1980); United States v. Edwards, 577 F.2d 883, 893-95 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 968, 99 S.Ct. 458, 58 L.Ed.2d 427 (1978); United States v. Martin, 566 F.2d 1143, 1144-45 (10th Cir. 1977); Cabbler v. Superintendent, Virginia State Penitentiary, 528 F.2d 1142, 1146-47 (4th Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 817, 97 S.Ct. 60, 50 L.Ed.2d 77 (1976); United States v. Gravitt, 484 F.2d 375, 381 (5th Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1135, 94 S.Ct. 879, 38 L.Ed.2d 761 (1974); United States v. Barnes, 443 F.Supp. 137, 143 (S.D.N.Y.1977); United States v. Balanow, 392 F.Supp. 200, 201-02 (N.D.Ind.1975), aff’d, 528 F.2d 923 (7th Cir. 1976); United States v. Gerlach, 350 F.Supp. 180, 182-83 (E.D.Mich.1972); People v. Meeks, 194 Colo. 214, 216-17, 570 P.2d 835, 837-38 (1977); People v. Trusty, 183 Colo. 291, 295-96, 516 P.2d 423, 425 (1973); State v. Gwinn, 301 A.2d 291, 293-94 (Del.1972); Griffin v. State, Ind.App., 372 N.E.2d 497, 499-501 (1978); State v. Wallen, 185 Neb. 44, 46-47, 173 N.W.2d 372, 374, cert. denied, 399 U.S. 912, 90 S.Ct. 2211, 26 L.Ed.2d 568 (1970); State v. Roberson, 156 N.J.Super. 551, 557, 384 A.2d 195, 198 (1978) (“The police are just as exposed to claims of lost or stolen property from the trunk as from any other part of the car.”); State v. Ruffino, 94 N.M. 500, 502, 612 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1980) (“To forbid entry into trunks as part of an inventory search would frustrate the very purpose of the inventory, since the trunk is a likely place for valuables to be stored.”); State v. Vigil, 86 N.M. 388, 391, 524 P.2d 1004, 1006 (Ct.App.), cert. denied, 86 N.M. 372, 524 P.2d 988 (1974), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 955, 95 S.Ct. 1339, 43 L.Ed.2d 432 (1975); People v. Prator, 93 Misc.2d 303, 307-08, 402 N.Y.S.2d 739, 742 (Dist.Ct.1978); People v. Kern, *50767 Misc.2d 495, 497-98, 324 N.Y.S.2d 442, 445 (Crim.Ct.1971); State v. Lemacks, S.C., 268 S.E.2d 285, 286 (1980); Capps v. State, 505 S.W.2d 727, 729 (Tenn.1974) (“An inventory of the contents of the car would be meaningless without an accounting of items in the trunk.”); Schaum v. Commonwealth, 215 Va. 498, 500-01, 211 S.E.2d 73, 74-75 (1975); see United States v. Wade, 564 F.2d 676, 676-77 (5th Cir. 1977); Roush v. State, 203 So.2d 632, 633-34 (Fla.App.1967); Highland v. State, 144 Ga.App. 594, 594-95, 241 S.E.2d 477, 477-78 (1978); Pierce v. State, 134 Ga.App. 14, 14-15, 213 S.E.2d 162, 163 (1975); Annot., 48 A.L.R.3d 537, 577-80 (1973). These decisions appear to us to be more consonant with the rationale of Op-perman.
Defendant challenges the search under the Iowa Constitution as well as the United States Constitution, but we see no reason to impose a different rule under the state constitution. See State v. Davis, 304 N.W.2d 432, 434 (Iowa 1981) (“The Supreme Court of Iowa is the final arbiter of the meaning of the Iowa Constitution, but when the federal and state constitutions contain similar provisions, they are usually deemed to be identical in scope, import, and purpose.”).
We have no occasion to try to anticipate the outer limits which the United States Supreme Court may impose on the inventory exception, for the circumstances of this case clearly bring it within that exception. We do not, for example, have a case in which Amick came upon latched personal luggage in the trunk, and opened it. The Wisconsin Supreme Court distinguished such cases in Prober, 98 Wis.2d at 355-356, 297 N.W.2d at 7:
Having ruled that Officer Szombathe-lyi could legally open the defendant’s car trunk for purposes of conducting an inventory, we must now decide whether the search of the defendant’s purse, found inside the trunk, was also within the permissible scope of that inventory. For the reasons set forth in McDougal, we conclude that it was not. In that case we said:
“To most people the contents of their locked suitcases or traveling bags are or can be extremely personal. To have these items examined and handled by strangers can cause embarrassment and humiliation. It is this type of invasion into one’s privacy that our constitutions sought to prohibit.” 68 Wis.2d [399] at 413-14, 228 N.W.2d [671] at 678.
This prohibition extends not just to locked suitcases in car trunks but to all closed or sealed containers, locked or unlocked found within the vehicle.
In recognizing that there is a greater expectation of privacy in closed or sealed containers found inside a vehicle than there is in a vehicle itself, we are balancing the need of the government (here, those relating to inventory searches) against the right of people to be free of warrantless intrusions into their personal effects. The balance tips in favor of the privacy of personal effects because the purpose of an inventory can be adequately served by inventorying a container as a closed unit. It is thereby secure from theft, and exposure to claims of loss is reduced. But see: State v. McDougal, 68 Wis.2d at 415-16, 228 N.W.2d 671 (R. Hansen, J., dissenting). Therefore, in conducting an inventory search of a vehicle, police officials may not open or search the contents of closed containers which could alternatively be removed from the vehicle and inventoried as a unit.
See also United States v. Bloomfield, 594 F.2d 1200, 1202-03 (8th Cir. 1979); Gwinn, 301 A.2d at 293-94.
Deputy Amick described the receptacle holding the marijuana as a “brown paper bag.” If, as we hold, Amick could lawfully inventory the contents of the trunk, could he lawfully look into the paper bag for valuables or was the bag of the nature of a locked or latched suitcase, briefcase, travel trunk, or similar container?
The question is whether a person who places items in a paper bag such as this one has a reasonable expectation of privacy *508in doing so which would require an officer, in taking inventory of valuables, to have grounds for a warrant and to obtain a warrant before looking into the bag. See Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753, 761, 99 S.Ct. 2586, 2591, 61 L.Ed.2d 235, 243 (1979).
We think that so to hold would extend “expectation of privacy” to an unreasonable extent. A person normally expects privacy when placing items in a suitcase, briefcase, or travel trunk, but hardly so when merely placing them in a paper bag. See the following decisions upholding car trunk inventories: Staller, 616 F.2d at 1288 (plastic bag containing counterfeit bills, also shopping bags from stores “each bag containing one or two small items of merchandise”); Barnes, 443 F.Supp. at 141 (bags of counterfeit bills in shopping bag); Gerlach, 350 F.Supp. at 183 (counterfeit bills in box); Ruffino, 94 N.M. at 501, 612 P.2d at 1312 (“The items in the trunk included grocery bags, clothing, a radio, repair items and a twelve-gauge shotgun with shells.”); Vigil, 86 N.M. at 390, 524 P.2d at 1006 (“They found a brown paper bag in the trunk which, upon inspection, was found to contain twenty-one packages of suspected marijuana.”).
We thus uphold the district court order overruling the motion to suppress, and return the case to district court for further proceedings.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED.
ORDER OF DISTRICT COURT AFFIRMED.
REMANDED.
All Justices concur except McCORMICK and ALLBEE, JJ., who dissent.

=== CASE 9741333 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:48.064436+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice
(dissenting).
I would affirm the Court of Appeals.
The question here is whether the warrant clauses of the Federal or Iowa Constitutions were violated by the warrantless police search of a closed paper sack in the locked trunk of defendant’s impounded automobile. I believe the search was unlawful under both constitutions.
I. The Federal Constitution. As the court recognizs, the authorities construing the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution are divided concerning whether a locked automobile trunk may always be entered during a routine inventory search. Such a blanket right is plainly not authorized under Cady v. Dombrowski, 413 U.S. 433, 93 S.Ct. 2523, 37 L.Ed.2d 706 (1973). Justice Powell recognized this in South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364, 377, n.2, 96 S.Ct. 3092, 3101, n.2, 49 L.Ed.2d 1000, 1010 (1976) (Powell, J., concurring) (distinguishing Dombrowski on the basis that an officer in that case reasonably believed the trunk contained a gun). Moreover, I do not believe Opperman recognizes such a right. Even if it did, the right could not include authority to open a closed container when its exterior does not disclose its contents and its incriminating nature is not immediately apparent.
A. Reasonableness of searching the locked trunk. When a Supreme Court opinion does not have the unqualified assent of five members, the holding of the Court may be viewed as the position taken by the members who concurred on the narrowest grounds. Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188, 193, 97 S.Ct. 990, 993, 51 L.Ed.2d 260, 266 (1977). Although Justice Powell joined the opinion in Opperman, his separate opinion expresses his understanding of the holding. Because the holding commanded only five votes, his view is authoritative.
Among other observations relating to the circumstances in Opperman, Justice Powell noted that the standard inventory at issue in that case did not include opening a vehicle trunk if it was found to be locked. 428 U.S. at 380, n.6, 96 S.Ct. at 3102, n.6, 49 L.Ed.2d at 1011. He also recognized that the reasonableness of a particular inventory search would depend on the circumstances of the case: “The absence of a warrant will not impair the effectiveness of post-search review of the reasonableness of a particular inventory search.” Id. at 383, 96 S.Ct. at 3104, 49 L.Ed.2d at 1014. Indeed, the majority opinion recognized that an inventory search must be reasonable in scope. 428 *509U.S. at 376, n.10, 96 S.Ct. at 3100, n.10, 49 L.Ed.2d at 1009.
I would hold that the search was unreasonable in scope in the present case. A similar conclusion was reached in analogous circumstances in United States v. Wilson, 636 F.2d 1161 (8th Cir. 1980). After stopping an automobile and arresting Wilson for traffic offenses, an officer decided to take him to the police station. Because he believed Wilson was incapable of driving the vehicle to the station, the officer decided to have it towed by a private towing service to a private towing yard. Before it was towed, the officer conducted a routine inventory search of the vehicle, including its locked trunk. Firearms were found in the trunk, and Wilson unsuccessfully moved to suppress that evidence in subsequent weapons offense prosecutions. On appeal, the court found the decision to have the vehicle towed was justified but held the search of the locked trunk was unreasonable:
We hold, therefore, that the needs of the Government in conducting an inventory search may be ordinarily accomplished without the serious intrusion into the locked trunk of an automobile. Absent a special justification for a more extensive intrusion, the routine search of a locked automobile trunk is unreasonable under the fourth amendment.
Id. at 1165.
In contrasting the circumstances with those in Opperman, the court said:
In Opperman, the Court noted that the car’s owner “was not present to make other arrangements for the safekeeping of his belongings” and that the “inventory itself was prompted by the presence in plain view of a number of valuables inside the car....” Here, by contrast, the police offered no special justification for the search and Wilson was present during the search and capable of making other arrangements to safeguard his property. The police could have protected their interests as well as Wilson’s without intruding into the privacy of the automobile trunk. The police, for example, could have asked for Wilson’s consent to search the car, or, in the alternative, requested that Wilson arrange to remove the car himself or relieve police from liability for claims. In addition, the police could have inventoried the trunk as a single unit. . .. [U]nit inventories might better serve the interests of the Government by minimizing “the possibility of loss and the possibility of false claims against police by the owner.”
Id. at 1165-66. In distinguishing a locked trunk from the rest of the automobile, the court observed that a locked trunk is not subject to the same level of visual intrusion as the vehicle interior and is more likely to be the repository of private effects, implicating a greater expectation of privacy. Id. at 1164. The court’s reasoning is equally persuasive in the present case. Other decisions which impose limitations on the scope of inventory searches include State v. Hatfield, 364 So.2d 578, 580-81 (La.1978); Manalansan v. State, 45 Md.App. 667, 670-74, 415 A.2d 308, 310-12 (1980); State v. Goff, W.Va., 272 S.E.2d 457, 459-62 (1980).
B. Reasonableness of searching the closed sack. The Opperman principle converges in this case with the principle in Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753, 99 S.Ct. 2586, 61 L.Ed.2d 235 (1979). The question in Sanders was whether, in the absence of exigent circumstances, police are required to obtain a warrant before searching luggage taken from an automobile properly stopped and searched for contraband. The Court said that the right to search an automobile does not carry with it the right to search everything found in it. Id. at 762-63, 99 S.Ct. at 2592, 61 L.Ed.2d at 244. It also said “a suitcase taken from an automobile stopped on the highway is not necessarily attended by any lesser expectation of privacy than is associated with luggage taken from other locations.” Id. at 764, 99 S.Ct. at 2593, 61 L.Ed.2d at 245. Consequently the Court held that “the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment applies to personal luggage taken from an automobile to the same degree it applies to such luggage in other locations.” Id. at 766, 99 S.Ct. at 2594, 61 L.Ed.2d at 246. *510Thus, under Sanders, the right to search items found during lawful automobile searches is independently subject to fourth amendment constraints.
We are now confronted with a problem suggested by Justice Blackmun in his dissent in Sanders:
Or suppose the arresting officer opens the car’s trunk and finds that it contains an array of containers — an orange crate, a lunch bucket, an attache case, a duffle-bag, a cardboard box, a backpack, a tote-bag, and a paper bag. Which of these may be searched immediately, and which are so “personal” that they must be impounded for future search only pursuant to a warrant?
Id. at 772, 99 S.Ct. at 2597, 61 L.Ed.2d at 250. (emphasis added). We addressed an analogous problem involving a knapsack in State v. Schrier, 283 N.W.2d 338 (Iowa 1979). We said: “The answer appears to turn on whether, under the circumstances, defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy regarding the contents.” Id. at 346.
We also noted the remark of the Court in Sanders: “ ‘Thus, some containers (for example a kit of burglar tools or a gun case) by their very nature cannot support any reasonable expectation of privacy because their contents can be inferred from their outward appearance.’ ” Id. The remark in Sanders included these additional statements:
Similarly, in some cases the contents of a package will be open to “plain view,” thereby obviating the need for a warrant. See Harris v. United States, 390 U.S. 234, 236, 88 S.Ct. 992, 993, 19 L.Ed.2d 1067, 1068 (1968) (per curiam). There will be difficulties in determining which parcels taken from an automobile require a warrant for their search and which do not. Our decision in this case means only that a warrant generally is required before personal luggage can be searched and that the extent to which the Fourth Amendment applies to containers and other parcels depends not at all upon whether they are seized from an automobile.
442 U.S. at 764, n.13, 99 S.Ct. at 2593-94, n.13, 61 L.Ed.2d at 245.
Under the Sanders-Schrier test, defendant plainly had an expectation of privacy in the contents of the paper sack in the present case. It was closed and kept in the locked trunk of his automobile. Unlike a kit of burglar tools or a gun case, its contents could not be inferred from its outward appearance.
Because the Sanders court said the extent to which the fourth amendment applies to containers and other parcels does not depend upon whether they are seized from an automobile, the “inventory search exception” to the warrant requirement does not justify the search of the paper bag. Furthermore, because the incriminating nature of the contents was not readily apparent, the plain view doctrine is inapplicable. See State v. Davis, 228 N.W.2d 67, 71 (Iowa 1975). Consequently I would hold that the search of the sack infringed defendant’s fourth amendment rights. See United States v. Bloomfield, 594 F.2d 1200 (8th Cir. 1979) (knapsack); United States v. Hill, 458 F.Supp. 31 (D.D.C.1978) (flight bag); State v. Daniel, 589 P.2d 408 (Alaska 1979) (briefcase); People v. Dennison, 61 Ill.App.3d 473, 18 Ill.Dec. 756, 378 N.E.2d 220 (1978) (tool box). Thus, even if the search of the locked trunk did not exceed the scope of a lawful inventory search, the search of the closed paper sack was unlawful.
II. The Iowa Constitution. We have previously exercised our prerogative to afford greater protections under the Iowa Constitution than are provided under similar provisions of the Federal Constitution. See, e. g., Bierkamp v. Rogers, 293 N.W.2d 577, 579 (Iowa 1980). Even if the court were right that the fourth amendment was not violated in this case, I would hold that Ia.Const.Art. I, § 8, was violated. A similar course was taken by the South Dakota Supreme Court in Opperman after remand. See State v. Opperman, 247 N.W.2d 673 (S.D.1976).
Iowa has a proud tradition of concern for individual rights. We should not be reluctant to show greater sensitivity to the *511rights of Iowans under our constitution than the Supreme Court accords to their rights under the Federal Constitution. The reasons for doing so are persuasive in this case.
ALLBEE, J., joins this dissent.

=== CASE 9741334 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:48.922283+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court: At issue in this case is whether the Illinois Department of Human Rights (the Department) has jurisdiction to hear a complaint alleging racial discrimination in an academic program at a public university. We conclude that it does not. Plaintiffs, the Board of Trustees (the Board) of Southern Illinois University (SIU) and certain of SIU’s employees, David White, Jim Bramlet, Richard Moy and Terry Travis, were granted a writ of prohibition by the circuit court of Jackson County to prevent defendants, the Department, its director, Joyce E. Tucker, and two of its investigators, Freddie Gatewood and Stanley R. Moen, from pursuing certain charges against plaintiffs. Plaintiffs had been charged with unlawful discrimination in violation of the Illinois Human Rights Act (the Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 1 — 101 et seq.). The circuit court determined that the Department did not have statutory jurisdiction to investigate the charges because the alleged discrimination occurred in the context of the SIU’s academic programs. A divided appellate court reversed (228 Ill. App. 3d 367), and we granted plaintiffs’ petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). We now reverse the appellate court’s ruling. The facts which gave rise to this appeal began when two black SIU students, Kevin Mitchell and Marsha Stokes, filed charges with the Department alleging that plaintiffs had discriminated against them based on their race or sex in violation of the Act. Mitchell charged that Terry Travis, the director of psychiatry clerkship at SIU’s school of medicine, and Richard Moy, the dean of the medical school, unlawfully discriminated against him when he was dismissed from the medical school after his third year. He claimed he was treated differently than nonblack and female classmates in the way he was evaluated. Mitchell also alleged that he was denied the same opportunities to retake final examinations and for clerkships, and that Travis demonstrated a racial bias which harmed the evaluation of Mitchell’s clerkship at his dismissal hearing. Stokes alleged that she was the only black student in the commercial graphics program at SIU. She claimed that David White, Jim Bramlet, and the Board were guilty of unlawful racial discrimination by sanctioning the existence of a racially hostile classroom environment. Stokes alleged that the other, white students were allowed to harass and threaten her and to subject her to racial epithets. Further, she was suspended from class without advance notice, which was usually provided to other students. The Department served copies of the charges on the plaintiffs. SIU filed a response on behalf of all the plaintiffs, in which it opined that the Department lacked jurisdiction “to entertain allegations of racial discrimination in academic programs.” The Department informed SIU that it intended to assert jurisdiction over the charges. Plaintiffs then filed a petition for a writ of prohibition to block the Department from proceeding further. The circuit court of Jackson County subsequently entered a default judgment for plaintiffs which permanently enjoined the Department from taking any additional action with regard to the charges. The appellate court reversed the default judgment and remanded the cause to the circuit court for consideration on the merits. Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University v. Department of Human Rights (1989), 190 Ill. App. 3d 644. On remand, plaintiffs filed an amended petition for writ of prohibition. Although similar to the initial petition, the amended petition added a request to block the Department from conducting any and all proceedings in the matter of an unlawful discrimination claim filed by another black SIU student, Michael Scruggs. Scruggs claimed that the Board unlawfully discriminated against him by grading and testing him differently than white students, resulting in the denial of his admission to a Ph.D. program. The amended petition was decided on cross-motions for summary judgment, as there were no disputed facts. The only question was the legal issue of whether the Department had jurisdiction to pursue the discrimination charges where the challenged conduct occurred in the context of SIU’s academic programs. The circuit court held that the Department had no such jurisdiction and granted the writ of prohibition. A split appellate court reversed the circuit court’s decision and remanded the cause. (228 111. App. 3d 367.) The majority of the appellate court concluded that it did not matter whether SIU was considered a place of public accommodation within the context of its academic programs because section 5 — 102(C) of the Act, which prohibits discrimination by a public official, does not require that such discrimination occur within a place of public accommodation. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 102(0. DISCUSSION "An administrative agency *** has no greater powers than those conferred upon it by the legislative enactment creating it.” (Village of Lombard v. Pollution Control Board (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 503, 506.) Thus, our inquiry is whether the General Assembly gave the Department jurisdiction to hear this case. There are but two sections of the Act which could arguably give rise to a claim of jurisdiction for the Department over the conduct alleged: section 5 — 102(A) or section 5 — 102(C) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, pars. 5 — 102(A), (C)). We address these sections in turn. Section 5 — 102(A) states: "It is a civil rights violation for any person on the basis of unlawful discrimination to: (A) *** Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the facilities and services of any public place of accommodation.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 102(A). At issue is whether an academic program in a public institution of higher learning is a "public place of accommodation” under the Act. Since the primary role of the court in interpreting a statute is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature (In re Marriage of Logston (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 266, 277), we look to the legislature’s definition of the term to resolve this issue. Section 5 — 101(A) defines a "Place of Public Accommodation” as follows: "(1) 'Place of public accommodation’ means a business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. (2) By way of example, but not of limitation, 'place of public accommodation’ includes facilities of the following types: inns, restaurants, eating houses, hotels, soda fountains, soft drink parlors, taverns, roadhouses, barber shops, department stores, clothing stores, hat stores, shoe stores, bathrooms, restrooms, theatres, skating rinks, public golf courses, public golf driving ranges, concerts, cafes, bicycle rinks, elevators, ice cream parlors or rooms, railroads, omnibuses, busses, stages, airplanes, street cars, boats, funeral hearses, crematories, cemeteries, and public conveyances on land, water, or air, public swimming pools and other places of public accommodation and amusement.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 101(A). The doctrine of ejusdem generis provides that when a statute lists several classes of persons or things but provides that the list is not exhaustive, the class of unarticulated persons or things will be interpreted as those "others such like” the named persons or things. Coldwell Banker Residential Real Estate Services of Illinois, Inc. v. Clayton (1985), 105 Ill. 2d 389, 396; Farley v. Marion Power Shovel Co. (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 432, 436. We note that the terms "institution of higher education,” "education program” and "classroom” are not contained anywhere in the list provided in the Act. Further, the examples listed in the Act are fundamentally different from institutions of higher education, which administer educational programs. The cited establishments are examples of facilities for overnight accommodations, entertainment, recreation or transportation. The definition specifically requires that the "services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations [be] extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 101(A)(1). Thus, what was anticipated by the General Assembly is a restaurant, or a pub, or a bookstore. What was not anticipated is an academic program of a higher education institution. Thus, we hold that the conduct alleged by the Department does not fall within section 5 — 102(A), and consequently no jurisdiction is conferred by that section over this cause of action. The second arguable source of jurisdiction is section 5 — 102(C). That section makes it a civil rights violation to "[d]env or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of the official’s office or services or any property under the official’s care because of unlawful discrimination.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 102(C). Plaintiffs concede that they are public officials for purposes of the Act, as the Act defines a public official as "any officer or employee of the state.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 101(C).) Thus, the issue becomes whether academic programs are "accommodations” of these public officials for purposes of section 5 — 102(C). Again, the primary purpose of statutory interpretation is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature. (In re Marriage of Logston (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 266, 277.) When the legislature spoke of the accommodations of a public official’s office, it was by definition referring to public accommodations. We therefore give the same reading to "the accommodations *** of the [public] official’s office or services” that we did to "public accommodations.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 102(C).) Consequently, we hold that the conduct alleged by the Department does not fall within section 5 — 102(C), and consequently no jurisdiction is conferred by that section to this cause of action. This conclusion is bolstered by the legislature’s 1983 enactment of article 5A of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, pars. 5A — 101, 5A — 102). That article specifically confers jurisdiction on the Department over claims of sexual harassment in higher education. Where the legislature has made a material change in a statute, such as by adding specific limited jurisdiction language, the presumption is that "the amendment was intended to change the law.” State of Illinois v. Mikusch (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 242, 252. Had higher education already been covered by the Act, a simple amendment adding sexual harassment to the Department’s jurisdiction would have been sufficient. The addition of an entire new article evinces the legislature’s understanding that, until that new article’s passage, no jurisdiction had yet been conferred to the Department over institutions of higher education. Since 1983, the Department has had jurisdiction over higher education, but only over a very distinct type of claim: sexual harassment. Since no such allegation was made in the present cause, the trial court appropriately granted the writ of prohibition, and the appellate court erroneously reversed. Thus, we reverse the appellate court and affirm the trial court. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed. JUSTICE HARRISON took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741252 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:22.498496+00 ===

YETKA, Justice
(dissenting).
The majority interprets section 179.65(5) to allow minority dues checkoff when the agreement between the school district and the exclusive representative so provides. The issue then becomes whether the exclusive representative has so agreed in this case. The majority does not undertake to answer this question.
Several factors demonstrate that the exclusive representative has agreed to permit minority dues checkoff. First, its contract with the school district has never prohibited this practice. If the contract was intended to prohibit minority dues checkoff, then it should have so provided. The fact that the contract never prohibited this practice becomes especially important in view of the fact that minority dues checkoff was permitted by the school district until August 20, 1973. Although the practice stopped at that time, no new language prohibiting minority dues checkoff was added to the contract. The 1973 amendment to section 179.-65(5) went into effect on May 25, 1973.1 For three months, the school district allowed minority dues checkoff under the new statute, and the exclusive representative acquiesced in the practice. If the contract with the school district permitted this practice in 1973 after the statute was amended, then the same contract should permit the same practice today. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 249 (Tent.Draft No. 6, 1971) (prior conduct of parties supplements and is used for interpreting agreement).
Second, the practice complained of in this case is one that is followed in many other school districts throughout the state. It is a custom in the profession and, because it is not prohibited by the contract, it becomes a term of the exclusive representative’s contract with the school district. See id. § 247 (agreements are supplemented by customary practice with respect to other agreements of the same type).
Finally, there is another factor that shows the parties did not intend their contract to prohibit minority dues checkoff. An affiliate of one of the plaintiffs in this case was involved in a 1974 arbitration proceeding that interpreted section 179.65(5) to give school districts the discretion to permit *331minority dues checkoff. Although this court gives no deference to an arbitrator’s interpretation of a statute, the arbitrator’s decision did give plaintiffs reason to know that section 179.65(5) might not prohibit minority dues checkoff. Yet the contract was never amended to prohibit the practice. This also shows long-term acquiescence; by the plaintiffs and demonstrates that the parties intended their contract to permit minority dues checkoff.
The prior conduct of the parties and the customs of the profession show quite clearly that the contract in this case allows minority dues checkoff. The majority decision acknowledges that the parties can agree to permit this practice, yet it does not decide whether such an agreement has been made. Because the facts demonstrate such an agreement, however, the trial court’s decision should be reversed.
SCOTT, Justice
(dissenting).
I agree with the dissent of YETKA, J.
. See Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 635, § 38, 1973 Minn.Laws 1526, 1541 (effective date provision).

=== CASE 9741253 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:23.105769+00 ===

HEFFERNAN, J.
This is a review of a decision1 of the court of appeals which affirmed a judgment of the circuit court for Dane county sustaining an order of the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations (hereinafter DILHR). DILHR’s order directed that the respondent, American Motors Corporation, cease and desist from discharging employees on the basis of religion. The order also provided that American Motors pay the complainant, Thomas L. Bartell, back wages for the period he was unemployed following his discharge by American Motors. The validity of the portion of the order concerned with back wages is not at issue on this review.2
*340The basic question on this review is whether the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, secs. 111.31 to 111.37, Stats., requires an employer to accommodate an employee’s work absences which are occasioned by the employee’s observance of religious holidays or days of religious obligation. DILHR, the circuit court, and the court of appeals held that accommodation was required. This court concludes that the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act does not impose that duty upon an employer, and we therefore reverse.
The undisputed facts show that Bartell applied for employment with American Motors in May of 1972. Although he stated on his employment application that he had received a bachelor’s degree in engineering, his degree requirements were not fully completed even at the time of his discharge from the company. Nevertheless, he was hired as an engineer for a management position which required him to participate in a six-month training program commencing on July 7, 1972. The training program consisted of a rotating schedule by which each management trainee was assigned to various departments within the American Motors plant, so he could observe and understand the manufacturing operations. Because this entailed some reallocation and disruption of the work in the operating departments of the American Motors plant, the schedule was rigidly planned to avoid having more than one trainee in any department at the same time.
At an orientation meeting prior to the start of the management training program, American Motor’s personnel manager explained the program and distributed the scheduled assignments to each of the trainees. He explained the company’s policies, including those concerning holidays, vacations, and leaves of absence. Although trainees were encouraged to ask any questions, Bartell did not, at that time, point out the conflict be*341tween his assigned training schedule and his religious commitments. Bartell acknowledged that he did not inform American Motors of possible religious conflicts with his work schedule, because he thought he would not be hired if he mentioned it.
Bartell had been baptized as a member of the Worldwide Church of God on January 8, 1972. He acknowledged that, at the time he was hired, he knew that members of that faith were required to abstain from secular work from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday of each week and on certain days, which were determined on the basis of biblical texts and were fixed in accordance with the Jewish calendar. In 1972, one such holy day, the Day of Atonement, fell on September 18, a Monday. Another, the Feast of Tabernacles, consisted of an obligatory eight-day religious convocation lasting from Friday, September 22, to Friday, September 29. During the Feast of Tabernacles, members of the Worldwide Church of God were required to abstain from secular work on the first and last days and to attend a regional church convocation for the entire week.
Bartell said he did not raise any question about days off for religious observances at the time of the orientation briefing, when vacations and leaves of absence were discussed, because he considered it a personal matter he did not want to discuss in the presence of other employees. He testified that he intended to speak to the personnel manager in private, but no opportunities for private conversation arose until August 7. On that date, he asked the personnel manager whether he could be excused from work on the Day of Atonement, Monday, September 18, and on the week days during the Feast of Tabernacles. The personnel manager said that he would confer with whomever was necessary in respect to this request, although he did not think American Motors could give Bartell the time off for this purpose. *342At the original conference with the personnel manager, Bartell did not explain that his religious observances were mandatory; and it was only at a later date, apparently on August 10, that he told the personnel manager that his religion obligated him not to work on the holy days. After further conferring with company officials, the personnel manager told Bartell on August 17 that his request was denied and that he would either have to work on the days he requested to have off or to be terminated from employment. The personnel manager suggested that Bartell think the matter over and make his decision the following day. On August 18, Bartell told the personnel manager that he could not change his request. He was then informed that he was terminated from employment with American Motors on that date.
Initially, on August 24, 1972, Bartell filed a complaint with the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (hereinafter EEOC), alleging that his discharge was based upon religious discrimination. The federal complaint was referred to the Wisconsin department of industry, labor and human relations. In the letter of referral to the Wisconsin department, the regional director of EEOC stated:
“Pursuant to Section 706(c) of the Act [Civil Eights Act of 1964] no charge may be filed with this Commission under Section 706(b) until the expiration of 60 days after proceedings have been commenced under the fair employment practice law of your State . . ,”3
Although Bartell on March 1, 1973, requested DILHE to withdraw his complaint, nevertheless DILHE, proceeding under the provisions of see. 111.36, Stats., made *343a finding of probable cause that discrimination had occurred, and attempted conciliation, which was unsuccessful. A hearing on the complaint was held. DILHR issued its final decision and order on January 13, 1977, determining that American Motors had violated the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act in discharging Bartell. American Motors was ordered to cease and desist from religious discrimination against its employees and to pay back wages from the date of discharge until Bartell found other employment.
American Motors commenced an action under ch. 227, Stats., to review these administrative findings. The circuit court undertook an extensive review of DILHR’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. The circuit court’s opinion discussed American Motors’ contention that the claimant Bartell was not terminated for his insistence on observing the holy days, but for his deception in failing to disclose the conflict between the work schedule and his religious obligations at an earlier time.
Judge Bardwell, the circuit judge, pointed out that the record indeed contained evidence to support American Motors’ contention that Bartell’s deception, and not his adherence to religious practices, was the reason for the firing. Nevertheless, there was also evidence — that submitted by Bartell — that he was terminated for his insistence on observing his religious holy days. In sustaining the findings of fact of DILHR, Judge Bardwell pointed out that each contention was worthy of belief, but the factual determination under those circumstances was for DILHR to make and would not be disturbed by the court. There is also evidence in the record that it was the policy and the usual practice for American Motors to permit sincere believers to abstain from work on obligatory holy days. Accordingly, Judge Bardwell sustained the findings of fact and conclusions of law, but modified the judgment to provide that DILHR’s order be limited in its applicability to only the com*344plainant, Thomas Bartell. The record in this case clearly would not warrant a conclusion that American Motors, as a matter of policy, disregarded the religious needs of its employees. The order of DILHR that American Motors “cease and desist from discharging employees on the basis of religion” was unjustified and unsupported by the record. The circuit court also eliminated the award of back pay. The judgment of the circuit court was appealed to the court of appeals. The circuit court judgment was affirmed, but the order for back pay was reinstated.
The court of appeals concluded that American Motors had a duty under the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act to accommodate Bartell’s religious needs and that the evidence was sufficient to support DILHR’s finding that American Motors failed to afford a reasonable accommodation to Bartell. The court of appeals further concluded that the duty of reasonable accommodation under the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act did not violate the establishment clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Art. I, sec. 18, of the Wisconsin Constitution.
On petition' to this court to review the decision of the court of appeals, only two questions were raised: Whether American Motors had a duty, under the Wisconsin statutes, of reasonable accommodation and, if so, the extent of that duty, and whether the imposition of that duty violated constitutional provisions.4 Because *345we conclude that there exists no duty under the Wisconsin statutes to accommodate the religious practices of Thomas Bartell, we have no occasion to reach the constitutional question.
The basic rationale of the court of appeals in finding that there is a duty to accommodate is that the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act of 1945 addresses the same problems of discrimination which are addressed in the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its amendments. Because the United States Supreme Court has held that Title VII of the Federal Civil Rights Act, as amended, requires accommodation to an employee’s religious practices and because some state courts, in interpreting their own statutes or constitutions which are designed to protect civil rights have interpreted those state provisions to require accommodation, the court of appeals concluded that it is reasonable to hold that the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act should also be interpreted the same. It also placed “considerable weight” on the administrative interpretations of DILHR that accommodation is required by the Wisconsin law.
To appreciate the error in this position, it is necessary to review the legislative history of the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act; and it should be emphasized at the outset that the Wisconsin act, unlike the Federal Civil *346Rights Act, as amended in 1972, contains no legislative requirement of accommodation. The portions of the Fair Employment Act relevant to the issue in this case are set forth in secs. 111.31(1), (2), (3) and 111.32(5) (a), Stats. 1971.5
*347The Fair Employment Act, as it appears today in the statutes, prohibits nine enumerated types of employment discrimination: Discrimination based on age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin, ancestry, and arrest record or conviction record. These types of discrimination are enumerated in secs. 111.31(1) and 111.32 (5), Stats. In addition, sec. 111.31(4) and other parts of the subchapter limit the permissible use of “honesty” tests to be given to employees or prospective employees. Of these nine categories, five — race, color, creed, national origin, and ancestry — were identified as creating problems of discrimination by the original enactment of the Fair Employment Act. Ch. 490, Laws of 1945. None of these five categories have ever been elaborated upon or further defined by the legislature in the course of numerous amendments to the act. By contrast, the four remaining categories — age, sex, handicap, and arrest record — were all added over the years following 1945 ;6 and the act now fully and clearly defines what constitutes discrimination in each of these problem areas.
It is the alleged discrimination against Bartell because of “creed” which is relevant to this decision. Although the legislature has never defined the meaning of “creed,” this court has concluded in Augustine v. Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith, 75 Wis.2d 207, 215, 249 N.W.2d 547 (1977), that “creed” refers to a “system *348of religious beliefs.” Despite the fact that discrimination as to creed is one of the five original areas of discrimination listed in the act of 1945, the legislature has not found it necessary to provide further guidance in respect to an employer’s obligation where arguably there is a conflict between an employee’s religious practices and the employer’s personnel and management procedures. Nor has there been any judicial interpretation beyond that given in Augustine.
It is clear, and it is acknowledged by all of the parties to this review, that nowhere in the act itself is there an express requirement that an employer be required to accommodate its business conduct to the employee’s religious observances. Insofar as the Wisconsin legislature is concerned, there is no evidence whatsoever of attention to the problems of religious discrimination between the original passage of the act in 1945 and 1981. Where there is so little evidence of subsequent legislative interest or attention, there is little upon which a court can determine intent on the basis of post-passage legislative treatment of the original statute.
The legislature has never acted explicitly to require an employer to accommodate an employee’s religious observances. What little evidence may be gleaned from the legislative history is to the contrary and would lead to the conclusion that the legislature has rebuffed efforts to incorporate the accommodation provisions of the Federal Civil Rights Act into the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act.
In 1975, Assembly Bill 485 was introduced as an amendment to the Fair Employment Act. In part, it would have amended the act:
“To provide for implementation within this state of the fair employment policies embodied in the federal civil rights act of 1964.”
*349At the time this bill was introduced into the Wisconsin legislature, the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 had been amended by congressional action in 1972 to expressly require that employers accommodate their employees’ religious practices. Had this amendment been incorporated into the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, it — arguably at least — would have incorporated the accommodation policy of the federal act. This bill, however, failed of passage and died in committee. We do not believe, however, it would be logical or reasonable to assert that the failure of this bill to be enacted constitutes a legislative rejection of the duty to accommodate. Bills frequently fail to attain the stature of laws for reasons that have nothing to do with their merit, but are more related to the time exigencies and other priorities with which the legislature is confronted. The most that could be gleaned from this legislative episode is that the legislature, when it had the opportunity to incorporate an accommodation provision into the Wisconsin act, did not do so.7
In summary, then, of the expressed legislative intent, the most that can be said is that the legislature has never stated that there is a duty on the part of an employer to accommodate an employee’s religious practices. *350In fact, religious practices, as such, are unmentioned in the legislation. Nevertheless, in sub. (3) of sec. 111.31, Stats., the legislature stated:
“. . . it is declared to be the public policy of the state to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry. This subchapter shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose.”
The court of appeals recites this legislative direction of liberal construction but does not point out why, by liberally construing the provisions which are expressly set forth in the act, a court has the authority to import into the act specific provisions that the legislature omitted. Apparently, the reasoning of the court of appeals is that it is appropriate to import into the act all mechanisms which are not inconsistent with the purpose and spirit of anti-discrimination legislation. We believe this goes beyond the parameters of liberal construction. This court has said in Lukaszewicz v. Concrete Research, Inc., 43 Wis.2d 335, 342, 168 N.W.2d 581 (1969):
“We cannot, of course, by a liberal construction change the wording of a statute to mean something which was not intended by the legislature or by the plain language used.”
We have also said in Augustine, supra at 215, quoting Shuchter v. Division of Civil Rights, 117 N.J. Super 405, at 408, 285 A.2d 42 (1971):
“ ‘We do not believe, however, that it is our function as a reviewing court to expand a legislative enactment because of new trends in the definition of a word. Whether discrimination on the basis of moral, philosophical, social or political values should be condemned or permitted among the citizens of this state is a question most properly answerable by the legislature.’ ”
*351We cannot conclude that the use of the undefined term, “creed,” permits us to supplant or supplement the legislature’s prerogative of determining by what means discrimination in respect to creed or religion should be suppressed or eliminated. This is a legislative function.
By liberal construction all that is meant is that the terms actually used by the legislature shall be given the fullest application within proper definitional guidelines that are consistent with the spirit of the legislation. This is precisely what Augustine, supra, did. It gave a liberal construction to the word, “creed,” but only within the appropriate definitions of the very word used by the legislature. Liberal construction does not give a court the right to expand the terms of the legislation. The term, “accommodation,” that is, the duty of an employer to reasonably adopt his business practices to the religious needs of an employee, is not hinted at in the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act. We do not in any way intimate that accommodation should not appropriately, or could not constitutionally, be adopted by legislative enactment. All we conclude is that the legislature in the State of Wisconsin has not yet seen fit to establish such public policy and it is not appropriate for this court, even though it may favor accommodation of religious beliefs, to usurp the prerogatives of the legislature and create legislation where none exists.
Although the legislature has not expressly provided for accommodation in the Fair Employment Act, it may have the opportunity to do so in the current session of the legislature. The files of the legislative reference bureau show the introduction on March 18, 1981, of Senate Bill 204 sponsored by numerous members of the senate and of the assembly. Among the changes proposed in the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act by that bill is the creation of sec. 111.337(1). The proposed amendment provides:
*352“In addition to the actions prohibited under s. 111.322 [a new subsection added by the proposed bill], it is employment discrimination because of creed to refuse to reasonably accommodate an employe’s or prospective employe’s religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the part of the employer, unless the employer demonstrates that he or she is unable to so accommodate.”
The introduction of this bill and its language is significant in the context of the present case, because it contemplates that the failure to accommodate is an adcttr tional type of employment discrimination not covered in the original statute. Thus, insofar as legislative intent is concerned, the framers of this bill are of the opinion that the question of the duty to accommodate is being submitted to the legislature for consideration for the first time. We note, however, the comments in the analysis of Senate Bill 204 by the legislative reference bureau. In discussing the bill generally, it states:
“It places into the subchapter the following concepts which are presently the law in this state either because of Wisconsin supreme court decisions or federal laws: ((
“(E) An employer must attempt to make certain reasonable accommodations to the . . . religious observances or practices of employes and prospective employes.”
We believe this analysis to be incorrect insofar as it applies to the duty of accommodation. No Wisconsin supreme court decision has found the duty to accommodate under state law. The court of appeals has done so, but only in the very case which is being reviewed herein. Moreover, the bill analysis’ apparent reliance on federal laws as establishing the law of this state in this context is inappropriate. While it is true that this court ordinarily has the duty to enforce federal causes of action (see Terry v. Kolski, 78 Wis.2d 475, 254 N.W.2d 704 *353(1977)), that is not true in respect to the Federal Civil Rights Act. The relationship between the Federal Civil Rights Act and the state Fair Employment Act shows that the remedies under each jurisdiction are to be pursued separately. As the statement of the procedural posture of this case demonstrates, Bartell initially sought his remedy in the office of the EEOC. The matter was referred to DILHR by the EEOC for proceedings “under the fair employment practice law of your State.” (Emphasis supplied.) When, as a matter of comity pursuant to federal law, EEOC defers to state aetion, it is not the federal law which is enforced by state action, but the law of the state itself. There is no ipso faeto incorporation of the Federal Civil Rights Act in the Fair Employment Act of the State of Wisconsin. Accordingly, the fact that the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1972, requires accommodation does not import those provisions into state law enacted in 1945, absent some appropriate action by the State of Wisconsin to incorporate that provision of the federal law. If the analysis of the legislative reference bureau was intended to mean that federal laws are automatically incorporated into the state law, it is incorrect.
Nevertheless, it is possible by a course of administrative interpretation to modify or supplement statutory provisions adopted by the Wisconsin legislature; and under proper circumstances, this court will give weight to such an administrative construction of a statute. This may be so even though, as we have often stated, upon review of actions of administrative agencies, questions of law such as statutory construction are reviewable ab initio by this court (see Jaeger Baking Co. v. Kretschmann, 96 Wis.2d 590, 594, 292 N.W.2d 622 (1980); Boynton Cab Co. v. ILHR Dept., 96 Wis.2d 396, 405, 291 N.W.2d 850 (1980)) and properly subject to judicial sub*354stitution of judgment (Dept. of Revenue v. Milwaukee Refining Corp., 80 Wis.2d 44, 48, 257 N.W.2d 855 (1977)). The position of DILHR is that its construction of the Fair Employment Act to include an accommodation requirement is entitled to such weight in the present case. The record, however, does not support any finding which would enable us to conclude that DILHR has taken any steps that would incorporate the accommodation provisions of the Federal Civil Rights Act into Wisconsin law.
One method of so doing would be the promulgation of administrative rules. As a part of the enactment of the Fair Employment Act, DILHR was given authority to “make, amend and rescind such rules as are necessary to carry out this subchapter.” Sec. 111.33, Stats. This authority was initially granted by ch. 490 of the Laws of 1945. The exercise of such rule-making function, however, is subject to the strictures of ch. 227, the Administrative Procedures Act. No administrative rule has ever been promulgated to require a duty of accommodation.8 Had the duty to accommodate been incorporated in a *355rule, it would, of course, have been subject to the legislature’s oversight of an agency’s rule-making power; and had such a rule been promulgated and not been suspended or set aside on legislative review pursuant to sec. 13.56, Stats., the rule would be some evidence that the legislature had acquiesced in DILHR’s interpretation of the statute. No rule was promulgated.
In light of the sweep of the policy of accommodation and the language of sec. 227.01(3) and (4), Stats. 1971,9 we believe that the exercise of the rule-making power by DILHR would have been the most appropriate method of requiring accommodation. However, this court recognizes, in a proper case, the administrative construction which an agency places upon a statute by its own deci-sional processes other than administrative rule making.10
DILHR asserts that it uniformly interprets and administers the statute to require accommodation. It asserts that its interpretation has twice been accorded judicial approval. We find those judicial approvals insufficient to be precedent, because both appear in circuit court opinions subsequent to the complaint in this case, and one of them is the opinion of Judge Bardwell which is the subject of this very appeal.
*356The court of appeals relied upon several decisions of DILHR which purport to show that DILHR’s uniform course of interpretation of the statute requires accommodation. These citations by the court of appeals are unconvincing, because the date of the earliest follows the complaint in the present case by more than two years. The most these administrative interpretations show is that, after the interpretation adopted by DILHR in the present case filed in 1972, DILHR has followed its own interpretations with consistency. But these interpretations or administrative decisions which followed the filing of Bartell’s complaint are hardly probative of a uniform and long-standing course of administrative interpretation that would control or strongly influence the outcome of this case. Cf. State ex rel. B’nai B’rith Fndn. v. Walworth County, 59 Wis.2d 296, 306, 307, 208 N.W.2d 113 (1973); State ex rel. City Bank & Trust Co. v. Marshall & Ilsley Bank, 8 Wis.2d 301, 306-07, 99 N.W.2d 105 (1959); Beghin v. Personnel Bd., 28 Wis.2d 422, 430, 137 N.W.2d 29 (1965).
American Motors in its brief states that this case was the first in which DILHR asserted that the statute required accommodation. DILHR has not disputed this contention. Moreover, even a long-standing and consistent administrative interpretation of a statute may have little probative effect and should not be followed when plainly erroneous or inconsistent with legislative intent (Milwaukee Fed. of Teachers, Local No. 252 v. WERC, 83 Wis.2d 588, 598, 266 N.W.2d 314 (1978); Karow v. Milwaukee County Civil Service Comm., 82 Wis.2d 565, 570, 263 N.W.2d 214 (1978)) or when the administrative construction is of a statute dealing with the agency’s own power (Big Foot Country Club v. Dept. of Revenue, 70 Wis.2d 871, 875, 235 N.W.2d 696 (1975)). The question of legislative intent — did the legislature intend to require an employer to accommodate an em*357ployee’s demand for time off for religious observances— is the central question on this appeal.
It has frequently been noted that, in order to be given substantial weight or deference by a court, an administrative agency’s construction or interpretation of the legislature’s intent in enacting a statute must be reasonably contemporaneous with its passage. Layton School of Art & Design v. WERC, 82 Wis.2d 324, 340, 262 N.W.2d 218 (1978); Wauwatosa v. Milwaukee County, 22 Wis.2d 184, 189-90, 125 N.W.2d 386 (1963). In this case, the statute was passed by the legislature in 1945. It was not until approximately 1972 — almost twenty-seven years after the legislature acted — that DILHR construed the statute to hold that the legislature intended the statute to require accommodation. This “Johnny Come Lately” construction of the statute hardly meets the requirement that there be substantial contemporaneity to be accorded judicial deference. See Norwegian Nitrogen Products Co. v. United States, 288 U.S. 294, 315 (1933); Guse v. Industrial Comm., 189 Wis. 471, 205 N.W. 428, 208 N.W. 493 (1926), Crownhart dissenting. 11
*358Accordingly, we conclude that, under the circumstances here, the court of appeals erred when it concluded that these administrative interpretations of DILHR were entitled to considerable weight. Rather, it appears that DILHR, following the amendment of 1972 to the Federal Civil Rights Act, which required accommodation under the federal law, was given the impetus to engraft *359the law of another jurisdiction — that of the United States —upon the law of Wisconsin. Under these circumstances, there is no defensible rationale which would lead to the conclusion that the post-1972 interpretations of DILHR were declaratory of the intent of the legislature in 1945, or, for that matter, at any subsequent, time.
The history of the federal EEOC regulations which followed the passage of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 is also instructive of the place, if any, that the federal law has in the interpretation and application of the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act. The relevant section of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was sec. 703(a):
“It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer—
“(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin . . . .” Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. 88-352, 78 Stat. 255, 42 U.S.C. 2000e, 2(a)(1) (1976).
At the time of the passage of this act, the chief concern of its proponents was racial discrimination. The background for the passage of the act is discussed at length in Edwards and Kaplan, Religious Discrimination and the Role of Abritration under Title VII, 69 Michigan Law Rev. 599. As the authors of this article state:
“Given this intent, it is not surprising that, during the hearings and debates preceding the passage of the Act, Congress focused its attention primarily on the race discrimination problem. . . .
“. . . Congress, without bothering seriously to consider or to document the problem, included religious discrimination as one of the employment practices proscribed by title VII.” P. 600.
*360In view of the lack of guidelines by specific legislation or meaningful debate, the precise legislative intent of congress in terms of implementation of religious freedom by the control of employment practices is vague indeed. Almost two years after the passage of the Civil Rights Act, the EEOC issued the first of its guidelines on discrimination because of religion, and it imposed “an obligation on the part of the employer to accommodate to the reasonable religious needs of employees . ...” It diluted this guideline by contemporaneously stating in explanation thereof:
“[A]n employer who closes his business on Christmas or Good Friday is not thereby obligated to give time off with pay to Jewish employees for Rosh Hashanah or Yom Kippur.
“The employer may prescribe the normal work week and foreseeable overtime requirements and, absent an intent on the part of the employer to discriminate on religious grounds, a job applicant or employee who accepted the job knowing or having reason to believe that such requirements would conflict with his religious obligations is not entitled to demand any alteration in such requirements to accommodate his religious needs.” (Emphasis supplied.) 31 Fed. Reg. 8370 (1966), codified at 29 CFRsec. 1605.1 (1967).
These initial guidelines, according to Edwards and Kaplan, supra, appropriately reflect the opinion expressed in congressional debates by Senators Humphrey, Clark, and Case that only intentional religious discrimination was to be barred by the original Civil Rights Act. See also Reid v. Memphis Publishing Co., 521 F.2d 512, 519, reh. en banc den. 525 F.2d 986 (6th Cir. 1975), cert. den. 429 U.S. 964 (1976), reh. den. 433 U.S. 915 (1977). See generally Edwards and Kaplan, Religious Discrimination and the Role of Arbitration under Title VII, 69 Michigan Law Rev. 599 (1971).
Sec. 1605.1 was amended a little over a year later, on July 13, 1967 (32 Fed. Reg. 10298 (1967), codified *361at 29 C.F.R. sec. 1605.1 (1968)), and the guideline adopted then, and which remains in effect to the present time (29 C.F.R. sec. 1605.1 (1980), provides:
“(b) The Commission believes that the duty not to discriminate on religious grounds, required by section 703(a) (1) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, includes an obligation on the part of the employer to make reasonable accommodations to the religious needs of employees and prospective employees where such accommodation can be made without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s business. . . .
“(c) . . . the employer has the burden of proving that an undue hardship renders the required accommodations to the religious needs of the employee unreasonable.”
Under the new guidelines, the reasonable accommodation provision was made far more stringent. Under the Civil Rights Act, if the new guideline of 1967 can be accepted as being declaratory of that law, an employer can avoid the requirement that he make reasonable accommodation only by carrying the burden of proving undue hardship.
In the posture of the case before this court, it is important to remember, however, that the guideline of the EEOC requiring as a matter of federal law the duty of accommodation came twenty-two years after the passage of the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act. Clearly, this pronouncement of a federal administrative agency made two decades after the passage of a Wisconsin act is not probative of the Wisconsin legislature’s intent in 1945.
Great difficulty was encountered by the federal courts when they faced the question of the effect to be given the EEOC’s 1967 guidelines construing the legislative intent of the 1964 act. One of the first challenges to the EEOC guideline was in Dewey v. Reynolds Metals Co., 429 F.2d 324 (6th Cir. 1970), aff’d per curiam by an equally divided court 402 U.S. 689 (1971). That court of appeals, while finding as a fact that there had been *362reasonable accommodation by the employer, raised a serious question whether the EEOC had the authority to impose accommodation guidelines on employers under the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The majority of the court of appeals for the Sixth Circuit stated that:
“[T]he gravamen of an offense under the statute is only discrimination. The authority of EEOC to adopt a regulation interfering with the internal affairs of an employer, absent discrimination, may well be doubted. [P. 331 n. 1]
ii
“The fundamental error ... is that [the parties] equate religious discrimination with failure to accommodate. We submit these two concepts are entirely different. The employer ought not to be forced to accommodate each of the varying religious beliefs and practices of his employees.” P. 335.
The Sixth Circuit in the same case stated:
“Nowhere in the legislative history of the Act do we find any Congressional intent to coerce or compel one person to accede to or accommodate the religious beliefs of another. The requirement of accommodation to religious beliefs is contained only in the EEOC Regulations, which in our judgment are not consistent with the Act.” P. 334.
Dewey was affirmed by an equally divided Supreme Court. 402 U.S. 689 (1971).
Reid v. Memphis Publishing Co., 521 F.2d 512, reh. en banc den. 525 F.2d 986 (6th Cir. 1975), cert. den. 429 U.S. 964 (1976), reh. den. 433 U.S. 915 (1977), also concluded that the EEOC’s 1967 guidelines went beyond the legislative intent and were unsupported by legislative history and, although the congressional amendment of 1972 had intervened, it was held that an amendment then did not establish a congressional intent in 1964 to require accommodation with respect to the original statute. On the other hand, the Fifth Circuit in Riley v. *363Bendix Corp., 464 F.2d 1113, reh. and reh. en banc den. (5th Cir. 1972), validated the 1967 EEOC guidelines as expressing the intent of congress.
It would unnecessarily belabor this opinion to try to trace definitively the perilous journey of the EEOC guidelines through the federal courts. Suffice it to say that the federal courts had great difficulty in concluding that the 1967 EEOC guidelines interpreting the federal law constituted a cognizable declaration of the legislative intent of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
It was not until the case of Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63 (1977), that the United States Supreme Court held that the EEOC’s construction in its 1967 guidelines to the 1964 legislation, imposing a reasonable accommodation requirement, was “defensible” and “entitled to some deference.” See Hardison, supra at 76, n. 11. In the analysis of Hardison, it is essential to recognize that in 1972 the congress, by affirmative legislation, added sec. 701 (j) to sec. 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the “Definitions” section, to provide that, for purposes of Title VII:
“ (j) The term ‘religion’ includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate to an employee’s or prospective employee’s religious observance or practice without undue hardship on .the conduct of the employer’s business.” Equal Opportunity Act of 1972, Pub. Law 92-261, 86 Stat. 103, March 24, 1972, codified 42 USC sec. 2000e(j) (1976).
Hardison makes clear that a reasonable accommodation requirement did not arise because there was evidence of that legislative intent in the 1964 act or because of the 1967 guidelines, but rather such a requirement could now be found because congress had affirmatively ratified the EEOC’s administratively created accommodation requirement by the specific 1972 legislation. The holding *364of Hardison that there was even a de minimis duty upon an employer to accommodate was founded not upon the 1964 legislation or the EEOC guidelines, but rather was upon specific subsequent congressional action of 1972.
It is clear, therefore, in the context of the instant case, that Hardison, when applied to the Wisconsin situation, leads to the conclusion that the vague provisions in respect to religious discrimination in the 1945 Wisconsin statute did not impose a duty of accommodation, and also that the injection of the EEOC’s guidelines or their administrative application by the Wisconsin DILHR cannot have that effect either.
The factors which led the United States Supreme Court to find a requirement of accommodation in Hardi-son are wholly lacking in the history of Wisconsin’s legislation or of the administrative practices of the Wisconsin DILHR. No amendment to the legislation has provided for accommodation, and DILHR has not attempted to provide for reasonable accommodation by a legislatively authorized administrative rule, as did the EEOC. The federal experience leads to the conclusion that no effective Wisconsin action, legislative or administrative, has imposed a duty of accommodation upon Wisconsin employers.
The court of appeals also relied on decisions of other state supreme courts which found an accommodation requirement where the state statutory or constitutional provisions prohibit religious discrimination in employment but were silent on the question of the duty to accommodate. These cases from other states are not persuasive. For example, in Wondzell v. Alaska Wood Products, Inc., 583 P.2d 860 (Alaska 1978), rev’d on other grounds 601 P.2d 584 (Alaska 1979), the Alaska court noted that its act, adopted in 1965, was “modeled” after the 1964 Federal Civil Rights Act and, accordingly, it concluded that it would review and adopt the decision*365al law under the federal statute. It, therefore, concluded that it was appropriate to follow the federal law and to read a duty of reasonable accommodation into the Alaska statute. The Alaska court relied specifically on the Hardison case. The Wisconsin statute, unlike that of Alaska, preceded the federal act by almost twenty years. It cannot be said that the Wisconsin act was modeled after the federal act and that, therefore, we should incorporate the federal decisional law into the interpretations of the Wisconsin statute.
The Maine supreme court’s approach may be similarly distinguished. Maine Human Rights Comm. v. Local 1361, United Paperworkers Int’l Union, AFL-CIO, 383 A.2d 369, 374 (Maine 1978). The Maine supreme court stated that the state act’s legislative history inescapably compelled:
“. . . but one conclusion: The employment discrimination provisions in our statute [enacted five years after the Federal Civil Rights Act] were intended to be the state counterparts of the Federal Act, complimenting and in certain instances supplementing the federal. In such circumstances, decisions by federal courts interpreting the federal statutory equivalents of the Maine Act provide significant guidance in the construction of our statute.” P. 375.
In addition, the Maine court pointed out that the administrative agency charged with the supervision of the state act had promulgated a “virtual carbon copy” (at 376) of the EEOC’s regulation establishing the requirement of reasonable accommodation. These similarities are not to be found in the Wisconsin statute nor in legislative or administrative history of the Wisconsin law.
California also followed federal policy in deciding that state law required accommodation. Rankins v. Comm. on Professional Competence, 24 Cal.3d 167, 154 Cal. Rptr. *366907, 593 P.2d 852 (1979), app. dism’d 444 U.S. 986 (1979). The California court placed primary reliance on the fact that the provision being interpreted was constitutional and not statutory. Moreover, its constitutional provision was adopted in 1974 — after the federal statutory policy was resolved by the 1972 amendment to favor accommodation.
Additionally, the California case is inapposite because the conduct in question involved state action — the duty of a California school district’s failure to accommodate the religious preferences of a teacher. It therefore relied heavily upon the analogy to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, which is, of course, applicable only to state action and not to discriminatory practices of private citizens or corporations.
More in point is the contrary holding of the recent case of the Michigan court of appeals, Department of Civil Rights ex rel. Mary Parks v. General Motors Corp, 93 Mich. App. 366 (1979), 287 N.W.2d 240, appeal docketed 408 Mich. 929 (1980). The statute enacted by the Michigan legislature in 1955 was silent on the question of accommodation. It merely provided:
“It shall be an unfair employment practice:
“(a) for any employer, because of the . . . religion . . . of any individual, to refuse to hire or otherwise to discriminate against him with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment . . . .” P. 371.
The Michigan Department of Civil Rights, expressly relying on the guidelines of EEOC and the amendment to the Federal Civil Rights Law of 1972, adopted interpretative guidelines construing the Michigan statute to impose a duty to accommodate. The Michigan court of appeals held, and the agency acknowledged, that these guidelines were not legislative-type rules and did not in *367themselves have the force of law. The court, therefore, considered the statute itself and concluded that the statute as passed by the legislature created no duty on the part of an employer to accommodate the religious practices of employees. It concluded that no such duty was to be found in the words of the statute or could be inferred from the legislative history. It pointed out, relying on the rationale of the Hardison case, that the statute itself was silent and there was no express legislative ratification of the agency’s guidelines of the kind that the United States Supreme Court found in Hardison. The Michigan court commented that the legislature had amended the statute in other ways subsequent to the agency’s administrative interpretation of the act but had declined to amend the statute to incorporate the administrative construction which imposed a duty to accommodate.
Basically, however, the central rationale of the Michigan ease is that there was nothing in the statute or the history of its enactment which indicated a legislative intent to require accommodation and there was no legislative activity subsequent to the tardy noncontemporaneous administrative construction of the statute which evinced a legislative approval of the agency’s interpretation. Accordingly, the posture of the Michigan case almost completely tracks that to be found in the case now before this court. The Michigan court also placed emphasis on the fact that the interpretative guidelines adopted by an agency were not to be given the weight afforded to a legislative-type rule.12 As in Wisconsin, the administrative agency in Michigan failed to incorporate its administrative interpretation or guidelines into a rule, as it could have under legislatively conferred authority. The Michigan court recognized, as we do in this opinion, that, *368while an administrative interpretation given to a statute by an agency charged with its enforcement is entitled to some weight where it accords with circumstances we have described earlier in this opinion, that interpretation is not binding on the court unless it reflects the intention of the legislature.
Because the controlling legislative intent must be that “which pertained at the time the alleged offense occurred, rather than the legislative intent as of the date of a subsequent enactment” (General Motors p. 381), the Michigan court refused the attempt of the department of civil rights to bolster its interpretation by reference to the 1972 amendment to the Federal Civil Rights Act and by reference to federal decisions which postdated the Michigan legislative enactment by more than a decade.
Other state supreme courts have also found that administrative regulations requiring accommodation were insufficient to impose that gloss upon a silent statute.13 However, we believe that the most persuasive of the state court decisions is that of the Michigan court of appeals. That case addresses precisely the same issues as those with which we are confronted and concerns the attempt of the administrative agency to retrospectively engraft an intent upon a legislative enactment by an interpetation that came long after the statute itself.
We, accordingly, conclude that the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, as adopted by the legislature in 1946, did not impose a duty upon private employers to accommodate the religious practices of their employees and that DILHR’s attempt to engraft the present federal statutory law upon the state legislation came far too late *369for us to conclude that it had any relevance to the legislature’s intent at the time of the passage of the act. Moreover, despite the changes in the federal law, the Wisconsin legislature to date has not enacted any requirement of accommodation, and DILHR has not by rule, as it could have, adopted such a requirement. It has not recommended such change to the legislature, nor has there been any pattern of past administrative practice or construction which is persuasive in the resolution of this case.
We conclude that the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act imposes no duty upon a private employer to accommodate the religious practices of an employee. The discharge of Bartell was not an act of discrimination under the act, and accordingly the decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
By the Court. — Decision reversed.
Day, J., took no part.
American Motors Corp. v. ILHR Dept., 93 Wis.2d 14, 286 N.W.2d 847 (Ct. App. 1979).
DILHR ordered the payment of back pay. The circuit court held that order beyond DILHR’s authority. The court of appeals reversed that portion of the circuit court’s judgment. In view of our disposition of the case, back pay is not an issue to be considered, nor have the parties sought further review on this issue.
This procedure followed the federal requirement. See 42 U.S.C. sec. 2000e-5(e) (Supp. II, 1972); 29 C.F.R. sec. 16.01.12(b)(1) (iii), (iv) (1972). Considerably later — on November 26, 1974— the EEOC made a determination of reasonable cause, and invited conciliation under federal law. This, however, is the only evidence of record indicating further proceedings in this matter by EEOC.
Contrary to the formulation of the issue proposed hy the dissenting opinion, which in large measure views this case as raising a question of differential treatment of religions by the same employer — discrimination—the parties throughout this litigation viewed, argued, and briefed this case as involving the question of the duty of reasonable accommodation. We accepted this case only to decide the important question whether the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act imposes such a duty and, if so, whether constitutional difficulties are thereby created. We would not have *345accepted review if the issue in the case were a question of religious discrimination; that question does not raise any matters of sufficient importance to justify review beyond the court of appeals, because the statutory prohibition against religious discrimination is well established. Had that been the issue, Bartell’s rights were appropriately vindicated in the court of appeals and the case would not have been taken on review. The entire posture of the case demonstrates beyond doubt that the active litigants, DILHR and American Motors, sought a definitive statement on the duty to accommodate. As the dissent acknowledges, Bartell “is no longer really interested in the case.” The discrimination issue, per se, is irrelevant to the purpose for which we accepted review.
“111.31 Declaration of policy. (1) The practice of denying employment and other opportunities to, and discriminating against, properly qualified persons by reason of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry, is likely to foment domestic strife and unrest, and substantially and adversely affect the general welfare of a state by depriving it of the fullest utilization of its capacities for production. The denial by some employers, licensing agencies and labor unions of employment opportunities to such persons solely because of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry, and discrimination against them in employment, tends to deprive the victims of the earnings which are necessary to maintain a just and decent standard of living, thereby committing grave injury to them.
“(2) It is believed by many students of the problem that protection by law of the rights of all people to obtain gainful employment, and other privileges free from discrimination because of age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry, would remove certain recognized sources of strife and unrest, and encourage the full utilization of the productive resources of the state to the benefit of the state, the family and to all the people of the state.
“(3) In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, and otherwise, it is declared to be the public policy of the state to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry. This subchapter shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose.
“111.32 Definitions. When used in this subchapter:
“(5) (a) ‘Discrimination’ means discrimination because of age, race, color, handicap, sex, creed, national origin or ancestry, by an employer or licensing agency individually or in concert with others, against any employe or any applicant for employment or licensing, in regard to his hire, tenure or term, condition or privilege of employment or licensing and by any labor organization against any member or applicant for membership, and also in-*347eludes discrimination on any of said grounds in the fields of housing, recreation, education, health and social welfare as related to a condition or privilege of employment.”
Age: Ch. 149, Laws of 1959; ch. 687, Laws of 1959.
Sex: Ch. 529, Laws of 1961; ch. 628, Laws of 1961; ch. 234, Laws of 1967; ch. 94, secs. 59-61, Laws of 1975; ch. 286, secs. 2-4, Laws of 1977.
Handicap: Ch. 230, Laws of 1965; ch. 275, sec. 18, Laws of 1975.
Arrest or conviction record: Ch. 125, Laws of 1977.
The honesty-testing provisions — which are also quite detailed —were added by ch. 319, Laws of 1979.
Similarly inconclusive is the history of Assembly Bill 1094 (1971). That hill inter alia would have redefined discrimination as “differential treatment between persons or between classes of persons” on the basis of enumerated grounds, including religion, unless related to merit. Because this definition is somewhat broader than the original and existing one, passage of the bill might have constituted evidence of a legislative intent to impose a duty of accommodation. However, the defeat of the bill, which died in committee, does not lead to the contrary inference of legislative disapproval, because the bill contained numerous other provisions which might equally well explain its non-passage.
The administrative rules governing Wisconsin Fair Employment Act are to be found in 7 Adm. Code, Ch. Ind. 88, pp. 29-33. A number of rules have been promulgated, but although the federal statute was given an administrative gloss by the EEOC in 1966 and 1967 in respect to accommodation and by congressional amendment in 1972, no effort was made by DILHR by administrative rule to broaden the scope of the statute or to keep pace with federal law. While the rules define “discrimination,” they do so in the words of the statute and do not refer to accommodation. 7 Adm. Code Ch. Ind. 88.01. Specifically, moreover, no effort, discernible in the legislative or administrative history, reveals that DILHR ever assumed the duty imposed by the legislature in sec. 111.36(6), Stats., to:
“Transmit to the legislature from time to time recommendations for any legislation which may be deemed desirable in the light of the department’s findings as to the existence, character and causes of any discrimination.”
“(3) ‘Rule’ means a regulation, standard, statement of policy or general order (including the amendment or repeal of any of the foregoing), of general application and having the effect of law, issued by an agency to implement, interpret or make specific legislation enforced or administered by such agency or to govern the organization or procedure of such agency.
“(4) Every statement of general policy and every interpretation of a statute specifically adopted by an agency to govern its enforcement or administration of legislation shall be issued by it and filed as a rule. . . .”
See Wisconsin Telephone Co. v. ILHR Dept., 68 Wis.2d 345, 228 N.W.2d 649 (1975), for a discussion of an administrative agency’s authority to announce general principles in contested cases. See also Helstad, New Law on Administrative Rule Making, 1956 Wisconsin Law Rev. 407.
We have noted above that DILHR’s administrative construction of the statute does not meet two criteria which might entitle it to some additional weight on judicial review — the “longstanding and consistent” factor, and the “contemporaneous” factor.
Davis identifies these, and two additional, factors as considerations which may prompt a court, in its discretion, to accord weight to administrative construction. The other two are the comparative expertise of the agency and the courts with respect to the particular problem, and whether the statute has been reenacted while the rule is outstanding. K. Davis, 1 Administrative Law Treatise, secs. 5.05-5.07, pp. 314-38 (1958). Neither is satisfied here. With regard to comparative judicial and administrative expertise, the question here involved — whether the Pair Employment Act contains a duty to accommodate — is not one within the unusual expertise or capability of DILHR; this is a rather straight-forward question of law and public policy, not an es*358pecially complex matter requiring extensive familiarity with highly specialized areas of knowledge, which the agency might be more likely to possess than the courts. And with regard to reenactment as evidence of legislative intent or approbation of administrative construction — which, even when it occurs, may be dubious (see id. at sec. 5.07, pp. 331-38, and W. Hurst, Statutes in Court, at 162-64 n. 9 (1970)) — the legislative record during the 1970’s subsequent to DlLHR’s adoption of an accommodation requirement does not reveal sufficient attention to the problem at hand to warrant an inference of approval of such construction.
We note that Professor Davis discusses the above four factors in connection with judicial review of an agency’s “interpretative rules” — rules adopted by an agency without a specific delegation of legislative power and therefore subject to close judicial scrutiny and substitution of judicial judgment, id. at 315 — in contradistinction to “legislative” rules. The latter are rules adopted by an agency pursuant to an express legislative grant of authority; as such they are valid and binding, and not to be re-evaluated by courts as long as they are within the granted statutory power, issued pursuant to proper procedure, and reasonable. Id. at 298. See also Barry Laboratories, Inc. v. State Bd. of Pharmacy, 26 Wis.2d 505, 132 N.W.2d 833 (1965). However, the same factors —contemporaneity, long-standing construction, and re-enactment— are properly applied even to legislative rules, “with respect to the question whether the legislative rules are within the granted power.” Davis, supra at 329, 338-39. See also K. Davis, Administrative Law Text, ch. 5, pp. 123-38 (3d ed. 1972). In the present case, given the practical effect of DlLHR’s construction of the Fair Employment Act — the construction operated as a rule even though it was not promulgated as one — these factors may be properly applied. None of them is satisfied, reinforcing our conclusion that a duty to accommodate does not reflect the legislative intent in Wisconsin’s Fair Employment Act.
See, K. Davis, 1 Administrative Law Treatise, ch. 5, pp. 285-359 (1958).
Corey v. Avco-Lycoming Div., Avco Corp., 163 Conn. 309, 307 A.2d 166 (1972), cert. den. 409 U.S. 1116 (1973); Olin v. Fair Employment Practices Comm., 67 Ill.2d 466, 476, 367 N.E.2d 1267 (1977) (the Illinois court declined to rule on the precise question).