=== CASE 9736905 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:30.034515+00 ===

DRAPER, P. J.
I concur in the judgment.
I would, however, base the decision upon the special facts doctrine.
Defendant Halbert, as president and chairman of the board, was the effective operating head of the corporation, completely controlling the conduct of its business. With his undisputed power over his wife’s shares, he controlled 53 percent of the corporation’s voting stock. This combined control of operations and of voting power goes to show him to be a fiduciary as to the minority shareholders. The special facts which establish this fiduciary capacity and show a breach of his trust consist of his refusal to consider an offer for the corporate assets as a whole, his affirmative effort to persuade minority shareholders to sell for far less than book value, his agreement to secure the necessary resignations to facilitate prompt transfer of operating control, his knowledge of the buyer’s plan to withhold dividends and thus depreciate the value of the minority shares, his opening of the company’s books to the prospective purchaser, and his concealment of all these facts from the minority stockholders. All these facts are established by uncontradicted evidence. It follows that the court’s finding (the jury verdict was but advisory) was unsupported by the evidence and that the liability of defendants is established as a matter of law. This case seems to me to fall within the *274rule of Low v. Wheeler, 207 Cal.App.2d 477 [25 Cal.Rptr. 538], or, at most, to require but a moderate and reasonable extension of that rule. Henee I would base the decision upon the special facts doctrine as applied in Low.
On April 25, 1969, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.

=== CASE 9736906 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:33.68025+00 ===

JUSTICE KUEHN delivered the opinion of the court:  “[P]roof of other crimes, unrelated to those alleged in the charging instrument, cannot be introduced merely to show a propensity for criminal wrongdoing.” People v. Hale, 326 Ill. App. 3d 455, 462, 762 N.E.2d 59, 65 (2001), citing People v. Lindgren, 79 Ill. 2d 129, 137, 402 N.E.2d 238, 242 (1980). This well-settled principle, as a general rule, bans rather persuasive evidence of someone’s guilt from the State’s arsenal of proof. However, if a prosecutor can find some legitimate issue that presents a need to admit evidence of other criminality, the State can use it, even though a clear and unmistakable message about an accused’s criminal propensities resonates from its admission. Several recognized exceptions to the rule allow other-crimes evidence to be heard. Everyone understands the persuasive potential that proof of other criminality packs, but those charged with the task of proving people guilty beyond a reasonable doubt understand it best. Whenever evidence of other criminal conduct surrounds a particular accused, expect a universal prosecutorial response. The prosecution’s modus operandi, given its intent to convict, is quite certain to be motivated by a common design to introduce other-crimes evidence under one of the exceptions to the general rule. Make no mistake about it, any prosecutor worth his salt will try very hard to persuade a judge that reason other than proof of criminal propensity exists, in order to introduce evidence of extraneous criminality. There simply is nothing better than full exposure of an accused’s evil ways. We are presented a case where the prosecution was allowed to present evidence about three burglaries other than the one for which the defendant stood trial. The trial judge’s decision to permit the other-crimes evidence as proof of the defendant’s intent, motive, and design, in addition to showing an absence of mistake, is challenged in this appeal. While evidence of three other burglaries was ostensibly admitted to prove four things, the defendant’s intent, motive, and design, in addition to an absence of mistake, the evidence necessarily conveyed a message that the defendant harbored a penchant for burglary and theft. Indeed, this was the message driven home by the prosecutor during his summation. No one tried to explain how proof of three other burglaries served to establish intent, motive, design, or a lack of mistake. Rather, the evidence of other criminality was linked to an argument about the kind of person with whom the Massac County jurors were dealing. Having recounted the evidence establishing four burglaries, the State’s Attorney argued that the defendant was the kind of person who would come to southern Illinois to gamble and, when he wagered himself short of money, would fund his habit by roaming rural Massac County in search of unlocked barns, garages, and sheds to burglarize. The argument was a succinct picture of what the evidence adduced at the defendant’s trial conveyed. The defendant stands convicted of the November 16, 1999, burglary of a barn owned by a man named Harry Foss. The defendant also stands convicted of the theft that he committed during the course of that burglary. He currently serves a 365-day jail sentence for theft, along with a five-year prison term for burglary, the punishment imposed upon the Massac County jury verdicts. On appeal, we are asked to overturn the convictions based upon the admission of the other-crimes evidence. The following is the defendant’s argument. The admission of evidence about three burglaries, other than the burglary at issue, resulted in verdicts predicated upon evidence of the defendant’s criminal propensity for burglary and theft. There was no other reason to admit evidence about the three other burglaries. While the State convinced the trial judge that the other-crimes evidence should be admitted to show intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake, none of those questions were placed at issue by the evidence presented at the defendant’s trial. There was no question about the intent with which someone entered Harry Foss’s barn. There was no question about any of the earlier burglaries serving as the motive for this one. There was no claim made that the barn was entered under some mistaken belief that the defendant had authority or consent to enter. And the burglary of the barn was a separate and distinct crime. Whoever entered the barn did so without some larger criminal objective to achieve. There was no common scheme or design being fulfilled by the burglary for which the defendant stood trial. It follows that the State was permitted to introduce evidence about three other burglaries to show the defendant’s intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake when the evidence was neither pertinent to nor helpful for the resolution of any of those things. Without a legitimate purpose to admit it, the other-crimes evidence was improper. It only served to demonstrate the defendant’s criminal propensity for burglary and theft. Therefore, the defendant deserves a new trial. The State counters this argument by insisting that the evidence about the other three burglaries was properly admitted to show intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake. As a backup position, the State asks us to consider any error in the admission of the other-crimes evidence as harmless error. The facts of the case are as follows. Between October 26, 1999, and November 16, 1999, the rural areas surrounding Metropolis, Illinois, were struck by a rash of tool thefts from workshops housed in unlocked barns, garages, and farm sheds. Farmers living on the outskirts of Metropolis discovered numerous tools missing from their unsecured workshops during that three-week time span. Metropolis is a relatively crime-free town that lies on the northern bank of the Ohio River, at the southernmost tip of the state, a town that boasts two things that set it apart from most other southern Illinois communities. First, it is home to a gambling boat docked on the Ohio River. The casino provides a venue for those interested in games of chance. In the fall of 1999, the defendant left his Decatur, Alabama, home and drove to Metropolis in order to place some wagers. In addition to the riverboat gambling casino, Metropolis is home to a bronze statute of the man of steel. This symbol of truth, justice, and the American way rests but a short distance from the J & D Jewelry and Loan, an establishment that the defendant visited four times between October 26, 1999, and November 16, 1999. On the first three occasions, he marketed a variety of stolen tools from the back of his pickup. Someone had pilfered the tools from a rural workshop shortly before each of the defendant’s three arrivals at the pawnshop. When the defendant arrived with a pickup load full of tools for a fourth time, the proprietor of the J & D Jewelry and Loan told him about a visit from the sheriff and the victim of a burglary. The burglary victim found one of his missing tools at the pawnshop. It was one of the tools purchased from the defendant. The defendant was also told that the sheriff was aware of all the defendant’s earlier transactions. The defendant promptly left Illinois and returned to his home in Decatur, Alabama. More than two years passed before his arrest in Alabama. At the trial, four farmers, three from Metropolis and one from close-by Vienna, Illinois, were permitted to testify that their unlocked barns or sheds had been unlawfully entered by someone who removed numerous workshop tools. In addition, the proprietor of the J & D Jewelry and Loan was permitted to testify about every transaction that took place between himself and the defendant, all of which involved the pawnshop’s purchases of items removed from the four unlawfully entered workshops. Here is a look at how the State presented its case. The State’s first witness was Jeff Jordan, a Johnson County deputy sheriff, who testified about his arrest of the defendant in Decatur, Alabama, and about a gratuitous comment made by the defendant during the trip back to Illinois. The defendant, who knew that he was returning to face burglary and theft charges, speculated out loud, “[The charges] must be about the barn that I went into.” The State then called Don Fairfield, the owner of the J & D Jewelry and Loan. Fairfield told the jury that the defendant first appeared at his pawnshop on October 26, 1999, driving a pickup truck loaded down with tools. Fairfield explained how he surveyed everything that the defendant wanted to sell and, thereafter, purchased a Campbell-Hausfield 4.5-horsepower air compressor, a Dewalt 4.5-horsepower hand grinder, and a Black & Decker Sawzall. He also purchased a number of hand tools. Fairfield had insisted upon a seller’s bill of sale, which the defendant executed in Fairfield’s presence. He identified this October 26, 1999, document and testified that he had witnessed the defendant sign it. The bill of sale was introduced into evidence. The date on which the bill of sale was executed and the recorded list of items sold coincided with the burglary of Arthur Meinders’ unlocked workshop on October 26, 1999. Someone had entered Meinders’ work shed located on the edge of Metropolis and removed a Campbell-Hausfield 4.5-horsepower air compressor and a Dewalt 4.5-horsepower hand grinder shortly before the defendant sold them to Fairfield. Fairfield identified a second bill of sale executed by the defendant on October 26, 1999. The date and the recorded item, a Sawzall, coincided with Randall Conley’s report of items missing from his Vienna, Illinois, farm that very day. The Sawzall was recovered from the J & D Jewelry and Loan and identified by Randall Conley. According to Fairfield, the defendant reappeared at the J & D Jewelry and Loan on November 4, 1999. The defendant again had his pickup truck loaded with tools. Fairfield looked them over and purchased a Craftsman cordless drill, a Sawzall, and a Craftsman jigsaw. He also bought other assorted hand tools. Fairfield identified a November 4, 1999, bill of sale that he had witnessed the defendant execute. It was admitted into evidence. The date on the bill of sale and the recorded list of the items sold proved significant to another rural burglary. At some point in time on November 4, 1999, someone had entered Steve Foss’s unsecured workshop on the outskirts of Metropolis and removed a Craftsman cordless drill, a Craftsman jigsaw, and a host of other hand tools. Fairfield then testified about the items taken in the burglary and theft for which the defendant stood trial. He told the jury that the defendant drove up with another pickup load full of tools on November 16, 1999. Fairfield inspected the load and purchased a jigsaw, another drill, and a host of other hand tools. Another bill of sale was executed. Fairfield identified the November 16, 1999, document and testified that he had witnessed the defendant sign it on that date. It was introduced into evidence. The date on the bill of sale and the listed items again coincided with a reported burglary. At some point in time on November 16, 1999, someone had entered Harry Foss’s unlocked work shed, just outside of Metropolis, and had pilfered two drills, a saw, and a hand grinder. Fairfield explained how the sheriff came by the pawnshop as a part of his investigation into the sudden, and uncommon, rash of rural burglaries in Massac County. Harry Foss accompanied the sheriff and was able to find one of his tools in Fairfield’s possession. Fairfield testified that when the defendant reappeared with another load of used tools, he confronted the defendant. According to Fairfield, when he told the defendant that he needed to straighten things out with the sheriff, the defendant assured him that he would, indicating that the items had been purchased from someone else. The defendant told Fairfield that everything would be taken care of and that he would return in an hour to transact more business. Finally, Fairfield testified that the defendant did not return and that Fairfield did not lay eyes on the defendant again until he walked into the courtroom. The State’s next witness was Randall Conley, who identified the Sawzall taken from his unlocked rural workshop on October 26, 1999. The State called Bradley Meinders, the son of Arthur Meinders, to identify his father’s grinder and to describe the air compressor, which was never recovered after it disappeared from his father’s workshop on October 26, 1999. The State called Steve Foss. Foss testified about the November 4, 1999, burglary of his workshop. Foss recovered some of the tools from the J & D Jewelry and Loan. The State called Harry Foss. Foss testified about the November 16, 1999, burglary of a workshop housed in his barn. He told the jury that a lot of tools were taken. He identified the only one recovered, a Craftsman drill that was retrieved from the J & D Jewelry and Loan. The State’s final witness was Ted Holder, chief deputy for the Massac County sheriffs department. He testified about a written statement taken from the defendant on September 12, 2001. Holder read its entire contents to the jury. In the statement, the defendant claimed to have purchased the tools that he presented for sale to Don Fairfield. According to the defendant, a hard-luck fellow gambler at the Metropolis riverboat casino sold them to him for $100. In his written statement the defendant laid claim to only one transaction with Don Fairfield. Holder gave his views about the statement’s veracity. He pointed out that the defendant made no mention of the air compressor, a piece of equipment that one man could barely handle, much less forget handling. Holder explained how the defendant had insisted upon only one visit to the J & D Jewelry and Loan and how he readily acknowledged the bill of sale for that visit. Thereafter, Holder confronted the defendant with the three other bills of sale that also bore the defendant’s signature. Holder told the jury that after being shown all the bills of sale, the defendant stopped the interrogation and refused to talk any further.1  The foregoing was the State’s formidable evidence of the defendant’s guilt. After the State rested, the defendant rested.  We return to the long-standing rule of evidence that prohibits proof of an accused’s other crimes. “Evidence of crimes for which a defendant is not on trial is inadmissible if relevant merely to establish his propensity to commit crime.” People v. Thingvold, 145 Ill. 2d 441, 452, 584 N.E.2d 89, 93 (1991). If the State has no other legitimate reason for proving extraneous criminality, we will not countenance the use of such proof. People v. Bobo, 278 Ill. App. 3d 130, 132-33, 662 N.E.2d 623, 625-26 (1996). “Even where the State has good reason to introduce other-crimes evidence, we acknowledge that an inference of criminal propensity will necessarily accompany its use and will require the trial judge to weigh the probative value of such evidence against its potential for producing an improper prejudicial effect, before deciding whether to allow for its admission.” Hale, 326 Ill. App. 3d at 462, 762 N.E.2d at 65, citing People v. Heard, 187 Ill. 2d 36, 58, 718 N.E.2d 58, 71 (1999). We will not disturb a conviction, based upon the admission of other-crimes evidence, unless the trial judge’s admission of that evidence constitutes a clear abuse of discretion. Thingvold, 145 Id. 2d at 452-53, 584 N.E.2d at 93-94. On appeal, the State defends the admission of the other-crimes evidence with the position that evidence of all four burglaries was necessary to show the defendant’s intent, motive, and design. In addition, the State maintains that the other criminality served to discount the possibility that the burglary of Harry Foss’s barn was the product of an innocent mistake. The State’s argument mirrors the arguments tendered by the State’s Attorney, when he convinced the trial judge to allow the other-crimes evidence. The trial judge accepted the State’s Attorney’s explanation for why the jury needed to know about the three other burglaries and admonished jurors several times about the limited reasons for the other-crimes evidence. At the close of the case, the trial judge again admonished the jury about the limited purpose such evidence served and about how jurors should treat that evidence. He gave the following instruction: “Evidence has been received that the defendant has been involved in offenses other than those charged in the information. This evidence has been received on the issues of the defendant’s intent, motive, designf,] and lack of mistake and may be considered by you only for that limited purpose. It is for you to determine whether the defendant was involved in those offenses and[,] if so, what weight should be given to this evidence on the issues of intent, motive, design[,] and lack of mistake.”  Initially, we note that the admission of evidence establishing the commission of three burglaries, other than the one for which a defendant stands trial, is a step that should not be taken lightly. Since it harbors such potential for juror misuse, the admission of evidence about three burglaries other than the burglary at issue should find support in sound reason for its need and in how it is relevant to prove something other than a defendant’s penchant for crime. The first step in deciding whether to admit such evidence is to define what is truly at issue during the trial. The reasons for the admission of evidence proving uncharged criminality need to be linked to contested issues. The tender of four recognized exceptions to the general ban of such evidence, without an articulation of how those exceptions relate to proof of the charge at hand, is unacceptable. The only contested issue in this case was identity. The jury was being asked to decide who committed the unlawful entry of Harry Foss’s barn and who purloined the tools that were kept there. The intent exception to the general ban on other-crimes evidence arises in the context of defenses that challenge the intent, or the state of mind, with which the defendant commits some act. Here is an example of how evidence of other crimes would prove admissible to show intent. The hypothetical charge on trial is shoplifting. Wal-Mart security arrested this defendant after he exited Wal-Mart with an item of merchandise for which he did not pay. The defendant immediately claimed, and maintains at the trial, that he forgot about the item that he pocketed and that he fully intended to pay for the item when he removed it from the shelf. Under such a circumstance, the State could properly introduce security tapes from other stores that record the defendant shoplifting from them, because the defendant’s other ventures are relevant on the question of the defendant’s intent when he exited Wal-Mart. The other crimes tend to show that when the defendant removed merchandise from a Wal-Mart shelf, pocketed it, and walked out of the store, he did so with the intent to permanently deprive Wal-Mart of the item and its worth. Here, the intent with which someone entered Harry Foss’s barn simply was not at issue. Whoever entered the barn left with a host of tools that the defendant ended up selling to the local pawnshop. The defendant did not claim that he entered the barn and took a tool only to fix a flat tire and that when he did so he fully intended to return it. The jury was not being asked to wrestle with the intent, or the state of mind, with which the defendant entered Harry Foss’s barn. Nor was the intent to permanently deprive Harry Foss of his tools and their worth being contested. Thus, the other burglaries were not legitimately admitted to help prove a question of intent. The motive exception to the general ban on other-crimes evidence arises in the context of other crimes that serve as the motive behind the crime charged. Here is an example of how the exception works. The defendant stands trial for first-degree murder. The deceased victim of this homicide was scheduled to testify against the defendant at his approaching trial on another pending murder charge. The State may properly introduce its evidence that the defendant committed the earlier murder, in order to establish the motive for the murder for which he stands trial. See Hale, 326 Ill. App. 3d 455, 762 N.E.2d 59 (a number of car hijackings, and the murders that accompanied them, were all admissible to show that the charged murder and car hijacking were motivated by a desire to avoid capture, arrest, and prosecution for the earlier crimes). Here, none of the other earlier burglaries were a motive for the burglary of Harry Foss’s barn. Thus, the other burglaries were not legitimately introduced to provide the jury with a proper understanding of the motive behind that burglary. The common-scheme-and-design exception to the general ban on other-crimes evidence applies to that rare instance when two or more crimes are really a part of a grander criminal objective. It is confined to those situations where several crimes are necessary in order to complete the overall design of the criminality and accomplish the true criminal objective. Here is an example. The defendant once had a wealthy and aged father who took a young and expensive new bride. At the defendant’s trial for the murder of his father, the State could properly admit evidence that the defendant had murdered his stepmother as well, both murders being a part of a common scheme and design to protect, preserve, and hasten a full inheritance of the family fortune. People v. Jones, 156 Ill. 2d 225, 620 N.E.2d 325 (1993), demonstrates how courts are apt to misapply this exception, treating it as authorizing other-crimes evidence when several crimes are committed in a common way or with a common method. There, the Illinois Supreme Court confronted a case where the defendant stood trial for aggravated criminal sexual assault and murder. Jones, 156 Ill. 2d at 234, 620 N.E.2d at 328. The State introduced evidence that the defendant had sexually assaulted another woman three months after the charged sexual assault occurred. Jones, 156 Ill. 2d at 235, 620 N.E.2d at 328. The jury was instructed that the second sexual assault could be considered by it as evidence of a common scheme and design. Jones, 156 Ill. 2d at 239, 620 N.E.2d at 330. The Illinois Supreme Court ruled that the instruction had been given in error, finding, “Since the two rapes were not portions of one larger crime, but rather two separate and independent crimes, the trial court incorrectly instructed the jury that it could consider the [second] rape as evidence of design.” Jones, 156 Ill. 2d at 239, 620 N.E.2d at 330. The State’s evidence did not show that the burglary itself was driven by some scheme or design common and related to another crime. The State was not trying to show that the defendant entered Harry Foss’s barn and stole a power drill and shovel in order to dismember his slain girlfriend and bury her parts. The burglary was a separate and distinct crime, without a larger scheme and design to necessitate its commission. Thus, the other three burglaries were not legitimately admitted to show a common scheme and design to accomplish some overall larger criminal plan. The admission of other-crimes evidence to show an absence of mistake on a defendant’s part arises when the defendant claims that his otherwise criminal acts were the result of a mistake. For example, the defendant might have claimed that he entered Harry Foss’s barn with the belief that he was on Uncle Earl’s land and that Uncle Earl had given him permission to remove tools from his barn. Had the defendant tendered such a claim, the other three burglaries would have become instantly relevant to dispel the notion that such a mistake had been made. Here, there was no claim of mistake. Thus, the other three burglaries were not legitimately admitted to help prove an absence of that claim. None of the reasons that the State tendered were legitimate reasons to admit the evidence of extraneous criminality. None of the tendered reasons were pertinent to what was at issue. Instructing the jurors that the other burglaries should only be considered to decide intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake implied that intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake were the important issues for determination, based upon the evidence heard. Such instruction actually diminishes the consideration of the only question that was at issue — identity. The limiting instruction implied that the question of who had entered Harry Foss’s barn and taken his tools was a foregone conclusion. We are asked to consider it harmless error to admit evidence of three other burglaries, because of the overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt. We are not asked to consider the mistake harmless because a legitimate reason, other than those tendered, could validate the admission of the other-crimes evidence. The harm in admitting evidence of three burglaries other than the one for which the defendant stood trial, coupled with how the evidence was argued to the jury, is manifest. We think it likely that the jury convicted the defendant because of a dislike for the kind of person who would roam rural Massac County and help himself to the various tools that residents housed in open barns and sheds. We think the jurors convicted the defendant, in large part, because the evidence clearly demonstrated his propensity for burglary and theft.2 We are left to wonder how jurors were supposed to limit their consideration of the three other burglaries to matters of intent, motive, design, and lack of mistake, when none of those matters were at issue. We cannot end our examination of this case without a discussion of another exception to the general ban on other-crimes evidence that may well have allowed for the admission of the other-crimes evidence. When, like here, the question of who committed a crime is the issue, evidence of other crimes can be admissible to show modus operandi. “Modus operandi *** refers to a pattern of criminal behavior so distinctive that separate crimes are recognizable as the handiwork of the same wrongdoer. [Citation.] *** *** While a showing of modus operandi does not require that the similarities be unique to the offenses being compared, there must be ‘some distinctive features that are not common to most offenses of that type.’ ” People v. Barbour, 106 Ill. App. 3d 993, 999-1000, 436 N.E.2d 667, 672 (1982), quoting People v. Tate, 87 Ill. 2d 134, 142-43, 429 N.E.2d 470, 475 (1981). Here is an example of how the modus operandi exception to the general ban of other-crimes evidence works. “Most gas station armed robberies involve the use of a pistol to reheve an attendant of all the money in the cash register. Evidence of a series of gas station robberies committed by a masked man who, while armed with a pistol, forces attendants to empty their cash registers would not qualify for admission in order to show modus operandi, even though every armed robbery was committed in identical fashion. There would be no distinctive features to the methodology uncommon to most gas station holdups. However, if this same armed robber repeatedly demanded all of the Fritos that the station had on hand, instead of its cash, the robberies would take on a distinctive feature to suggest that they were the work of the same individual. Authorities would know that they were dealing with the Frito Bandito, and upon his arrest, the prosecution would be armed with all the robberies to prove his identity in the crime charged.” People v. Wilson, 343 Ill. App. 3d 742, 756, 798 N.E.2d 772, 783-84 (2003) (Kuehn, J., dissenting). Here, the various burglaries share common and distinctive features that suggest the work of one person. Someone targeted the easiest kind of building to steal from — remote unlocked rural barns and sheds that housed workshops. The entries and thefts occurred during broad daylight. The same kinds of tools were always pilfered. And, most important of all, the tools all arrived at the J & D Jewelry and Loan on the same day of their disappearance, via transport in the defendant’s pickup truck. Certainly, an argument could be made that evidence about all the burglaries should be admitted to show the defendant’s modus operandi, the same distinctive method used to purloin the tools from Harry Foss’s barn. The other burglaries would help prove that the defendant was the person who entered the barn and took the tools. When the State’s Attorney initially announced that he intended to introduce evidence of all the burglaries, he mentioned the modus operandi exception to the general prohibition against other-crimes evidence. The trial judge did not rule at that time. Weeks later, prior to the trial, the State’s Attorney apparently abandoned that reason for the use of the evidence, tendering “intent, motive, design, and lack of mistake” as the reasons it should be admitted. The trial judge weighed the probative value of the other-crimes evidence against its prejudicial potential, based upon that submission, and ruled that the three other burglaries would be allowed to show “intent, motive, design, and lack of mistake.” We suspect that the trial judge would have allowed the State to use evidence of the other three burglaries to show the defendant’s modus operandi, in order to enhance the State’s proof of who burglarized Harry Foss’s barn. He would have probably determined that the probative effect of the other-crimes evidence outweighed the prejudice that accompanied its admission, had that reason been tendered instead of intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake. However, we are not ready to declare that to be the case. More important, since we presume that jurors take direction from limiting instructions and consider evidence only in a manner in which they are told to consider it, the instruction on the use of other-crimes evidence, if given, needs to be accurate. When jurors are told to consider this kind of evidence for intent, motive, design, and lack of mistake and the evidence has no bearing on those matters, jurors have no way to use the evidence in an appropriate limited manner. When evidence that harbors such a potential for misuse has been admitted and jurors have been told to consider it for the wrong reasons, we cannot presume that jurors used the evidence for a limited valid reason about which they were not informed. Finally, the decision to admit this kind of evidence requires a balancing process. That process requires more than mindless submission of every possible exception to the general ban of other-crimes evidence, with a hope and a prayer that one of the exceptions fits. Whenever other-crimes evidence is admitted, ostensibly to show “intent, motive, design, and absence of mistake,” and any one of those reasons, much less all of them, is inapplicable to the issues at hand, the balancing process by which the evidence was allowed to be heard is inherently flawed. The trial judge has mistakenly viewed its use for an illegitimate reason and thereby misjudged the probative value of the evidence. Under such a circumstance, the decision to admit the other-crimes evidence constitutes an abuse of discretion. For these reasons, we reverse and remand for a new trial. Reversed; cause remanded. HOPKINS, J., concurs.  The defendant raises an ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim over his lawyer’s failure to object when Chief Deputy Holder commented upon the assertion of the right to remain silent. Even if an appropriate challenge had been made to this testimony, the trial’s outcome would not have changed. A different outcome is simply not a reasonable possibility, in light of the remaining evidence against the defendant.   Our dissenting colleague believes that the State’s case, absent the other-crimes evidence, was overwhelming. However, if the evidence had been confined to one sale of stolen tools between the defendant and Don Fairfield, the State’s case would have been dramatically weakened. A juror’s conclusion that the defendant committed burglary would rest entirely upon the inference drawn from the sale of the stolen tools. The defendant’s written statement could not have been introduced into evidence without supplying the defendant with an explanation for the one-time possession of stolen tools. That explanation would have been far more compelling without evidence of three separate sales to the pawnshop, all involving tools recently stolen from different rural workshops. The statement’s contents, if introduced, would even explain the defendant’s flight when he heard that Foss and the sheriff had visited the pawnshop. Having claimed to have paid only $100 for all of Foss’s tools, the defendant could have argued that his flight evidenced guilt, but not guilt for having committed burglary. The defendant could have claimed that he ran to Alabama because he knowingly possessed and sold stolen merchandise. He could have claimed that he knew he had committed a crime but that he had not committed the crime of burglary. Contrary to the dissent, we cannot conclude that the jury would have readily dispatched a guilty verdict in the absence of the error.

=== CASE 9736907 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:33.687839+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. Although I agree with the majority’s conclusion in footnote 1 that the defendant’s ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim fails, I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that the admission of other-crimes evidence in this case requires us to grant the defendant a new trial. Assuming, arguendo, that the admission of the other-crimes evidence was error, I do not believe that any prejudice that might have resulted to the defendant is sufficient to warrant a reversal and a new trial. Even when one casts aside the purportedly tainted evidence, there is still overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt on the charges of burglary and theft. As the majority itself points out, there was ample evidence properly before the jury that pertained to the burglary and theft for which the defendant stood trial. Don Fairfield, the owner of the pawnshop to which the defendant sold the tools he had stolen from Harry Foss, testified that the defendant drove up to the pawnshop with a pickup load of tools on November 16, 1999, that Fairfield inspected the load and purchased a jigsaw, another drill, and a host of other hand tools, and that a bill of sale for the tools was executed. Fairfield identified the November 16, 1999, document and testified that he had witnessed the defendant sign the document on that date. The bill of sale was introduced into evidence. Harry Foss testified that he lives in rural Metropolis and that on November 17, 1999, he reported to the Massac County sheriff that several drills, tools, and wrenches were missing from his barn. Foss also testified that he found one of the stolen items at Fairfield’s pawnshop. Foss identified as his a Craftsman drill that Fairfield identified as one of the tools he had purchased from the defendant. The evidence adduced from the testimony of Fairfield and Foss and directly related to the crimes with which the defendant was charged was without a doubt properly before the jury. Johnson County deputy sheriff Jeff Jordan testified that the defendant, who knew that he was returning to Illinois to face burglary and theft charges, speculated out loud that the charges “must be about the barn that [he] went into.” Although it is not clear from the remark itself which barn it was to which the defendant was referring, it could well have been Harry Foss’s barn, and thus Jordan’s testimony was properly before the jury as well. Accordingly, the jury had before it evidence that the jury could have found directly linked the defendant to the scene of the crime, as well as evidence directly impheating him in the sale of the goods stolen from that scene. In the past, we have held error to be harmless where the evidence supporting a defendant’s conviction is so overwhelming that the defendant would have been convicted even if the error was eliminated. See People v. Tucker, 317 Ill. App. 3d 233, 243 (2000). The majority claims the error in this case is not harmless because the majority believes the allegedly improper evidence led the jury to convict the defendant on the basis of the defendant’s “propensity for burglary and theft” rather than, presumably, the one burglary and theft the State easily would have proven even had the other-crimes evidence been excluded. I find this reasoning highly speculative and simply do not believe the outcome of this case would have been any different had the other-crimes evidence been excluded. Because I believe the evidence properly before the jury in this case is overwhelming, I would hold any error in the admission of other-crimes evidence harmless and would affirm the defendant’s conviction and sentence.

=== CASE 2207859 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.103584+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 838 (1969)
GORDON VIRGIL WEGNER, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 25504.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Four.
Apr. 16, 1969.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, and Wiley W. Manuel, Deputy Attorney General, for Defendant and Appellant.
Twohy, Wegner & Likens, Wegner & Likens and John M. Compton for Plaintiff and Defendant.
DEVINE, P. J.
The Department of Motor Vehicles appeals from a judgment granting a writ of mandate which commands the department to set aside its order suspending respondent's driving license for six months.
Respondent does not dispute the fact that the officers had reasonable cause to believe that he had been driving a motor vehicle on a highway while he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. He refused to take the required tests unless an attorney or a doctor were present.
Shortly after the refusal, respondent announced that he would take a blood test. The technologist put the constricting band on his arm. Respondent then balked, saying, "I don't want to be railroaded," and refused to continue. According to respondent's testimony, when the technologist started to take the blood respondent noticed that the man's hands were grimy and there was dirt under his fingernails. Respondent stated that he was more apprehensive of an abscess from a dirty needle than he was of a criminal charge, and he reiterated that he wanted a doctor at his own expense to be summoned to take the blood sample. Respondent was told again that he had a choice of one of three tests, but he refused all three.
Respondent was allowed to call his personal physician, a Dr. Brown. The doctor arrived about an hour and a half after respondent's refusal. Respondent asked that Dr. Brown be allowed to take a blood test at the sheriff's office and his request was refused. Dr. Brown drove respondent directly to a hospital and took a blood sample there. The test showed a result of 0.16 percent. This was around 5 a.m., about two hours after the formal request for taking of the test had been made by the officer. *840
[1] The first issue in the appeal, as presented by the briefs, is whether the holder of an operator's license, when lawfully required as a condition to holding his license against suspension to take one of the three tests (blood, urine or breath) prescribed by Vehicle Code section 13353, having chosen to take the blood test, may comply with the statute by a consent which is made conditional upon the withdrawing of the blood by a physician of his choice. The trial judge held that such a consent was valid provided that an unreasonable delay in withdrawing the blood had not occurred. The decision, made on January 2, 1968, antedated that of Fallis v. Department of Motor Vehicles, 264 Cal. App. 2d 373 [70 Cal. Rptr. 595], in which it was squarely held that such a qualified consent is a refusal (p. 382). The licensee has a right to an additional test made by his own physician (Veh. Code,  13354), as was done in this case. It is argued by respondent that diminution of the alcoholic content in the blood with the passage of time can be measured, wherefore calculation could be made backward from the taking of the sample at five o'clock to the earlier time of the proposed test under the direction of the arresting officer. But the statute does not allow the procedure selected by respondent as an alternative. We hold, therefore, that respondent's conduct constituted a refusal.
[2] Although the trial judge made his determination on the ground of the reasonableness of the substitution of the sampling taken by the physician for that proposed by the officer under the statute, and said it was not necessary to decide the question of the refusal by the licensee on the grounds that the procedure was unsanitary, he did make findings on the subject, the subject has been briefed on both sides, and we regard it as a second issue on appeal. The court's findings are stated thus: "6. When the technician arrived, the petitioner rolled up his sleeve and allowed the restricting band to be placed on his arm. 7. Petitioner then objected to the technician's taking of blood on the basis that his hands were grimy and that there was dirt under his fingernails."
But there is no evidence that respondent told the officers or the technologist that he feared that the needle was dirty because of the condition of the technologist's hands. Nor is there evidence that he protested that the particular needle was, or was likely to be, dirty. A general statement only was made about respondent's fears. This was insufficient. (See *841 Westmoreland v. Chapman, 268 Cal. App. 2d 1, 6 [74 Cal. Rptr. 363].)
The officers and the department were left without opportunity to assess the validity of respondent's unannounced complaint. Of course, it was impossible for the trial court to determine that there actually was an unsterile needle in the hands of the technologist.
Even if respondent's observation of the condition of the hands of the technologist were correct (and the trial judge does not find that this was so, but only that the licensee's objection was on the basis of the condition of the technologist's hands and nails), respondent, by his failure to call attention to what he deemed objectionable, neglected to suggest to the officers or to the technologist a correction.
[3] Although it may well be that if one or two of the three tests is objectionable to the licensee because of a valid technical deficiency he need not submit to a test which is not his first choice, nevertheless it is reasonable to require, and we hold that it is required, that the licensee upon whom demand is properly made must point out the deficiency which has caused him to refuse his preferred test with clearness sufficient to permit the officer or officers to decide upon the validity of his protest and if it is reasonable to do so, to take steps to meet the objection. To do less than this would be to make the provisions of the statute subject to easy evasion.
The judgment ordering that a writ of mandate issue is reversed and the trial court is directed to make findings consistent with this opinion and to render judgment denying the writ of mandate.
Rattigan, J., and Christian, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2208012 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.667648+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 52 (1988)
230 Neb. 97
John J. WILLIAMS, Appellant,
v.
Vernon HJORTH, Sheriff of Madison County, Nebraska, et al., Appellees.
No. 87-651.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 7, 1988.
*53 Steven M. Lathrop, of Lathrop & Lathrop, Omaha, for appellant.
Robert M. Spire, Atty. Gen., Lynne R. Fritz, and Lisa D. Martin-Price, Lincoln, for appellees.
BOSLAUGH, WHITE, and SHANAHAN, JJ., and HOWARD, and COLWELL, District Judges, Retired.
WHITE, Justice.
This is an appeal from a decision by the district court for Madison County denying the appellant "good time" credit for time served in the county jail before sentencing and time served as a mentally disordered sex offender (MDSO) at the Lincoln Regional Center. Because Neb.Rev. Stat. § 29-2915 (Reissue 1985) regarding incarceration as an MDSO was amended to mandate good time credit for time spent in the regional center, only the issue of good time credit for presentence confinement, pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 47-502 (Reissue 1984), remains.
The facts in this case are not contested. John J. Williams was arrested and confined in the Madison County jail on September 4, 1986. On January 9, 1987, the appellant was sentenced to the 1-year maximum for third degree sexual assault and was transferred to the Lincoln Regional Center on February 5. Credit was granted for 128 days of presentence confinement. Appellant violated no rules of discipline while incarcerated. No good time credit was given to the appellant for the time spent in county jail prior to sentencing.
Because the appellant was released from the regional center on August 26, the issue of mootness arises in this appeal. Counsel for both appellant and appellee request that this court reach the merits of this appeal by finding that the issues involved are within an exception to the mootness doctrine, either as a wrong "capable of repetition yet evading review" or as a matter affecting the public interest.
As a general rule, appellate courts do not sit to give opinions on moot questions on abstract propositions, and an appeal will ordinarily be dismissed where no actual controversy exists between the parties at the time of the hearing. Braesch v. DePasquale, 200 Neb. 726, 265 N.W.2d 842 (1978). However, this general rule is subject to some exceptions. One notable exception recognized by this court concerns cases involving matters of public interest. State ex rel. Coulter v. McFarland, 166 Neb. 242, 88 N.W.2d 892 (1958). In McFarland, this court held that the issues involved matters of public interest because they affected all county courts of the state. Similar questions of public interest are presented in this case. In the context of good time credit for presentence confinement when sentenced to a county jail term, because confinement is necessarily 1 year or less, no case could reach this court for review before it became moot. Additionally, the issues involved in this action are similar to those presented in McFarland, as they affect all county jails in the state. Therefore, this appeal must be decided on the merits under the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine.
This court has never decided whether good time credit is available for time served in jail awaiting sentencing, pursuant to § 47-502. To determine whether good time credit is authorized for presentence confinement, the plain language of the statute must first be examined. This court will not resort to interpretation to ascertain the meaning of statutory words which are plain and unambiguous. Lawson v. Ford Motor Co., 225 Neb. 725, 408 N.W.2d 256 (1987). In the absence of anything indicating the contrary, statutory language is to be given its plain and ordinary meaning. Lawson v. Ford Motor Co., supra; Midwest Messenger Assn. v. Spire, *54 223 Neb. 748, 393 N.W.2d 438 (1986). Section 47-502 provides:
Any person sentenced to a city or county jail shall have his or her term reduced seven days for each twenty-one consecutive days during which he or she has not committed any breach of discipline or other violation of jail regulations. The reductions authorized by this section shall be granted at the end of each period of twenty-one days, with such periods to run consecutively from the date of confinement following sentencing.
The language "with such periods to run consecutively from the date of confinement following sentencing" is ambiguous. As stated in appellant's brief, it is difficult to determine whether this portion of § 47-502 limits good time to postsentence confinement or whether it grants an inmate good time credit for every 21 consecutive days, including presentence confinement, with credit for confinement given only after sentencing. Because of the inherent ambiguity in the statutory language, recourse must be had to the legislative history surrounding the enactment of § 47-502 to determine the intent of the Legislature. County of Lancaster v. Maser, 224 Neb. 566, 400 N.W.2d 238 (1987). Legislative history includes the record of a floor explanation or debate, which is an extrinsic, secondary source in statutory interpretation. Spence v. Terry, 215 Neb. 810, 340 N.W. 2d 884 (1983).
The history of the enactment of § 47-502 is fairly simple. Section 47-502 was the result of 1983 Neb. Laws, L.B. 180, and 1982 Neb. Laws, L.B. 231. These bills were presented to provide a county jail counterpart to the state penitentiary good time statutes, Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 83-1,106 and 83-1,107 (Reissue 1987). The committee statement on L.B. 231 states that the purpose of the bill is to provide for good time in county jails "similar" to that applicable to confinement in state institutions. One distinction between the state and county good time statutes, however, is that § 83-1,107 specifically provides for good time credit to be given for presentence confinement: "The total of all such reductions shall be credited from the date of sentence, which shall include any term of confinement prior to sentence and commitment...." § 83-1,107. Section 47-502 contains no such language.
The omission of this language in § 47-502 is not conclusive. The legislative history surrounding the enactment of § 47-502 evinces a strong legislative intent on behalf of the Legislature to provide a county good time statute closely synonymous to the state good time statute. Much of this intent is evidenced in Senator Fowler's statement in support of L.B. 231. Senator Fowler emphasizes an "equity argument" in support of adopting a county jail counterpart to the state good time statute. He compares Class II felonies with Class I misdemeanors and notes that convictions under either class may result in a 1-year sentencethe felony sentence to be served in the state penitentiary where good time credit is allowed, the misdemeanor sentence to be served in county jail where, before the passage of § 47-502, no good time credit was available. The crimes classified as felonies are, presumably, more serious than the crimes classed as misdemeanors. Yet, as stated by Senator Fowler, "in our effort to try and establish a certain hierarchy of penalties, we may have built in an inequity because people who go to state institutions could serve less time for a higher crime than the people that went to the county institutions." Judiciary Committee Hearing, L.B. 231, 87th Leg., 1st Sess. 43 (Feb. 25, 1981).
Evidently, the Legislature was concerned about those in county institutions serving longer sentences for lesser offenses than those in state prison serving time for more serious offenses. Because good time credit for presentence confinement is available in the state system and is utilized in those institutions to reduce the sentence actually served, presumably the Legislature intended credit to be given for presentence confinement in the county jail system to eliminate the "inequities" between the two jail systems.
*55 Finally, by interpreting § 47-502 as authorizing good time credit for presentence confinement, good time provisions for both state and county jails will be harmonized. Additional support for inferring that the Legislature intended consistent treatment for all prisoners in regard to good time credits can be found in the recent amendment to § 29-2915 regarding MDSOs. This amendment provides, "If the defendant is sentenced to a county jail as a misdemeanant, he or she shall be entitled to have his or her jail sentence reduced while in the county jail or regional center pursuant to § 47-502." § 29-2915 (Cum.Supp.1988). This extension of good time credit to incarceration in the regional center evinces an intent to provide a cohesive, consistent sentencing system throughout the state's detention facilities.
Accordingly, we hold that § 47-502, establishing good time credit in the county jail system, is applicable to time spent in the county jail awaiting sentencing.
The judgment of the district court is therefore reversed.
REVERSED.

=== CASE 9736937 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:26.001933+00 ===

KARWACKI, Judge.
This case arises from the application of Paul A. Buckman to Montgomery County (the “County”) for “service-connected disability” retirement benefits provided for county employees by § 33-43 of the Montgomery County Code (1984, as amended). The Administrator of Montgomery County’s retirement plan (the “Administrator”) awarded Buckman a 15% partial and permanent service-connected disability retirement. Buckman appealed the Administrator’s decision to the Montgomery County Merit System Protection Board (the “Board”) which sustained the determination of the Administrator. Buckman then sought judicial review in the Circuit Court for Montgomery County. The circuit court reversed the Board’s decision and awarded Buckman a total and permanent service-connected disability retirement. The Court of Special Appeals affirmed. Montgomery County v. Buckman, 96 Md. App. 206, 624 A.2d 1274 (1993). We granted certiorari to determine whether, under § 33-43 of the Montgomery County Code, a County employee who, as a result of an on-the-job injury, is unable to perform enough of the duties to keep the job with the County or a position of comparable status within the same department is entitled to total disability retirement benefits.1
*520I
Buckman began working for Montgomery County as a liquor store clerk in October 1978. In September 1985, Buck-man sustained an accidental injury to his back while at work. After being placed on “light duty” for a short period of time, Buckman resumed his full duties. In January 1988, Buckman sustained an aggravation of his 1985 injury while lifting a ease of liquor from a conveyor belt. Buckman underwent back surgery — a partial hemilaminectomy and excision of a herniated disc — a week later.
Buckman returned to work on light duty status in March 1988 and remained on light duty until the fall of 1989. After resuming full duties, Buckman experienced continuing soreness in his back, pain radiating down his left leg, and numbness in. his left toes. At the suggestion of his neurosurgeon, John W. Barrett, M.D., Buckman, who was then 33 years of age, applied for a service-connected disability retirement on February 15, 1990. In a supplementary neurosurgical report, Dr. Barrett stated that “[i]n view of [Buckman’s] ongoing symptoms I would feel that he should consider a disability retirement at this time. Unless he can be maintained in some occupation where he does not have to do repeated bending, lifting, etc., I feel certain that his symptoms will continue to recur.” Dr. Barrett rated Buckman’s disability as “Class 3— Slight limitation of functional capacity; capable of light work (33-55%).”
After Buckman applied for disability retirement, he was again placed on light duty. Donald R. Boelke, M.D. performed an independent medical examination of Buckman on
*521April 27, 1990. Dr. Boelke stated: “I do not feel [Buckman] would be able to return to the liquor business, lifting and particularly shifting boxes____” He added that resuming his usual duties would “be resultant in a recurrence of his severe symptoms.” Dr. Boelke rated Buckman’s disability at 15%, stating that “Mr. Buckman is not totally disabled but is markedly disabled particularly from heavy physical type of work.” He then stated:
“I do not have much information on what type of work he could currently perform on a full time basis because I do not know his TQ’ or intelligence or grading or academic records. However, based on the fact that he did have 30 credits in business administration at Montgomery College I feel he is a competent enough individual to at least be switched to a sedentary type occupation with business administration or personnel work or if he is suited for accounting or mathematics.”
Clifford Hinkes, M.D. also rated Buckman’s disability at fifteen percent after an earlier independent medical examination on November 16, 1988.
Buckman’s responsibilities as a liquor store clerk included the sale of alcoholic beverages and related clerical and custodial duties. The County’s job description for the position he held stated:
“The work involves varied duties in a liquor store including stocking shelves, cleaning and arranging merchandise, operating a cash register, providing information to customers, performing housekeeping duties, and performing related store operations. Employees are required to spend long hours standing and to lift/move cases of merchandise. Employees in this class assist Store Managers and Assistant Store Managers with the preparation of daily sales and inventory reports, making deposits and picking up cash from banks; they also help train other Liquor Store Clerks, may manage store operations for periods of short duration, and attempt to resolve any unusual problems that may arise____”
*522The minimum qualifications of the position required, among other things, the ability to “independently move by lifting and/or pushing single and case items weighing up to 40 pounds.” Notwithstanding his disability, Buckman is capable of performing clerical work; typing; selling liquor; operating a cash register; answering questions and handling “fairly difficult questions when dealing with the public”; cleaning up merchandise depending on the extent of bending required; operating a vacuum cleaner depending on how heavy the vacuum cleaner; sweeping the floor; filling out special order forms, sales summaries and inventory lists; training part-time employees; making bank deposits; and operating an adding machine and calculator.
Buckman’s service-connected disability retirement became effective August 11, 1990. The County did not give Buckman the option to work in another position. Although Buckman contacted the County’s Handicapped Assistance Program and attempted to find alternative county employment, he was unsuccessful.
II
This appeal focuses on the proper construction of § 33-43 pertaining to service-connected disability retirement eligibility and benefits. A County employee’s eligibility for service-connected disability retirement is governed by § 33-43(e), which provides:
“(e) Service-connected disability retirement. A member may be retired on a service-connected disability retirement if:
(1) The member is totally incapacitated for duty or partially and permanently incapacitated for duty as the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring ... while in the actual performance of duty; ... and the incapacity is likely to be permanent.
(2) The member is unable to perform the duties of the occupational classification to which assigned at the time *523disability occurred or a position of comparable status within the same department, if qualified.”
Section 33^3(h) specifies the amount of pension payable:
“(h) Amount of pension at service-connected disability retirement. The yearly amount of pension payable upon retirement for service-connected disability equals:
(1) Total Incapacity.
a. 2 percent of final earnings, multiplied by years of credited service, up to a maximum of 36 years, plus sick leave credits, but not less than 66% percent of final earnings, if the member is totally and permanently incapacitated.
(2) Partial incapacity. 6 percent of final earnings for each 10 percent of permanent disability, but not less than 25 percent of final earnings, if the member is partially and permanently incapacitated----”
We begin our analysis with a brief review of the oft-stated rules of statutory construction. The cardinal rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and carry out the intent of the legislature. Stapleford v. Hyatt, 330 Md. 388, 400, 624 A.2d 526, 531 (1993); Taxiera v. Malkus, 320 Md. 471, 480, 578 A.2d 761, 765 (1990); Jones v. State, 311 Md. 398, 405, 535 A.2d 471, 474 (1988). To do so, the Court considers the language of an enactment and gives that language its natural and ordinary meaning. Harford County v. University, 318 Md. 525, 529, 569 A.2d 649, 651 (1990); NCR Corp. v. Comptroller, 313 Md. 118, 124, 544 A.2d 764, 767 (1988); Utt v. State, 293 Md. 271, 286, 443 A.2d 582, 590 (1982). Thus, when there is no ambiguity or obscurity in the language of a statute, there is no need to look elsewhere to ascertain the intent of the legislative body. In re Criminal Investigation No. 1-162, 307 Md. 674, 685, 516 A.2d 976, 982 (1986); Police Comm’r v. Dowling, 281 Md. 412, 418, 379 A.2d 1007, 1011 (1977); State v. Fabritz, 276 Md. 416, 421, 348 A.2d 275, 278 (1975), cert, denied, 425 U.S. 942, 96 S.Ct. 1680, 48 L.Ed.2d 185 (1976); Furthermore, absent a clear intent to the contrary, a statute is *524to be read so that no word, clause, sentence or phrase is rendered surplusage, superfluous, meaningless, or nugatory. State v. 149 Slot Machines, 310 Md. 356, 361, 529 A.2d 817, 819 (1987); Sibert v. State, 301 Md. 141, 153, 482 A.2d 483, 489 (1984); City of Baltimore v. Hackley, 300 Md. 277, 283, 477 A.2d 1174, 1177 (1984); Police Comm’r v. Dowling, 281 Md. at 419, 379 A.2d at 1011. Applying these principles to the language of § 33 — 43(e)(1), we see that an employee may be retired on a service-connected disability retirement if he or she is totally incapacitated for duty or partially and permanently incapacitated for duty. Thus, there are two distinct types of service-connected disability retirement: one for employees who are totally incapacitated for duty, and a second for employees who are only partially, yet permanently, incapacitated for duty. The language of § 33-43(e)(l) expressly distinguishes between these two types of service-connected disability retirees.
Furthermore, in order to be retired on a service connected disability retirement, the employee must also satisfy the requirement of § 33-43(e)(2). That section provides that the employee must be unable to perform the duties of the occupational classification to which the employee was assigned at the time the disability occurred or a position of comparable status within the same department, if qualified. Thus, regardless of the degree of incapacitation for duty, whether total or partial, the employee must also be unable to continue to perform his or her job duties.
Thus, the Montgomery County Council has unambiguously created a type of disability retirement for an employee, who because of a workplace accident, suffers from a permanent partial disability which prevents that employee from performing enough of the duties of the job held at the time the disabling accident occurred2 but who is not totally incapacitated from employment.
*525Buckman urges us to rule, as the Circuit Court did, that where an employee, due to a job-related injury, is “unable to perform enough of the duties of that job to remain in that position,” he or she is entitled to the service-connected retirement benefits provided for an employee who is totally incapacitated for duty. We decline to do so. We similarly reverse the Court of Special Appeals’ holding that an employee who sustains a work-place injury, and otherwise qualifies for a service-connected disability retirement, is totally incapacitated for duty and therefore entitled to total disability benefits if the extent of incapacity prevents the employee from continuing in his or her occupational classification or a position of comparable status. It does not follow that if an employee loses a job because of the inability to perform enough of the job duties, the employee is necessarily totally incapacitated for duty. Such a holding would render the provision for partial incapacitation superfluous because anytime an employee met the requirement for § 33 — 43(e)(2), that employee would necessarily be considered totally incapacitated. Because we will not construe a statute so that any word, phrase or clause is rendered superfluous, we will not construe § 33^3(e)(l) such that “partially incapacitated” refers to a status that does not exist.
We find support for this distinction in City of Baltimore v. Hackley, 300 Md. 277, 477 A.2d 1174 (1984). In Hackley, we were called upon to interpret two sections of Baltimore City’s disability retirement law. Section 34(c) of Article 22 of the Baltimore City Code (1976 Ed., 1979 Supp.), the section that provided for ordinary retirement benefits, contained a requirement that the employee be “mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of the duties.... ” Section 34(e), the section that provided for special disability retirement benefits, contained a requirement that the employee be “totally and permanently incapacitated for the further performance of the duties....”3 Baltimore City argued that the *526degree of incapacitation necessary for disability retirement benefits under § 34(c) was different from that necessary for disability retirement benefits under § 34(e). We, however, concluded that the word “totally,” which modified the word “incapacitated” in § 34(e) of the Baltimore City Code, was redundant. Because the word incapacitated was not qualified in either § 34(c) or § 34(e), “[t]here is no indication that the requisite degree of incapacity for entitlement to disability benefits is anything less than total.” We noted, however, that “[a]s used in § 34(e) an adjective such as ‘partially’ ... would have meaning when used with ‘incapacitated.’ It [the adjective ‘partially’] would indicate something less than the absolute term.” Hackley, 300 Md. at 289, 477 A.2d at 1180. Thus, in the instant case, the phrase “partially ... incapacitated for duty” in § 33-43(e)(1) means something less than “totally incapacitated for duty.”
Our interpretation is further bolstered by virtue of § 33-43(h). Once an employee’s entitlement to a service-connected disability retirement has been established, the amount of pension is determined according to § 33-43(h):
“(h) Amount of pension at service-connected disability retirement. The yearly amount of pension payable upon retirement for service-connected disability equals:
(1) Total Incapacity.
a. 2 percent of final earnings, multiplied by years of credited service, up to a maximum of 36 years, plus sick leave credits, but not less than 66% percent of final earnings, if the member is totally and permanently incapacitated.
(2) Partial incapacity. 6 percent of final earnings for each 10 percent of permanent disability, but not less than 25 percent of final earnings, if the member is partially and permanently incapacitated____”
*527Here again, the Montgomery County Code provides for two different ways to compute service-connected disability benefits: one for employees totally incapacitated, and one for employees partially incapacitated. Under Buckman’s interpretation, all disability retirees would be entitled to benefits under § 33-43(h)(l), thereby making § 33-43(h)(2) meaningless. Because we will not construe a statute so that any sentence or provision is rendered nugatory, we will construe § 33-43 so that a totally incapacitated employee receives benefits in accordance with § 33-43(h)(l) and a partially incapacitated employee receives benefits in accordance with § 33-43(h)(2).
We hold that the Montgomery County Council, by use of the words “partial” in § 33-43(h)(2) and “partially” in § 33-43(e)(1), intended a lesser amount of retirement benefits to a partially disabled employee.
Ill
Buckman claims that our interpretation is unreasonable because it “would effectively render the total disability provisions meaningless since there are no cases short of coma or total paralysis in which the injured employee is unable to perform even one of his duties set forth on his job description.” Respondent’s Brief at 25. Buckman’s concern, however, is unfounded because we have not said, nor has Montgomery County asserted, that every employee who is capable of performing even the most minor task would be ineligible for full disability retirement benefits. What we do say is this: § 33 — 43(e) provides two distinct forms of service-connected disability retirement — one for those employees who suffer total incapacity and another for those employees who suffer partial incapacity. It is the function of the administrative agency, the Board, to make the factual determination as to whether the employee is totally incapacitated for duty or partially incapacitated for duty. On judicial review, the court determines if the decision of the Board is arbitrary or capricious by examining whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the factual finding of the administrative *528agency. Supervisor v. Asbury Methodist Home, 313 Md. 614, 625-26, 547 A.2d 190, 195 (1988); Balto Lutheran High Sch. v. Emp. Sec. Adm., 302 Md. 649, 661-62, 490 A.2d 701, 708 (1985); Insurance Comm’r v. Nat’l Bureau, 248 Md. 292, 309-10, 236 A.2d 282, 291-92 (1967). In the instant case, the Board’s decision was supported by the required substantial evidence.
Furthermore, even if our interpretation effectively makes it very difficult for an employee to collect disability retirement benefits for total incapacity, this result is no more strict than that ordinarily obtained under the Workers’ Compensation system. Permanent total disability within the contemplation of the Workers’ Compensation Act, Md.Code (1991 Repl.Vol.) § 9-101 et. seq., of the Labor and Employment Article, means the incapacity to do work of any kind for which a reasonable market exists, and not merely an incapacity to perform that work which the employee was accustomed and qualified to perform before the injury. Richard F. Kline, Inc. v. Grosh, 245 Md. 236, 243-44, 226 A.2d 147, 151 (1967); Mureddu v. Gentile, 233 Md. 216, 220, 196 A.2d 82, 84 (1964); Jewel Tea Co. v. Blamble, 227 Md. 1, 3, 174 A.2d 764, 765 (1961); Congoleum Nairn v. Brown, 158 Md. 285, 287, 148 A. 220, 221 (1930); R.P. Gilbert and R.L. Humphreys, Jr., Maryland Worker’s Compensation Handbook § 9.5 at 220-21. As we stated in Babcock & Wilcox, Inc. v. Steiner, 258 Md. 468, 473, 265 A.2d 871, 874 (1970), “ ‘ “[t]otal disability” in compensation law is not to be interpreted literally as utter and abject helplessness.’ ” (quoting 2 Workmen’s Compensation Law, § 57.51). “An employee who is so injured that he can perform no services other than those which are so limited in quality, dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist, may well be classified as totally disabled.” Id. at 474, 265 A.2d at 874-75 (citations omitted). In the instant case, Buckman is far from being utterly helpless and certainly capable of performing services for which a market exists. Dr. Boelke stated in his report that Buckman “is a competent enough individual to at least be switched to a sedentary type occupation with business administration or *529personnel work or if he is suited for accounting or mathematics.” An employee capable of performing marketable, sedentary duties, cannot be classified as totally disabled under the Workers’ Compensation Act. See Jewel Tea Co., 227 Md. at 5-6, 174 A.2d at 766; Mureddu, 233 Md. at 220, 196 A.2d at 84. Therefore, it is not unreasonable that Buckman be denied retirement disability benefits for total incapacity when he too can perform sedentary duties.
IV
Buckman attempts to strengthen his position by arguing that the benevolent purpose and intent of § 33-43 requires an award of benefits for total incapacity. He quotes the County Council’s declared policy in enacting the Montgomery County Employees’ Retirement Act:
“It is the policy of the county to maintain a system of retirement pay and benefits for its employees which is adequately funded and insures employees sufficient income to enjoy during their retirement years.”
Montgomery County Code § 33-34 (1984, as amended). We agree that Montgomery County’s system of retirement benefits is benevolent in purpose and intended to insure that its employees have “sufficient income to enjoy during their retirement years.” The Montgomery County Council, however, has expressed its intent as to what amount of benefits are sufficient to satisfy those benevolent purposes. If employees are totally incapacitated for duty, the amount of disability retirement benefits that the County Council has deemed sufficient to satisfy the benevolent purpose of § 33-43(e) is at least 66% percent of their final earnings. § 33 — 43(h)(1). If the employee, however, is only partially incapacitated for duty, then the amount of disability retirement benefits that the County Council has deemed to be sufficient to satisfy the benevolent purpose of § 33-43(e) is a function of the percentage of the employee’s permanent disability, but at least 25 percent of final earnings. § 33-43(h)(2).
*530V
Finally, Buckman argues that since the Court of Special Appeals decided the case of Montgomery County v. Whittaker, No. 1466, Sept. Term 1981 (unreported) on August 3,1982, the Board has relied in several cases on the holding in that case to award total incapacity disability retirement to employees who were able to perform some of the duties of the position held by them when injured. Moreover, Buckman stresses that the Montgomery County Council has not amended § 33-43 in response to Montgomery County v. Whittaker. The answer to both prongs of this argument is found in Maryland Rule 8-114(a): “An unreported opinion of the Court of Appeals or Court of Special Appeals is neither precedent within the rule of stare decisis nor persuasive authority.” With regard to the reliance on consistent Board interpretation of § 33-43 since Whittaker, it is well settled that administrative interpretation contrary to the clear and unambiguous meaning of a statute is entitled to no deference by a reviewing court. Atlantic, Gulf v. Dep’t of Assess. & T., 252 Md. 173, 183, 249 A.2d 180, 186 (1969). And, as to the lack of any amendment of § 33-43 by the County Council since Whittaker, it is probable that the Council was confident that its expressed intention in § 33-43(h) to distinguish in the award of a service-connected retirement benefit between retirees who were totally incapacitated for duty and those who were partially and permanently incapacitated for duty would be given effect by courts reviewing Board action until such time when binding appellate precedent was announced. Since the intermediate appellate court and the trial court failed to give effect to that expressed intention of the Montgomery County Council, we shall reverse the decision of the Court of Special Appeals.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS REVERSED; CASE REMANDED TO THAT COURT WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO REVERSE THE DECISION OF THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND TO REMAND THE CASE TO THAT COURT WITH THE DIRECTION TO AFFIRM THE ORDER OF
*531
THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY MERIT SYSTEM PROTECTION BOARD; COSTS IN THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS, THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND IN THIS COURT TO BE PAID BY RESPONDENT.
. An order of an administrative agency, such as the Montgomery County Merit System Protection Board, must be upheld on judicial review if it is not based upon an erroneous determination of law, and if the agency’s conclusions reasonably may be based upon the facts proven. Younkers v. Prince George’s County, 333 Md. 14, 633 A.2d 861 (1993) (quoting People’s Counsel v. Maryland Marine, 316 Md. 491, 496-97, 560 A.2d 32, 34 (1989)); Ad + Soil, Inc. v. County Comm’rs, 307 Md. 307, 338, 513 A.2d 893, 909 (1986). But a reviewing court is under no constraints in reversing an administrative decision that is *520premised solely upon an erroneous conclusion of law. People's Counsel, 316 Md. at 497, 560 A.2d at 34-35. In the instant case, the issue of statutory construction was one of law and on judicial review the court's review is expansive. Once the court determines, however, that the administrative agency applied the proper standards prescribed by the statute at issue, judicial review of the agency’s conclusion is then tested by the substantial evidence test. CBS v. Comptroller, 319 Md. 687, 698, 575 A.2d 324, 329 (1990); City of Baltimore v. Hackley, 300 Md. 277, 283, 477 A.2d 1174, 1177 (1984).
. or a position of comparable status
. The fact that the special disability benefits under § 34(e) are more generous than the ordinary benefits under § 34(c) gave rise to the *526controversy in Hackley. 300 Md. at 281, 477 A.2d at 1176. The difference between the two sections stemmed from the eligibility requirement under § 34(e) that the disability be job-related.

=== CASE 2208027 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.832489+00 ===

225 Cal.App.2d 752 (1964)
THELMA DICKSON, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
LINTON J. DICKSON, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 27578.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 23, 1964.
Joseph R. Grillo for Defendant and Appellant.
Richard C. Cumming for Plaintiff and Respondent.
ROTH, J.
In disposing of this divorce action wherein the parties complained against each other, the trial court granted a divorce to each of the parties, divided the property, awarded custody of the minor children to the mother (respondent) with rights of visitation to the father (appellant) and awarded attorney's fees for respondent.
[1] Appellant complains of everything that was done. He asserts no extreme cruelty was proved against him, that he, on the other hand, did prove extreme cruelty against his wife, and that the divorce should have been awarded to him alone.
We have examined the record and without detailing the evidence, we are satisfied that although it is not abundant and the corroboration is not overwhelming, there is sufficient corroborative testimony to justify the court's finding of extreme cruelty against respondent and vice versa. In this connection, it may be noted that appellant's counsel in one of his arguments to the trial court, as the case was in the process of being concluded, asserted "... We will admit ... the record shows without dispute that Mr. Dickson has made derogatory remarks about Mrs. Dickson. ..."
[2] It is settled as a matter of law that a single act of cruelty may be sufficient on which to base a decree of divorce and that where no collusion exists and the corroboration is slight, the sufficiency of the evidence is for the trial judge. (Cardew v. Cardew, 192 Cal.App.2d 502 [13 Cal.Rptr. 620]; Schulze v. Schulze, 206 Cal.App.2d 330 [23 Cal.Rptr. 693]; Negley v. Negley, 82 Cal.App.2d 355 [186 P.2d 151].)
[3a] The parties were married on September 2, 1946, and separated on June 19, 1962. There are three children of the marriage, two daughters and a son. The latter was born on August 21, 1958. The evidence showed that respondent was *755 41 years old, that she was under the care of several doctors and had no outside income, had no special training and had not been employed for approximately 20 years. Appellant earned $720 gross per month which amounted to approximately $600 per month take- home pay, and in addition, had the use of a company car and received an allowance for entertainment expense. The trial court awarded respondent as alimony the sum of $100 per month for a period of one year; $50 per month for the further period of two years, and thereafter the sum of $1.00 per month, until the further order of the court. In the form of additional alimony, the court awarded $72 per month and specified that said $72 per month was to be applied as a monthly payment on the encumbrance to a parcel of real estate consisting of a house in which the parties and their children lived.
In addition, the court awarded $60 per month per child for two children, as the eldest child was self-supporting.
Appellant argues that these awards were excessive, particularly the alimony award in view of his limited earning capacity. The awards detailed, exclusive of allowance for attorney's fees, total for the first year $292 per month and for the following two years $242 per month.
[4] It is thoroughly settled that the trial court has broad discretion in making an award of alimony and that such discretion will not be interfered with on appeal unless abused. [3b] We find no such abuse. (Schulze v. Schulze, supra, 206 Cal.App.2d 330; Blankenship v. Blankenship, 212 Cal.App.2d 736 [28 Cal.Rptr. 176].)
The trial court disposed of the real property of the parties which consisted of a home hereinbefore referred to in which the family was living, by awarding the exclusive possession of the home to respondent and the minor children of the parties "... so long as said residence is used as a home for the minor children of the parties, said possession is to remain in [respondent] until the last surviving minor child attains majority, marries or leaves home, or until such time as [respondent remarries or until such time as [respondent] no longer retains custody of said minor children. At such time, the house is to be sold and the equity to be divided equally between [respondent] and [appellant]. ..."
[5a] In respect of the division of said real property, appellant contends that the downpayment made thereon was his separate property. The evidence showed he came to California in June 1948, bought the house in question on July 8, 1948, while his wife was still out of the state, using $1,800 as *756 a downpayment, which he testified was his life savings. However, he took title to the house in the name of himself and wife as joint tenants. Respondent followed with the two girls and joined appellant in the same month the house was purchased, to wit: July 1948. The only evidence in the record that the $1,800 was appellant's separate property, was his testimony that said $1,800 comprised his "life savings" from Pennsylvania. The parties had been married for approximately two years. All subsequent monthly payments on the house were made with community funds. Respondent testified that in a discussion she had with appellant after the purchase of the home, she said: "... I owned half of his community property, and I was always under the impression that the woman owned half of what a man owned in community property." The excerpted testimony is nowhere specifically denied. [6] The law is clear that a husband and wife may change the nature of their property by express or implied agreement. (Tomaier v. Tomaier, 23 Cal.2d 754 [146 P.2d 905].) [5b] The court was justified in holding the real property to be community real property.
[7a] Appellant also contends that a balance of community personal property was unevenly divided. The court awarded respondent: a 1955 Ford; the household furniture and furnishings; two insurance policies with a combined value of $2,000; one half of the stock in Container Corporation of America, held in trust by the corporation. Appellant was awarded: two insurance policies with a combined value of $2,000, and one half of the aforementioned stock, plus all increments and additions to the stock trust after June 30, 1962. Appellant asserts this division awarded to respondent $3,000 more than was awarded to appellant.
[8] An uneven division is contrary to the rule that where each party is granted a divorce upon the grounds of extreme cruelty, the community property must be evenly divided. (DeBurgh v. DeBurgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 874 [250 P.2d 598]; Mears v. Mears, 180 Cal.App.2d 484 [4 Cal.Rptr. 618].) [7b] However, appellant in his brief offers to accept the division of community personal property as awarded in the judgment notwithstanding his assertion that the property awarded his wife was valued in excess of $3,000 more than the property awarded to him, if the trial court in respect of its division of stock and cash in Container Corporation of America accepts an interpretation of its judgment, as respondent has interpreted the judgment in her brief. *757
The judgment in dealing with assets of the parties in Container Corporation of America insofar as it makes an award to respondent, is as follows:
"One-half of the stock and cash in Container Corporation of America, the Container Common Stock Trust standing in the name of Linton J. Dickson, as such stock and cash existed as of June 30, 1962."
In the same judgment in making the award to appellant, the court adjudged:
"One-half of the stock and cash in Container Corporation of America, the Container Common Stock Trust standing in the name of Linton J. Dickson, as such stock and cash existed as of June 30, 1962, plus any and all increments and additions to said trust after June 30, 1962." (Italics added)
Respondent, in her brief says:
"The retirement fund was divided unequally between Plaintiff and Defendant. The retirement fund was divided with 1/2 as of June 30, 1962, going to Plaintiff, and 1/2 to Defendant as it existed on June 30, 1962, plus all increments and additions to said trust after June 30, 1962."
"All increments and additions would cover interest, stock dividends and stock splits on the entire fund including those increments and additions which would normally inure to the benefit of Plaintiff's 1/2 interest. Also there would be the normal addition to the stock trust which would incur from June 30, 1962 to the date of trial and to the date of the Final Decree. The Court must have taken these added benefits into consideration in making the division of community property in order to arrive at as near an equal split as was possible under the circumstances, since the Finding of Fact and Conclusions of Law obviously made an unequal division of the stock trust in Defendant's favor."
Appellant says in his brief:
"Appellant interprets the term 'stock dividends' to mean cash dividends paid on the stock owned by plaintiff in said stock trust, together with dividends paid in the form of stock other than cash. With this understanding, and subject to the Court's approval, appellant accepts said argument as a stipulation to the effect that all interest, cash dividends, stock dividends and stock splits earned or accrued to the benefit of the entire trust fund after June 30, 1962 (including the half awarded to plaintiff) are for the benefit and account of defendant. With said stipulation appellant abandons his point that the community property was unequally divided." *758
[9] Appellant's final complaint is that the court abused its discretion in awarding an additional attorney's fee in the sum of $250 to respondent's counsel, payable at the rate of $15 per month. It appears to be admitted that the trial consumed two court days. No criticism is made of the original allowance to respondent's attorney; nor is the amount brought to our attention. [10] It is thoroughly settled as a matter of law that the amount of counsel fees rests in the discretion of the trial court and that in the absence of a clear abuse of such discretion, the amount fixed will not be disturbed on appeal. (Blankenship v. Blankenship, supra; Primm v. Primm, 46 Cal.2d 690 [299 P.2d 231].)
[7c] The judgment is affirmed in all respects except that it is hereby modified in accordance with respondent's interpretation of the judgment in respect of stock and cash in the Container Corporation of America, and appellant's acceptance of said interpretation, on condition that the trial court accepts such interpretation. If such interpretation is accepted by the trial court, then the trial court is directed to modify the judgment to reflect said interpretation. If the trial court does not accept said interpretation, then the trial court is directed to modify the judgment so that there will be an equal division of the community personal property.
Herndon, Acting P. J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting pro tempore under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2208030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.866559+00 ===

225 Cal.App.2d 525 (1964)
GREAT LAKES PROPERTIES, INC., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
CITY OF ROLLING HILLS ESTATES et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 27257.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 12, 1964.
Musick, Peeler & Garrett, David P. Evans, Bruce E. Clark, Norman L. Roberts and Edward J. Riordan for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Latham & Watkins, H. Randall Stoke, Alan N. Halkett, John P. McLoughlin, Harold W. Kennedy, County Counsel, and David D. Mix, Assistant County Counsel, for Defendants and Respondents.
KINCAID, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
Petition for writ of mandate was brought by plaintiffs to prevent annexations of territory by defendants City of Rolling Hills Estates et al., by virtue of its proposed Annexation Nos. 7, 8 and 10, and test the validity of the refusal by the Los Angeles County Boundary Commission to accept for filing a proposal for incorporation of the new City of Rancho Palos Verdes. Following issuances of alternative writs a trial was had, resulting in a judgment for defendants and a dissolving of the alternative writs and stay orders. Plaintiffs appeal from this judgment.
Plaintiffs Great Lakes Properties, Inc., and Brockett are owners of property within the limits of the proposed new city, the boundaries of which include the territory encompassed by the proposed annexations. *528
On August 28, 1962, the city council of defendant City of Rolling Hills Estates, hereinafter referred to as "City," authorized the filing of two annexation proposals with defendant Boundary Commission of Los Angeles County, hereinafter referred to as "Commission," and the following day filed the two annexation proposals with legal descriptions and maps thereof with said Commission.
On September 11, 1962, a Notice of Intention to Circulate a Petition for the Incorporation of a New City to be called the City of Rancho Palos Verdes, and maps and legal descriptions thereof, was filed with and accepted by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles, hereinafter referred to as "board."
On September 12, 1962, the Commission approved the boundaries filed by the City on August 29, 1962, for Annexation Districts Nos. 7 and 8.
On September 12, 1962, following approval by the Commission, the city council adopted its resolution declaring its intention to annex the property described in Annexation Districts 7 and 8.
On September 16, 1962, the clerk of the Board of Supervisors of Los Angeles County gave notice to the City of said notice of intention to incorporate, filed with such board on September 11 by the proposed new city.
On October 15, 1962, the City filed with the Commission an additional annexation proposal designated Annexation District No. 10 of the City of Rolling Hills Estates, the territory of which was additionally within the territory proposed to be incorporated under the notice of intention filed September 11, 1962.
Thereafter, on October 15, 1962, plaintiff Brockett presented to the Commission a proposal for the incorporation of the new city. The commission rejected this proposal for incorporation and refused to accept it for filing.
Plaintiffs contend that by their filing on September 11, 1962, with the board, of a notice of intention to incorporate the new city, the boundaries of which included all of the territory sought to be annexed to defendant City of Rolling Hills Estates, all persons, including defendant City, were barred for at least 90 days from instituting or proceeding with an annexation of any of the territory sought to be incorporated as the new city. This contention is made despite the prior filing on August 29, 1962, by defendant City of its proposal to annex the territory with the Commission. *529
The trial court held, under section 35002 of the Government Code, that for a period of 45 days following the filing by defendant City of its annexation proposals with the Commission of its proposed Annexation Districts Numbers 7 and 8 on August 29, 1962, and of its proposed Annexation District Number 10 on October 15, 1962, no one else, including plaintiffs, could proceed to annex or incorporate any portion of the same territory. Therefore the notice of intention filed by plaintiffs on September 11, 1962, was of no force or effect since it was filed within the 45-day period following filing by defendant City of its boundaries for its proposed Districts Numbers 7 and 8. That the Commission properly rejected and refused the filing of both the plaintiffs' proposals for incorporation of September 11, 1962, and of October 15, 1962, because said proposals included territory within Annexation Districts 7, 8 and 10 and said proposals were offered within 45 days after the filing with the Commission by the City of its proposals for annexation of August 29, 1962, and October 15, 1962. That the proposals to incorporate offered by plaintiffs did not constitute a filing or submission thereof to the Commission within the purview or requirements of section 34303.5 of the Government Code and the notice of intention to circulate petition filed by plaintiffs on September 11, 1962, in no way prohibited or affected the right of the City to proceed with its proposed Annexation Districts 7, 8 and 10.
Plaintiffs challenge the holding of the trial court on the grounds that: (1) the last paragraph of Government Code section 35002, relied upon by the defendants and upheld by the trial court in its judgment, is unconstitutional in that it is violative of article IV, section 25, clauses 28 and 33 of the California Constitution; (2) even if this paragraph were constitutional, it would not give the annexing city jurisdiction as against the proponents of a new city under the circumstances of this case, but rather merely provided a 45-day waiting period during which the annexing city and the proponents of the new city might have settled their differences if they had been able to do so; and (3) exclusive jurisdiction is acquired by proponents of a corporation by the filing of the notice of intention, whereas exclusive jurisdiction is acquired by a city seeking to annex territory by the adoption of a resolution of intent to annex (Gov. Code,  35308), not by filing of a proposal with the Commission.
At the 1961 session of the Legislature, section 35002, Government *530 Code was amended by adding the last paragraph thereof which provides as follows:
"In a county having a population of 4,000,000 or more, for a period of 45 days after the filing by a city with the secretary of the boundary commission of a proposal for the annexation of territory to a city, no other proposal shall be filed hereunder for the annexation of any of the same territory to any city, or for the incorporation of any of such territory."
Plaintiffs contend that this provision of the Government Code is unconstitutional and specifically that it is violative of the 28th and 33d clauses of article IV, section 25 of the California Constitution which provide in part as follows: "The Legislature shall not pass local or special laws in any of the following enumerated cases, that is to say: ... Twenty-Eighth-Creating offices, or prescribing the powers and duties of officers in counties, cities, cities and counties, townships, election or school districts. ... Thirty-Third-In all other cases where a general law can be made applicable."
Plaintiffs contend that section 35002 purports to require certain county officers--members of the Los Angeles County Boundary Commission--to perform their duties differently from their counterparts in other counties. That it thus violates the above quoted clause 28, while also violating clause 33 in that general laws can be made applicable to annexations and incorporations.
In support of their position that the last paragraph of section 35002 is unconstitutional, plaintiffs argue it creates a special law applicable to Los Angeles County alone without reason. That use of the words "a county having a population of 4,000,000 or more" is no different than referring to Los Angeles County by name. They rely in part on cases wherein legislative enactments applying to counties of a named class were held violative of said constitutional provisions. (Hollman v. Warren, 32 Cal.2d 351, 359 [196 P.2d 562], limiting notaries in counties of the second class (San Francisco); Pratt v. Browne, 135 Cal. 649 [67 P. 1082], fixing salaries of court reporters in counties of the thirtieth class (Ventura); Consolidated Printing & Publishing Co. v. Allen, 18 Cal.2d 63 [112 P.2d 884], establishing procedure for publication of tax delinquent property for counties of the first class (Los Angeles).)
They point out that the population of Los Angeles County according to Government Code section 28020 is 6,038,771 *531 whereas the next most populous county is San Diego with 1,033,011; therefore the arbitrary figure of 4,000,000 in section 35002 is no different than referring to the excluded county as being one of the first class.
Plaintiffs contend that a classification of the county of largest population is not a reasonable one in the field of annexation and incorporation. That the problems of conflicting annexations, or an annexation conflicting with an incorporation, are not exclusive to Los Angeles County or to large counties in general, but have and will occur in numerous counties. If the need for the system established by the last paragraph of section 35002 exists, that need exists in many other counties.
Plaintiffs also rely on Stout v. Democratic County Central Committee, 40 Cal.2d 91, 94-95 [251 P.2d 321], holding a section of the Elections Code involved as local and special legislation wherein it attempted to permit the county central committee in "any city and county" to increase its membership by majority vote of the committee. The court held that the provision any city and county could only mean and apply to San Francisco and there was no rational basis why the number and method of its committee members should be different than in all other counties of the state. The court concluded this Elections Code statute applied only to San Francisco even though it is possible at some future time another such city and county may be created. Plaintiffs argue that it is equally clear that the use of the words "a county having a population of 4,000,000 or more" is no different than referring to Los Angeles by name or to a county of the first class.
Defendants cite the general rule that, when a legislative classification is questioned, if any state of facts can reasonably be conceived that would sustain it, there is a presumption of existence of that state of facts, and the burden of showing arbitrary action rests upon the one who assails the classification. (People v. Western Fruit Growers, Inc., 22 Cal.2d 494, 507 [140 P.2d 13].)
They point to the conditions existing in Los Angeles County compared to all the other counties as demonstrating it well may be classified in a different manner. They say the size, congestion, growth and relation of incorporated to unincorporated territories in Los Angeles County dictate that the problems of conflicting claims to unincorporated territories *532 are more severe and require different treatment than elsewhere. While size of population is not always a justification for differing regulations in different counties it may be under certain circumstances. They cite the following causes as authority for the proposition that population may legislatively classify counties even though the class then consists of only one unit: Matter of Petition of Burke, 160 Cal. 300 [116 P. 755] (statute prohibiting sale of liquor within 1 1/2 miles of a university having more than 1,000 students, more than 500 of whom reside, thereon, etc.); Sacramento etc. Drainage Dist. v. Rector, 172 Cal. 385, 391 [156 P. 506] (statute disqualifying judge in reclamation district unless parties waive); Ogle v. Eckel, 49 Cal.App.2d 599 [122 P.2d 67] (statute providing for creation of office of county counsel in counties having population of 100,000 or more); Chitwood v. Hicks, 219 Cal. 175 [25 P.2d 406] (holding invalid a statute providing for judicial secretary for judge in counties of twelfth class, Riverside County, the only one).
In the latter case the court, while invalidating the involved statute, distinguished the facts therein from those in Noel v. Lewis, 35 Cal.App. 658 [170 P. 857]. The enactment in question in Noel created the position of secretary of the superior court applicable to all counties and cities and counties having a population of 300,000 and over, and was found not to be unconstitutional as being special or limited in its application. With reference to such act, the court in Chitwood v. Hicks, supra, said (p. 178-179):
"It is apparent that the legislature in that act did not single out any one county of the state and create in that county the position of secretary of the court without regard to the above provision of the Constitution limiting its powers in that regard. The act was made applicable to all counties and cities and counties of the state having a certain number of inhabitants or over. If perchance only one county of the state contained the requisite population required by said act, then there was a natural and intrinsic distinction between that county and all other counties of the state, which justified the legislature in making the statute applicable to such county only."
"There can be no question that the business in the courts of the larger counties is more involved and complicated than in the smaller counties of the state. The former require a greater number of judges, and a proper correlation of the work of the various departments of the court requires not *533 only additional clerical assistance, but assistance of a distinctive character and different from that employed in counties with only a limited number of judges. That population of a county is a natural and intrinsic distinction justifying a classification upon that ground is evidenced by the Constitution itself, which makes the population of the various counties of the state the basis upon which the legislature may classify them for the purpose of fixing the salaries of county officers."
[1] As pointed out in People v. Western Fruit Growers, Inc., supra, 22 Cal.2d 494, 506, the distinction between a general and a special law is that a law is a general one when it applies equally to all persons embraced in a class founded upon some natural, intrinsic or constitutional distinction; on the other hand, it is special legislation if it confers particular privileges, or imposes peculiar disabilities or burdensome conditions, in the exercise of a common right, upon a class of persons arbitrarily selected from the general body of those who stand in precisely the same relation to the subject of the law. [2] "Under this rule, it is apparent that the constitutional prohibition of special legislation does not preclude legislative classification but only requires that the classification be reasonable." (P. 506.)
[3] "When a legislative classification is questioned, if any state of facts reasonably can be conceived that would sustain it, there is a presumption of existence of that state of facts, and the burden of showing arbitrary action rests upon the one who assails the classification." (P. 507.) (See Lelande v. Lowery, 26 Cal.2d 224, 232 [157 P.2d 639, 175 A.L.R. 1109]; Takahashi v. Fish & Game Com., 30 Cal.2d 719, 727 [185 P.2d 805]; In re Herrera, 23 Cal.2d 206, 212 [143 P.2d 345].)
[4] The legislative classification here challenged is limited to any county having a population of 4,000,000 or more. Prior to adoption in 1961 of the last paragraph of section 35002, the Legislature by various enactments had endeavored to insure orderly procedures designed to curb the sometimes unseemly conduct of government agencies in their rivalry to expand by annexation or incorporation. (See People ex rel. City of Torrance v. City of Gardena, 192 Cal.App.2d 686, 696 [13 Cal.Rptr. 742].) In considering and adopting the 1961 amendment the Legislature may very well have taken into consideration the markedly different problems presented *534 in territorial annexation and incorporation matters in a county so densely populated as to contain within its borders 4,000,000 or more residents as compared with others of less population. It may properly have decided that a county of such greater size contains many cities closely crowding each other with growing unincorporated areas contiguous to them. The necessary procedures to meet the varying circumstances presented in such a populous county may justify less burdensome and complicated procedures in counties with fewer residents and there seems to be no basic reason why the latter should be compelled to tailor their incorporation and annexation requirements to counties of such large size.
The enactment did not single out any single county as such in violation of the provision of the Constitution limiting the powers of the Legislature in that respect. If it so happens that only one county of the state contains the requisite population required by the act, then there was a natural and intrinsic distinction between that county and all the other counties which justified the Legislature in making the statute applicable to such county only. This distinction is not arbitrary but is a reasonable one under all the existing facts and circumstances.
[5] As to their remaining grounds, plaintiffs contend in effect that the Legislature, by its adoption of the last paragraph of section 35002 did not intend to prohibit a valid filing with the board of supervisors of a notice of intention to incorporate within the 45-day period following the filing with the Commission of a proposal to annex the same territory but intended only to prohibit the filing of a "proposal" for the incorporation with the boundary commission. It would follow therefore that if a notice of intention to incorporate was filed with the board during such 45-day period then the proponents of incorporation would thereupon receive a 90-day period of protection under section 34302.6.
Such a construction of the 1961 amendment to section 35002 is plainly contrary to the intent of the Legislature in prescribing new and different procedures for incorporation and annexation of additional territory in counties of 4,000,000 or more as contrasted from those of lesser population. [6a] By its phraseology, this paragraph means that in counties of the prescribed or more population, for a period of 45 days after the filing by a city with the secretary of the boundary commission of a proposal for the annexation of territory to a city, no other proposal shall be filed for the *535 annexation of any of the same territory to any city and no other proposal by a notice of intention to incorporate shall be filed. [7] That a notice of intention to incorporate is no less a proposal than is a petition seeking the annexation of territory to a city ( 35002) is shown by section 34302.5, in part as follows: " 'Before circulating a petition seeking the incorporation of a new city, the proponents shall file a notice of intention to do so with the board of supervisors. The notice shall contain ... signers as proponents ... of the territory proposed to be incorporated, and shall designate ... the person to act as chairman of the proponents ..." And by section 34300, the first section in the Government Code dealing with the incorporation of a new city defining "board of supervisors" or "board" as meaning such a board "of the county in which the land comprising the city proposed to be incorporated is situated." Likewise the following section 34301 defining "qualified signer" as meaning the owner or purchaser of land "within the limits of the city proposed to be incorporated." (Italics added).
[6b] It therefore follows that, in a county having a population of 4,000,000 or more, for a period of 45 days following filing by a city with the secretary of the boundary commission of a proposal for the annexation of territory to such city no other city could commence proceedings to annex and no persons could seek to incorporate by filing a notice of intention to circulate a petition for the incorporation of a new city of any part of the same territory. [8] If, during this 45-day period the city should have its proposed boundaries approved, and should then adopt its resolution to annex, it could proceed to annex the territory, or, if a majority protest was filed, the proceedings would be terminated. If such majority protest was filed or the proceedings terminated then another city or a proposed incorporation would be free to commence proceedings to acquire the territory.
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, Acting P. J., and Roth, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting pro tempore under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736939 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:39.307253+00 ===

JUSTICE LINN delivered the opinion of the court: The minor plaintiffs, Sonja F. Perkins and Denisha Perkins, by their mother, Frances Roberts, brought an action against the mother’s insurance company, State Security Insurance Company, following an automobile collision in which they were injured. The mother was driving, with the children as passengers, when their car struck a parked car. Plaintiffs assert that the parent-child immunity doctrine bars them from directly suing their mother. Therefore, they contend that she is uninsured as to them and they are entitled to recover under the uninsured motorist provision of her policy. Defendant, State Security Insurance Company, counters that in Illinois, intrafamily immunities are procedural bars, rather than substantive ones which destroy the cause of action itself. Procedural bars are personal and may be waived. Nothing in the policy prevents the children from suing her. Therefore, the insurance company contends that the children may sue their mother in negligence. Because she is thus an insured motorist, the pending action should be dismissed. The trial court heard arguments and entered summary judgment for plaintiffs. Defendant filed its notice of appeal shortly thereafter. Opinion The order from which the parties appeal, dated August 22, 1988, enters summary judgment in favor of plaintiffs and against defendant. Although the lawsuit was not filed as a declaratory judgment action, the parties have stipulated that the only issue that was before the trial court was the existence of coverage under the insurance policy. The order, in effect (although not expressly), compels the parties to arbitrate the claim because the order implicitly holds that coverage is available under the uninsured motorists’ provision of the policy. The narrow issue before us is whether the uninsured motorist provision of the mother’s policy is available to satisfy the claims her children have against her for their injuries. A corollary issue centers on the applicability of the parent-child immunity doctrine and whether that bar transforms the mother into an uninsured as to the children. Initially we note that the children appear to be covered directly as “persons insured” for their reasonable medical expenses under “Part II — Expenses for Medical Services.” Coverage for reasonable and necessary medical expenses is provided “to or for the named insured and each relative who sustains bodily injury ***, caused by accident, while occupying *** an automobile.” We assume that the balance of plaintiffs’ claim under the uninsured motorists’ coverage is for pain and suffering and whatever other injury is compensable under law. Plaintiffs base their claim on the uninsured motorist provision rather than under the general liability provision of the insurance policy. They reason that the parent-child immunity doctrine bars them from suing the mother directly and therefore prevents them from stating a cause of action in negligence. Hence, the mother is actually “uninsured” as to them and they are entitled to assert their claim against her insurance company under the uninsured motorist coverage. State Security, conversely, maintains that the uninsured motorist provision is unavailable because nothing in the policy precludes the children, as family members, from suing their mother in order to obtain the insurance proceeds under the general liability coverage. Accordingly, the mother is insured and the uninsured motorist section does not apply. Part I, the general liability provision of the insurance policy, provides in relevant part that the insurance company shall “pay on the behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of *** bodily injury *** sustained by any person *** arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the owned automobile *** and the company shall defend any suit alleging such bodily injury.” The uninsured motorist provision is part IV of the policy. “Part IV — Family Protection Coverage” provides that the company shall pay all legally recoverable sums to the “named insured and any relative” for “bodily injury caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of [an] uninsured automobile.” We believe that the insurance policy does provide coverage for the injuries that the children suffered when their mother’s automobile was involved in the collision. However, we agree with State Security Insurance Company that the theory plaintiffs advance is technically incorrect. In General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp. v. Klatt (1984), 121 Ill. App. 3d 862, 460 N.E.2d 339, the court rejected a husband’s claim under the uninsured motorist coverage of the policy on his automobile. His wife was driving at the time he was injured. The court noted that the interspousal immunity did not destroy a cause of action between the spouses but only provided a defense. Accordingly, the court held that the wife was an insured and that the uninsured motorist coverage did not apply as a matter of law. Other cases which have considered the applicability of uninsured motorist provisions in the context of intrafamily claims interpret such coverage as extending to family members of the insured-driver when the insurance policy contains “household exclusions.” Thus, in Kerouac v. Kerouac (1981), 99 Ill. App. 3d 254, 425 N.E.2d 543, the driver’s minor brother was allowed to maintain a claim against the father’s insurance company pursuant to the uninsured motorist provision of the insurance policy. The court noted that the insured and his family members were excluded from the general liability coverage. After reviewing the legislative intent behind the passage of the uninsured motorist statute, the court stated, “As to this particular plaintiff, the minor [plaintiff], because of the exclusion with respect to liability for injury to family members, the automobile in which he was riding was not an insured automobile and the driver was not an insured motorist.” 99 Ill. App. 3d at 259-60, 425 N.E.2d at 547, citing as controlling, Barnes v. Powell (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 449, 275 N.E.2d 377. In Farmers Insurance Group v. Nudi (1982), 108 Ill. App. 3d 151, 438 N.E.2d 1260, the court held that the injured wife of the driver of an insured automobile was entitled to make a claim under the uninsured motorist provision of their policy because of the household exclusion in the policy. The court did not analyze the exclusion except to note that it caused the husband to become uninsured as to the wife.  In the pending case, the policy of insurance contains no such exclusion for household members under the general liability coverage. Accordingly, logic and general principles of construction lead us to conclude that the mother is insured as to the children and that their claim against her may be maintained as a suit in negligence. This conclusion does not end the analysis, however, because plaintiffs contend that they are absolutely barred from suing their mother because of the parent-child tort immunity. Their belief that the immunity is substantive and thus prevents a cause of action from arising is the reason they brought their claim under the uninsured motorist provision in the first place.  We disagree with plaintiffs’ view of the law. In Farmers Insurance Group v. Nudi (1982), 108 Ill. App. 3d 151, 153, 438 N.E.2d 1260, 1261, the court held that the interspousal tort immunity was procedural in nature, a personal defense that “does not inure to the benefit of third parties.” Nudi cited Allstate Insurance Co. v. Elkins (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 384, 396 N.E.2d 528, which held that the immunity is a defense that can be waived by a defendant spouse, not a substantive bar that would prevent the cause of action from accruing in the first place. Allstate also held that the third-party insurance company could not assert the immunity defense on behalf of its insured.  We believe that the parent-child immunity is sufficiently analogous to the interspousal immunity as to justify similar treatment. Accordingly, we hold that the minor plaintiffs are not substantively barred from maintaining an action against their mother. We further note that since the immunity is a defense personal to her, she may waive it, and State Security may not freely assert it on her behalf as a means of defeating the claim. See Maryland Casualty Co. v. Peppers (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 187, 198-99, 355 N.E.2d 24, 31 (where a conflict of interest exists between insurer and insured, insurer has duty to decline to defend its insured, in favor of independent counsel). Because we have held that the mother is not uninsured as to her children under this policy, we must reverse the trial court’s grant of summary judgment. Nothing in this opinion or disposition should be read as defeating the rights of the plaintiffs to pursue relief under the appropriate legal theories; accordingly, the matter will be remanded to the trial court to give the parties a fair opportunity to amend pleadings or take whatever additional steps that may be necessary. For the foregoing reasons, we reverse and remand. Reversed and remanded. JOHNSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2207852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.049992+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 670 (1969)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JERRY WALKER LYNN, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 14105.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Apr. 11, 1969.
Charles M. Berg, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Megan A. Wagner, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FILES, P. J.
Case 326106
By information, defendant was charged with violation of Health and Safety Code sections 11530.5 (possession of marijuana for sale) and 11500.5 (possession of heroin for sale). After a trial held before the court sitting without a jury, defendant was found guilty as charged. He appeals from the judgment.
On May 24, 1966, officers of the Los Angeles Police Department, armed with a search warrant, went to 5930 Reseda Boulevard, apartment 70. The warrant had been obtained on information supplied by a confidential, reliable informant, to the effect that narcotics could be found at that location. There they found in a closet 50 kilo-sized blocks of a green, leafy substance later identified as marijuana. In the medicine cabinet were found two cellophane packages, each of which contained approximately 1 ounce of a whitish powder later *672 identified as heroin. The only articles of personal property found in the apartment were one shirt and one pair of pants and a rent receipt made out to Jerry Alexander for apartment 70 from May 17 to May 29.
Five or ten minutes later, defendant entered the apartment and was taken into custody. He was then taken to the office of the apartment manager, where the officer heard the manager ask defendant what the trouble was. An officer stated that the man was under arrest. Then the manager asked, " 'Are you going to keep that apartment or can I clean it up?' " Defendant replied, " 'I am going to keep it until my rent is paid up ... That is the 27th.' "
Defendant testified at the trial that, although he had rented the apartment in question under the name of Jerry Alexander, he had never lived there. He had rented the apartment because he had had a fight with his wife and needed a place to stay; but, since they reconciled soon after, he didn't need it. He stated that on May 20 or 21, he met a man named "Jim" or "Tim" in a bar. He had first met this man in jail and knew very little about him. "Jim" or "Tim" indicated that he was having problems at home because there were so many people living there. Since he no longer needed the apartment, defendant suggested that his acquaintance might stay there. They then had a duplicate key made and defendant never saw him again. Although defendant denied having stayed overnight at the apartment, he testified that at one time he went there to change his clothes and noted paper plates and things in the kitchen which made it look as though someone had been there eating. Since he was not returning home that night, he had left the clothes in the apartment, intending to retrieve them later. It was while he was on this return mission that he was arrested.
[1a] In the trial court defendant made a timely demand for the disclosure of the name of the informant upon whose report the search warrant was issued. The police officer who had received that report declined to furnish the information. The trial court ruled that this was not the kind of case in which the prosecution must either disclose the identity of the informer or incur dismissal.
That ruling was an error which compels reversal of the judgment. Recent decisions of the California Supreme Court leave no doubt about it. (See Honore v. Superior Court (1969) 70 Cal. 2d 162 [74 Cal. Rptr. 233, 449 P.2d 169]; People v. Garcia (1967) 67 Cal. 2d 830 [64 Cal. Rptr. 110, 434 *673 P.2d 366]; People v. Perez (1965) 62 Cal. 2d 769 [44 Cal. Rptr. 326, 401 P.2d 934].) [2] The rule was stated in the Honore opinion thus: "We explained at some length in People v. McShann, supra, 50 Cal. 2d 802 [330 P.2d 33], and have recently repeated in People v. Garcia, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 830, that when it appears from the evidence that an informer is a material witness on the issue of the defendant's guilt, the informer's identity may be helpful to the defendant and nondisclosure would deprive the latter of a fair trial. Thus, when 'the accused seeks disclosure on cross-examination, the People must either disclose [such informer's] identity or incur a dismissal.' (Original italics.) (People v. Garcia, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 830, 836, quoting from People v. McShann, supra, 50 Cal. 2d 802, 808.)"
[3] "Defendants need not prove that the informer could give testimony favorable to them in order to compel disclosure of his identity nor need they show that he was a participant in or an eyewitness to the crime. (People v. Garcia, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 830, 837.) Their burden extends only to a showing that 'in view of the evidence, the informer would be a material witness on the issue of guilt and nondisclosure of his identity would deprive the defendant of a fair trial.' (People v. Williams (1958) 51 Cal. 2d 355, 359 [333 P.2d 19].) 'That burden is discharged, however, when defendant demonstrates a reasonable possibility that the anonymous informant whose identity is sought could give evidence on the issue of guilt which might result in defendant's exoneration. "No one knows what the undisclosed informer, if produced, might testify. He might contradict or persuasively explain away the prosecution's evidence." ' " (70 Cal.2d at p. 168.)
In the case at bench the declaration of the police officer, on which the search warrant issued, contains this statement: "Your affiant was informed by the said confidential reliable informant on the aforementioned date that he observed, within the prior three days, a large quanity [sic] of Heroin and Marijuana in Apt 70 at 5930 Reseda Blvd. That he has observed, within the prior three days, Jerry Lynn transport said Narcotics to Apt 70 at 5930 Reseda Blvd in two seperate [sic] 1956-59 Ford Thunderbird vehicles, one vehicle Red in color and the other Blue in color."
[1b] We have here a case where narcotics are found concealed in an apartment rented to defendant but apparently not occupied by him as a place of residence. His connection with the contraband is purely circumstantial--based as it is *674 upon his equivocal relationship to the apartment. The police have knowledge of an individual who claims to have observed the narcotics there and to have seen defendant bring them there. Such a person would be capable of proving defendant guilty if he is guilty or proving him innocent if the report given to the officer is erroneous. At least two defense theories immediately present themselves: (1) the informant himself may be the guilty party who, to save himself, reported that the contraband belonged to defendant, or (2) some third person, using defendant's name, has hidden the narcotics in this supposedly unoccupied apartment, and the informant, if confronted by the real Jerry Lynn, will exonerate the latter.
The Supreme Court has pointed out that to make a case for disclosure of the informant the defendant need not show what the informant will testify to. It is enough that he is shown to be "a material witness on the issue of guilt." It should be noted too that the grounds for disclosure are not dependent upon the testimony given by the defendant. The materiality of the informant's testimony is here shown by the People's own evidence, which includes the affidavit in support of the warrant. (See People v. Garcia (1967) 67 Cal. 2d 830, 839, fn. 10 [64 Cal. Rptr. 110, 434 P.2d 366].)
Case 295419
[4] In 1965 defendant pleaded guilty to receiving stolen property (Pen. Code,  496).proceedings were suspended and he was placed on probation for four years. On June 14, 1967, following defendant's conviction of the narcotics offenses in case 326106, probation was revoked and defendant was sentenced to state prison. He has appealed from this judgment also.
Since the trial court stated no ground for the revocation of probation, we assume it was on the ground of the new felony convictions, and for that reason only, the judgment in case 295419 must be reversed. Now that the narcotics convictions are being reversed, they cannot stand as a ground for revocation of probation. It may be that there are other grounds of which we have no knowledge upon which defendant's probation should be revoked. Upon remand the trial court will have the opportunity to determine whether circumstances other than the narcotics convictions in case 326106 justify a revocation.
Each judgment is reversed.
Kingsley, J.,and Dunn, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207862 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.152011+00 ===

636 A.2d 732 (1993)
Lois R. GARRISON
v.
Stephen J. MULCAHY.
No. 93-3-Appeal.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
December 17, 1993.
Arthur Read, II, Providence.
John McCann, Pawtucket.
ORDER
This matter came before the Supreme Court pursuant to an order directing the plaintiff to appear and show cause why the *733 issues raised in this appeal should not be denied and dismissed. In this matter the plaintiff/mother has appealed from a Family Court dismissal of her complaint and the granting of defendant/father's counterclaim. In her complaint the mother had requested that the father's visitation rights be modified due to her and her husband's anticipated relocation out of state. In his counterclaim the father requested that the mother be enjoined and restrained from removing their minor child outside of the jurisdiction of Rhode Island on a permanent basis and also requested that he be awarded physical custody of the child. At the hearing in the Family Court the stepfather, the mother's husband, testified that his employment prospects with his current employer in Rhode Island were "50/50." He had been offered a job in Indiana in a business owned by his family. Also the stepfather owned a vacation home in Rhode Island to which the mother and child would return for two and one-half months a year.
The mother and stepfather also acknowledged that if permission was not granted by the court the family would stay within Rhode Island. In his decision the trial justice found that there was no compelling reason to authorize the change. Evidence presented from an expert witness was that unless there was a compelling reason to leave the area, he would not advise that the child be removed. The mother did not establish that moving to Indiana would be in the child's best interests.
After reviewing the memoranda submitted by the parties and after hearing their counsel in oral argument, it is the conclusion of this court that cause has not been shown. The court is of the opinion that the trial justice was justified in denying the petition to allow the removal of the child from the jurisdiction on the basis that there was no compelling reason to do so.
Therefore the plaintiff's appeal is denied and dismissed, the order appealed from is affirmed and the papers of the case are remanded to the Family Court.

=== CASE 9736908 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:36.071673+00 ===

HUDOCK, Judge:
Carol A. Holland (Mother) appeals from the order of the trial court denying her exceptions to the hearing officer’s recommendation that no support award be entered and that *211she pay $50 per month toward arrears to David Depp (Father). We affirm in part and reverse in part.
The facts and procedural history may be summarized as follows: While the parties have never been married to each other, they are the parents of Kyle Holland Depp (Kyle), who was born on September 25, 1988. From his birth until November 17, 1989, Mother had primary physical custody of Kyle and Father was paying support and had limited visitation rights. On that date, pursuant to a complaint for primary custody filed by Father, Father was awarded primary physical custody. Father then proceeded to provide for his son without the financial assistance of Mother. On September 13, 1990, Father filed a petition for the support of Kyle against Mother. At the conclusion of a hearing on January 4, 1991, the permanent hearing officer recommended that Mother pay $210 per month for Kyle’s support, as well as $20 monthly toward arrearages. Following argument on exceptions, on July 31, 1991, the order of support was reduced to $117 per month.
On January 2, 1992, a petition for contempt against Mother was filed, and a date for a compliance hearing was requested. On January 17, 1992, Mother filed a counter-petition requesting either a downward modification or termination of the child support order based on the fact that she had given birth to a second child out-of-wedlock to John Beyers. As of that date, Mother had only paid $120 toward her support obligation. After a full hearing on March 5, 1992, the permanent hearing officer recommended that Mother be found in contempt. Her support obligation was reduced to $100 per month and $20 monthly toward arrearages which were, at that time, set at $1,916. In addition, Mother was ordered to seek employment and to present a job log to the court at a compliance hearing which was ultimately scheduled for September 15, 1992. Mother filed exceptions to this recommendation, urging that the “nurturing parent doctrine” was applicable, thereby exempting her from responsibility for the support of Kyle. These exceptions were dismissed by the trial court.
*212In the meantime, and after a period of supervised partial custody at Father’s residence, Mother, after posting security, was granted expanded partial custody away from Father’s residence at her home in Murrysville. On August 19, 1992, the parties entered into a consent order which created shared custody between the parties. The precise apportionment of time was established to be that Kyle spend 52.68% of his time with Mother and 47.32% of his time with Father.
Four days prior to the September 15 compliance hearing, Mother filed a petition for modification/termination of the existing support order based on her claim that the consent order regarding shared custody presented a change in circumstances. After a full hearing regarding both Mother’s compliance with earlier orders of court and with her petition to modify/terminate, the permanent hearing officer: 1) suspended the order of March 23, 1992 (dismissing Mother’s exceptions and entering a $100 monthly support order retroactive to August 17, 1992); 2) found Father had a monthly net income of approximately $1,400 and established an earning capacity for Mother of $1,200 per month, an increase in the previous $600 monthly earning capacity attributed to her at the March 5, 1992, hearing; 3) entered no award of support in favor of either party, but set arrearages at $2,423.16 as of September 15, 1992, payable to Father at a rate of $50 per month; 4) found that Mother remained in contempt for failing to seek employment and failing to make support payments; and 5) directed that a compliance hearing be held in six months.
Mother filed exceptions to these findings and recommendations claiming, among other things, that she was improperly accorded an increased earning capacity, that Father should have been ordered to pay child support to her, and that she should have been given the benefit of the “nurturing parent doctrine.” Following argument on these exceptions, the trial court sustained Mother’s exceptions to the extent that Mother’s earning capacity was reduced to $600 per month, but otherwise dismissed the exceptions and reaffirmed a September 30, 1992, order directing Mother to pay $50 per month in arrearages. Thereafter, a petition for reconsideration was *213denied. On appeal, Mother claims that the trial court erred in failing to enter an order of child support in her favor against Father and in failing to apply the “nurturing parent doctrine.” We will address these claims in reverse order.
As our Supreme Court has recently stated:
Our scope of review in support matters is well settled. Absent an abuse of discretion, we will not disturb on appeal a properly entered support order. Melzer v. Witsberger, 505 Pa. 462, 480 A.2d 991 (1984). An abuse of discretion “is not merely an error of judgment, but if in reaching a conclusion the law is overridden or misapplied, or the judgment exercised is manifestly unreasonable, or the result of partiality, prejudice, bias or ill-will, as shown by the evidence or the record, discretion is abused.” In re Women’s Homeopathic Hospital of Philadelphia, 393 Pa. 313, 316, 142 A.2d 292, 294 (1958).
At common law, the duty of a parent to support his child was conditioned upon a parent receiving love, affection and assistance from that child. Contrary to the common law, today, the duty to support a minor child is absolute. Melzer, supra. However, in awarding child support, we must be cognizant of its purpose which is to promote the best interests of the child. Sutliff v. Sutliff, 515 Pa. 393, 528 A.2d 1318 (1987).
Oeler by Gross v. Oeler, 527 Pa. 532, 537, 594 A.2d 649, 651 (1991). Child support is a shared responsibility; both parents must contribute to the support of their child in accordance with their relative incomes and ability to pay. DeWalt v. DeWalt, 365 Pa.Super. 280, 529 A.2d 508 (1987).
As averred by Mother, the support guidelines do not directly address support obligations in shared custody situations. The permanent hearing officer considered the obligations of each party in this situation by calculating offsetting support obligations. Using a monthly net income of $1,400 for Father as obligee and $1,200 for Mother as obligor, the hearing officer arrived at a guideline figure of $210 per month. The hearing officer then divided that figure by 47.32 percent, representing *214the time Father had custody of Kyle. The resultant figure was $93.37. The hearing officer then used the same figures as if Mother were the obligee and Father the obligor, and arrived at a guideline figure of $245 a month. The hearing officer then divided that figure by the time Kyle spends with Mother, 52.68 percent, and arrived at a figure of $129 per month. Offsetting these two figures, the hearing officer achieved a difference of $29.63. Offsetting the monthly support obligations as if either party had primary physical custody, the hearing officer found a difference of $35 per month. Finding this result to be substantially the same, no order of support was assessed against either party. The hearing officer, however, did recommend that Mother pay Father $50 per month toward arrears. As stated above, the trial court denied Mother’s exceptions to its order affirming the recommendation except for stating that Mother was to be assessed a $600 earning capacity.
Mother first claims that the trial court erred in assessing her any earning capacity because she should have received the benefit of the “nurturing parent doctrine.” This Court recently discussed this doctrine in a case, like the present, where the issue was the mother’s duty to support the child of her first marriage in view of the fact that she stayed home to care for her infant child of a second marriage. In reviewing the actions of the trial court, which assigned no earning capacity to her, this Court stated:
The trial court, while finding the issue a troubling one, relied upon the nurturing parent doctrine whereby, in appropriate cases, the earning capacity of a parent who chooses to stay home with young children need not be considered, citing Hesidenz v. Carbin, 354 Pa.Super. 610, 512 A.2d 707 (1986); Butler v. Butler, 339 Pa.Super. 312, 488 A.2d 1141 (1985). Apparently there is no problem with the rule when the mother is caring for the children of the marriage. It is when the mother is caring for her children of a second marriage that the conflict arises. Judge Blahovic determined that the issue was not whether the mother was caring for her children as opposed to their children, but whether *215under the facts of the case what the earning capacity would be. This is the correct analysis under these facts, particularly since there is no evidence of the mother’s earning capacity based on her work record or employability. On this record imputing earning capacity to the mother is a fiction which simply shifts the burden of supporting the wife’s child of the first marriage to her second husband, who has no legal obligation to do so.
The concept of imposing a support Order based on earning potential is of long standing in support law and derives from the principle that a person who has a support obligation may not withdraw from income producing endeavors to defeat the right of support to his/her dependents. It has never been the law that a mother who elects to care for her young child is chargeable with voluntary withdrawal from income-producing activity to defeat the right to support her child by a previous marriage.
Atkinson v. Atkinson, 420 Pa.Super. 146, 148-149, 616 A.2d 22, 23 (1992) (emphasis in original). Finding that the record was totally devoid of any evidence that the mother ever worked, the majority in Atkinson affirmed the assessment of zero earning capacity to the mother.
As recognized by the dissent in Atkinson, the “nurturing parent doctrine” is not an absolute rule; it is but one factor to be considered by the trial court in determining whether to excuse the parent from contributing toward support. See Atkinson, supra, (Del Sole, J. dissenting). Upon review, we find that the particular facts of this case do not warrant the application of the “nurturing parent doctrine” to Mother. Unlike the mother in Atkinson, Mother not only has a past work history but, as demonstrated by the record, she has in the past performed private accounting for persons and at one time ran a day care facility out of her home. Under these circumstances, application of the “nurturing parent doctrine” is not appropriate. Thus, we affirm this part of the trial court’s order.
*216Mother’s next exception was that the hearing master overstated her earning capacity at $1200 per month. The trial court sustained this exception and lowered the assessed earning capacity to $600 per month. In its 1925(a) opinion, the trial court states that it need not further address this contention because it sustained the exception. However, we note that this adjustment in earning capacity alters completely the calculations of the hearing officer. Our own calculations now place the offsetting figures in favor of mother to be approximately $59 per month. While we do not find this to be a substantial difference, we remand to the trial court for its determination as to whether this difference would alter its previous order.
Order affirmed in part and reversed in part. The matter is remanded for a determination of an order of support, if any, given Father’s net income of $1,400 per month and Mother’s earning capacity of $600 a month.1 Jurisdiction relinquished.
TAMILIA, J. files a Concurring Opinion.
. In closing, Mother argues "to the extent that [Mother] was entitled to an order of child support, she is entitled to an adjustment of arrears." Mother's Brief at p. 9. We note, however, that Mother has not taken issue with her obligation to pay Father $50 per month toward these arrearages.

=== CASE 9736909 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:36.075817+00 ===

TAMILIA, Judge,
concurring:
I join my colleagues but write separately to clarify my position on the issue of the “nurturing parent doctrine.” In this case, the mother of the child for whom support was ordered alleges trial court error in assessing her an earnings potential of $600, thus diminishing the amount that the father was required to contribute for the child’s support. I believe Judge Baldwin was correct in making such an assessment and reducing the earning capacity/potential of the mother from $1,200 per month, as recommended by the hearing officer, to $600 per month because such a decision was fact specific.
With the advent of the Equal Rights Amendment in Pennsylvania in 1972, and the recent application of equal protection concepts of the Federal and State Constitutions, custody and *217support matters have undergone a fundamental revision from the past. Before the changes occurred, the father was held to be primarily liable for the support of children, the mother, secondarily liable. The mother’s duty became operative only if and when the father was unable to maintain the child. The tender years doctrine established a prima facie right to custody in a mother, which the father could overcome only by establishing her unfitness as a parent. Today, support obligations are the equal and joint responsibility of both parents, based upon their ability to pay, which includes earning capacity, and custody is determined on the standard of the best interest of the child with both parents having equal right to custody unfettered by gender based biases.
To assist trial courts in reaching the very difficult decision on support, federal and state legislation has provided for support guidelines, factoring in the joint parental obligation, which are promulgated under rule by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. As to the even more difficult decisions to be made by trial judges as to custody, legislation has been promulgated providing for shared custody. Even more significant is the judicially approved doctrine of the primary caretaker which provides an alternative to any presumptions based on the standard of the best interest of the child and filling the void created by Spriggs v. Carson, 470 Pa. 290, 368 A.2d 635 (1977), which abrogated the tender years doctrine. Once the award of custody has been made, the court may consider whether a parent having custody is entitled to elect child care responsibility as opposed to employment under the nurturing parent doctrine.
Focusing these concepts to bear on this case, the proper result was achieved by giving proper weight to the various concepts. At the outset, I believe as a matter of public policy, as this writer stated in Atkinson v. Atkinson, 420 Pa.Super. 146, 616 A.2d 22 (1992) (Tamilia, J.), a mother who is in custody of a child, particularly an infant, may elect to remain at home caring for that child and no earning capacity or potential may be assessed to the mother without actual earnings because of that decision. It is likely that under the same *218circumstances, a father would receive the same treatment. However, where as here there is an agreement and consent Order of shared custody, and where the mother had significant earning capacity prior to the birth of the child, but chooses to pursue her education rather than be employed, her part-time parenting does not qualify for a full exemption from child support by claiming the nurturing parent benefit. The law has never permitted a parent to withdraw from support or maintaining children to pursue private education goals. The needs of the children have always been paramount. The able trial judge made this abundantly clear by exempting one-half the caring capacity of $1,200 per month because the mother is nurturing the child approximately 50 per cent of the time. If she had been employed instead of seeking an educational goal for the remaining 50 per cent, assuming her income was at the rate of $1,200 per month, reduced by 50 percent, the share attributed to her would have been the same. It also is worthy of comment that the mother in this case is entitled to the benefits of the nurturing parent doctrine despite the fact this child was born out of wedlock. It has been the law since Levy v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 68, 88 S.Ct., 1509, 20 L.Ed.2d 436 (1968), that children born out of wedlock may not be treated differently than children born during marriage. In computing support for such children, the nurturing parent doctrine must be applied as with children born within marriage. Also see Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S.Ct. 1208, 31 L.Ed.2d 551 (1972).
Finding no error in the trial court’s analysis and finding, I join in affirmance.

=== CASE 2207873 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.276388+00 ===

333 Md. 507 (1994)
636 A.2d 444
DIANE P. BRANTLEY, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF ARCHIE P. JONES
v.
FALLSTON GENERAL HOSPITAL INC., ET AL.
No. 6, September Term, 1993.
Court of Appeals of Maryland.
January 11, 1994.
Reconsideration Denied March 4, 1994.
Benjamin Lipsitz, Baltimore (Edward L. Keefer, Hydes, both on brief), for petitioner.
Kathleen Howard Meredith (Semmes, Bowen & Semmes, both on brief), and Michael J. Baxter (David J. McManus, Smith, Somerville & Case, all on brief), Baltimore, for respondents.
Argued before MURPHY, C.J., and ELDRIDGE, RODOWSKY, McAULIFFE, CHASANOW, KARWACKI and ROBERT M. BELL, JJ.
McAULIFFE, Judge.
On 4 July 1981, Archie P. Jones was struck by an automobile while standing alongside another vehicle. He was taken to Fallston General Hospital (the hospital) where he was treated by several health care providers for severe injuries to his left leg. In November 1981, Jones settled his claim against the driver who struck him, and executed a general release. Three years later, in November 1984, following extensive treatment by the doctors and multiple admissions to the hospital, Jones was required to undergo amputation of his left leg below the knee. Thereafter, in July 1986, Jones filed a claim with the Health Claims Arbitration Office, contending that the hospital, Dr. Alberto Barretto, and others were negligent in providing medical and hospital care for his injuries.
The chairman of the arbitration panel granted summary judgment in favor of all defendants, finding that the release earlier executed by Jones applied to those who rendered medical treatment after the accident as well as to the original tortfeasor. Jones filed an action in the Circuit Court for Baltimore City to nullify the arbitration award. The defendants successfully challenged venue, and the action was transferred to the Circuit Court for Harford County. The hospital and Dr. Barretto are the only defendants in that action who are before this Court.[1] The hospital and Dr. Barretto moved for summary judgment in the circuit court, again arguing that the release given by Jones effectively released them from liability. Those motions were denied on 19 June 1990.
On 20 August 1990, Jones died of causes unrelated to his claims. For more than a year after his death, his case remained inactive. No papers were filed until 6 November 1991, when Dr. Barretto filed a motion to dismiss for lack of prosecution, citing Maryland Rule 2-507.[2] Benjamin Lipsitz, counsel for Jones (counsel), responded to the motion on 25 November 1991, and filed a request for a hearing. He stated that his response was "submitted in behalf of Archie P. Jones, plaintiff (now deceased), and/or his heirs at law and/or other persons interested in his estate and/or claiming through him...." He represented that his co-counsel, Edward L. Keever, had encountered some difficulty in locating Jones' heirs because Jones had died a widower without children. Counsel represented that he had discovered a niece, however, who was "ready, willing, and able to proceed with this action." He asked for additional time to substitute the niece as a party.
On 2 December 1991, Dr. Barretto's motion to dismiss was granted, without a hearing. Shortly thereafter, the hospital filed a motion to dismiss, and counsel filed another response, much the same as the response earlier given to Dr. Barretto's motion. The court granted the hospital's motion to dismiss on 21 January 1992, again without a hearing. Counsel noted an appeal on 19 February 1992. The notice of appeal was filed by counsel "on behalf of Archie P. Jones, plaintiff (now deceased) (and/or his heir(s) at law and/or other person(s) interested in his estate and/or claiming through him)...."
Counsel argued on appeal that the decision to grant the motions to dismiss should be reversed for several reasons. First, he contended that it was error to grant dispositive motions without conducting a hearing when a hearing had been requested. Second, he argued that the motions under Rule 2-507 should not have been granted because the clerk of court had not issued a notice of contemplated dismissal, as required by the Rule. Third, he argued that even if proper procedures had been observed, the trial judge incorrectly determined that the delay in prosecution was without substantial justification.
The Court of Special Appeals affirmed the dismissals, in an unreported opinion. The court determined that Rule 2-507 permits a motion to dismiss to be filed by a party, and in that instance does not require the clerk of the court to issue the notice of contemplated dismissal.[3] The intermediate appellate court also found that because counsel had requested a hearing in his own name, and not on behalf of any existing party, the lower court was not bound to honor the request. Finding no abuse of discretion by the trial judge, the court refused to set aside the dismissals.
We granted certiorari, and before this Court the defendants raise a new question based on part of the rationale of the Court of Special Appeals decision. They suggest that if counsel was without authority to request a hearing because his client had died, he similarly was without authority to file an appeal to the Court of Special Appeals, and consequently that appeal should be dismissed.
Ordinarily, under well-established principles of agency law, an agent's authority terminates upon the death of the principal. See Restatement (Second) of Agency, § 120 (1958). The lawyer-client relationship is not excepted from this rule. Switkes v. John McShain, 202 Md. 340, 348, 96 A.2d 617 (1953). Thus, we have specifically held that an attorney has no authority to note an appeal on behalf of a client who has died. Id. at 350, 96 A.2d 617. Although an agency coupled with an interest may survive the death of the principal, we have held that "the interest must be in the subject matter of the power ... and not merely in [its] proceeds ...," id. at 348-49, 96 A.2d 617, so that the expectation of earning a fee from the representation is not sufficient to constitute an `interest' that will extend the relationship. Id. at 348-50, 96 A.2d 617. See also Karr v. Shirk, 142 Md. 118, 121-24, 120 A. 248 (1923).
In Owings v. Owings, 3 Gill & J. 1, 2-4 (1830), an attorney filed an appeal after his client died. This Court dismissed the appeal, holding that it was not just "a mere irregularity, but a complete and radical defect." Id. at 4. More recently, in Switkes, a worker's compensation claimant died shortly after his claim was denied. Two days after his death, his attorney filed a timely notice of appeal. The appellees successfully moved to dismiss the appeal by arguing that counsel had no authority to act on behalf of a deceased client, and the widow did not herself appeal within the time allowed. Switkes, supra, 202 Md. at 350, 96 A.2d 617.
We hold in this case that counsel's authority to file an appeal terminated upon the death of his client. At the time he noted the appeal, no personal representative had been appointed, and no other real party in interest had been substituted in the action.[4] Thus, when counsel filed the appeal, he purported to be acting on behalf of a non-existing client.
Next we consider whether counsel might have properly taken the appeal in his own name. Again, Switkes compels an answer in the negative. We considered and rejected the same question there, where we held that an "attorney has no right in his own name and on his own motion to appeal from an order or judgment of the court below affecting the interests of his client." Switkes, supra, 202 Md. at 347, 96 A.2d 617, quoting National Park Bank v. Lanahan, 60 Md. 477, 515 (1883). Two exceptions to this rule have been recognized in other states: these involve an attorney who can demonstrate a personal interest in the litigation other than a fee, id. 202 Md. at 348, 96 A.2d 617; and the attorney who can show that he or she was specifically retained by the client to continue the representation even beyond death. See Vincent v. Vincent, 16 Wash. App. 213, 554 P.2d 374, 378 (1976).
In this case, counsel has not made any showing that either of those exceptions would apply. Accordingly, we hold that counsel was not permitted to file the appeal in this case in his own name.
Petitioner argues that an attorney for a deceased party should be granted standing to protect the cause of action while attempts are made to locate and substitute a successor in interest, because to hold otherwise would conceivably work an injustice. We have traced the history of Maryland Rule 2-241, pertaining to substitution of parties, and we fail to find any indication that an attorney for a deceased party has ever been granted standing to act in his own name.
At common law, an action of this type would have died with the plaintiff. Stewart v. United Elec. L. & P. Co., 104 Md. 332, 333, 65 A. 49 (1906). When the rigors of the common law in this area were ameliorated by legislation, see e.g., Chapter 80 of the Laws of 1785, and Chapter 262 of the Laws of 1888, the legislature provided a detailed procedure to be followed when a party died but the action survived. This procedure remained a part of the statutory law of this State until 1957, when §§ 29-38 of Article 75 of the Maryland Code were repealed and replaced by Rule 220 of the Maryland Rules of Procedure. Rule 220 carried forward much of the detailed procedure of the former statute, and continued to be authority for the substitution of a party in the event of death until 1984, when that Rule was superseded by Maryland Rule 2-241.
The earlier statute and Rule, like its current counterpart, permitted the personal representative (or in an appropriate case an heir or other proper person) to be substituted for the deceased claimant. Under the statute, if a successor in interest did not appear and request substitution at the term of court at which the suggestion of death was made, the defendant would issue a summons for the proper person to prosecute the action. If that person failed to appear in obedience to the summons, the court issued an attachment of contempt, and if no appearance was made within a stated time after service of the attachment, judgment of non-suit was entered. Article 75, § 32, Maryland Code (1951).
Under Maryland Rule 220, the procedure to be followed if a successor in interest or a deceased plaintiff did not voluntarily appear was similar to that formerly required by the statute. If a successor in interest did not appear and ask to be substituted within 30 days of a party's death, the opposite party was to file a motion suggesting the death and identifying the successor in interest. The court then issued process for the successor in interest, calling upon that person to appear and prosecute or defend the action. If after being served the successor in interest did not appear, the court could dispose of the case as in other cases of default. Rule 220 also provided that if neither the successor in interest nor the opposing party filed a suggestion of death, the "attorney for any person affected by the action" could file a suggestion of death. Rule 220 e. of the 1957 Rules of Procedure provided:
If the successor in interest of a deceased party and the opposite party shall both fail to suggest the death of a deceased party, the attorney for any person affected by the action may, by motion in writing, suggest the death. Upon the filing of such motion, or upon its own motion the court may issue an order directed to the successor in interest calling upon him to appear and prosecute or defend the action or to the opposite party requiring him to cause the substitution of a proper party.
Rule 220 f. provided that "[i]f substitution is not made within one year from the date of service of the order provided for in section e of this Rule, the action may be dismissed as to the deceased party."
Nowhere in the former statute or Rule is it made to appear that the attorney for a deceased party may continue the action, in the name of the decedent or in the attorney's own name. To the contrary, the specified procedure was designed to afford a reasonable time for substitution of a successor in interest after proper notice, and dismissal or default if appropriate action was not taken. Rule 2-241, though Spartan in its description of action to be taken when there is no voluntary substitution, similarly does not purport to authorize continuance of an action by the attorney for a deceased party.
Under ordinary circumstances, the identity of the proper successor in interest for a deceased plaintiff is easily ascertainable, and substitution is readily accomplished. In those cases where there will necessarily be some delay in having a personal representative appointed, anyone, including the attorney who represented the deceased plaintiff, may notify the court of the death of the party. In the typical case, the court will then order a stay of proceedings for a reasonable period of time to permit substitution.
In the case before us, it is somewhat difficult to understand why Diane Brantley could not have been properly named personal representative of her uncle's estate, and substituted as plaintiff. Her identity was apparently known from the date of death, because her name was listed on Jones' death certificate as the person providing pertinent information, together with her Baltimore address. Although Jones apparently had no other assets at the time of his death, administrative probate for the purpose of pursuing this cause of action was readily granted by the Register of Wills for Baltimore City. See Maryland Code (1974, 1991 Repl.Vol.) Estates and Trusts Article, § 5-602. Counsel did not purport to represent a specific successor in interest at the time he noted an appeal. Because he had no standing or authority to appeal at that time, the appeal should have been dismissed.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS VACATED; CASE REMANDED TO THAT COURT WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO DISMISS THE APPEAL; COSTS IN THIS COURT AND IN THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS TO BE PAID BY PETITIONER.
NOTES
[1]  Jones sued another doctor, who was never served. He also sued the hospital administrator, but summary judgment was entered against Jones in that claim, and he did not appeal from that action.
[2]  Rule 2-507 states, in relevant part:
(c) An action is subject to dismissal for lack of prosecution at the expiration of one year from the last docket entry....
(d) When an action is subject to dismissal pursuant to this Rule, the clerk, upon written request of a party or upon the clerk's own initiative, shall serve a notice on all parties pursuant to Rule 1-321 that an order of dismissal for lack of ... prosecution will be entered after the expiration of 30 days unless a motion is filed under section (e) of this Rule.
[3]  In so holding, the Court of Special Appeals adhered to the view it had taken earlier in Byrne v. Amalgamated Transit Union, 73 Md. App. 551, 535 A.2d 503, cert. denied, 312 Md. 601, 541 A.2d 964 (1988). Because this appeal must be dismissed, we express no opinion as to the validity of that holding.
[4]  Diane Brantley, Jones' niece, qualified as personal representative of Jones' estate on 20 May 1992, while the appeal was pending before the Court of Special Appeals. Upon qualifying, she filed with that court a "Notice Substituting Personal Representative as Party Appellant," and the caption of the case was changed to reflect her appearance. This substitution came too late, and "[i]t could not be considered a ratification of the appeal which had been taken earlier, because there was nothing to ratify, that appeal having been a nullity." Switkes v. John McShain, 202 Md. 340, 350, 96 A.2d 617 (1953).

=== CASE 2207878 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.346818+00 ===

333 Md. 567 (1994)
636 A.2d 474
ROBERT LESLIE BALLARD, JR.
v.
STATE OF MARYLAND.
No. 55, September Term, 1993.
Court of Appeals of Maryland.
January 31, 1994.
Victoria S. Lansburgh, Asst. Public Defender (Stephen E. Harris, Public Defender, both on brief), Baltimore, for petitioner.
Diane E. Keller, Asst. Atty. Gen. (J. Joseph Curran, Jr., Atty. Gen., of Maryland, both on brief), Baltimore, for respondent.
Argued before MURPHY, C.J., and ELDRIDGE, RODOWSKY, McAULIFFE,[*] CHASANOW, KARWACKI and ROBERT M. BELL, JJ.
RODOWSKY, Judge.
The issue here involves the rule requiring corroboration of the confession of an accused by some independent evidence of the corpus delicti. We return to this well plowed ground because of the contentions of the petitioner, Robert Leslie Ballard, Jr. (Ballard), who stands convicted, inter alia, of felony murder in an attempted robbery. Ballard contends that corroboration of the corpus delicti in this case requires independent proof of the attempted robbery. As explained below, this contention greatly overstates the corroboration requirement.
Ballard was convicted by a jury in the Circuit Court for Prince George's County of felony murder, attempted armed robbery, and the use of a handgun in the commission of a crime of violence. He was acquitted of premeditated murder. The court imposed a life sentence and a consecutive five year term for the handgun conviction. For purposes of sentencing, the attempted armed robbery conviction was merged into the felony murder.
The Court of Special Appeals affirmed in an unreported opinion. This Court granted Ballard's petition for certiorari, which raised the following question:
"Whether the Court of Special Appeals erred in holding that the petitioner's confessions alone were enough to establish the corpus delicti of the offense of attempted robbery with a deadly weapon, under the circumstances of the instant case."
The murder victim was Ferris Bernard Dyson (Dyson), age twenty-five. On the night of January 8, 1992, Dyson had dinner with his fiancee at her apartment at 6801 Milltown Court, District Heights, Maryland. Dyson's fiancee was pregnant with their child, whose birth was imminent. At about 9:30 p.m. Dyson left to take a Metro bus to visit his grandmother. Dyson walked one block to the bus stop on Walker Mill Road, at Karen Boulevard, adjacent to the Walker Mill Garden Apartments complex, in Capitol Heights. While at the bus stop Dyson was mortally wounded by a .25 caliber bullet fired from a semiautomatic handgun that was held eighteen to twenty-four inches from the left side of Dyson's head. The bullet entered into the left ear, crossed the left side of the brain and lodged in the right side of the brain, on a trajectory that was slightly upward and slightly back to front.
The first police officer on the scene was Officer Nelson William Rhone, Jr. of the Prince George's County Police Department. Officer Rhone was working part time as a security officer for the Walker Mill Garden Apartments. At approximately 9:45 p.m. he heard a report over the police radio "saying shots had just been fired, and a man was down on the corner of Karen Boulevard and Walker Mill Road." Officer Rhone went to that location, found Dyson, summoned an ambulance, and secured the scene.
Dyson was taken to the intensive care unit at Prince George's Hospital. Dyson's fiancee saw him there the next day when she was in that hospital to deliver their child. Dyson died two days after the shooting.
No weapon was found at the scene of the shooting. The police, however, did find a .25 caliber shell casing on the sidewalk of Walker Mill Road near the bus stop. Dyson had a toothbrush and $21.15 on his person.
The petitioner, Ballard, was then a seventeen year old special education student at Central High School. One of the Central High teachers, Elizabeth Ann Wilson, acting on information she had heard "in the community," asked Ballard about the shooting. Ballard made statements, constituting admissions or confessions, to Ms. Wilson, and then to the school security officer, to the school principal, to the police, both orally and in writing, to his father, and to the court and jury at trial.
The substance of these statements was that Ballard and his friend, Cory Urquahart (Urquahart), had spent the late afternoon and early evening of Wednesday, January 8, 1992, drinking vodka and grapefruit juice in Urquahart's mother's apartment in the Walker Mill Garden Apartments. Then they went out for a walk. Urquahart had furnished Ballard with a .25 automatic to carry, and Urquahart also was carrying a handgun. At about 9:45 p.m. they saw a man whom they did not know at the bus stop near the entrance to the Walker Mill Garden Apartments. Urquahart suggested that they rob the man. Ballard "was getting ready to rob him, pulled out the gun, pointed it at the man, and the gun fired." The youths ran from the area of the bus stop, through the garden apartment building closest to Walker Mill Road, around the swimming pool of the apartments, and back to Urquahart's mother's apartment. They hid the guns under a chair in Urquahart's bedroom where the police, executing a search warrant, later recovered them.
The State established that the .25 caliber bullet taken from Dyson's brain had been fired from the .25 caliber semiautomatic found at the place where Ballard said that the weapon had been hidden after the shooting.
In oral, extrajudicial statements and in his testimony at trial, Ballard at times said that, because he had been drunk, he had no recollection of the shooting, and that his various statements identifying himself as the shooter were based upon what Urquahart had told him had happened.
The only direct, as contrasted with inferential, evidence that Ballard and Urquahart were attempting to rob Dyson is found in Ballard's statements. He contends that, in order to convict, there must be evidence, independent of his statements, to corroborate the attempted robbery which underlies his felony murder conviction. That is not the Maryland law.[1]
Woods v. State, 315 Md. 591, 556 A.2d 236 (1989), defeats Ballard's contention. That was a contract murder case in which the killer confessed to having shot the victim three or four times at point blank range. We said:
"`In a homicide case the proof of the corpus delicti is sufficient if it establishes the fact that the person for whose death the prosecution was instituted is dead, and that the death occurred under circumstances which indicate that it was caused criminally by someone.'"
Id. at 617, 556 A.2d at 249 (quoting Jones v. State, 188 Md. 263, 272, 52 A.2d 484, 488 (1947)). In Woods, the evidence apart from the confession established that the victim died of gunshot wounds. We said that "[t]he gunshot wounds were enough to show that the manner of death was homicide  that [the victim's] death was not by accident or suicide but was caused criminally by someone." Id. at 617, 556 A.2d at 249. That was sufficient corroboration to consider the confession, and the State's proof was sufficient to sustain the conviction of murder in the first degree.
The rule as stated in Jones has also been stated in Thanos v. State, 330 Md. 77, 97, 622 A.2d 727, 736 (1993), Whittlesey v. State, 326 Md. 502, 560 n. 11, 606 A.2d 225, 254 n. 11 (1992) (Bell, J., dissenting), Bagley v. State, 232 Md. 86, 96, 192 A.2d 53, 58 (1963), Pierce v. State, 227 Md. 221, 226, 175 A.2d 743, 744 (1961), Crouch v. State, 77 Md. App. 767, 770, 551 A.2d 943, 944, cert. denied, 315 Md. 307, 554 A.2d 393 (1989), Hurley v. State, 60 Md. App. 539, 549, 483 A.2d 1298, 1303 (1984), and Lemons v. State, 49 Md. App. 467, 473, 433 A.2d 1179, 1183, cert. denied, 292 Md. 13 (1981).
Here, the fatal weapon was not by the victim's body. Suicide can therefore be excluded. Further, the independent evidence indicates that Dyson's death was not an excused, accidental homicide. Officer Rhone's hearsay statement, that multiple shots were fired, came into evidence without objection. An F.B.I. firearms identification expert testified that the .25 caliber semiautomatic murder weapon required a distinct five and one-half pound pull on the trigger in order to fire each round, and that that pull was standard for the weapon. Viewing the facts from the foregoing perspective, the instant matter is indistinguishable from Woods.
If one infers from the fact that the police found only one shell casing at the crime scene the further fact that only one shot was fired, the corpus delicti was nevertheless established. Based on the gunpowder stippling around the entrance wound at Dyson's left ear, the opinion of the medical examiner was that someone pointed a loaded firearm at Dyson's head from eighteen to twenty-four inches away. Thus, the independent evidence demonstrates, at a minimum, such recklessness in the handling of the weapon by someone as to constitute involuntary manslaughter and, thereby, a criminal homicide that satisfies the corroboration requirement. See Duckworth v. State, 323 Md. 532, 542-44, 594 A.2d 109, 113 (1991) (pointing a firearm at a nearby human being, without justification and without being certain that it is unloaded, is generally sufficient to support a manslaughter conviction where an unintended discharge of the weapon results in death).
Ballard principally relies on Hadder v. State, 238 Md. 341, 209 A.2d 70 (1965), which he reads as impliedly recognizing that independent proof of the underlying felony is required. Hadder was convicted of the first degree murder of a police officer. The jury had not been asked to specify whether it found premeditated murder or murder in the course of an attempted robbery or both. The facts were these.
At about 1:15 a.m. the dead body of a uniformed Prince George's County police officer was found over an embankment off of a highway. Id. at 345, 209 A.2d at 72. On the road, thirty to forty feet away, was the officer's police cruiser with its motor running, its headlights on, and its red light flashing. The officer had been killed by a .45 caliber bullet, fired from no more than twelve inches away, which entered the chest, emerged from the left side of the victim's back near the belt line, and remained in his clothing. Another .45 caliber bullet had been fired into the dashboard of the cruiser. At various places in or near the crime scene the investigators found the dead officer's.38 service revolver, six empty .38 cartridge casings, a .45 automatic pistol, an automobile registration, a wallet, and a shoe. Later that day Hadder surrendered himself and gave several statements. In one statement Hadder said that, after having been stopped by the officer and while seated in the patrol car, he intended to take the officer's gun and car keys in order to escape. Id. at 346, 209 A.2d at 72-73. On appeal, Hadder contended that independent corroboration of that portion of his statement, expressing intent, was required. Id. at 352, 209 A.2d at 76.
The physical facts in Hadder demonstrated that the officer was dead as the result of a criminal act by someone. That is all that is required to corroborate the corpus delicti, as explained above. The opinion in Hadder, however, does not cite Jones v. State, 188 Md. 263, 52 A.2d 484, and the opinion reviews all of the evidence. In his brief in this case, Ballard argues that Hadder is consistent with requiring independent proof of the underlying attempted robbery where that crime is the basis for felony murder. Although Hadder's discussion went beyond corroboration of the corpus delicti, as Jones and its progeny defined it, and considered corroboration of Hadder's criminal agency, there was no mention of any independent evidence directly corroborating the attempted robbery.
In his statements Hadder acknowledged that he had been transporting illicit liquor. Hadder also admitted that, while seated in the right front seat of the cruiser, next to the officer, he drew his .45 handgun and a tussle ensued in which the handgun discharged and was wrested from Hadder by the officer. Hadder fled on foot, pursued by the officer who shot at him. Later, Hadder returned, got his own car, and drove away. Hadder again returned to the scene, made a U-turn, parked behind the police car, looked for his .45 handgun, could not find it, reentered his car, and left. Id. at 346-48, 209 A.2d at 72-74.
Independent evidence showed that while passing through Prince George's County about two hours earlier that evening, Hadder had obtained road service from a gasoline station that sold him a new tire, for which Hadder did not pay. The station operator notified the police. The vehicle registration, the wallet, the shoe, and the .45, all found at the scene, were Hadder's. The bullet that passed through the officer's body was fired from Hadder's .45 handgun. Indeed, an eyewitness also saw Hadder's car return to the scene and execute the U-turn maneuver. Id. at 345-49, 209 A.2d at 72-74.
Thus, Hadder's statements dovetailed with the independent evidence, which thereby corroborated many of the material facts contained in Hadder's statements. But nothing in the independent facts tended to prove affirmatively that it was Hadder's intent, when drawing the .45, to take the officer's car keys and service revolver in order to escape. Indeed, the stronger inference from the independent facts alone is that Hadder intended to effect his escape by shooting the officer, as opposed to leaving the officer without a weapon and transportation.
It is well settled in this State that "the independent evidence... need not be full and complete or establish the truth of the corpus delicti beyond a reasonable doubt or by a preponderance of proof." Birchead v. State, 317 Md. 691, 706, 566 A.2d 488, 495 (1989). See also Woods v. State, 315 Md. at 616, 556 A.2d at 248; Hadder, 238 Md. at 353, 209 A.2d at 76. We have said also that "the independent evidence necessary to support the confession need not be `full and positive' proof of the corpus delicti and may be small in amount, if such proof, when considered with the confession, convinces the jury beyond a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused." Bradbury v. State, 233 Md. 421, 425, 197 A.2d 126, 128 (1964) (quoting Pierce, 227 Md. at 226, 175 A.2d at 744).
Illustrative of these rules is Commonwealth v. Coontz, 288 Pa. 74, 135 A. 538 (1927), the authority relied upon by this Court in Jones v. State, 188 Md. at 272, 52 A.2d at 488, to support the description, most recently repeated in Thanos, 330 Md. at 97, 622 A.2d at 736, of the operation of the corroboration requirement in homicide cases. In Coontz the appellant was convicted of second degree murder. The independent evidence came from eyewitnesses who could see the events, described below, but could not hear what the participants in the events were saying. 288 Pa. at 76, 135 A. at 539. While an automobile in which the appellant was a right front seat passenger was being driven up a hill outside of a town, a police officer stopped the vehicle and climbed onto the right side running board. Id. at 77, 135 A. at 539. The vehicle made a U-turn and proceeded back down the hill, swerving from side to side. Near the bottom of the hill the police officer fell backwards from the running board. The officer's dead body, with his skull crushed, was found by the side of the traveled portion of the road about one and one-half feet from a telegraph pole. The occupants of the car fled in it, but the appellant was arrested the next day. In his statement the appellant admitted that the driver had told the appellant to push the constable off the running board, that the appellant had put his hand out, and that the officer fell. Id. at 78, 135 A. at 540.
The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania held that the statement was admissible based on the following analysis of the corroboration requirement:
"[T]he position of the body on the road, the cuts on deceased's hand and head, and the nature of the main wound on the head, are certainly consistent with crime, though they are perhaps not inconsistent with an accident. When testimony adduced points to an unlawful killing, although it may indicate as well accident or suicide, statements of one accused of the homicide then become admissible to show that there was an unlawful slaying and the accused's connection therewith."
Id. at 79, 135 A. at 538.
In the case before us the urban setting of the shooting, in the dark of night and in the dead of winter, and the gunpowder markings around the wound, coupled with the required trigger pressure, negate any inference of accident to a much greater degree than accidental homicide was negated by the inferences in Coontz.
The Maryland corroboration requirement, operating in homicide cases as above described, does not require that every element of the consummated crime be independently established. Accordingly, the Court of Special Appeals in Ball v. State, 57 Md. App. 338, 470 A.2d 361 (1984), modified on other grounds sub nom. Wright v. State, 307 Md. 552, 515 A.2d 1157 (1986), correctly rejected an argument in a felony murder case that there was insufficient corroboration because the only evidence of an attempted robbery was the statement of the appellant. "The requirement that there be some corroborating evidence tending to establish the corpus delicti generally, does not establish an independent corroboration requirement as to each component element of the corpus delicti." 57 Md. App. at 351, 470 A.2d at 368. Ball was relied upon by the Court of Special Appeals in its unreported opinion in the instant matter.
A national overview of the corroboration requirement is presented in 1 McCormick on Evidence § 145 (Strong 4th ed. 1992).
"The traditional formulation of the requirement, still applied by most jurisdictions, demands that there be some evidence other than the confession that tends to establish the corpus delicti....
"There is some dispute regarding the definition of corpus delicti, which literally means the `body of the crime.' To establish guilt in a criminal case, the prosecution must ordinarily show that (a) the injury or harm constituting the crime occurred; (b) this injury or harm was done in a criminal manner; and (c) the defendant was the person who inflicted the injury or harm. Wigmore maintains that corpus delicti means only the first of these, that is, `the fact of the specific loss or injury sustained,' and does not require proof that this was occasioned by anyone's criminal agency....
"Most courts, however, define corpus delicti as involving both (a) and (b). This means that the corroborating evidence must tend to show the harm or injury and that it was occasioned by criminal activity. It need not, however, in any manner tend to show that the defendant was the guilty party. Thus in a homicide case, the corpus delicti consists of proof that the victim died and that the death was caused by a criminal act, but it need not tend to connect the defendant on trial with that act.
"The traditional approach has been to require that the elements of the offense be carefully distinguished and that the corroborating evidence tend to show each of those elements. A growing number of courts, however, are abandoning the strict requirement that the corroborating evidence tend to prove all elements of the corpus delicti. Thus the corroborating evidence need only tend to show the `major' or `essential' harm involved in the offense charged and not all of the elements technically distinguished. This tendency is most pronounced in homicide cases, where defendants are often tried for offenses that involve requirements beyond simply the causing of death in a criminal manner....
"Felony murder cases have posed the problem with special difficulty. Under the traditional application of the corpus delicti formulation, the elements of felony murder include the predicate felony as well as the fact of death and the causing of it in a criminal way; thus, corroborating evidence would have to tend to prove that predicate felony. Most courts, however, have balked at this and have held that the corroborating evidence need not tend to prove the predicate felony."
Id. at 557-59 (footnotes omitted). Thus, the rule with respect to felony murder cases that this Court announced in Jones and applied in Woods, Thanos, and other cases cited above is that applied by "[m]ost courts." Id. at 557-58. Further, McCormick points out that "[a] growing number of courts" do not require "that the corroborating evidence tend to prove all elements of the corpus delicti," but only the major or essential harm involved in the charged offense. Id. at 558. That is the rule applied by the Court of Special Appeals in Ball which we now approve.
Ballard's brief also discusses a "trustworthiness" rule. He asserts that, if this Court applied a "trustworthiness" analysis to test whether the confessions in this case should be considered, they would be excluded from the sufficiency calculus. Under this approach, "the corroborative evidence need not be sufficient, independent of the statements, to establish the corpus delicti," but the State would be required "to introduce substantial independent evidence which would tend to establish the trustworthiness of the statement." Opper v. United States, 348 U.S. 84, 93, 75 S. Ct. 158, 164, 99 L. Ed. 101, 108-09 (1954). Ballard points out that the Supreme Court of North Carolina has recently announced that it "need not adhere to [its] strict rule requiring independent proof of the corpus delicti," and that it has adopted the trustworthiness rule. State v. Parker, 315 N.C. 222, 235, 337 S.E.2d 487, 494 (1985). Ballard suggests that this Court either could or should apply the same approach here.
We need not consider a trustworthiness rule in this case because, even if it were to be applied in some fashion, it would not alter the result. The circumstances surrounding Ballard's many oral and written inculpatory statements, including particularly the fact that his admissions were repeated in open court, demonstrate the trustworthiness of his statements.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS AFFIRMED. COSTS TO BE PAID BY THE PETITIONER.
NOTES
[*]  McAuliffe, J., now retired, participated in the hearing and conference of this case while an active member of this Court; after being recalled pursuant to the Constitution, Article IV, Section 3A, he also participated in the decision and adoption of this opinion.
[1]  The corroboration requirement, like the parol evidence rule, is a rule of substantive law and not a rule of evidence. Thus, although Ballard's multiple admissions and confessions came into evidence essentially without objection, Ballard was not precluded from contending, in support of his motion for a judgment of acquittal, that the confessions could not be considered in weighing the sufficiency of the evidence to convict. The timing of a ruling on the sufficiency of corroboration of the corpus delicti, i.e., whether made conditionally or unconditionally when a confession or admission is offered, or deferred until ruling on a motion for judgment of acquittal, is a function of defense tactics and trial court discretion.

=== CASE 9736910 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:43.784836+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
Defendant asserts that, contrary to Estelle v Smith, 451 US 454; 101 S Ct 1866; 68 L Ed 2d 359 (1981), he was not properly informed that he had a Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and a Sixth Amendment right to counsel at his presentence psychiatric examination. We hold that defendant’s Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights were adequately protected by the procedures followed by the trial court and the Detroit Recorder’s Court psychiatric clinic. We thus uphold the Court of Appeals affirmance of defendant’s conviction.
BACKGROUND
Following a jury trial in Recorder’s Court, defendant was convicted of second-degree murder. At the end of trial in the presence of counsel, the trial judge ordered the defendant to be examined *285in the Recorder’s Court psychiatric clinic prior to sentencing. Neither defendant nor his counsel objected. The examining psychologist concluded that defendant was assaultive, antisocial, and posed a high risk to the community. At sentencing, the trial judge referred to these findings and sentenced defendant to forty to seventy years’ imprisonment. In addition to other issues raised in the Court of Appeals, defendant asserted noncompliance with Estelle v Smith, supra, in which the United States Supreme Court held that when the results of a psychiatric examination are used in determining the nature and severity of a convicted defendant’s sentence, the defendant’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and Sixth Amendment right to counsel attach. The Court of Appeals affirmed defendant’s conviction in an unpublished opinion without discussing Estelle.
We granted leave to appeal limited to the issue whether the psychiatric examination was improperly conducted in violation of defendant’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 426 Mich 864 (1986). Although not included within our order granting leave, we will also discuss the alleged violation of defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel, which was briefed by both parties.
Before discussing the Estelle holding and the present issues, it is helpful to summarize the three types of psychiatric examinations which are typically performed at forensic psychiatric clinics, and the importance of the one involved here.1 When a defendant’s competency to stand trial is questioned, a competency examination is given to determine his mental state at the time of trial to assure that he understands the charges against *286him and can knowingly assist in his defense.2 When a defendant pleads not guilty by reason of insanity, a criminal responsibility or sanity examination is given to determine the defendant’s mental state at the time of the offense.3
In Michigan, the results of competency examinations may not be used at trial as evidence of a defendant’s guilt, obviating Fifth Amendment concerns regarding self-incrimination.4 Also, a defendant must submit to, and participate in, a criminal responsibility examination before being allowed to present an insanity defense at trial.5 Statements made during that examination are not admissible on any issue other than the defendant’s mental illness or insanity at the time of the alleged offense.6 The Estelle Court confirmed that the Fifth Amendment right to remain silent is not implicated when the results of the competency and sanity examinations are used for their intended purposes:
[T]he interview with Dr. Grigson [the examining psychiatrist] cannot be characterized as a routine competency examination restricted to ensuring that respondent understood the charges against him and was capable of assisting in his defense. Indeed, if the application of Dr. Grigson’s findings had been confined to serving that function, no Fifth Amendment issue would have arisen.
Nor was the interview analogous to a sanity examination occasioned by a defendant’s plea of *287not guilty by reason of insanity at the time of his offense. When a defendant asserts the insanity defense and introduces supporting psychiatric testimony, his silence may deprive the State of the only effective means it has of controverting his proof on an issue that he interjected into the case. Accordingly, several Courts of Appeals have held that, under such circumstances, a defendant can be required to submit to a sanity éxamination conducted by the prosecution’s psychiatrist. [451 US 465.]
The third type of psychiatric examination is the postconviction presentence evaluation, which is either court-ordered or requested as part of the presentence investigative process to determine the defendant’s character traits for purposes of sentencing. In Michigan, the Legislature has expressly provided for the preparation of a presentence investigation report in § 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
(1) Before sentencing any person charged with a felony, . . . the probation officer shall inquire into the antecedents, character, and circumstances of the person, and shall report in writing to the court. [MCL 771.14(1); MSA 28.1144(1).]
Implicit within § 14 is the option of having a psychiatric examination performed during the presentence investigation. MCL 771.14(7); MSA 28.1144(7). This is the type of examination which was performed in the present case.
Deciding the appropriate sentence for a convicted criminal is perhaps the most critical stage of a successful criminal prosecution. The information gathered during the state’s presentence investigation is usually heavily relied on by the sen-*288fencing judge, hence its importance cannot be overemphasized.7
In Estelle, the Supreme Court held that the prosecution’s use of certain psychiatric testimony at the sentencing phase of the defendant’s murder trial violated his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights. In that case, the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder in Texas and was sentenced to death. At the time of the defendant’s trial, Texas law required two jury proceedings to impose the death penalty: one to decide guilt and one to determine the penalty. Following conviction in the guilt phase, the state had the burden of proof on three questions in the penalty phase. If the jury answered the questions affirmatively, the judge was bound to impose the death penalty. Of these three inquiries, the one at issue in Estelle was the defendant’s future dangerousness. The examination which produced the objectionable information was a pretrial competency examination which had been routinely ordered by the judge because the defendant faced the death penalty. The examining psychiatrist, however, was also called as a witness *289during the penalty phase where he testified extensively regarding the defendant’s sociopathic character and future dangerousness. The jury answered the "future dangerousness” question and the other two questions affirmatively, and the defendant was sentenced to death.
FIFTH AMENDMENT ISSUE
The Estelle Court held that because the psychiatric examination was used in determining the nature and severity of defendant’s sentence, his Fifth Amendment right attached at the examination:
The essence of this basic constitutional principle is "the requirement that the State which proposes to convict and punish an individual produce the evidence against him by the independent labor of its officers, not by the simple, cruel expedient of forcing it from his own lips.” [451 US 462.]
We agree with the defendant in the present case that he, too, had a Fifth Amendment right to remain silent at his presentence psychiatric examination. It is not relevant that the defendant’s examination occurred prior to trial in Estelle and after trial here. Both examinations were used in determining the severity of the defendant’s sentence, which was what the Estelle Court focused on:
Just as the Fifth Amendment prevents a criminal defendant from being made " 'the deluded instrument of his own conviction,’ ”... it protects him as well from being made the "deluded instrument” of his own execution.
We can discern no basis to distinguish between the guilt and penalty phases of respondent’s capital murder trial so far as the protection of the *290Fifth Amendment privilege is concerned. [451 US 462-463.]
The Estelle Court rejected the state’s argument that, like voice and handwriting exemplars, lineups, and blood samples, the defendant’s statements were not used for their testimonial content:
Dr. Grigson’s diagnosis, as detailed in his testimony, was not based simply on his observation of respondent. Rather, Dr. Grigson drew his conclusions largely from respondent’s account of the crime during their interview, and he placed particular emphasis on what he considered to be respondent’s lack of remorse. [451 US 464.]
As in Estelle, defendant’s statements in the present case were testimonial in nature. The examining psychologist relied on the content of defendant’s statements to draw several conclusions about him, including that he was prone to act out in an aggressive manner, and that he was a high social risk to the community.8_
*291The Estelle Court concluded that defendant Smith’s Fifth Amendment right had not been adequately protected because the defendant was not advised that the results of the competency examination would be later used by the state in seeking the death penalty:
The state trial judge, sua sponte, ordered a psychiatric evaluation of respondent for the limited, neutral purpose of determining his competency to stand trial, but the results of that inquiry were used by the State for a much broader objective that was plainly adverse to respondent. [451 US 465.]
Under the above circumstances, the Estelle Court held that defendant should have received warnings, pursuant to Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966), that he had a right to remain silent and that any statement he made could be used against him at a sentencing proceeding.
In Miranda, the Court was concerned with protecting a suspect’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination under "inherently compelling *292pressures,”9 and thus specified mandatory warnings to alert the suspect of his rights. At the time of a suspect’s arrest, he is without counsel, usually without knowledge of the precise limits of the potential charges he faces, and without knowledge of the information which the police have to implicate him in criminal activity. In these circumstances, and in light of the history showing frequent abuses of a prisoner’s rights, the Supreme Court in Miranda adopted a prophylactic rule: precise warnings of specific rights must be given and clear waivers of those rights obtained, before a prisoner can be interrogated. 384 US 475.
Relying on Miranda, the Estelle Court held:
[AJbsent other fully effective procedures, a person in custody must receive certain warnings before any official interrogation, including that he has a "right to remain silent” and that "anything said can and will be used against the individual in court.”
The considerations calling for the accused to be warned prior to custodial interrogation apply with no less force to the pretrial psychiatric examination at issue here. [451 US 466-467. Emphasis added.]
Defendant asserts that the requirements of Estelle must be strictly followed in any psychiatric examination which is considered in determining the severity of a defendant’s sentence. However, the emphasized portions of the above quotation, and the following footnote, suggest otherwise:
Of course, we do not hold that the same Fifth Amendment concerns are necessarily presented by all types of interviews and examinations that *293might be ordered or relied upon to inform a sentencing determination. [451 US 469, n 13.]
Defendant’s examination constituted custodial interrogation in one sense because he was being questioned while in custody. However, such questioning was not tantamount to the custodial interrogation which troubled the Miranda Court, where defendants were subjected to "incommunicado interrogation ... in a police-dominated atmosphere” without being warned of their rights to remain silent or to the assistance of counsel. 384 US 445. In the present case, defendant was questioned by the psychologist after having had the assistance of counsel throughout trial. We can presume that the defendant’s attorney had already counseled defendant and informed him of his right against self-incrimination. Similarly, the considerations which led the Estelle Court to find that "inherently compelling pressures”10 were at work on the defendant in that case are absent here.* 11
First, the information in Estelle was obtained during a competency examination. That type of examination is ordinarily not used to provide information for sentencing, and in fact the defendant in Estelle was not informed that his competency examination would be used for such purpose. Here, the information was obtained from a presentence examination which was clearly conducted to evaluate the defendant’s character exclusively for sentencing purposes. Moreover, at the examination the psychologist preceded the evaluation by reading the following information to defendant:
I am one of several examiners of the Psychiatric Clinic of Recorder’s Court who will examine and *294talk to you. We must give to the Court a report of our findings and possibly an option or a recommendation.
The Clinic serves only as an adviser to the Court and cannot determine the outcome of your case.
The examiner then asked defendant whether he understood what he had been told and whether he was willing to proceed. Defendant responded "Yes” to both questions.12 Thus, unlike the defendant in Estelle, defendant here knew as he spoke what his answers would be used for.
Second, the examination in Estelle was used by the state to prove one of the three elements required to obtain the death penalty. The Estelle Court repeatedly focused on Texas’ unique system and the fact that the defendant faced the death penalty.13 In the present case, the information *295appeared to be used generally to reach a fair prison sentence. There were no elements which the state needed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, which the examination might have helped it do.
The real teaching of Miranda, and Estelle’s application of it, is not a rigid formula, but that the Fifth Amendment must be protected.14 It would exalt form over substance to say under the facts of the present case that defendant’s Fifth Amendment right was violated. The examiner’s explanation of the purpose and potential use of the examination, and the inquiry whether defendant was willing to proceed, adequately protected that right.
We emphasize that the absence of uncounseled and coercive interrogations of the kind which called for precise warnings in Miranda and Estelle does not negate the continued existence of a Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. For example, no one would deny that, under the Fifth Amendment, a defendant on trial has a right to remain silent. Yet it has never been argued that failure to give explicit Miranda warnings before he testifies would require reversal of a testifying defendant’s conviction. Therefore, while we conclude that precise Miranda warnings were not required in the present case to protect defendant’s right against self-incrimination, we nonetheless hold that such right attaches at a court-ordered psychiatric examination used for sentencing purposes.15
SIXTH AMENDMENT ISSUE
As stated earlier, we did not grant leave on the *296Sixth Amendment issue raised by defendant. Assuming arguendo that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel recognized in Estelle applies to the present defendant, we find no violation of that right.
In Powell v Alabama, 287 US 45, 57; 53 S Ct 55; 77 L Ed 158 (1932), the United States Supreme Court held that a defendant has a Sixth Amendment right to counsel at all critical stages of criminal proceedings. The Estelle Court determined that the defendant had a Sixth Amendment right to the assistance of counsel before submitting to the psychiatric examination:
[R]espondent’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel clearly had attached when Dr. Grigson examined him at the Dallas County Jail, and their interview proved to be a "critical stage” of the aggregate proceedings against respondent. [451 US 470.]
The Court clarified in a footnote that it was not holding that the defendant had a right under the Sixth Amendment to have counsel present during the examination:
[T]he issue before us is whether a defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to the assistance of counsel is abridged when the defendant is not given prior opportunity to consult with counsel about his participation in the psychiatric examination. . . .
Respondent does not assert, and the Court of Appeals did not find, any constitutional right to have counsel actually present during the examination. In fact, the Court of Appeals recognized that "an attorney present during the psychiatric interview could contribute little and might seriously disrupt the examination.” [Smith v Estelle] 602 F2d [694], 708 [CA 5, 1979], [451 US 470, n 14. Emphasis added.]
The Estelle Court held that the defendant was *297not afforded his right to counsel16 because his attorneys were not notified in advance that the pretrial competency examination would also encompass the issue of their client’s future dangerousness:
[Respondent was denied the assistance of his attorneys in making the significant decision of [sic] whether to submit to the examination and to what end the psychiatrist’s findings could be employed. [451 US 471.]
In fact, there was some doubt that counsel had ever been informed of the competency examination itself. 451 US 471, n 15.
In the present case, defendant asserts that he and his counsel were not given sufficient notice of the presentence examination and, hence, that defendant was denied assistance of counsel prior to participating in the examination. Defendant’s claim is not supported by the record, however. The trial court ordered the examination in the presence of defendant and his counsel. The examination was held nearly two weeks later. This period of time afforded defendant ample opportunity to consult with his counsel prior to the examination. If defendant did not recognize such opportunity, it can be assumed, at the very least, that his counsel did. The facts which prompted the Estelle Court to find that the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right was violated are not presented here. Further, we decline to review defendant’s vague assertion that he had a right to have counsel present in the examining room. He relies exclusively on Estelle *298in asserting that right, and, as noted above, Estelle did not reach that issue.17
While we affirm the Court of Appeals result, we do not adopt its rationale.18 Defendant’s conviction is affirmed.
*299Levin, Brickley, and Archer, JJ., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
Although this opinion and Estelle use the term "psychiatric” examination, our holding also applies to presentence examinations performed by psychologists and other mental health professionals.
In Michigan, see MCL 330.2020 et seq.; MSA 14.800(1020) et seq. See also MCR 6.106.
In Michigan, see MCL 768.20a; MSA 28.1043(1).
MCL 330.2028(3); MSA 14.800(1028)(3).
MCL 768.20a(4); MSA 28.1043(1)(4). See People v Martin, 386 Mich 407, 428; 192 NW2d 215 (1971). For the Sixth Circuit’s treatment of a Fifth Amendment claim under Estelle in the context of a sanity examination, see Watters v Hubbard, 725 F2d 381, 384 (CA 6, 1984).
MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5). See, e.g., People v Jacobs, 138 Mich App 273, 276; 360 NW2d 593 (1984).
See, generally, 3 ABA Standards for Criminal Justice (2d ed), Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, 18-5.1 to 18-5.6, pp 18-332 to 18-418.
See also People v Lee, 391 Mich 618, 635; 218 NW2d 655 (1974) (the presentence report is widely regarded as an effective method of supplying information essential to an informed sentencing decision); People v Brown, 393 Mich 174, 181; 224 NW2d 38 (1974) (a convicted felon may not waive the mandatory use of a presentence report at sentencing); People v Triplett, 407 Mich 510, 515; 287 NW2d 165 (1980) (a defendant must be resentenced when a reasonably updated presentence report is not used); People v Grier, 152 Mich App 129, 134; 393 NW2d 551 (1986), lv den 425 Mich 878 (1986) (a defendant has a right to be resentenced when his sentence is based upon inaccurate information in the presentence report); People v Harvey, 146 Mich App 631, 636; 381 NW2d 779 (1985) (a sentencing court must respond to a defendant’s allegations of inaccuracies in a presentence report); People v McKeever, 123 Mich App 533, 541; 332 NW2d 596 (1983), lv den 417 Mich 1100.9 (1983) (a defendant may not be sentenced on the basis of the presentence report prepared for another offense).
It has been suggested, in discussing pretrial evaluations, that to consider statements made during clinical evaluations to be nontestimonial is "to deny the reality of the clinical endeavor”:
Certain aspects of the clinical evaluation are clearly "nontestimonial” as that term has been defined by the Supreme Court. For example, part of the clinical assessment may consist of a physical examination. The clinical opinion may also rely, to some extent, on the defendant’s mannerisms, facial expressions, attention span, speech patterns, and other behavioral characteristics that manifest themselves during the evaluation. These physical traits are analagous [sic] to writing or voice exemplars, and compelled disclosure would probably not be considered violative of the Fifth Amendment even if they proved incriminating.
The bulk of the typical clinical assessment, however, consists of verbal communication between the evaluator and the defendant.
[E]ven when his goal is solely to reach conclusions about the *291defendant’s mental state, the clinician depends upon the meaning of the defendant’s statements, not upon their form. ... To use the Court’s wording in Estelle, almost every clinical evaluation relies heavily on the "substance” of the defendant’s statements. To exempt the defendant’s verbal disclosures during a pretrial clinical evaluation from Fifth Amendment scrutiny on the ground that they are nontestimonial would be to deny the reality of the clinical endeavor. [Slobogin, Estelle v Smith: The constitutional contours of the forensic evaluation, 31 Emory L J 71, 85-87 (1982).]
The above comments are even more apt regarding the type of evaluation in the present case. Examinations used to gather information which will be considered in imposing a sentence are more testimonial and potentially incriminating in nature than statements used solely to evaluate a defendant’s mental state.
384 US 467.
451 US 467.
Compare Jones v Cardwell, 686 F2d 754, 756 (CA 9, 1982).
There is no tape recording or transcript of the examination. In the appendix to its brief, the people provided a copy of the Recorder’s Court psychiatric clinic "Consent to Examination” form, which was used at defendant’s evaluation. Defendant has not challenged its accuracy.
A split of authority is developing at the federal level regarding Estelle’s applicability to noncapital sentencing proceedings. See n 6 of the dissent. The Sixth Circuit has not yet addressed that question, however. While the fact that the defendant faced the death penalty certainly heightened the Estelle Court’s concern over his Fifth Amendment right, we conclude that the right against self-incrimination recognized in Estelle also exists at noncapital sentencing evaluations. See, e.g., note, Fifth Amendment and compelled psychiatric examinations: Implications of Estelle v Smith, 50 Geo Wash L R 275, 295 (1982):
Although the Supreme Court did not venture beyond the context of a capital sentencing proceeding in Estelle, lower courts may justifiably rely upon Estelle in applying the fifth amendment to other sentencing procedures. Regardless of the crime committed, the state should be required to warn the defendant that his disclosures to the psychiatrist may lead to a longer sentence. The defendant should not be compelled to acquiesce in the psychiatric examination. Moreover, the sentencing judge should not be able to draw an adverse inference from the defendant’s failure to cooperate with the psychiatrist. This limitation on the use of psychiatric examinations is apparent from Estelle.
The warnings mandated by Miranda in themselves are not of constitutional dimensions. Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433, 444; 94 S Ct 2357; 41 L Ed 2d 182 (1974).
Our holding today should not be read as diminishing the importance of receiving full Miranda warnings in situations which create the "inherently compelling pressures” discussed in Miranda and its progeny.
See Satterwhite v Texas, 486 US 249; 108 S Ct 1792; 100 L Ed 2d 284 (1988), where the Court adopted the harmless error rule of Chapman v California, 386 US 18; 87 S Ct 824; 17 L Ed 2d 705 (1967), for reviewing Sixth Amendment claims under Estelle.
But see, People v Martin, supra at 429, where the Court considered this question in the context of a sanity examination.
In addressing the present issues, the Court of Appeals did not cite Estelle, but simply referred to it as one of “the federal cases relied upon by defendant . . . .” The Court relied on three of its cases in contravening Estelle and holding that a psychiatric interview is not an adversarial proceeding at which a defendant’s Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights attach: People v Burton, 44 Mich App 732; 205 NW2d 873 (1973), lv den 389 Mich 795 (1973); People v Vroman, 148 Mich App 291; 384 NW2d 35 (1985); People v Murphy, 146 Mich App 724; 381 NW2d 798 (1985).
People v Burton was decided prior to Estelle, and thus the Court of Appeals reliance on it in evaluating defendant’s post-Estelle claims was of marginal value. To the extent Burton conflicts with our holding today, it is overruled.
People v Vroman does conflict with Estelle, which it fails to cite when rejecting Fifth and Sixth Amendment claims almost identical to the present ones:
As opposed to a sentencing conference, a defendant’s presentence interview is not an adversarial proceeding, but a diagnostic and rehabilitative procedure. Accordingly, the right against self-incrimination or to have counsel present does not attach. . . . Likewise, psychiatric evaluation is a diagnostic procedure to which we believe the privilege against self-incrimination is not applicable. The purpose of the privilege is to assure that no one will be convicted upon his own coerced confession. . . . We do not believe that the privilege should be extended to clinical interviews which take place after a guilty plea has been entered and which have a purpose quite different from the determination of guilt. [148 Mich App 297. Emphasis added.]
The above language from Vroman conflicts with Estelle and our present holding, and to that extent it is overruled.
People v Murphy supports the Court of Appeals result, but not its analysis. The Murphy Court did not reject the notion that a defendant is entitled to his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination at a psychiatric examination, as does the Court of Appeals here. In Murphy, the defendant was evaduated at a presentence postconviction psychiatric examination in the Recorder’s Court, where he was apparently given a consent form similar to the one used in the present case. The Murphy Court found that the Fifth Amendment rights existed, that the defendant was adequately informed of them, and that he waived them:
*299[D]efendant signed a waiver form and agreed to proceed with the full knowledge that the court could be informed of the results of the interview. Considering these facts, we feel that defendant voluntarily waived his rights and that the trial court properly considered the psychiatric report at sentencing. [146 Mich App 728.]
We reject that portion of Murphy which distinguished Estelle from its facts because Murphy’s psychiatric evaluation occurred after he was convicted.

=== CASE 9736911 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:43.791933+00 ===

Boyle, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
i
We are asked to decide in this case whether one who has been convicted of a crime and is remanded to undergo a psychiatric examination as part of the presentence investigation must be given Miranda1 warnings under the rule announced in Estelle v Smith, 451 US 454; 101 S Ct 1866; 68 L Ed 2d 359 (1981). While not included in this Court’s order granting leave to appeal, we are also asked to decide whether defendant possessed a Sixth Amendment right to the assistance of counsel during the presentence psychiatric examination. The majority concludes that while the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination attaches at a psychiatric examination when ordered as part of a presentence investigation, the defendant’s rights were adequately protected in this case, notwithstanding the absence of Miranda warnings.
I agree with the majority that no Fifth Amendment violation is present in this instance, and *300therefore concur in that result.2 Assuming arguendo that the Sixth Amendment advance notice to counsel requirement applies to presentence post-conviction psychiatric interviews, I . agree that the record does not support the claimed violation of that rule.
A
The United States Supreme Court has determined that the applicability of the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination turns on two subsidiary questions — the nature of the statement or admission involved, and the exposure to defendant that admission into evidence of the statement or admission would invite. In re Gault, 387 US 1, 49; 87 S Ct 1428; 18 L Ed 2d 527 (1967). Foregoing this analysis, however, the majority proceeds on the bare assumption that the defendant possessed a Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination at a psychiatric examination used for sentencing purposes, while openly acknowledging that the factors prompting the Smith Court to find the Fifth Amendment applicable in that case are not present here.
While I agree that a convicted defendant retains a Fifth Amendment privilege not to incriminate himself during a presentence interview with regard to activity unrelated to the crime for which he has been convicted,3 I cannot agree with the *301majority’s assumption that the Fifth Amendment applies to the use of a defendant’s interview with a psychiatrist bearing only on the potential range of a legislatively determined sentence. Unlike Smith, this is neither a situation in which the question of the penalty to be imposed was to be resolved in an evidentiary proceeding, nor a situation in which the defendant was compelled to submit to the psychiatric evaluation. Nor is this a situation like that in Smith, where the defendant was unaware that the psychiatrist was obtaining evidence that would be used against him for another purpose and in a different context than the limited function of the psychiatric examination. Indeed, as the Court noted in Smith, "if the application of Dr. Grigson’s findings had been confined to serving that function, no Fifth Amendment issue would have arisen,” Estelle v Smith, supra, p 465.
In my view, Smith does not compel the conclusion that the Fifth Amendment applies to statements made by a defendant in this context. While in an abstract sense it is correct to state that the Fifth Amendment is always applicable to prohibit "use by the prosecution in its case in chief only of *302compelled testimony,” Oregon v Elstad, 470 US 298, 306; 105 S Ct 1285; 84 L Ed 2d 222 (1985), the Court’s approach in Smith illustrates that the relevant inquiry requires an examination of the government’s obligation in the circumstances presented. Thus, the Court in Smith answered the question "whether the Fifth Amendment privilege is applicable in the circumstances of this case,” id., p 461, by looking to the use made of the statements and concluding that if the government uses compulsory examination to gather evidence against a defendant, the government is obligated to advise the defendant that he has "a constitutional right not to answer the question put to him.” Id., p 467.
Absent further guidance, the conclusion I draw from Smith is that while the protection of the Fifth Amendment privilege does not disappear merely because the respondent’s statements were uttered in the context of a presentence psychiatric examination, id., p 465, neither does the fact that defendant made statements during the psychological examination automatically include them within the reach of the Fifth Amendment. Whether the Fifth Amendment applies depends upon the nature of the statement or admission and the exposure which it invites. Thus, if the issue here were whether a psychologist who obtained information at a presentence examination that the defendant had admitted the commission of another crime could testify on the issue of guilt at the defendant’s trial for that crime, Smith might well compel the answer that the Fifth Amendment is applicable. In my judgment, however, Smith does not compel the conclusion that the Fifth Amendment applies to every postconviction interview.
*303B
In concluding that the Fifth Amendment applied to the facts presented in Smith, the Supreme Court looked to several distinct factors. First, the Court assessed the gravity of the decision to be made at the penalty phase of the prosecution and concluded that the Fifth Amendment was applicable at a capital-sentencing hearing.
Next, rejecting the state’s claim that defendant’s communications to Dr. Grigson were nontestimonial, the Smith Court considered the fact that the state, in seeking the death penalty, used as evidence detailed descriptions of statements made by defendant to the state’s psychiatrist during the course of a pretrial competency examination. These statements were offered to prove to the jury the defendant’s future dangerousness during the penalty phase of the proceeding. The Court viewed as dispositive the fact that "Dr. Grigson drew his conclusions largely from respondent’s account of the crime during their interview, and he placed particular emphasis on what he considered to be respondent’s lack of remorse,” 451 US 464. Because the prognosis as to defendant’s future dangerousness rested on the defendant’s own recitation of the details of the crime, and because these statements were used as direct evidence against the defendant during the penalty phase of the proceeding, the Fifth Amendment was implicated.
Finally, the Court acknowledged "the[] distinct circumstances” of the case, 451 US 466, noting that the trial judge, sua sponte, had ordered the psychiatric examination.
By contrast in the instant case, as the majority properly notes, the facts found by the Smith Court to mandate the observance of Fifth Amendment rights are simply inapposite to those found here.
First, we do not operate under a bifurcated trial system in which the state must prove certain facts beyond a reasonable doubt to secure a desired *304sentence in a contested adversarial context.4 Thus, it cannot be said that information given by the defendant provided evidence against him that reduced the government’s burden to shoulder the load.
Second, the purpose of the instant examination was limited to assistance in the sentencing decision. By contrast, as the Court observed in Smith, Dr. Grigson’s examination had not been restricted to serving the neutral purpose of determining defendant’s competency to stand trial, in which case, "no Fifth Amendment issue would have arisen.” Id., p 465. However, "[w]hen Dr. Grigson went beyond simply reporting to the court on the issue of competency and testified for the prosecution at the penalty phase on the critical issue of respondent’s future dangerousness, his role changed and became essentially like that of an agent of the State recounting unwarned statements made in a postarrest custodial setting.” Id., p 467. In this case, Mr. Crenshaw’s examination contained no reference to the details of the instant crime or any other criminal activity by defendant.5 Rather, his evaluation served only as a neutral psychological profile based on the defendant’s family background, school, and work history, and the results of a battery of psychological testing. Mr. Crenshaw did not become an agent for the state securing disclosures to be used against the defen*305dant for a purpose of which the defendant was unaware. His only function was to provide his findings to the trial judge and this was the only use made of his report.
Finally, the defendant was not compelled to submit to this examination, and was not subject to any legal sanctions, such as the threat of contempt, had he chosen to remain silent. The very fact that the defendant was informed of the examination by the trial judge during formal proceedings, was provided with the Recorder’s Court "Consent to Examination” form explaining the purpose of the examination and the role of the examiner, and was asked whether he understood and was willing to proceed prior to his participation underscores the noncoercive nature of the examination. The defendant’s interview was not compelled and thus is not within the Smith proscription that a defendant may not be compelled to respond to a psychiatrist if his statements can be used against him at a capital sentencing proceeding.
Underscoring the importance of the purpose to which compelled disclosures are ultimately put, the Court has recently observed in Buchanan v Kentucky, 483 US 402, 425, n 21; 107 S Ct 2906; 97 L Ed 2d 336 (1987), that if upon being adequately advised, a defendant expresses his desire to refuse to answer any questions, a pretrial competency examination can still proceed "upon the condition that the results would be applied solely for that purpose,” cf. Estelle v Smith, supra, p 468. Thus, as the Court observed in Smith, the proper conduct and use of competency examinations are not frustrated, but the state must make its case on future dangerousness in some other way.
The clear import of those statements for the case at hand is that Smith precludes the use of *306statements "compelled” for one purpose as evidence in another proceeding against the defendant. The Fifth Amendment right in question is the right to decline to undergo a custodial inquiry in which defendant’s statements will be used for incriminatory purposes. It should follow that the statements in issue here which were obtained for a valid purpose and used solely for that nonevidentiary purpose do not implicate the Fifth Amendment.
It thus appears that the rule of Smith that the Fifth Amendment applies to preclude the use of compelled disclosures as evidence against a defendant is simply inapplicable in this instance. The facts leading that Court to conclude that the Fifth Amendment was applicable are not found here. The majority has offered no justification for the conclusion that the defendant had a Fifth Amendment privilege in this circumstance.
An examination of the cases dealing with Smith claims resulting from postverdict, presentence interviews or examinations reveals that only in the instance where a state agent sought a confession concerning additional criminal activity for which the defendant might have been prosecuted was the Fifth Amendment privilege deemed applicable. See Jones v Cardwell, 686 F2d 754, 756 (CA 9, 1982) (defendant was instructed by the court that he had no choice but to answer a probation officer’s questions); Arnett v Ricketts, 665 F Supp 1437, 1444 (D Ariz, 1987) (Miranda warnings were required before questioning concerning details of other crimes).
It is clear from the record here that the defendant was not questioned concerning other crimes for which he might have been prosecuted. His complaint centers on the trial judge’s consideration of the conclusion contained in the psychiatric *307report that defendant demonstrated an assaultive personality. The rule found in Jones and Arnett is, therefore, not applicable to this appeal.6
Smith does not command us to constitutionalize the sentencing process by applying Miranda Fifth Amendment jurisprudence to all presentence information received by the trial judge. In Smith, the defendant was examined only to determine his competence, but the state later used the psychiatrist’s testimony at the penalty phase of the proceedings. The Court held "these distinct circumstances,” 451 US 466, which included the fact that the defendant had not raised any issue of competency and had been given no notice that the results could be used against him at the sentencing phase, had denied the defendant his Fifth Amendment rights.
The Court’s holding was specific and limited:
A criminal defendant, who neither initiates a psychiatric evaluation nor attempts to introduce any psychiatric evidence, may not be compelled to respond to a psychiatrist if his statements can be used against him at a capital sentencing proceeding. [Id., p 468.]
Moreover, the Court carefully noted that it was not holding that the same "Fifth Amendment concerns are necessarily presented by all types of *308interviews and examinations that might be ordered or relied upon to inform a sentencing determination,” id., p 469, n 13.
Smith does not dictate the result in this case.
ii
Assuming, arguendo, that the defendant enjoyed a Fifth Amendment privilege during the psychiatric evaluation, I cannot agree with the majority conclusion that defendant’s rights were not violated. I would not reach the question whether the full panoply of the prophylactic warnings required by Miranda must be given in this situation. I would conclude without reaching that question that if the Fifth Amendment is applicable to the use of a postsentence psychological interview for sentencing purposes, defendant would at a minimum, be entitled to a warning of his right to remain silent, failing which a resentence must be ordered.
It is clear on this record that the defendant’s statements were not involuntary as that term is historically defined in Fifth Amendment jurisprudence.7 The defendant was informed by the sen*309tencing judge while in the presence of counsel that he was to undergo a presentence investigation and psychiatric examination. By contrast, in the typical Miranda situation, the defendant is not afforded the opportunity to consult with counsel prior to the custodial interrogation. See United States ex rel Bachman v Hardy, 637 F Supp 1273 (ND Ill, 1986). It is the inability to seek the advice of counsel, to prepare for the possibility that the examiner may attempt to elicit privileged information, coupled with the pressures of the custodial environment, that triggers the need for the Miranda warnings. In this case, however, while defendant was obviously in custody at the time of the presentence examination, he was afforded ample notice and nearly two weeks to consult with counsel prior to his participation. Further, defendant was not under court order to cooperate with the examining psychiatrist, yet freely chose to do so after reviewing the "Consent to Examination” form prior to the examination which explained the purpose of the examination and asked whether he was willing to proceed.
Thus, the defendant was under no threat of legal sanction such as perjury or contempt for his failure to participate. When asked to participate, defendant surely had to weigh the possibility that his statements would aid the examiner in formulating an opinion as to his character, which in turn would become part of the presentence report for the sentencing judge to review. However, when offered the option to forego the examination, defendant freely chose to proceed. Defendant’s statements were voluntary and not compelled in viola*310tion of the Fifth Amendment. See United States v Barragan, 793 F2d 1255, 1260 (CA 11, 1986); United States v Jones, 640 F2d 284, 288 (CA 10, 1981).
This analysis does not end the inquiry, however. If the Fifth Amendment applies and the examination at issue constituted "custodial interrogation,”8 the question for resolution is whether the failure to provide the prophylactic rules developed to protect the right requires exclusion of the report at sentencing. The majority proceeds, at least implicitly, on the assumption that the psychological examination was custodial interrogation, yet finds no violation of defendant’s rights because the "inherently compelling pressures” typical of those prompting Miranda warnings are not found in this case. If the majority’s assumption is true concerning the custodial character of the psychological examination, I would conclude that defendant’s rights were not adequately protected.
To be sure, the United States Supreme Court has observed that Miranda warnings are not of constitutional dimension, but rather a means to protect fundamental rights.9 The Court has, how*311ever, albeit in dicta, recently observed in the context of evaluating rights attendant to a competency hearing when the trial judge has doubts about a defendant’s mental condition, see Pate v Robinson, 383 US 375; 86 S Ct 836; 15 L Ed 2d 815 (1966), that "the Fifth and Sixth Amendments would mandate that [defendant] be allowed to consult with counsel and be informed of his right to remain silent.” Buchanan v Kentucky, supra, 483 US 402, n 21. In this case it is clear that defendant was afforded the opportunity to consult with counsel, but it is equally clear that he was not told of his right to remain silent. Were I satisfied that the Fifth Amendment applied to the examination at issue and that the examination constituted custodial interrogation, as the majority plainly assumes, it would appear that the defendant’s sentence should be vacated notwith*312standing the precautions taken prior to the questioning.
in
Defendant further claims that Estelle v Smith, supra, requires us to conclude that his Sixth Amendment right to the assistance of counsel was violated. Estelle v Smith establishes that defense counsel must be given advance notice of a pretrial competency hearing where the results may be used as evidence on the issue of future dangerousness in a death-penalty proceeding. Defendant in this case acknowledges that counsel was given actual advance notice of the presentence psychiatric interview. Assuming that the Sixth Amendment advance notice holding in Smith applies to a postconviction presentence interview, I agree with the majority that defendant has failed to present any Sixth Amendment claim of error on this record.
Specifically, the defendant here contends that the Sixth Amendment mandates a) that the defendant and his trial counsel be informed that "defendant would be interviewed by a member of the clinic” and b) that counsel be present during the interview. As to the former contention, the defendant does not claim that counsel did not receive actual advance notice that an evaluation would be made. The defendant focuses on the adequacy of notice, asserting that counsel was not advised when the defendant would be interviewed or that the report would be based on a personal interview with the defendant, rather than a profile drawn from other sources. Because the defendant in this case is not claiming that counsel was not given advance notice that the examination was to be conducted, but, rather, contests the adequacy of the notice, we have no occasion to resolve the *313question as to whether the Sixth Amendment Smith holding applies in this case.10
I would conclude that, assuming arguendo that defendant enjoyed a Sixth Amendment right to advance notice to counsel of the examination,* 11 no violation of such right occurred. The defendant and his counsel received actual notice of the examination, and it appears that the Sixth Amendment does not require counsel’s presence during the examination.12
CONCLUSION
I agree with the majority that the defendant has failed to demonstrate a denial of either his Fifth or Sixth Amendment rights. I disagree with the majority to the extent it assumes that the Fifth *314Amendment right against self-incrimination is applicable in this context. I also agree that we need not reach the merits of the question whether the Sixth Amendment requires advance notice to counsel of a presentence psychiatric examination.
I would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Riley, C.J., and Griffin, J., concurred with Boyle, J.
384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966).
Defendant has also attempted to raise claims under Const 1963, art 1, §§ 17 and 20. While observing that these claims extend outside this Court’s order granting leave to appeal, we also note that defendant has not offered authority to support the argument that a different result should obtain under art 1, §§ 17 and 20 than under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments of the United States Constitution. Thus, we conclude that defendant’s appeal lacks an independent state ground and proceed to address his federal claims. Michigan v Long, 463 US 1032; 103 S Ct 3469; 77 L Ed 2d 1201 (1983).
In People v Den Uyl, 318 Mich 645; 29 NW2d 284 (1947), this Court *301found that the privilege against self-incrimination under Const 1908, art 2, § 16 protects a witness in a state proceeding from testifying to facts which could lead to incrimination in a pending federal prosecution. Although preceding the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Malloy v Hogan, 378 US 1; 84 S Ct 1489; 12 L Ed 2d 653 (1964), which ruled the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination applicable to the states, DenUyl has been viewed as establishing that the privilege against self-incrimination applies when an appeal remains pending as to a conviction to which the statement would relate. See People v Giacalone, 399 Mich 642, 644, n 3; 250 NW2d 492 (1977); People v Lindsay, 69 Mich App 720, 722-723; 245 NW2d 343 (1976); People v St Onge, 63 Mich App 16, 18; 233 NW2d 874 (1975); People v Thomas, 55 Mich App 368, 370; 222 NW2d 320 (1974).
Counsel for the defendant does not contend that the defendant made statements during the interview regarding the crime he had been convicted of, and we therefore have no occasion to consider whether the defendant retained a Fifth Amendment privilege as to the crime of which he had already been convicted.
Further, we do not have capital punishment in this state, thus distancing the Smith rationale. The majority concludes that the Smith holding applies to noncapital proceedings. Ante, p 294, n 13. The courts have split on whether to limit Smith to capital sentencing cases, see, e.g., Baumann v United States, 692 F2d 565, 576 (CA 9, 1982); United States v Jones, 640 F2d 284, 288 (CA 10, 1981); cf. United States v Chitty, 760 F2d 425, 432 (CA 2, 1985).
There has here been no allegation and no showing that the examining psychologist employed statements taken from defendant concerning the details of the crime when he compiled his evaluation for insertion in the presentence report to the trial judge.
The Ninth Circuit soundly rejected this claim in Baumann v United States, 692 F2d 565 (CA 9, 1982). In Baumann, the defendant argued that an uncounseled interview with a probation officer for the purpose of constructing a presentence report constituted custodial interrogation requiring Miranda warnings. Rejecting the Smith analysis as factually inapposite, the Baumann court concluded that there was nothing of record to enable the court to find that the presentence interview in that case, or presentence interviews in general, "entail pressures at all similar to those 'which the Miranda Court found so inherently coercive as to require its holdings.’ ” 692 F2d 577. To do so, the court found, "would be to apply a principle 'broader than that required to implement the policy of Miranda itself.’ ” Id.
In Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433, 441; 94 S Ct 2357; 41 L Ed 2d 182 (1974), the Court explained:
Before Miranda the principal issue in these cases was not whether a defendant had waived his privilege against compulsory self-incrimination but simply whether his statement was "voluntary.” In state cases the Court applied the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, examining the circumstances of interrogation to determine whether the processes were so unfair or unreasonable as to render a subsequent confession involuntary. See, e.g., Brown v Mississippi, 297 US 278 [56 S Ct 461; 80 L Ed 682] (1936); Chambers v Florida, 309 US 227 [60 S Ct 472; 84 L Ed 2d 716] (1940); White v Texas, 310 US 530 [60 S Ct 1032; 84 L Ed 1342] (1940); Payne v Arkansas, 356 US 560 [78 S Ct 844; 2 L Ed 2d 975] (1958); Haynes v Washington, 373 US 503 [83 S Ct 1336; 10 L Ed 2d 513] (1963). See also 3 Wigmore, Evidence (Chadbourn rev), § 815 et seq. *309Where the State’s actions offended the standards of fundamental fairness under the Due Process Clause, the State was then deprived of the right to use the resulting confessions in court.
It should be observed that there is an unargued and unresolved issue in this case whether the psychological interview was custodial interrogation and, if so, whether defendant made any inculpatory or exculpatory statements which the prosecution used against him absent Miranda warnings.
In Michigan v Tucker, supra, pp 438-439, the Court concluded that incomplete Miranda warnings did not deprive the defendant of his Fifth Amendment privilege. In reply to custodial police questioning which had not included the required Miranda warning that defendant would be furnished counsel free of charge, defendant gave the police the name of an individual he had allegedly been with at the time of the crime. When contacted by the police, this person said defendant had left him earlier in the evening on the night of the rape, and provided the police with admissions made to him by the defendant. At trial defendant’s own statements taken during interrogation were excluded, but the witness whose identity had been learned during the interview was allowed to testify that defendant had told him that the scratches on his face had been made by a "widow woman” who lived the next block over. As described by the Court, the issue was whether
*311proper regard for the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination requires, with limited exceptions not applicable here, that all evidence derived solely from statements made without full Miranda warnings be excluded at a subsequent criminal trial. . . . [W]e believe that the question thus presented is best examined in two separate parts. We will therefore first consider whether the police conduct complained of directly infringed upon respondent’s right against compulsory self-incrimination or whether it instead violated only the prophylactic rules developed to protect that right. We will then consider whether the evidence derived from this interrogation must be excluded.
The Court noted that the Fifth Amendment right against compelled disclosure had been given broad scope, but concluded that the facts of the case as compared to the historical circumstances underlying the privileges "strongly indicate[] that the police conduct here did not deprive respondent of his privilege against compulsory self-incrimination as such, but rather failed to make available to him the full measure of procedural safeguards associated with that right since Miranda.” Id., p 444. The Court concluded that the respondent’s statements could hardly be termed involuntary as that term had been defined in its decisions and also observed "[additionally, there were no legal sanctions, such as the threat of contempt, which could have been applied to respondent had he chosen to remain silent. He was simply not exposed to 'the cruel trilemma of self accusation, perjury or contempt.’ ” Id., p 445.
The wisdom of the traditional view that the Court does not resolve constitutional issues unnecessary to a decision, People v Adams, 430 Mich 679, 699; 425 NW2d 437 (1988), is particularly apropos here; the Sixth Amendment issue was not the subject of the order granting leave, and neither brief undertakes any significant analysis as to whether the Smith holding that the defense counsel must be given advance notice of such an examination applies, or whether, if error occurred, it was harmful. Satterwhite v Texas, 486 US 249; 108 S Ct 1792; 100 L Ed 2d 284 (1988). The prosecution appears to concede the issue, and the defendant’s brief does not dispute that notice was given. Having been informed of the purpose the examination would serve, "It can be assumed — and there are no allegations to the contrary, — ” that defense counsel consulted with the defendant about the nature of the examination, Buchanan v Kentucky, supra, 483 US 402.
We note that this Court has never held that a criminal defendant enjoys the right to the assistance of counsel during postconviction proceedings. In People v Gonyea, 421 Mich 462; 365 NW2d 136 (1984), three members of the Court found that the defendant possessed a right to counsel under Const 1963, art 1, § 20, during postsentencing proceedings.
See United States v Byers, 239 US App DC 1; 740 F2d 1104 (1984); Baumann v United States, n 6 supra at 578; People v Daniels, 149 Mich App 602, 609; 386 NW2d 609 (1986); People v Vroman, 148 Mich App 291, 297; 384 NW2d 35 (1985); People v Shively, 45 Mich App 658, 664-665; 206 NW2d 808 (1973); People v Burton, 44 Mich App 732, 734-735; 205 NW2d 873 (1973). See also anno: Right of accused in criminal prosecution to presence of counsel at court-appointed or -approved psychiatric examination, 3 ALR4th 910, 920-925.

=== CASE 2207906 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.600445+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 310 (1964)
DECOTO SCHOOL DISTRICT OF ALAMEDA COUNTY, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
M. & S. TILE COMPANY, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 21073.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Mar. 4, 1964.
LeRoy A. Broun and Bernard M. King for Defendant and Appellant.
J. F. Coakley, District Attorney, Frank D. Parker, Assistant District Attorney, and James E. Jefferis, Deputy District Attorney for Plaintiff and Respondent.
MOLINARI, J.
Defendant in a condemnation action appeals from an order striking from its cost bill the item of $300 for attorney fees incurred in connection with a successful *312 appeal from a prior order of the court striking its cost bill for attorney's and appraiser's fees, upon the abandonment by plaintiff of the eminent domain proceedings pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 1255a.  [fn. 1] [1a] The question presented is whether the provisions of section 1255a,  [fn. 2] providing for an allowance of attorney's fees upon an abandonment of an eminent domain proceeding, include attorney fees incurred upon an appeal from an order retaxing such costs.
The case comes to us upon the following agreed statement of facts: On April 1, 1960, plaintiff filed an action in eminent domain seeking to condemn for public school purposes certain real property owned by defendant. On October 31, 1960, and within 40 days of the date set for pretrial conference, plaintiff filed a written notice of the abandonment of said action. Pursuant to stipulation of the parties a judgment of dismissal was entered on December 1, 1960. Thereafter, defendant filed a timely cost bill wherein it claimed $500 for an appraiser's fee and $1,500 for attorney fees. On December 5, 1960, plaintiff filed a motion to retax costs seeking to strike said items.  [fn. 3] The motion was granted and both items were stricken by the trial court from the cost bill. Defendant filed a notice of appeal from said order. After the filing of defendant's opening brief and plaintiff's reply brief, a stipulation was entered into between the parties providing for a reversal of the order appealed from insofar as it related to the items of costs claimed by defendant.  [fn. 4] Following the issuance of the *313 remittitur, defendant filed with the trial court a memorandum of costs and disbursements on appeal which included additional attorney fees claimed under section 1255a in the amount of $300 for services rendered subsequent to the hearing on the aforesaid motion to retax costs and including services on the appeal from the order retaxing costs. Thereafter, plaintiff moved to retax said sum of $300 and to strike it from the cost bill on appeal. A hearing was thereupon had, on April 4, 1962, upon the original motion to retax costs and upon the motion to retax the costs on appeal.  [fn. 5] Pursuant to said hearing the trial court taxed the attorney's fees on the original cost bill at $1,250, and granted the motion to retax the costs on appeal by striking said item of claimed attorney fees in the sum of $300. No appeal was taken from the order taxing the attorney's fees at $1,250. The instant appeal is solely from the order striking the item of $300 from the cost bill on appeal.
[2] It is well settled that section 1255a permits attorney's fees to be allowed for services rendered in connection with the proposed taking, whether those services are rendered before or after the filing of the action, and whether the eminent domain proceeding is abandoned prior or subsequent to trial. (La Mesa-Spring Valley School Dist. v. Otsuka, 57 Cal. 2d 309, 315-318 [19 Cal. Rptr. 479, 369 P.2d 7]; City of Inglewood v. O. T. Johnson Corp., 113 Cal. App. 2d 587, 591 [248 P.2d 536]; People v. Thompson, 5 Cal. App. 2d 668, 670-671 [43 P.2d 606]; City of Los Angeles v. Clay, 126 Cal.App. *314 465, 468 [14 P.2d 926].)  [fn. 6] [3] While section 1255a places no limitation upon the extent of the expenses recoverable for legal services,  [fn. 7] such services must be of the type reasonably necessary to the defense of the action and the protection of the defendant's interests at the trial. (See La Mesa-Spring Valley School Dist. v. Otsuka, supra, pp. 315-318; City of Inglewood v. O. T. Johnson Corp., supra, at p. 591.)
In Inglewood the trial court refused to tax as costs the outlay of the appellants for counsel fees in prosecuting a proceeding in the District Court of Appeal to review and annul the action of the superior court in making its orders for the immediate possession of the property to be condemned. The reviewing court rejected the contention of the respondent that the proceeding for the writ of review was " 'entirely independent of and collateral to' " the condemnation proceeding and therefore the expense of such phase of the litigation cannot be recovered under section 1255a. (P. 591.) The appellate court held that the respondent's demand for immediate possession was "part and parcel of the condemnation action" and "an integral part of the proceeding." (P. 591.)
In Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., 217 Cal. App. 2d 678 [32 Cal. Rptr. 288], we recently held that the motion to tax costs made pursuant to section 1255a is a part and a continuation of the original eminent domain proceeding. We there noted that the purpose of section 1255a is to recompense the defendant for expenses which he is impelled to incur by reason of the plaintiff's failure to carry the proceeding through to conclusion, thereby depriving the defendant of any award for his property. (Citing City of Inglewood v. O. T. Johnson Corp., supra.)
[4] We are satisfied that the statute contemplates that a defendant be reimbursed for reasonable attorney fees incurred not only in the preparation for the trial and his services during trial, but also for services necessarily incident to the accomplishment of the statutory objectives. In our opinion, the letter and spirit of section 1255a is to make the *315 defendant whole for the reasonable attorney fees incurred by him in connection with the defense of an eminent domain action which the condemner has voluntarily abandoned. (See County of Los Angeles v. Hale, 165 Cal. App. 2d 22, 27-28 [331 P.2d 166]; Torrance Unified School Dist. v. Alwag, 145 Cal. App. 2d 596, 599-600 [302 P.2d 881]; City of Inglewood v. O. T. Johnson Corp., supra, p. 591.) [5] The award of costs and disbursements, including attorney fees, under section 1255a is an incident of the judgment of dismissal. (Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., supra, at pp. 696-698.) Such costs and disbursements, must, under section 1255a be established by the filing by the defendant of a memorandum of his items thereof. [1b] Certainly, section 1255a contemplates that a defendant will take every reasonable and necessary step to establish such costs and disbursements and to protect his rights thereto. If, in so protecting his rights he must take an appeal, he should be reimbursed for the reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection therewith because such expense proximately and directly results from the plaintiff's action in abandoning the proceedings. Upon the same rationale he should be entitled to reasonable attorney fees in proceedings subsequent to the original motion to retax costs necessary to establish and perfect his rights to the costs and disbursements, including attorney fees, to which he is entitled under section 1255a. A contrary holding in the instant case would not make defendant whole, but would render him out of pocket to the extent of the reasonable attorney fees incurred on appeal and in the proceedings subsequent to the original motion to retax costs.
We are fortified in the conclusion reached by us by the holding in several cases dealing with costs on appeal from condemnation proceedings. [6] It is a basic rule in eminent domain proceedings that the party seeking condemnation should not only be required to pay his own costs, but all proper costs of the owner of the land incurred in good faith. (Heimann v. City of Los Angeles, 30 Cal. 2d 746, 752 [185 P.2d 597]; Sacramento & San Joaquin Drainage Dist. ex rel. State Reclamation Board v. Reed, 217 Cal. App. 2d 611, 612 [31 Cal. Rptr. 754]; City & County of San Francisco v. Collins, 98 Cal. 259, 262 [33 P. 56].) The rationale of this rule is that to require the defendant to pay his costs necessarily incidental to the trial of the issues would reduce the just compensation awarded by a sum equal to that paid by him for such costs. (See City & County of San Francisco v. Collins, supra, *316 at p. 262.) This rule has been applied to costs incurred after a successful appeal by the condemner (City of Stockton v. Vote, 76 Cal. App. 369, 408 [244 P. 609]; San Joaquin etc. Irr. Co. v. Stevinson, 165 Cal. 540, 541-542 [132 P. 1021]; Sacramento & San Joaquin Drainage Dist. ex rel. State Reclamation Board v. Reed, supra, at p. 613), as well as in cases where an unsuccessful appeal was taken by the landowner. (San Diego Land etc. Co. v. Neale, 88 Cal. 50, 67-68 [25 P. 977, 11 L.R.A. 604]; City of Oakland v. Pacific Coast Lumber etc. Co., 172 Cal. 332, 336-337 [156 P. 468, Ann.Cas. 1917E 259].) In San Diego, the landowner appealed from an order granting the condemning party a new trial. In affirming the order the Supreme Court held that the party seeking to condemn the land should pay all expenses attaching to the process. In Oakland, the landowner, to whom the jury's award of damages was not acceptable, appealed from the judgment and the order denying a motion for new trial. The judgment and order were affirmed by the Supreme Court. A subsequent motion to recall the remittitur providing that the respondent recover costs on appeal was denied on the ground that such provision was "in accord with the law. ..." (P. 337.)
[1c] We do not wish to be understood as holding that the rule that a landowner is entitled to his attorney fees on an appeal from an order denying the same or retaxing such fees in proceedings pursuant to section 1255a is an ironclad rule to which there can be no possible exception. It is conceivable that there can be cases wherein such an appeal might be unjustified so as to warrant the denial of attorney fees incurred on appeal. Moreover, while we would not depart from the philosophy that a landowner ought to be made whole where eminent domain proceedings are abandoned pursuant to section 1255a, we do not subscribe to the concept that he necessarily should be made whole according to his notions thereof or to the extent claimed by him.
The reasonableness of the sum of $300 for attorney fees in the instant case is not attacked by plaintiff. It does not appear from the record, moreover, that the reasonableness of such item was contested in the court below. [7] Although the burden of proof is upon the defendant to establish the costs which are objected to on a motion to retax (Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., supra, at p. 698; City of Los Angeles v. Abbott, 129 Cal. App. 144, 153 [18 P.2d 785]; Estate of Bauer, 59 Cal. App. 2d 161, 164 [138 P.2d 721]), if the items appear to be proper charges, the verified memorandum is prima facie evidence that the costs, expenses, and *317 services therein listed were necessarily incurred by the defendant (Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., supra, at p. 698; Port San Luis Harbor Dist. v. Port San Luis Transp. Co., 213 Cal. App. 2d 689, 696 [29 Cal. Rptr. 136]; Haydel v. Morton, 18 Cal. App. 2d 695, 696 [64 P.2d 954]), and the burden of showing that an item is unreasonable is upon the plaintiff. (Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., supra, at pp. 698-699; Wilson v. Nichols, 55 Cal. App. 2d 678, 682-683 [131 P.2d 596]; Von Goerlitz v. Turner, 65 Cal. App. 2d 425, 431-432 [150 P.2d 278].) [1d] Although the record on appeal does not include the cost bill in question, we may assume, in the absence of any contention or showing to the contrary by plaintiff, that such cost bill was in the form prescribed by section 1033 and that it was "verified by the oath of the party, or his attorney or agent, or by the clerk of his attorney" as therein provided.  [fn. 8] Accordingly, proper inclusion of the item of $300 for attorney fees on appeal, and in the proceedings subsequent to the original motion to retax costs, is prima facie evidence that such sum is reasonable and necessarily incurred in such proceedings, and in the absence of a showing by plaintiff that such sum is unreasonable, such amount must be charged and taxed to plaintiff.
[8] Plaintiff makes the contention in his brief on appeal that defendant's attorneys were employed on a contingent fee contract, and that therefore it was proper to strike the item of attorney fees from defendant's cost bill because since there is no award defendant is not liable for such fees. Respondent cites City of Long Beach v. O'Donnell, 91 Cal. App. 760 [267 P. 585], which applied this principle to the situation where the eminent domain proceedings were abandoned by the condemner. The answer to plaintiff's contention is that there is no evidence whatsoever in the record before us that defendant's attorneys were employed upon a contingent fee basis. Upon the record before us, and for the reasons hereinbefore stated, we are constrained to hold that the item of $300 attorney fees was properly chargeable in the cost bill in question, that such fees were necessarily incurred, and that such sum is reasonable for the services rendered. *318
The order is reversed with directions to the trial court to charge said sum of $300 to plaintiff and to tax the subject cost bill in such amount.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. An order taxing costs made after entry of judgment is a special order made after judgment from which an appeal will lie. (Code Civ. Proc.,  963; Lacey v. Bertone, 33 Cal. 2d 649, 654 [203 P.2d 755]; Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., 217 Cal. App. 2d 678, 711 [32 Cal. Rptr. 288].)
[fn. 2]  2. All statutory references are to the Code of Civil Procedure unless otherwise indicated.
[fn. 3]  3. At the time said motion was filed and heard  1255a, in pertinent part, read as follows: "Upon such abandonment, ... a judgment shall be entered dismissing the proceeding and awarding the defendants their costs and disbursements, which shall include all necessary expenses incurred in preparing for trial and reasonable attorney fees. These costs and disbursements, including expenses and attorney fees, may be claimed in and by a cost bill, to be prepared, served, filed and taxed as in civil actions; provided, however, ... that said costs and disbursements shall not include expenses incurred in preparing for trial where the said action is dismissed forty days prior to the time set for the trial of the said action."
[fn. 4]  4. Said stipulation reads as follows: " 'Pursuant to the stipulation of the parties hereto, the order of the trial court in the above entitled cause granting plaintiff's motion to retax costs is hereby reversed insofar as it relates to the items of costs claimed by appellants, and is remanded to the trial court for a decision not inconsistent with the opinion of the Supreme Court of the State of California in the case of LaMesa-Spring Valley School District v. Nobuo Otsuka, designated LA 26634. The remittitur is to issue forthwith.' "
[fn. 5]  5. Pending the appeal in the instant case from the order taxing costs,  1255a was amended, effective September 15, 1961, to provide insofar as pertinent to these proceedings as follows: "(c) ... a judgment shall be entered dismissing the proceeding and awarding the defendants their costs and disbursements, which shall include all necessary expenses incurred in preparing for trial and during trial and reasonable attorney fees. These costs and disbursements, including expenses and attorney fees, may be claimed in and by a cost bill, to be prepared, served, filed and taxed as in civil actions; provided, however, ... that said costs and disbursements shall not include expenses incurred in preparing for trial where the action is dismissed 40 days or more prior to the time set for the pretrial conference in the action or, if no pretrial conference is set, the time set for the trial of the action." (Underscoring indicates the additions made by the amendment.)
[fn. 6]  6. In La Mesa and Inglewood the action was abandoned prior to trial; in Thompson and Clay, subsequent to trial.
[fn. 7]  7. In La Mesa the Supreme Court recognized the distinction in section 1255a between "attorney fees" and "expenses incurred in preparing for trial," and noted that the former were not subject to the limitation that "expenses incurred in preparing for trial" cannot be recovered where the action is abandoned more than 40 days before the time set for either a pretrial conference or trial. (Pp. 313-314.)
[fn. 8]  8.  1255a provides that the items of costs and disbursements, including expenses and attorney fees, "may be claimed in and by a cost bill, to be prepared, served, filed and taxed as in civil actions," i.e., pursuant to  1033 which has to do with cost bills, generally, in civil actions after judgment. (See Oak Grove School Dist. v. City Title Ins. Co., supra, at p. 696.

=== CASE 9736912 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:49.698254+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice.
Gregory Allen Schwalk appeals from a judgment of conviction finding him guilty of being in actual physical control of a vehicle while having a blood alcohol concentration of at least .10 percent, in violation of Section 39-08-01(l)(a), N.D.C.C. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
On March 28,1987, .at approximately 2:30 a.m., a Fargo police officer found Schwalk slumped over the steering wheel of his pickup, which was parked on the side of the road with the engine running and the headlights on. After unsuccessfully attempting to wake Schwalk by tapping on the window, the officer opened the door and shook Schwalk until he awoke. The officer conducted field sobriety tests and arrested Schwalk. Schwalk was transported to a local hospital where a nurse drew a blood sample. The arresting officer mailed the sample to the State Toxicologist for testing.
Schwalk was convicted of being in actual physical control of a vehicle while having a blood alcohol content of at least .10 percent. The court rejected his contentions that the actual physical control statute does not apply to a sleeping or unconscious person and that the statute is void for vagueness. The trial court admitted the results of the blood test over Schwalk’s objection that the State had failed to lay an adequate foundation for its admission.
Schwalk raises the following issues on appeal:
I.May a person who is asleep or unconscious be convicted of being in “actual physical control” of a vehicle?
II.Is the actual physical control statute, Section 39-08-01(1), N.D.C.C., unconstitutionally vague?
III.Did the trial court err in admitting the blood test results?
I.
Section 39-08-01(l)(a) & (b), N.D.C.C., provides:
“39-08-01. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any other drugs or substances not to operate vehicle — Penalty.
“1. A person may not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle upon a highway or upon public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state if any of the following apply:
“a. That person has a blood alcohol concentration of at least ten one-hundredths of one percent by weight at the time of the performance of a chem*319ical test within two hours after the driving.
“b. That person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor.”
Schwalk asserts that the statute does not apply to a person who is behind the wheel of a vehicle but is asleep or unconscious.
We recently rejected a similar argument in Buck v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, 425 N.W.2d 370 (N.D.1988). Our opinion in Buck clearly points out that one may be in “actual physical control” of a vehicle under the statute even though he is asleep or unconscious when found by the officer:
“ ‘The purpose of the “actual physical control” offense is a preventive measure.’ State v. Schuler, 243 N.W.2d 367, 370 (N.D.1976). ‘[A]n intoxicated person seated behind the steering wheel of a motor vehicle is a threat to the safety and welfare of the public.’ Id., 243 N.W. 2d at 370, quoting Hughes v. State, 535 P.2d 1023, 1024 (Okl.Crim.App.1975). An intoxicated person in a motor vehicle poses a threat to public safety because he ‘might set out on an inebriated journey at any moment.’ Martin v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 358 N.W.2d 734, 737 (Minn.App.1984).
“That Buck may neither have driven his vehicle while intoxicated, nor have intended to drive while still intoxicated, does not vitiate Officer Scherbenske’s reasonable grounds to believe that Buck was in actual physical control of a vehicle in violation of § 39-08-01, N.D.C.C. ‘[T]he real purpose of the statute is to deter individuals who have been drinking intoxicating liquor from getting into their vehicles, except as passengers.’ State v. Ghylin, 250 N.W.2d 252, 255 (N.D.1977). An intoxicated individual who gets into his vehicle to sleep poses a threat of immediate operation of the vehicle at any time while still intoxicated.” Buck v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, supra, 425 N.W.2d at 372-373.
We conclude that the actual physical control statute may be applied to Schwalk under the circumstances presented here. In accordance with Buck, it was appropriate for the trial court to find that Schwalk was in actual physical control of his vehicle while having a blood alcohol concentration in excess of the legal limit.
II.
Schwalk asserts that the actual physical control statute is unconstitutionally vague because an ordinary person would not understand what conduct is proscribed.
The due process clauses of the federal and state constitutions require definiteness of criminal statutes so that the language, when measured by common understanding and practice, gives adequate warning of the conduct proscribed and marks boundaries sufficiently distinct for judges and juries to fairly administer the law. State v. Johnson, 417 N.W.2d 365, 368 (N.D.1987). In order to survive a vagueness challenge, a statute must meet two requirements: (1) it must provide adequate warning as to the conduct proscribed, and (2) it must establish minimum guidelines to govern law enforcement. Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352, 357-358, 103 S.Ct. 1855, 1858, 75 L.Ed.2d 903, 909 (1983); State v. Johnson, supra, 417 N.W. 2d at 368.
Schwalk has not cited any case which has held that the phrase “actual physical control” fails to apprise an ordinary person of the conduct proscribed by the statute. Our research, however, reveals a line of cases from other jurisdictions consistently rejecting vagueness challenges to actual physical control statutes. See, e.g., City of Kansas City v. Troutner, 544 S.W.2d 295, 299-300 (Mo.Ct.App.1976); State v. Ruona, 133 Mont. 243, 321 P.2d 615, 618-619 (1958); Parker v. State, 424 P.2d 997, 999-1000 (Okla.Crim.App.1967); State v. Trucott, 145 Vt. 274, 487 A.2d 149, 152-153 (1984); Adams v. State, 697 P.2d 622, 624 (Wyo.1985).
We agree with the reasoning in these cases that the phrase “actual physical control” provides adequate notice of the conduct proscribed and provides the requi*320site guidance to law enforcement. In particular, we note that prior judicial interpretations of our actual physical control statute, Section 39-08-01(1), N.D.C.C., provided sufficient notice that the type of conduct engaged in here was proscribed by the statute. In this respect we note that judicial interpretations clarifying vague or ambiguous language may be taken into consideration in determining whether the public has been put on notice of the conduct proscribed. See, e.g., Bose v. Locke, 423 U.S. 48, 49-50, 96 S.Ct. 243, 244, 46 L.Ed.2d 185 (1975); Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 752-756, 94 S.Ct. 2547, 2560-2561, 41 L.Ed. 2d 439 (1974). As noted in Rose v. Locke, supra:
“It is settled that the fair-warning requirement embodied in the Due Process Clause prohibits the States from holding an individual ‘criminally responsible for conduct which he could not reasonably understand to be proscribed.’ United States v. Harriss, 347 U.S. 612, 617, 74 S.Ct. 808, 812, 98 L.Ed. 989 (1954); see Wainwright v. Stone, 414 U.S. 21, 22, 94 S.Ct. 190, 38 L.Ed.2d 179 (1973). But this prohibition against excessive vagueness does not invalidate every statute which a reviewing court believes could have been drafted with greater precision. Many statutes will have some inherent vagueness, for ‘[i]n most English words and phrases there lurk uncertainties.’ Robinson v. United States, 324 U.S. 282, 286, 65 S.Ct. 666, 668, 89 L.Ed. 944 (1945). Even trained lawyers may find it necessary to consult legal dictionaries, treatises, and judicial opinions before they may say with any certainty what some statutes may compel or forbid. Cf. Nash v. United States, 229 U.S. 373, 33 S.Ct. 780, 57 L.Ed. 1232 (1913); United States v. National Dairy [Products] Corp., 372 U.S. 29, 83 S.Ct. 594, 9 L.Ed.2d 561 (1963). All the Due Process Clause requires is that the law give sufficient warning that men may conduct themselves so as to avoid that which is forbidden.”
We believe that Section 39-08-01(1), N.D. C.C., when viewed in light of prior judicial interpretations, provided adequate warning that Schwalk’s conduct was proscribed. As noted in Buck v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, supra, we have long construed Section 39-08-01(1), N.D. C.C., to broadly prohibit any exercise of dominion or control over a vehicle by an intoxicated person. For example, in State v. Schuler, 243 N.W.2d 367 (N.D.1976), we upheld a conviction of a defendant who was seated behind the wheel of her vehicle, which was partially in the ditch and “high-centered,” apparently unable to move. We cited with approval Hughes v. State, 535 P.2d 1023 (Okla.Crim.App.1975), specifically noting that Hughes upheld a conviction for actual physical control where the defendant was found slumped and unconscious in the driver’s seat. State v. Schuler, supra, 243 N.W.2d at 370. We quoted with approval the following language from Hughes:
“ ‘It is our opinion that the legislature, in making it a crime to be in “actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor,” intended to enable the drunken driver to be apprehended before he strikes.
* * * * * *
“ ‘We believe that an intoxicated person seated behind the steering wheel of a motor vehicle is a threat to the safety and welfare of the public. The danger is .less than where an intoxicated person is actually driving a vehicle, but it does exist.’ ” State v. Schuler, supra, 243 N.W.2d at 370 (quoting Hughes v. State, supra, 535 P.2d at 1024).
In State v. Ghylin, 250 N.W.2d 252, 255 (N.D.1977), we again quoted much of the above language from Hughes v. State, supra, and continued the quote:
“ ‘The defendant when arrested may have been exercising no conscious violation with regard to the vehicle, still there is a legitimate inference to be drawn that he placed himself behind the wheel of the vehicle and could have at any time started the automobile and driven away. He therefore had “actual physical control” of the vehicle within the meaning of the *321statute.’ ” State v. Ghylin, supra, 250 N.W.2d at 255, (quoting Hughes v. State, supra, 535 P.2d at 1024).
We also stated in State v. Ghylin that the definition of “actual physical control” does not rest on exacting factual distinctions:
“The definition of ‘actual physical control’ does not rest on such fine distinctions. The court, in Commonwealth v. Kloch, 230 Pa.Super. 563, 327 A.2d 375, 383 (1975), defined the phrase in these terms:
“ ‘A driver has “actual physical control” of his car when he has real (not hypothetical), bodily restraining or directing influence over, or domination and regulation of, its movements of machinery. * * *
“ ‘It is not dispositive that appellant’s car was not moving, and that appellant was not making an effort to move it, when the troopers arrived. A driver may be in “actual physical control” of his car and therefore “operating” it while it is parked or merely standing still “so long as [the driver is] keeping the car in restraint or in position to regulate its movements.’ ” State v. Ghylin, supra, 250 N.W.2d at 254.
We went on to conclude in Ghylin that the purpose of the actual physical control statute is to deter intoxicated individuals from getting into their vehicles, except as passengers.
We conclude that Section 39-08-01(1), N.D.C.C., when read in light of interpretive judicial decisions, provided adequate notice to Schwalk that his conduct was proscribed by the statute and provided sufficient guidance for law enforcement. Accordingly, the statute is not unconstitutionally vague as applied to Schwalk.1
III.
Schwalk asserts that the trial court erred in admitting the results of the blood alcohol test. Subsections (5), (8), and (10) of Section 39-20-07, N.D.C.C., govern the admissibility of blood sample test results:
“Interpretation of chemical tests. Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, drugs, or a combination thereof, evidence of the amount of alcohol, drugs, or a combination thereof in the person’s blood at the time of the act alleged as shown by a chemical analysis of the blood, breath, saliva, or urine is admissible. For the purpose of this section:
* * * * * *
“5. The results of the chemical analysis must be received in evidence when it is shown that the sample was properly obtained and the test was fairly administered, and if the test is shown to have been performed according to methods and with devices approved by the state toxicologist, and by an individual possessing a certificate of qualification to administer the test issued by the state toxicologist. The state toxicologist is authorized to approve satisfactory devices and methods of chemical analysis and determine the qualifications of individuals to conduct such analysis, and shall issue a certificate to all qualified operators who exhibit the certificate upon demand of the person requested to take the chemical test.
* * # * * *
“8. A certified copy of the analytical report of a blood, urine, or saliva *322analysis issued by the office of the state toxicologist must be accepted as prima facie evidence of the results of a chemical analysis performed under this chapter.
******
“10. A signed statement from the nurse or medical technician drawing the blood sample for testing as set forth in subsection 5 is prima facie evidence that the blood sample was properly drawn and no further foundation for the admission of such evidence may be required.”
The purpose of Section 39-20-07 is “to ease the requirements for admissibility of chemical test results while ensuring that the test upon which the results are based is fairly administered. The legislature has struck a balance between procedural efficiency and substantive reliability.” Salter v. Hjelle, 415 N.W.2d 801, 803 (N.D.1987). In interpreting the statute we must construe subsections (5), (8), and (10) together to give effect to the entire statute. Salter v. Hjelle, supra, 415 N.W.2d at 804. Thus, a certified copy of blood test results is admissible pursuant to subsections (8) and (10) only if fair administration of the test has been established in accordance with subsection (5). See, State v. Reil, 409 N.W.2d 99, 102 (N.D.1987).
In light of this statutory scheme, the State Toxicologist has drafted Form 104 to be used when a blood sample is drawn for blood alcohol testing. The back side of Form 104 contains the directions for collection and submission of blood samples, including a nine-step process:
“‘FOR BLOOD OR OTHER FLUID SPECIMENS
“ ‘1. Use only a sterile, dry, clean syringe, and needle and a non-alcoholic, non-volatile, skin disinfectant.
“ ‘2. Remove stopper from glass vial before filling. These vials do not have a vacuum.
“ ‘3. Place 10 ml of whole blood or other liquid specimen into the vial and replace the stopper.
“ ‘4. Immediately invert the vial several times to dissolve the chemical and prevent clotting.
“ ‘5. Seal the vial with one layer of tape and label the vial with the name of the subject and the arresting officer.
“ ‘6. Fill out this form, wrap it around the vial, and place in the mailing container.
“‘7. Place cotton or tissue paper on top of the vial. Replace the metal screw cap.
“ ‘8. Seal mailing container with the long, narrow label by putting it over the cap and attaching it to the cardboard sides.
“ ‘9. Affix the return address label around the mailing container over the ends of the seal.
“ ‘Forward the sample to the State Toxicologist without delay. If delay is unavoidable refrigerate the urine sample to minimize loss of alcohol & drugs. Use sufficient postage when sent by mail. “ ‘The specimen containers for urine and blood contain sodium azide, and sodium fluoride & potassium oxalate, respectively. These chemicals are poisonous and care should be taken in handling the vial’ ” State v. Reil, supra, 409 N.W.2d at 103 n. 4.
The directions for sample collection and submission on Form 104 essentially comprise two components: the actual procedure for collecting and preserving the blood sample and the directions for submitting the sample to the State Toxicologist. The first component ensures that the scientific accuracy and reliability of the test are not affected by improper collection or preservation of the blood sample. The second component in effect provides an evidentiary shortcut for establishing chain of custody. In a trio of recent cases we have held blood alcohol test results inadmissible where the State failed to prove chain of custody either through compliance with the directions on Form 104 or through other evidence. State v. Nygaard, 426 N.W.2d 547 (N.D.1988); State v. Wright, 426 N.W.2d 3 (N.D.1988); State v. Reil, supra. There is, however, no chain of custody issue raised in *323this case. Schwalk’s assertions go to the sample collection/scientific accuracy component.
The front of Form 104 contains a section to be filled in by the nurse or medical technician who draws the blood. The nurse is to certify that the container was intact before use, that a sterile, dry, clean syringe and needle were used, that non-alcoholic, non-volatile skin disinfectant was used, and that the specimen was drawn from the named individual. This statement essentially covers only the first step of the nine-step process.
Nowhere on Form 104 is there any signed statement or certification, either by the nurse or the officer, that the remaining eight steps have been complied with. We noted this deficiency in State v. Reil, supra, 409 N.W.2d at 103 n. 4, stating that “Form 104 could be improved with the inclusion of a provision wherein the specimen collector certifies that he or she followed the directions and placed the properly drawn and sealed container in the regular mailing process.” Absent such a written certification that all of the State Toxicologist’s directives for sample collection have been followed, Form 104 does not on its face establish fair administration of the test, and the State must therefore do so by other evidence.
The State attempted to meet its burden in this case by introducing testimony of the arresting officer regarding the collection of the sample and compliance with the State Toxicologist’s directives. The officer’s testimony, however, does not establish compliance with all nine steps. Schwalk specifically points to the lack of any evidence of compliance with step four, which requires that immediately upon placing the blood in the glass vial it must be inverted several times to dissolve the chemicals contained in the vial. Failure to invert the vial calls into question the scientific accuracy of the blood alcohol test results.
Because Sehwalk’s assertion raises questions regarding the scientific accuracy of the specimen collection, our holding in Moser v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, 369 N.W.2d 650 (N.D.1985), is controlling. Moser involved a challenge to admissibility of Breathalyzer test results where the operator had failed to accurately follow all steps for conducting the test as set out in the approved method promulgated by the State Toxicologist. In holding that deviation from the approved method rendered the test results inadmissible, we stated:
“The foundational requirements needed to show that a Breathalyzer test was ‘fairly administered’ so as to render the results admissible, may be met either through testimony of the state toxicologist or through the introduction of certified copies of approved methods and techniques filed by the state toxicologist with the clerk of the district court pursuant to NDCC § 39-20-07. State v. Schneider, supra [270 N.W.2d 787 (N.D.1978)]. Absent testimony by the state toxicologist, the foundational requirement necessary to show fair administration of a breathalyzer test and admissibility of the test results is a showing that the test was administered in accordance with the approved methods filed with the clerk of the district court. Thus, reliability and accuracy of the results are established by demonstrating compliance with the methods adopted by the state toxicologist. Because the statute permits admission of such evidence without expert witness testimony to establish accuracy and reliability, all the requirements of the statute must be scrupulously met to ensure a uniform basis of testing throughout the State and fair administration.” Moser v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, supra, 369 N.W.2d at 653-654.
The import of our decision in Mos-er is that when the State Toxicologist has established methods and procedures for conducting the requisite test, fair administration can be established only by proof that those methods were “scrupulously” complied with or by expert testimony. While we recognize that the approved method for the Breathalyzer at issue in Moser was formally adopted and filed with the district court, we find no reason to *324accord any less deference to the directions for blood sample collection set out on Form 104. Those directions are part of an official document drafted by the State Toxicologist and are included in every blood sample kit used to collect blood samples for alcohol testing in the state. We assume that the State Toxicologist has reasons for establishing directions for blood sample collection and submission, State v. Nygaard, supra, 426 N.W.2d at 549, and those reasons must be to ensure the scientific accuracy and reliability of the test results. Thus, we conclude that if the State fails to establish compliance with those directions for sample collection which go to the scientific accuracy and reliability of the test, the State must prove fair administration of the test through expert testimony. Moser v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, supra, 369 N.W.2d at 653.
The State in this case did not prove that step four on Form 104 had been completed. The State could have attempted to cure the foundational defect through testimony of the State Toxicologist explaining the effect of failure to invert the vial and mix the chemicals with the blood. Moser v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, supra, 369 N.W.2d at 654; State v. Guthmiller, 350 N.W.2d 600, 602 (N.D.1984). In the absence of such testimony, however, we will not speculate on the possible effect failure to invert the vial might have had on the ultimate test results. We note, however, that at least one author suggests that immediate inversion of the vial and mixing the blood with the chemicals therein is necessary to “retard the generation of alcohol in a blood specimen.” B. Quick, I Only Had Two Beers: A North Dakota Prosecutor’s Manual for DUI Cases 58 (1984, revised 1986) (published by the North Dakota Attorney General's Office).
The State contends that the officer’s testimony in this case was sufficient to establish fair administration of the test, relying upon State v. Hanson, 345 N.W.2d 845 (N.D.1984). In State v. Hanson, supra, we stated that the officer’s testimony regarding the conditions of obtaining the blood sample and his subsequent handling and mailing of the sample was sufficient to establish chain of custody and fair administration of the test. We believe, however, that Hanson is distinguishable from the case at bar. There was no indication in Hanson that the State Toxicologist had established methods and procedures for collection and submission of blood samples. A notation on Form 104 appears to indicate that the form was issued in November 1984, after Hanson had been decided. Thus, we were not presented with a situation where the State failed to prove compliance with an approved method. The State Toxicologist’s development of methods and procedures for blood sample collection, and our intervening decision in Moser, require that fair administration of the test may now be established only through proof that the Form 104 methods for collection and preservation of the blood sample were scrupulously complied with or through expert testimony establishing the scientific accuracy of the test. The State has failed to prove fair administration of the test in this case.
The State argues that it can be presumed that the nurse or the officer inverted the vial as required by step four on Form 104. We rejected such an argument in Salter v. Hjelle, supra, 415 N.W.2d at 804-805, noting that to apply such a presumption “would effectively eliminate the requirement of § 39-20-07(5) that the [State] prove fair administration.”
We conclude that the trial court erred in admitting the results of Schwalk’s blood alcohol test. Because Schwalk was convicted of violating Section 39-08-01(l)(a), N.D.C.C. (actual physical control while having a blood alcohol content of at least .10 percent), and the test results were the only evidence presented demonstrating a blood alcohol content of .10 percent or greater, Schwalk’s conviction must be reversed.
The judgment of conviction is reversed and we remand to the county court *325for a new trial.2
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and YANDE WALLE and GIERKE, JJ., concur.
. Schwalk has raised various hypothetical situations which he asserts demonstrate the vagueness and ambiguity of the statute. Other than in a First Amendment context, however, a defendant must demonstrate that the statute in question is vague as applied to his own conduct, without regard to its potentially vague application in other circumstances. State v. Tibor, 373 N.W.2d 877, 880 (N.D.1985). Because Schwalk’s conduct was clearly prohibited by the statute, he cannot complain of its possible application to the conduct of others. State v. Johnson, 379 N.W.2d 291, 293 (N.D.), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1141, 106 S.Ct. 1792, 90 L.Ed.2d 337 (1986).
. Schwalk has asked this court to reverse his conviction outright, apparently upon grounds of double jeopardy, although he provides no authorities or supportive reasoning for such a result. It is a "venerable principle” of double jeopardy jurisprudence that a successful appeal of a judgment of conviction, on any ground other than insufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict, poses no bar to further prosecution on the same charge. E.g., Montana v. Hall, 481 U.S. 400, 405, 107 S.Ct. 1825, 1826, 95 L.Ed.2d 354 (1987); United States v. Scott, 437 U.S. 82, 90-91, 98 S.Ct. 2187, 2193-2194, 57 L.Ed.2d 65 (1978).
Our resolution of this case does not, for purposes of double jeopardy, constitute a determination that the evidence was insufficient to support the verdict. Numerous federal cases indicate that a reversal for a procedural trial error such as erroneous admission of evidence does not bar further prosecution of the defendant, even where, as here, the erroneously admitted evidence was the only evidence presented on a necessary element of the offense. See, e.g., United States v. Gonzalez-Sanchez, 825 F.2d 572, 588-589 n. 57 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 108 S.Ct. 510, 98 L.Ed.2d 508 (1987); United States v. Marshall, 762 F.2d 419, 423 (5th Cir.1985); United States v. Key, 725 F.2d 1123, 1127 (7th Cir.1984); United States v. Harmon, 632 F.2d 812, 814 (9th Cir.1980). The basis for the rule is explained in United States v. Harmon, supra, 632 F.2d at 814:
"Reversal for evidentiary insufficiency constitutes a decision that the government failed to prove the guilt of the accused. Reversal for failure to suppress evidence involves only a determination that the trial process was defective in a material respect, and implies nothing as to the sufficiency of the evidence of guilt of the defendant. The untainted evidence introduced by the government does not necessarily reflect all other available evidence of the defendant’s involvement. It is impossible to know what additional evidence the government might have produced had the faulty evidence been excluded at trial, or what theory the government might have pursued had the evidence before the jury been different. United States v. Mandel, 591 F.2d 1347, 1373-74 (4th Cir.), rev’d on other grounds, 602 F.2d 653 (4th Cir.1979) (en banc); United States v. Block, 590 F.2d 535, 544 n. 12 (4th Cir.1978). It would prolong trials unduly to adopt a rule that would require the government to introduce all available evidence and assert every possible legal theory in anticipation of reversal of trial court rulings admitting evidence. Moreover,
"it is at least doubtful that appellate courts would be as zealous as they now are in protecting against the effects of improprieties at the trial or pretrial stage if they knew that reversal of a conviction would put the accused irrevocably beyond the reach of further prosecution. In reality, therefore, the practice of retrial serves defendants’ rights as well as society’s interest.
“United States v. Tateo, 377 U.S. 463, 466, 84 S.Ct. 1587, 1589, 12 L.Ed.2d 448 (1964). See also United States v. Houltin, 566 F.2d 1027, 1033 (5th Cir.1978).”
The erroneous admission of the blood test results in this case was a procedural error, and double jeopardy does not bar a retrial.

=== CASE 9736913 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:49.704002+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur that the “actual physical control” statute applied to Schwalk and that it was constitutional. I respectfully dissent from the holding that the trial court erred in admitting the results of Sehwalk’s blood test.
Without evidence, the majority opinion conjectures that “[fjailure to invert the vial calls into question the scientific accuracy of the blood alcohol test results.” This speculation proceeds from an assumption that the State Toxicologist’s reason for each one of his directions “must be to ensure the scientific accuracy and reliability of the test results.” I am unwilling to so conclude without evidence.
In fact, we do not know whether a step to “prevent clotting” of the sample relates to scientific reliability or to some other reason, for example, laboratory convenience for assaying the sample. For all we know, the State Toxicologist required certification of all essential steps for the scientific reliability of the blood test. The fact that he suggested additional steps, other than those certified by the “nurse or medical technician,” does not make those added steps indispensable. It is for the State Toxicologist, not this court, to decide what determines whether the sample was properly drawn and what affects its scientific reliability.
The majority opinion correctly observes that the State “did not prove that step four ... had been completed.” (Emphasis added). But, in my view, there is no evidentia-ry rule or statutory dictate that the State *326must do so. Only assumption and conjecture suggest such a need.
I agree that the various subsections of NDCC 39-20-07 should be construed together to give effect to the entire statute. I do not agree that the phrase, “properly obtained,” in subsection 5 should have this court’s notions about “scientific reliability” amended to it. Nor do I think that judicial amendment should override the legislated presumption in subsection 10 that a blood sample was “properly drawn.”
This report contained the statement signed by the nurse as prescribed by the State Toxicologist:
“I state under the penalties of perjury that I withdrew the blood specimen from the above subject and the information given in this section is true and correct.”
The legislature has directed that this is “prima facie evidence that the blood sample was properly drawn.” The legislature has also declared “no further foundation for the admission of [the report] may be required.” NDCC 39-20-07(10). No published rule of evidence says otherwise. By adding essential requirements to those stipulated by the State Toxicologist, the majority opinion thwarts an important legislative policy.
There is no gross unfairness to a driver in admitting the test report in a case like this. If, in fact, the assumed foundational detail not proven by the State seriously affects the “scientific reliability” of the test, the driver may show that. Indeed, the legislature has given each driver cost-free access to the persons involved in each test, thus fairly balancing the usual cost-savings to the public through the abbreviation of routine scientific testimony about every test. Subsection 9 of NDCC 39-20-07 says:
“Notwithstanding any statute or rule to the contrary, the defendant in any criminal proceeding may subpoena, without cost to the defendant, the person who conducted the chemical analysis referred to in this section to testify at the trial on the issue of the amount of alcohol, drugs, or a combination thereof in the defendant’s blood, breath, saliva, or urine at the time of the alleged act.”
Where there was probable cause to believe the driver was drunk, the legislature has sought thus to shift the burden of going forward with evidence to the driver to show error in the test. The majority opinion does not credit this purpose. This adds to the social cost of controlling drunk drivers on our highways.
I agree that a trial court may properly refuse to allow evidence of a test report not “properly obtained and fairly administered.” But only evidence can show that, not the lack of evidence. Only real, not imaginary, defects in a blood test should prevent its use as evidence. See State v. Vetsch, 368 N.W.2d 547, 549 (N.D.1985). Therefore, I do not agree that admission of a report with a possible, but unconfirmed, defect was reversible error.
We should review the evidentiary admission of a test report under our North Dakota Rules of Evidence which “vest[] wide discretion in the trial court to control the introduction of evidence.” Explanatory Notes to Rules 403 and 401, NDREv. Generally, lack of proof about compliance with one particular procedure should reflect only on the weight of a test report, not its admission. Only if the variance is confirmed to be critical to its evidentiary worth, to the satisfaction of the trial judge, should the test report be excluded. See my dissents in Moser v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, 369 N.W.2d 650 (N.D.1985); Schirado v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, 382 N.W. 2d 391 (N.D.1986); State v. Reil, 409 N.W. 2d 99 (N.D.1987); and State v. Nygaard, 426 N.W.2d 547 (N.D.1988). We should not adhere to technical evidentiary notions which have been bypassed by experience and by rule, as well as by legislation.
In this case, we do not know whether, in fact, there was a failure to follow step 4 of the directions. Nor do we know how it may have affected the test result, if at all. This driver chose not to submit any evidence about the scientific reliability of the test report if step 4 of the directions was *327omitted. He did not even establish that the step was omitted.
Because this driver was not foreclosed from showing scientific unreliability of the test report (if that was the case), and because I believe that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the report, I would affirm on all points. However, at the retrial, the State is certainly free to offer evidence that step 4 of the test was carried out, or, if it was not, that its omission did not seriously reduce the reliability of the results.

=== CASE 2207942 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.003632+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 193 (1964)
MARTIN PATRICK KELLY et al., Minors, etc., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
BANK OF AMERICA NATIONAL TRUST & SAVINGS ASSOCIATION, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7167.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Feb. 28, 1964.
S. L. Kurland and Allan F. Grossman for Plaintiffs and Appellants. *194
Block, Toler, Bulloch & Biggerstaff and Ralph A. Biggerstaff for Defendants and Respondents.
BROWN (Gerald), J.
[1] This is an action by Mary Louise Kelly and Martin Patrick Kelly, minors, through their guardian ad litem, Verna Kelly Johnson, to establish a claim for support against their deceased father's estate. There is no dispute as to the facts. The decedent, Thomas Kelly, died testate on January 9, 1960. He left five children. The plaintiffs are the two children of decedent's more recent marriage and they were aged 6 and 10 at the time of their father's death. The decedent had three other children of an earlier marriage, aged 13, 15 and 17. All of the children reside with their respective mothers. Decedent's net distributable estate will be worth from $150,000 to $170,000, and under the terms of his will the entire estate is given in trust to decedent's five minor children.
Appellants contend: That the estate should be divided in accordance with a schedule based upon the years of minority of each minor child upon the death of the father; that therefore the younger children should receive more of the estate; and that these shares should be paid into individual trusts on behalf of each child. In other words, appellants contend: That the total years of minority of the children are 44; that the appellants have respectively 15 and 11 years of minority; and they are, therefore, entitled to slightly more than one-half of decedent's total estate. The trial court held that the testamentary trust satisfied the decedent's obligation to support and maintain his minor children and it refused to enter a decree sequestering any of the decedent's property to secure the child support payments under the provisions of Probate Code section 953.1.
The parties to this action agree it is the rule in California "that the obligation of a father to support his minor child which is fixed by divorce decree or property settlement agreement, does not cease upon the father's death, but survives as a charge against his estate." (Taylor v. George, 34 Cal. 2d 552, 556 [212 P.2d 505].) The court in the Taylor case denied a child's claim based upon a support judgment "on the ground that the decedent's will when reasonably construed shows that the testator intended to and did fulfill his obligation of support. ..." (Taylor v. George, supra, 34 Cal. 2d 552, 558.) The trial court, in the instant case, found: "That decedent satisfied his obligation to support his minor children *195 by the provisions therefor contained in his will made for that purpose."
The trial court's finding is not only supported by the facts, but it is supported by reason and is consistent with the decedent's intent. The estate was quite large. It was left almost in its entirety to the decedent's five children and the trustee was given discretion to adjust distributions to all of the children according to their needs.
In Jones v. Roberts, 163 Cal. App. 2d 89, 95 [329 P.2d 50], the court said: "While the discretion of the trial court in a proceeding such as the one now engaging our attention [an action to sequester funds from a decedent's estate for the support of a minor child] must not be arbitrary or capricious and must be exercised within reason, it is equally true that an appellate tribunal may not substitute its judgment for that of the court below unless it clearly appears that a case has been made reasonably justifying the conclusion that the questioned finding indicates a lack of ordinary good judgment, and that no reasonable inferences can be drawn from the evidence to support the finding and the judgment predicated thereon."
The questions presented by the instant case were directed to the equity side of the court (Jones v. Roberts, supra, 163 Cal. App. 2d 89, 94), and the answers thereto lie within the sound discretion of that court. We find no abuse of that discretion.
Judgment affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736916 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:56.773946+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Chief Judge Kaye.
On November 14, 1994, in Supreme Court, New York County, defendant was sentenced to 20 years to life imprisonment after having been found guilty of murder in the second degree. On that day, defendant filed a notice of his intent to appeal.1 Precisely one week later defendant was produced in Supreme Court, Bronx County, in connection with an indictment for criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree (one count) *128and. criminal possession of a controlled substance in the third degree (two counts), carrying a possible maximum sentence of SVs to 25 years; these were defendant’s only arrests.
In Bronx County, defendant agreed to plead guilty to the top count of the indictment in exchange for a sentence of 1 to 3 years to run concurrently with the murder sentence. Defendant pleaded guilty to criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree, admitting that on January 5, 1994, he sold one bag of cocaine to an undercover officer in exchange for $20; he was subsequently sentenced to l-to-3 years’ imprisonment.
On June 24, 1998, defendant’s appellate attorney moved to vacate his murder conviction, arguing that he had been denied effective assistance of trial counsel.2 On January 11, 2000, the Judge who had presided over the trial vacated defendant’s murder conviction and ordered a new trial, concluding that he had not received reasonably competent representation and that counsel’s errors seriously compromised defendant’s right to a fair trial.3 The court noted that counsel seemed to be unfamiliar with important Rosario material in his possession, failing to impeach the People’s primary witness—the only witness connecting defendant to the shooting—and never calling potentially exculpatory witnesses to challenge that identification. In vacating the murder conviction, the Trial Judge coupled these failures with defense counsel’s “regrettable ignorance of basic principles of criminal law, his failure to recognize the appropriate scope of cross-examination of his client before putting him on the witness stand, and his failure to effectively challenge the People’s identification evidence, misidentification being a defense entirely compatible with and ordinarily accompanying the defense of alibi.”
On June 15, 2000 defendant was retried and acquitted of the murder. By this time, he had fully served the l-to-3-year drug sentence.
Days after his acquittal, defendant brought a CPL 440.10 motion to vacate his Bronx County conviction on the ground that *129his plea had been induced by the promise that his sentence would run concurrently with the New York County sentence, since set aside. Supreme Court granted defendant’s motion, finding that the “appellate court consistently vacated guilty pleas which were induced by a promise of a concurrent sentence following the reversal of the original conviction without noting whether the later sentence had already been served” (internal citations omitted).
The Appellate Division reversed and reinstated defendant’s Bronx conviction based on the “totality of these circumstances,” citing unrelated indictments in different counties before different judges (298 AD2d 101, 102 [1st Dept 2002]). The Appellate Division further noted that when defendant pleaded guilty in Bronx County the court stated that the sentence would be concurrent “with any other sentence being served,” which on its face appeared to promise a concurrent sentence only if there was another sentence to be served (id.). We now reverse and reinstate the order of Supreme Court, Bronx County, vacating the plea..
Discussion
This Court on several occasions has concluded that when a guilty plea is induced by the court’s explicit promise that the defendant will receive a lesser sentence to run concurrently with a sentence in another case, and that conviction is overturned, the defendant may withdraw his plea and face the indictment, since the promise cannot be kept (see People v Taylor, 80 NY2d 1 [1992]; People v Boston, 75 NY2d 585 [1990]; People v Fuggazzatto, 62 NY2d 862 [1984]; People v Rogers, 48 NY2d 167 [1979]; People v Clark, 45 NY2d 432 [1978]). In all of these cases, defendants raised no challenge to the validity of their pleas—concededly they had admitted their guilt before the court, including factual details of the crimes charged. What was in issue was the fundamentally changed condition that induced their admission of guilt: a sentencing promise based on an explicit understanding that, by virtue of the plea, there would be no additional prison time.
When it is unclear that such a promise was made, vacatur of the plea is unwarranted (see People v Lowrance, 41 NY2d 303, 304 [1977]). Were the Appellate Division correct in suggesting ambiguity in the plea arrangement now before us, the result might well be otherwise. Here, however, the Bronx court was crystal-clear in promising a sentence concurrent with the New *130York County sentence. As the Judge told defendant in imposing a l-to-3-year sentence, “that sentence runs concurrent or together with the sentence you are now serving.” Indeed, the Judge himself several times underscored that point.
In our Court, the People’s argument centers on the fact that, having completed his drug sentence concurrently with time being served for murder, defendant actually received what he bargained for; thus, the promise was in fact fulfilled. But the fortuity of timing cannot be determinative of the issue, as it was not in Boston or Fuggazzato, where defendants also had served out their lesser sentences by the time they sought vacatur of their pleas. It cannot be that, in these circumstances, a plea may be vacated if defendant happens still to be serving the lesser sentence, and otherwise not.4
What changed essentially here were the- facts that induced defendant’s plea. In effect, when the murder conviction was vacated, defendant’s “concurrent” time became a nullity—in the eyes of the law, it is as if he served no time at all on the murder, and his sentence on the drug charge stood alone, based on an unfulfilled and unfulfillable promise. On this record, we cannot say that defendant would have foregone pretrial and trial rights and pleaded guilty to the top count of the Bronx County indictment—based on the sale of a $20 bag of cocaine to an undercover officer—had it not been for the New York County conviction for murder, of which he now stands acquitted.
Finally, for the future, we note that a better practice might be for the parties in similar circumstances to spell out, on the record, the consequences that will follow upon vacatur of the conviction (see People v Rivera, 195 AD2d 389, 390 [1st Dept 1993]).
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed and the order of Supreme Court, Bronx County, vacating the plea reinstated.
. On October 11, 1995, Daniel L. Greenberg, Esq. was assigned as counsel for defendant for purposes of the appeal (see People v Pichardo, 1st Dept, Oct. 11, 1995, M-4651, Indictment No. 1883/94).
. In a letter to the 440 motion court, dated June 7, 1999, defendant’s appellate attorney explained that he had “not yet filed a brief on appeal because resolution of the CPL 440.10 motion is integral to resolution of the appeal.” The court subsequently held a hearing on defendant’s motion.
. Defendant also claimed that Brady material was wrongfully withheld by the People. While the court agreed the People failed to turn over this material—inadvertently—it held that the failure to recognize or explore the potential of this material was defense counsel’s alone, and another example of his ineffectiveness.
. It would, for example, be wholly arbitrary to permit a defendant with days or weeks remaining on a sentence to seek vacatur of his conviction, but to deny that remedy to a defendant whose sentence had just been completed. CPL 440.10 (1) expressly permits the filing of a motion to vacate “[a]t any time after the entry of a judgment” (emphasis added).

=== CASE 9736917 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:56.778248+00 ===

Graffeo, J.
(dissenting). We respectfully dissent because we do not believe that the Appellate Division erred in concluding that defendant was not entitled to vacatur of his conviction of criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree. We *131would therefore affirm the Appellate Division’s determination to reinstate the drug-sale conviction.
In November 1994, defendant pleaded guilty to selling cocaine in return for a 1-to- 3-year prison sentence that would run concurrently with a previously imposed sentence for a second-degree murder conviction. After defendant completed the term of imprisonment for the drug sale, his murder conviction was vacated and, in June 2000, he was acquitted on retrial of all charges pertaining to the homicide. Supreme Court subsequently vacated the drug conviction, concluding that it had been induced by the promise of a sentence that would be concurrent to the overturned murder conviction.
We agree with the majority that this Court has permitted plea vacatur where a guilty plea was induced by a promise to allow a defendant to receive a lesser sentence intended to run concurrently with a sentence imposed for another crime and that prior conviction is later vacated (see e.g. People v Taylor, 80 NY2d 1, 15 [1992]). In this case, however, we believe that vacatur is unwarranted because the lesser sentence was completed while defendant was serving a concurrent sentence and it is not manifestly unjust to hold defendant to his negotiated plea.
In People v Fuggazzatto (62 NY2d 862 [1984]), two indictments were filed simultaneously and were therefore subject to identical time periods for the People to announce their readiness for trial under CPL 30.30. The defendant’s CPL 30.30 motion to dismiss the indictments for untimely prosecution was denied and he elected to proceed to trial on the first indictment. After being convicted, the defendant pleaded guilty to the second indictment in exchange for a sentence that “would run concurrently with and not exceed the first.” On appeal of the first conviction, the Appellate Division reversed, concluding that the People failed to comply with CPL 30.30. This Court agreed. Having entered a guilty plea to the second indictment, however, the defendant had waived his right to raise the CPL 30.30 issue with respect to that conviction on appeal (see People v Savage, 54 NY2d 697, 698 [1981]). Because it would have been manifestly unjust to deprive the defendant of that relief, this Court concluded that vacatur of the plea was appropriate even though the concurrent sentence had been completed.
People v Boston (75 NY2d 585 [1990]) similarly illustrates circumstances under which it would be unfair to allow a plea to stand. The defendant in Boston—a 15-year-old boy—was indicted for attempted intentional murder in the second degree, *132first-degree assault and criminal possession of a weapon in the fourth degree. With the defendant’s consent, the People filed a superior court information charging one count of attempted depraved indifference murder based on the same criminal incident. After consolidation of the superior court information and the indictment, the defendant pleaded guilty to attempted depraved indifference murder and first-degree assault in return for two concurrent indeterminate prison terms. This Court overturned the attempted murder conviction on the ground that the defendant’s waiver of indictment was not in accord with CPL 195.10. The assault conviction was vacated as well because the assault was inextricably related to the murder, both having stemmed from the same criminal incident.
The same cannot be said in this case. Defendant pleaded guilty to a crime that was completely unrelated to the murder charge. He knowingly and voluntarily admitted that he sold cocaine and, in exchange, received the most lenient sentence allowed by law—1 to 3 years of imprisonment—rather than the 81/s to 25-year maximum sentence that could have been imposed. The prison term ran concurrently with the sentence imposed for the prior murder conviction, as defendant was promised, and he completed the drug-sale sentence well before the murder conviction was overturned (cf. People v Hooper, 302 AD2d 894, 895 [4th Dept 2003]). In other words, defendant received the full benefit of his negotiated bargain. Because the drug and murder prosecutions stemmed from unrelated incidents, the charges did not share any common defenses or procedural avenues of relief, and the concurrent murder sentence remained in full force until defendant completed his drug-sale sentence, there is nothing manifestly unfair about allowing the drug conviction to stand. In addition, it has now been almost a decade since defendant’s plea allocution, and this lapse of time will undoubtably impede the People’s ability to retry defendant.
Finally, there was no showing in the record that defendant would not have pleaded guilty and accepted the People’s offer if he had not been convicted of murder. The evidence against defendant was compelling, he received the most advantageous sentence possible and, most significantly, neither defendant nor his counsel suggested that defendant did not, in fact, sell the cocaine. In his motion to vacate the plea, defendant did not assert that he had a meritorious defense or contend that he would not have pleaded guilty if not for the murder conviction (see *133generally People v McDonald, 1 NY3d 109, 115 [2003]). Under the circumstances of this case, because defendant received the full benefit of his bargain and it would not be manifestly unfair to allow the plea to stand, we conclude that the Appellate Division did not abuse its discretion in finding insufficient justification to grant defendant’s motion.
Judges Cipakick, Rosenblatt and Read concur with Chief Judge Kaye; Judge Graffeo dissents and votes to affirm in a separate opinion in which Judge G.B. Smith concurs.
Order reversed, etc.

=== CASE 2207937 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.947704+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 1185 (2003)
208 Ill.2d 309
280 Ill.Dec. 664
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellant,
v.
Kingsley L. CARTER, Appellee.
No. 94895.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
November 20, 2003.
Rehearing Denied January 26, 2004.
*1186 James Ryan and Lisa Madigan, Attorneys General, Springfield, and Kevin W. Lyons, State's Attorney, Peoria (Gary Feinerman, Solicitor General, Lisa Anne Hoffman, Michael M. Glick and Linda D. Woloshin, Assistant Attorneys General, Chicago, and Norbert J. Goetten, John X. Breslin and Richard T. Leonard, of the Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, of counsel), for the People.
Robert J. Agostinelli, Deputy Defender, and Fletcher P. Hamill, Assistant Defender, of the Office of the State Appellate Defender, Ottawa, for appellee.
Justice FITZGERALD delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Kingsley Carter, was charged with first degree murder and aggravated battery with a firearm. On January 20, 2000, following a jury trial in the circuit court of Peoria County, defendant was convicted of both first degree murder and aggravated battery with a firearm and sentenced to a term of 30 years' imprisonment for the offense of first degree murder. The appellate court held that the trial court erred in not sua sponte issuing an involuntary manslaughter instruction to the jury, and reversed and remanded for a new trial. No. 3-00-0512 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We allowed the State's petition for leave to appeal (177 Ill.2d R. 315), and we now reverse the appellate court.
*1187 BACKGROUND
The following evidence was adduced at trial. Defendant, 53 years old, and the victim, Roy Williams, who was over sixty years old, were next-door neighbors. Defendant believed that between 1995 and 1999 the victim routinely vandalized his property by "keying" his car, throwing garbage into his yard, hitting the side of his house with a sledgehammer, throwing objects onto the roof of his house, and urinating in his basement through a leaky window.
Defendant testified that in December 1999 he purchased a shotgun because he was frightened by the victim's guests. He testified that strange people gathered at the victim's house and he became concerned when they hung around the victim's yard and had "loud discussions." Therefore, he kept the shotgun loaded and hidden in the closet for his safety.
On April 6, 1999, defendant called the police to report an alleged incident of vandalism. Defendant told the police that the victim had "keyed" his car. The police responded to defendant's home to investigate his complaint, and defendant informed them that he did not actually see the victim vandalize his property, but that he was certain the victim was responsible. After speaking with the victim and after examining the car and discovering no damage beyond normal wear and tear the police discontinued the investigation.
On April 16, 1999, defendant finished his lunch and walked outside to his front yard. It was then that he allegedly observed several holes in the back window of his car. He drove his car to the police station to report the damage, and on the way to the police station the window allegedly shattered. He completed the incident report at approximately 2 o'clock in the afternoon, and returned home.
On that same evening, the victim and his wife were at their home watching television. At approximately 11:15 p.m. the victim decided to go to the store for a snack. He exited the house through the front door, and walked to his truck parked on the street in the front of the house.
Meanwhile, also at 11:15 p.m., defendant decided to retaliate against the victim by damaging the victim's truck. Defendant testified that he was angry with the police for failing to promptly respond and investigate his shattered car window and as a consequence he retrieved a 12-gauge pump action shotgun, walked outside into his front yard and fired two shots into the windshield of the victim's truck located 20 feet in the distance. After the second shot entered the windshield, the door to the truck flew open and he saw the victim get out of the truck and run into the street. Defendant followed the victim into the street and fired a third shot into the air, causing the victim to trip as he ran. Defendant then continued to walk toward the victim who was by then lying on the ground. Defendant fired a fourth shot in front of the victim. As the victim attempted to get up off the ground, defendant fired a fifth shot to the side of the victim. Defendant then returned to his house and placed the shotgun against the wall next to the front door.
The police responded to the 911 call from the victim's wife. At the scene, the police discovered the victim in his front yard bleeding heavily from his left leg. Police also observed a late model Oldsmobile with a broken back window parked in a nearby driveway, and a truck with gunshot holes to the windshield parked along the curb. The police recovered three spent shotgun shells, each holding approximately 130 pellets, in defendant's front yard. The police arrested defendant after the victim identified him as the shooter. *1188 The police retrieved a shotgun from defendant's home and a fourth spent shell casing inside the chamber of the shotgun.
The victim died in surgery due to massive hemorrhaging. A forensic pathologist testified that the victim had approximately 59 shotgun pellet holes on the back left leg, a few pellet holes on the right leg, six pellet holes on the mid-back, one pellet hole in the right neck, and one pellet hole in the lower lip, together totaling 77 wounds.
At trial, defendant argued that he lacked the intent or knowledge required to support a murder conviction. Defendant testified that he only meant to damage the victim's property and that he did not intend to hit or strike the victim with his gunshots. He stated that it was coincidence the victim was inside his truck when he decided to shoot out the truck's windshield. He told the jury that once he realized the victim was inside the truck after firing the first and second shot, he only meant to frighten the victim when he continued shooting. Defendant testified that he did not aim at the victim and that he was not familiar with the scatter of shotgun pellets. Defendant stated, "I don't feel [the victim's] death wasI don't feel I contributed to his, I mean, I caused his death solely. I just don't feel that. I feel something else that happened to [the victim] from the time he got in the ambulance until they pronounced him dead at the hospital, it was something else that caused him to die. You don't normally die from being shot in the leg." Further, defendant presented expert testimony to explain that he suffered from a delusional disorder that hampered his relationships with others and blurred reality and fiction.
The State argued that defendant possessed the intent and knowledge required to support a murder conviction. The State presented evidence that defendant served five years in the Air Force and two years in the Navy to show that he was familiar with guns and their destructive capabilities. The State urged the jury to disbelieve defendant's assertion that it was coincidence the victim was inside the truck when he decided to shoot out the truck's windshield. The State argued that the defendant's deliberate pulling of the pump handle, reloading of the chamber after firing shots, and continued shooting at the victim as he fled, fell, and continued to flee demonstrated the necessary intent and knowledge required for a murder conviction.
Following arguments, defense counsel tendered an involuntary manslaughter instruction to the trial court, and the trial court held arguments concerning whether the evidence warranted the lesser-offense instruction. Following a recess to consider the issue, the trial court discussed with both parties whether it believed the evidence warranted an involuntary manslaughter instruction. The trial court held that "it would appear" the evidence warranted an instruction. The trial court then questioned whether defendant personally wanted the instruction. However, the trial court called a second recess when defendant informed the court that he and his counsel did not discuss the giving of an involuntary manslaughter instruction, nor did defendant understand the concept of what it meant to give a lesser-offense instruction. The trial court instructed defense counsel to clarify and discuss the issue with defendant.
Following a recess, this exchange occurred:
"THE COURT: Do you have any questions you need to ask me about your right to have that [the involuntary manslaughter instruction] included and your right to have it not included?
*1189 THE DEFENDANT: I don't want it included.
THE COURT: You do not want it included?
THE DEFENDANT: No, I don't.
THE COURT: You have discussed that with your attorney * * *?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, I have.
THE COURT: [Defense Counsel], anything you wish to state on the record?
COUNSEL: Judge, I have spent a great deal of the week researching this issue and it would be against my advice tofor [defendant] to make this decision, but I have gone over it with him and it is his decision and he may very well be right, it's just against my advice to do so."
The trial court did not instruct the jury on involuntary manslaughter, and the jury found defendant guilty of first degree murder and aggravated battery with a firearm.
Defense counsel filed a motion to set aside the verdict or for a new trial. Defense counsel claimed that it was error not to instruct the jury on involuntary manslaughter and that defendant's mental defect prevented him from making a rational choice regarding the giving of the instruction. Prior to hearing oral arguments on the posttrial motion, the trial court allowed defense counsel to withdraw after defendant complained that he was dissatisfied with counsel's representation. On June 21, 2000, with new representation, defendant argued his posttrial motion to the court.
Defendant testified that he did not recall discussing the involuntary manslaughter instruction with his attorney, he did not recall discussing the instruction or receiving admonishments from the trial judge, nor did he recall opposing the instruction. Defendant's trial counsel also testified in support of defendant's motion. Defendant's trial counsel testified on direct examination that he discussed the giving of a lesser-offense instruction at least three times with defendant. He testified that he thoroughly explained the meaning of the instruction including that defendant could receive less time if found guilty of the lesser offense. However, he stated that he believed the waiver was not knowing and voluntary. The trial court denied the motion.
Defendant appealed, and the appellate court reversed defendant's conviction and remanded for a new trial. The appellate court held that the trial court abused its discretion when it failed to give the lesser-offense instruction sua sponte after determining that the instruction was warranted by the evidence. According to the appellate court, once the trial court determined that the evidence warranted an instruction, the trial court was required to give the instruction. Relying upon this court's decision in People v. Garcia, 188 Ill.2d 265, 281, 242 Ill.Dec. 295, 721 N.E.2d 574 (1999), the appellate court held that "it is the duty of the trial court, independent of defendant's actions or understanding, to protect `society's interest in avoiding the unjustified exoneration of wrongdoers and in punishing a defendant only to the extent of his crime.'" Accordingly, the appellate court held, "Once the trial court exercised its discretion and determined that it was appropriate to give an involuntary manslaughter instruction, it was an abuse of discretion to deny the instruction based upon the mistaken belief that the defendant had a right to stop the court from giving the instruction." No. 3-00-0152 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We granted the State's petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill.2d R. 315.
ANALYSIS
The State first asserts that the facts of this case did not warrant an involuntary *1190 manslaughter instruction. The State points to evidence that defendant fired several shots from a loaded shotgun in the direction of the victim. Further, defendant followed the victim as he fled and continued to shoot at the victim as the victim ran and fell to the ground. Additionally, defendant admitted that he continued to shoot at the victim after the victim was lying on the ground. Therefore, the State argues that no version of the evidence would support a verdict of involuntary manslaughter. Instead, the evidence reveals a deliberate act by defendant, done willfully and with knowledge that his acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm, sufficient to constitute the offense of murder and insufficient to establish the offense of involuntary manslaughter.
Defendant contends that this argument is waived because it was not argued before the appellate court and was not included in the State's petition for leave to appeal. Defendant appealed the conviction, and argued that the evidence supported an involuntary manslaughter instruction. The State did not respond to this argument. The appellate court held that the evidence warranted an involuntary manslaughter instruction, and the State appealed to this court. In its petition for leave to appeal, the State did not challenge the appellate court's finding that the evidence warranted the giving of an involuntary manslaughter instruction. Despite several opportunities, the State has failed to address this issue. The State first presented this issue in its brief to this court after we granted its petition for leave to appeal.
Supreme Court Rules 341(e)(7) and 315(g) provide that a party must raise arguments and provide citation to legal authority or to the record in the petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill.2d R. 315(g); 188 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7). Failure to comply with Rules 341(e)(7) and 315(g) results in waiver. See City of Chicago Heights v. Living Word Outreach Full Gospel Church & Ministries, Inc., 196 Ill.2d 1, 26, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916 (2001); but see People v. Donoho, 204 Ill.2d 159, 169, 273 Ill.Dec. 116, 788 N.E.2d 707 (2003). We recognize waiver is a limitation on the parties not on the court. Unzicker v. Kraft Food Ingredients Corp., 203 Ill.2d 64, 73, 270 Ill.Dec. 724, 783 N.E.2d 1024 (2002). However, in the instant case, the State repeatedly failed to raise or address this argument. We hold that the issue is waived.
The State next contends that the appellate court's reversal was improper because reversal was predicated on an alleged error invited by defendant. According to the State, defendant requested that the trial court proceed in the manner he later claimed was in error, and as a consequence defendant is precluded from raising the issue on appeal.
Under the doctrine of invited error, an accused may not request to proceed in one manner and then later contend on appeal that the course of action was in error. People v. Villarreal, 198 Ill.2d 209, 227, 260 Ill.Dec. 619, 761 N.E.2d 1175 (2001); People v. Lowe, 153 Ill.2d 195, 199, 180 Ill.Dec. 90, 606 N.E.2d 1167 (1992); People v. Segoviano, 189 Ill.2d 228, 240-41, 244 Ill.Dec. 388, 725 N.E.2d 1275 (2000). The record clearly illustrates, and neither party disputes, that when asked whether he wished to submit an involuntary manslaughter instruction defendant answered that he did not want the instruction given to the jury. Defendant unequivocally opposed the giving of a lesser-offense instruction, and continued to oppose the instruction even after his attorney disagreed with his decision.
*1191 We agree with the State. Action taken at defendant's request precludes defendant from raising such course of conduct as error on appeal. See Villarreal, 198 Ill.2d at 227, 260 Ill.Dec. 619, 761 N.E.2d 1175 ("To allow defendant to object, on appeal, to the very verdict forms he requested at trial, would offend all notions of fair play" (emphasis in original)).
We also reject defendant's assertion that his decision to oppose the involuntary manslaughter instruction was not knowing or voluntary.[1] Defendant contends that it is clear from the record that he did not understand the decision he was making and believed he was deciding not to plead guilty. Defendant argues his conduct during the proceedings when he made his decision evinces his confusion. Further, defendant directs this court to his trial counsel's testimony during posttrial arguments as support for his argument that he did not understand the nature and consequences of his decision.
The record belies defendant's assertion. After defendant displayed some initial confusion, the trial court ordered a recess so that defense counsel could explain and discuss the matter with defendant. Defendant returned from recess certain of his decision. He remained certain of his decision after questioning from the trial court, and after his counsel indicated for the record that it was against his advice. Defense counsel stated, "I don't know what his exact words were [during the recess], but he made it clear that he did not want any lesser-included instruction. He believed that he didn't commit murder and wanted the case to be dealt with that way." Defendant's trial counsel further informed the court that he "went over all of the alternatives [including the sentencing ranges for involuntary manslaughter], told him what I thought, and then he decided."
We also disagree that trial counsel's testimony during posttrial arguments supports that defendant's testimony was neither knowing nor voluntary. This plainly distorts trial counsel's testimony. Defendant's trial counsel testified that the decision must have been neither knowing nor voluntary because it was against his better judgment. Simply stated, because defendant did not follow defense counsel's advice, defendant must not have understood the decision or its ramifications. Several comments by defendant's trial counsel during posttrial arguments illustrate this point:
"I believe that if he rejected an involuntary manslaughter instruction, that then he obviously couldn't understand the decision or ramifications of the decision that he was making.
* * *
I say that [he could not understand the nature and consequences of the decision] because it seems to me that if anybody could understand the nature and consequences of that decision, they wouldn't have made that decision. But you know, I didn't state it as a psychologist, I stated it as an attorney.
* * *
Well, if he didn't understand them [the ramifications of his decision], or either he didn't understand them or he chose to ignore them, but either way, he made a decision that I disagreed with."
Notably, defendant's trial counsel also agreed that one advantage to defendant's position was that the jury "could find him *1192 not guilty and he could walk out the door a free man."
In People v. Brocksmith, 162 Ill.2d 224, 229, 205 Ill.Dec. 113, 642 N.E.2d 1230 (1994), we held that defendant, rather than his counsel, has the right to make the decision whether to tender an instruction on a lesser-included offense. Our holding in Brocksmith rests upon the principle that a defendant should ultimately have the ability to make the decision because it concerns "the potential loss of liberty on an initially uncharged offense." Brocksmith, 162 Ill.2d at 229, 205 Ill.Dec. 113, 642 N.E.2d 1230. The mere existence of a decision against counsel's advice does not establish that defendant could not understand the consequences of his decision. Rather, in this case, the record simply demonstrates that defendant exercised his right to oppose the tendering of the lesser-offense instruction, a decision which protected him against the possibility of a compromise verdict by the jury. Therefore, the record does not demonstrate that defendant's decision to oppose the giving of a lesser-offense instruction was not knowing or voluntary.
Despite our finding that defendant cannot request the court proceed in one manner and then contend the action was in error, we are compelled to comment further to provide guidance to our trial courts. We observe that waiver is a limitation on the parties and not on the court (People v. Kliner, 185 Ill.2d 81, 127, 235 Ill.Dec. 667, 705 N.E.2d 850 (1998)), and a reviewing court may ignore waiver "to ensure the maintenance of a sound and uniform body of precedent" (Lowe, 153 Ill.2d at 199, 180 Ill.Dec. 90, 606 N.E.2d 1167). Therefore, we look beyond waiver to address the issue in this case: whether the appellate court misinterpreted when a lesser-offense instruction is mandatory and erred in finding that the trial court had a duty to give the involuntary manslaughter instruction sua sponte.
In this case, neither defendant nor the State requested the giving of a lesser-offense instruction. Rather, defendant objected, and ultimately the trial court did not tender the instruction to the jury. Under these circumstances, we are guided by our decision in People v. Taylor, 36 Ill.2d 483, 224 N.E.2d 266 (1967), where we clearly rejected the notion that a trial court has a duty to give the instruction sua sponte. Like defendant in the instant matter, in Taylor neither the defendant nor his attorney requested the lesser-offense manslaughter instruction, the State did not request a lesser-offense instruction, and the trial court did not tender the instruction to the jury. Taylor, 36 Ill.2d at 491, 224 N.E.2d 266. The defendant complained on appeal that the trial court erred in failing to give the manslaughter instruction sua sponte. We held that the decision is discretionary.
"The decisions of the court indicate no more than an application of the familiar procedural rule that error cannot be assigned in a reviewing court with respect to a matter upon which the trial court was not called upon to rule. So it has been said, `The general statement contained in the cases, that a manslaughter instruction should be given where there is evidence justifying it, must be understood in the sense the duty exists when such instruction is offered by either side, when the circumstances justify it, but does not apply to cases where no instructions for manslaughter are offered in the case. The failure to give an instruction for manslaughter where none was tendered is not error.' [Citation.]
The result is that when the evidence in a murder case would support a verdict of manslaughter, and the defendant does not request a manslaughter instruction, *1193 the giving of such an instruction is committed to the discretion of the trial judge." Taylor, 36 Ill.2d at 489, 224 N.E.2d 266.
Importantly, in Taylor we also rejected the assertion that whenever the evidence warrants a lesser-offense instruction, the instruction must be tendered.
"Many decisions of this court have stated that `* * * if there is any evidence in the record which, if believed by the jury, would reduce a charge of murder to manslaughter, an instruction defining that crime should be given. [Citations.] Under these authorities it is immaterial that the defendant did not request a manslaughter instruction, or objected to it.
On the other hand it has been held that the failure to give a manslaughter instruction cannot be asserted as a ground for reversal in a reviewing court unless such an instruction has been requested. [Citations.] * * * `No such instructions having been asked by plaintiff in error, the court had a right to assume that plaintiff in error preferred to submit the case to the jury in such way that the jury would be compelled to find the defendants guilty of murder or not guilty. It was the right of plaintiff in error to submit that question to the jury and require the jury to pass on the question of his guilt or innocence of the crime of murder, and it was not the duty of the court to submit issues and questions to the jury which the parties, by their action, said they did not desire passed upon.' * * *.
* * *
When the evidence will support either charge and the prosecution does not tender an instruction on the lesser offense, the defendant has a choice, subject to the judge's authority to instruct sua sponte, of submitting one or both instructions. Different views have been expressed as to the consequences of submitting both instructions. It has been said that `merciful, or weak jurors may disregard even overwhelming proof of culpability and acquit entirely or convict of a lower crime than the evidence reflects.' [Citation.] It has also been said that to give both instructions `is apt to induce a doubtful jury to find the defendant guilty of the less serious offense rather than to continue the debate as to his innocence.' [Citation.]
It may be that more accurate results would be obtained if the trial judge was required to instruct as to both the greater and the lesser offenses whenever the evidence would sustain either verdict, and in some jurisdictions such a requirement has been imposed by statute or by decision. [Citation.] But we are not sufficiently persuaded that we are willing to eliminate by judicial decision an established procedure that has long been considered to operate for the benefit of those accused of crime." (Emphasis added.) Taylor, 36 Ill.2d at 488, 490-91, 224 N.E.2d 266.
We will not depart from this well-established procedure. See People v. Garcia, 188 Ill.2d 265, 270, 242 Ill.Dec. 295, 721 N.E.2d 574 (1999); People v. Barnard, 104 Ill.2d 218, 232, 83 Ill.Dec. 585, 470 N.E.2d 1005 (1984); see also People v. Sinnott, 226 Ill.App.3d 923, 932, 168 Ill. Dec. 865, 590 N.E.2d 502 (1992). When the evidence will support either charge, a trial court may exercise discretion and consider several factors in arriving at the decision to tender or not tender the lesser-offense instruction. It is appropriate for the trial court to give weight to the views of the prosecution, the defense, and also society's interest in avoiding unjustified exoneration of wrongdoers and in punishing an accused only to the extent of the *1194 crime. However, no one consideration predominates over another. Rather, this well-established procedure is a balancing exercise and where facts exist like those before us today the decision has long been committed to the discretion of the court.
The appellate court erred in finding that the trial court had a duty to give the involuntary manslaughter instruction sua sponte. Furthermore, there is no evidence to suggest the trial court abused its discretion when it declined to tender the instruction. The trial court considered the appropriate factors and chose not to tender the lesser-offense instruction in light of the defendant's opposition to the instruction. The exercise of restraint in giving the instruction does not signal an abuse of the court's discretion.
CONCLUSION
For the aforementioned reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Appellate court judgment reversed; circuit court judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The parties do not raise and we make no comment regarding what action, if any, the trial court must take to ensure that a defendant's decision to tender or withhold a lesser-offense instruction is knowing or voluntary.

=== CASE 2207941 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.978788+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 1008 (2004)
Marshall RANDOLPH, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 45A04-0307-PC-376.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
February 10, 2004.
Transfer Denied April 12, 2004.
*1010 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender of Indiana, Brian Eisenman, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Richard C. Webster, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
*1009 OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Marshall Randolph was convicted following a jury trial of murder. He filed a Petition for Post-Conviction Relief which the post-conviction court denied. He now appeals. We affirm.
Issues
Randolph raises three issues for our review which we consolidate and restate as:
1. Whether the trial court properly instructed the jury regarding self-defense; and
2. Whether Randolph received effective assistance of trial and appellate counsel.
Facts and Procedural History
Randolph was convicted by a jury of murder and his conviction was affirmed by our supreme court. Randolph v. State, 755 N.E.2d 572 (Ind.2001). The facts of the case were outlined as follows:
The essential facts of this tragic and senseless killing are as follows. In the evening hours of August 1, 1998, Randolph approached a group of young men that included Hicks and inquired which one of the group had been "messing with" his sister. The record shows that earlier in the day Marcus Holloway, a member of the group, allegedly made an untoward remark directed at Randolph's sister. After an exchange of words between Holloway and Randolph, the matter seemed to have been closed when Randolph said, "You don't mess with my sister and my sister won't mess with you." However, Randolph continued his belligerence exclaiming, "Next time I come out here. It is not going to be talking." At that point Hicks intervened and asked why Randolph had come into his neighborhood starting trouble and that no one had bothered Randolph's sister. The two then exchanged words, and Randolph produced a handgun pointing it at Hicks. When Hicks raised his hands saying, "Do what you got to do," Randolph fired three times. Hicks died as a result of a gunshot wound to the chest. Randolph was eventually arrested and charged with murder. After a jury trial he was convicted as charged, and the trial court sentenced him to fifty-two years imprisonment.
Id. at 574. Randolph sought post-conviction relief alleging that the trial court gave erroneous instructions to the jury and that he received ineffective assistance of both trial and appellate counsel. The post-conviction court denied Randolph's petition for post-conviction relief and this appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Randolph's Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
Under the rules of post-conviction relief, the petitioner must establish *1011 the grounds for relief by a preponderance of the evidence. Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1, § 5. A petitioner who has been denied post-conviction relief appeals from a negative judgment and he must convince the appellate court that the evidence as a whole leads unerringly and unmistakably to a decision opposite that reached by the post-conviction court. Hyppolite v. State, 774 N.E.2d 584, 599 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied. In other words, we "will disturb a post-conviction court's decision as being contrary to law only where the evidence is without conflict and leads but to one conclusion and the post-conviction court has reached the opposite conclusion." Id. (quoting Miller v. State, 702 N.E.2d 1053, 1058 (Ind.1998), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 1083, 120 S. Ct. 806, 145 L. Ed. 2d 679 (2000) (citations omitted)).
When reviewing the post-conviction court's decisions, we will not reweigh the evidence nor will we judge the credibility of the witnesses. Lineberry v. State, 747 N.E.2d 1151, 1154 (Ind.Ct.App.2001). Rather, we consider only the evidence that supports the decision of the post-conviction court together with any reasonable inferences drawn therefrom. Dickenson v. State, 732 N.E.2d 238, 241 (Ind.Ct.App. 2000). Also, we accept the post-conviction court's findings of fact unless clearly erroneous. Dewitt v. State, 755 N.E.2d 167, 170 (Ind.2001).
II. Jury Instructions
A. Standard of Review
Instruction of the jury is within the discretion of the trial court and is reviewed only for an abuse of discretion. Bayes v. State, 791 N.E.2d 263, 264 (Ind. Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. This well-settled standard by which we review challenges to jury instructions affords great deference to the trial court. Id. Further, we note that any error in giving jury instructions is subject to a harmless error analysis. Id.
B. Jury Instructions on Self-Defense
The trial court gave the following instructions regarding self-defense to the jury:
FINAL INSTRUCTION NUMBER 13
The defense of self-defense is defined by law in Indiana as follows: A person is justified in using reasonable force against another person to protect himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the eminent [sic] use of unlawful force. However, a person is justified in using deadly force only if he reasonably believes that that force is necessary to prevent serious bodily injury to himself or a third person or the commission of a forcible felony. No person in this state shall be placed in legal jeopardy of any kind whatsoever for protecting himself by reasonable means necessary. However, a person is not justified in using force if: He is committing or is escaping after, the commission of a crime; he provokes unlawful action by another person, with intent to cause bodily injury to the other person; or he has entered into combat with another person or is the initial aggressor, unless he withdraws from that encounter and communicates to the other person his intent to do so or and [sic] the other person nevertheless continues or threatens to continue unlawful action.
The State has the burden of disproving the defense of self-defense beyond a reasonable doubt. Before you may find the defendant guilty of the crime charged, or a lesser offense, you must find beyond a reasonable doubt *1012 that the defendant was not acting in self-defense.
FINAL INSTRUCTION NUMBER 14
It is well settled that a defendant need only raise the issue of self-defense so that a reasonable doubt exists. The State then carries the burden of negating the presence of one or more of the necessary elements of self-defense:
1. that the defendant was without fault;
2. was in a place where he had a right to be in relation to his alleged assailant; or,
3. acted in reasonable fear of death or great bodily harm.
The questions concerning the existence of the eminent [sic] use of unlawful force, the necessity or apparent necessity of using force, as well as the amount of force necessary to repel an attack, can be determined only from the standpoint of the defendant at the time and under all existing circumstances. In the exercise of self-defense, the defendant ordinarily is required to act immediately, without time to deliberate and investigate. In such circumstances, the danger which exists only in appearance is to him as real and eminent [sic] as if it were actual.
The important inquiry is: Was the danger actual to the defendant's comprehension? It is not whether an injury was actually intended by the assailant but whether it presented a danger from the defendant's point of view.
Appellant's Appendix at 77-80 (emphasis added). Randolph contends that Instruction number thirteen was improper because an individual who is in the process of committing a crime is not absolutely precluded from claiming self-defense. He contends that evidence was presented that he did not have a license for the gun he was carrying. Thus, he argues that the jury could have been led to believe that, because he was committing a crime by carrying a weapon for which he did not have a license, he was not entitled to claim self-defense. Additionally, he argues that Instruction number fourteen was improper because it informed the jury that a person who is claiming self-defense must have acted without fault. Randolph argues that this is an incorrect statement of the law.
We note first that Randolph has waived his argument to the jury instructions by failing to object at trial and by failing to tender a competing set of instructions. Franklin v. State, 715 N.E.2d 1237, 1241 (Ind.1999). Randolph, however, argues that the instructions constitute fundamental error. However, this claim is not available in post-conviction proceedings because the issue was available to Randolph on direct appeal. The purpose of a petition for post-conviction relief is to raise issues unknown or unavailable to a defendant at the time of the original trial and appeal. Lockhart v. State, 632 N.E.2d 374, 375 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied. Issues available, but not raised, at trial or on direct appeal are waived for post-conviction proceedings. Timberlake v. State, 753 N.E.2d 591, 597 (Ind.2001), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 839, 123 S. Ct. 162, 154 L. Ed. 2d 61 (2002). Additionally, our supreme court has held that freestanding allegations of fundamental error are not available in post-conviction proceedings. Sanders v. State, 765 N.E.2d 591, 592 (Ind. 2002) ("The fundamental error exception to the contemporaneous objection rule applies to direct appeals. In post-conviction proceedings, complaints that something went awry at trial are generally cognizable only when they show deprivation of the right to effective counsel or issues demonstrably *1013 unavailable at the time of trial or direct appeal."). Thus, Randolph's fundamental error argument is not available in post-conviction proceedings. Therefore, Randolph has waived this argument. However, we still address the issue in terms of the effectiveness of his trial and appellate counsel.
III. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
A. Standard of Review
To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel, Randolph must show that his counsel's performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness as determined by prevailing norms, and that the lack of reasonable representation prejudiced him. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984); Hyppolite v. State, 774 N.E.2d 584, 601-02 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied. Counsel is afforded considerable discretion in choosing strategy and tactics and we will accord that decision deference. Conner v. State, 711 N.E.2d 1238, 1244 (Ind.1999), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 829, 121 S. Ct. 81, 148 L. Ed. 2d 43 (2000). A strong presumption arises that counsel rendered adequate assistance and made all significant decisions in the exercise of reasonable professional judgment. Id. Isolated mistakes, poor strategy, inexperience, and instances of bad judgment do not necessarily render representation ineffective. Id.
The standard for reviewing claims of ineffective assistance of appellate counsel is the same as the standard for reviewing assistance of trial counsel. Walker v. State, 779 N.E.2d 1158, 1162 n. 1 (Ind.Ct. App.2002), trans. denied. To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, Randolph must show that his counsel's performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness as determined by prevailing norms, and that the lack of reasonable representation prejudiced him. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S. Ct. 2052; Hyppolite, 774 N.E.2d at 601-02.
B. Randolph's Claims of Ineffective Assistance of Trial Counsel
Randolph claims that his trial counsel was ineffective for not objecting to the self-defense instructions given by the trial court. He also claims that his trial counsel was ineffective for not tendering correct instructions setting out the necessity of a causal connection between the crime committed and the act of self-defense.
Prejudice exists when a petitioner shows "there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome." Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052. Although we held above that Randolph's post-conviction challenge to the instructions was waived, we must still examine whether his counsel was effective.
The State contends that any error in the instructions given was harmless. We agree. Errors in the giving or refusing of instructions are harmless where a conviction is clearly sustained by the evidence and the instruction would not likely have impacted the jury's verdict. Crawford v. State, 550 N.E.2d 759, 762 (Ind.1990). An instruction error will result in reversal when the reviewing court "cannot say with complete confidence" that a reasonable jury would have rendered a guilty verdict had the instruction not been given. Dill v. State, 741 N.E.2d 1230, 1233 (Ind.2001) (citing White v. State, 675 N.E.2d 345, 349 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied).
Our supreme court has held that the giving of an instruction similar to the instructions *1014 we are considering here was not erroneous. In Mayes v. State, 744 N.E.2d 390 (Ind.2001), the trial court gave an instruction on self-defense which stated that a person is not justified in using force even for self-defenseif he is committing, or is escaping after the commission of, a crime. Id. at 392. Mayes conceded that he possessed an unlicensed gun at the time he shot his girlfriend and admitted that doing so was a crime. Thus, Mayes argued that the jury could have believed that self-defense was unavailable to Mayes. Our supreme court agreed that in some instances a contemporaneous crime may not negate a claim of self-defense. Id. at 393. However, the court stated that such a literal application of the statute would nullify claims of self-defense in a variety of circumstances and produce absurd results. Id.[1]
Our supreme court held that because a defendant is committing a crime at the time he is allegedly defending himself is not sufficient standing alone to deprive the defendant of the defense of self-defense. Id. at 394. Rather, there must be an immediate causal connection between the crime and the confrontation. Id. In other words, the evidence must show that but for the defendant committing a crime, the confrontation resulting in injury to the victim would not have occurred. Id. The court then turned to the question of whether there was evidence demonstrating that but for Mayes's possession of an unlicensed handgun, the confrontation resulting in his girlfriend's death would not have occurred. Id. Determining that this was ultimately a question for the jury and that the jury returned a guilty verdict, the court stated that the trial court's instruction was not erroneous. Id. at 394-95.
The case at hand is very similar to Mayes. Here, Randolph is arguing that, because he was in possession of an unlicensed handgun, the jury could have believed that the claim of self-defense was unavailable to him. He makes a similar argument by saying that, through Instruction number fourteen, the jury could have believed that the claim of self-defense was unavailable to him because he was not without fault. However, following the holding of Mayes, we do not find Randolph's argument convincing.
As our supreme court did in Mayes, we turn to the question of whether there was evidence demonstrating that but for Randolph's possession of an unlicensed handgun, the confrontation resulting in Hicks's death would not have occurred. Our supreme court considered the evidence in Randolph's direct appeal:
One of the State's key witnesses, Marcus Holloway, testified that Hicks raised his hands when Randolph pointed his weapon. In turn, the only evidence supporting a claim of self-defense was Randolph's own testimony. Further, firing multiple shots undercuts a claim of self-defense. Three eyewitnesses testified that Randolph fired multiple shots at Hicks. The jury was free to disbelieve Randolph's self-serving testimony, which it apparently did.
Randolph, 755 N.E.2d at 576. The fact that Randolph did not have a license to possess the weapon would seem to have no bearing on its use in Hicks's death. On the other hand, the jury could have concluded that but for Randolph's possession *1015 of the unlicensed handgun, Hicks would still be alive because Randolph's unlicensed handgun was required, by law, to be kept at his dwelling, on his property, or at his fixed place of business. See Ind. Code § 35-47-2-1. Ultimately, it is left to the jury, the fact-finder in this case, to determine whether there is an immediate causal connection between Randolph's possession of an unlicensed firearm and Hicks's death. This is not an issue that can be resolved by this court as a matter of law. See Mayes, 744 N.E.2d at 394.
Additionally, we note that Randolph is not entitled to relief on this claim for an additional reason. As noted by our supreme court in Randolph's direct appeal, three eyewitnesses testified that Randolph fired multiple shots at Hicks. Firing multiple shots undercuts a claim of self-defense. Id. at 395 n. 2. Thus, there was overwhelming evidence before the jury that Randolph's claim of self-defense was without merit notwithstanding the contemporaneous crime language contained in the instruction. See id. Because any error in the jury instructions was harmless, we cannot now say that Randolph's trial counsel was ineffective.
C. Randolph's Claims of Ineffective Assistance of Appellate Counsel
Randolph argues that his appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to raise the issue of improper jury instructions. Again, Randolph has not demonstrated to this court that the outcome of his trial would have been different had his appellate counsel raised the issue. First, we held above that the trial court's instructions were not grounds for reversal. Second, there was overwhelming evidence of guilt so as to rebut any self-defense claim. Therefore, we cannot say that Randolph's appellate counsel was ineffective.
Conclusion
Any errors in the jury instructions on self-defense were harmless. Additionally, Randolph's trial and appellate counsel were not ineffective. Therefore, the denial of Randolph's Petition for Post-Conviction Relief is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BROOK, C.J., and SULLIVAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  As an example, the court stated that, had Mayes shot his girlfriend the minute before his handgun license expired, he would have been able to assert a claim of self-defense, but, had he shot her a minute later, the claim would have been unavailable to him. The court noted that this would not seem to be the intent of the legislation. Mayes, 744 N.E.2d at 394.

=== CASE 9736918 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:59.205974+00 ===

OPINION
ZAPPALA, Justice.
This case involves a claim for post-mortem work loss benefits under the now-repealed No-Fault Motor Vehicle Insur*533anee Act, Act of July 19,1974 P.L. 489, No. 176 §§ 101-701, 40 P.S. §§ 1009.101-1009.701. On August 12, 1980, John Miller, the named insured on a no-fault automobile insurance policy issued by the Appellant, Keystone Insurance Company (Keystone), sustained fatal injuries in a motor vehicle accident. Appellant promptly paid funeral, collision and survivor’s loss benefits to Appellee Mary Miller, the mother of John Miller. On August 11, 1986, Appellee filed a claim on behalf of her son’s estate, seeking post-mortem work loss benefits, plus interest and counsel fees, for herself and the class which she represents. Following a change in venue and an involved procedural history, the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County conducted a hearing and granted Appellant’s motion for summary judgment on the basis that the Appellee’s claim was barred by the statute of limitations.1 On appeal, Superior Court interpreted our decision in Dercoli v. Pennsylvania National Mutual Insurance Company, 520 Pa. 471, 554 A.2d 906 (1989), applied it retroactively and reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment. We granted allowance of appeal to consider Superior Court’s interpretation of Dercoli as well as its retroactive application.
Initially, we note that we need not decide the issue of whether Dercoli, supra, requires retroactive application because of our determination that it is not applicable to the instant case. The essence of Appellant’s argument is that Superior Court misinterpreted this Court’s holding in Dercoli and applied it to a situation which is factually distinguishable. We agree. There being no error of law or abuse of discretion, we find the trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of Appellant.
The pertinent factual background is as follows: Appellant paid Appellee $1,500 in funeral benefits on September 15, 1980, $5,652.97 in collision coverage benefits on October 1, 1980, and $5,000 in survivor’s loss benefits over a period of *534time ending on April 30, 1982. Appellee did not request nor did she seek post-mortem work loss benefits until August, 1986, when she filed a complaint averring that Keystone misled her into believing that her son’s estate had no valid claim for work loss benefits. Appellee did not attend the trial court’s hearing and the sole evidence introduced into the record on her behalf consisted of two exhibits offered by her counsel. One exhibit, to which Appellant objected, was a copy of a letter written by an independent adjuster, retained by Appellant, to Appellant’s claims manager. This letter dated October 21, 1980, indicated that the adjuster knew of the estate’s potential entitlement to work loss benefits by reason of recent court decisions but that the adjuster made no mention of “possible” wage loss benefits to Miller and would “await developments in that regard”.2 The other exhibit was a Keystone chart showing the various payments made to plaintiff, including a final payment of survivor’s loss benefits on April 30, 1982.
Appellee argued to the trial court that collision benefits are not considered no-fault benefits, hence, a four year statute of *535limitations was applicable.3 The trial court determined that even if the four year statute of limitations was triggered, Appellee’s action was untimely as the four year period expired on August 12,1984.4 Appellee did not dispute the trial court’s interpretation of the applicable statute of limitations in her appeal to Superior Court. Instead, she asserted that Keystone knew of the estate’s entitlement to work loss benefits by reason of recent appellate decisions but consciously and deliberately elected to keep silent in its dealings with her. The Appellee contended that these actions constituted a breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing announced in Dercoli which operated to toll the statute of limitations.
In the Superior Court’s view, Dercoli held that an insurance company has an affirmative duty to inform an insured of all the potential claims that the insured may have against the company when the three following conditions exist: (1) the insurer has assumed the responsibility for processing its insured’s claims; (2) the insurer knows that the insured is relying exclusively on its advice and counsel; and, (3) the insurer has knowledge regarding an additional claim for benefits to which the claimant is potentially entitled. Superior Court found that the responsibility to obtain for the estate all that it is potentially entitled to is implicitly imposed by the No-Fault Act. It also determined that when an insurer counsels an unrepresented claimant, the insurer tacitly knows that its level of information is greater than that of the insured. Finally, Superior Court held that even though the law is not settled on the question of whether an insured is able to recover at the time the insured’s claims are being processed, the duty of good faith and fair dealing announced in Dercoli *536imposes an affirmative obligation upon an insurer to inform its insured that it has knowledge of the possibility of a claim for recovery and that it is no longer acting in the interests of its unrepresented insureds in this matter. Finding some evidence for the imposition of the Dercoli duty of good faith and fair dealing, Superior Court reversed and remanded to determine whether Miller was relying upon the advice of Appellant’s agent or was represented by her own counsel.5
Superior Court was incorrect in holding that Dercoli imposes an affirmative duty upon an insurer to advise and inform an insured of all potential claims when the insurer assumes the responsibility for processing the claim. Superior Court erroneously interpreted and impermissibly expanded our limited holding in Dercoli beyond its natural bounds by applying it to a situation which is factually distinguishable.
Dercoli involved a situation where the widow of an insured sued two automobile insurers for damages for breach of an alleged duty of good faith and fair dealing. The plaintiff alleged that she had been severely injured in an automobile accident in which her late husband had been at fault. Significantly, she further alleged that upon the advice and assurances of the insurers that she would receive everything to which she was entitled, she was induced to refrain from hiring counsel to represent her in her dealings with the insurers. While the insurers were still adjusting the plaintiffs claims, the defense of interspousal immunity was abolished. This meant that the plaintiff had a viable tort claim for negligence against her late husband’s estate which was unquestionably covered by the policies’ liability coverage. Notwithstanding the insurers’s representations and assurances, the insurers did not advise the plaintiff of the potential tort claim or of the fact that the claim was clearly covered by the policies. The insurers in Dercoli successfully demurred to the complaint and the plaintiff appealed. Superior Court affirmed the trial court’s dismissal. This Court reversed.
*537Taking great care to emphasize that the insurers in Dercoli actively fostered the insured’s erroneous belief that no viable tort claim existed, this Court stated:
The appellees’ agents in this case voluntarily undertook to provide assistance and advice to appellant and in the process advised her against retaining independent legal counsel. The appellees were bound to deal with the appellant on a fair and frank basis, and at all times, to act in good faith. The duty of an insurance company to deal with the insured fairly and in good faith includes the duty of full and complete disclosure as to all of the benefits and every coverage that is provided by the applicable policy or policies along with all requirements, including any time limitations for making a claim. (Citations omitted.) This is especially true where the insurer undertakes to advise and counsel the insured’s claim for benefits.
520 Pa. at 477-478, 554 A.2d at 909. Clearly, the insurer’s knowing and purposeful misrepresentation was critical to this Court’s determination that the insurers were bound to disclose all of the benefits to which the claimant was entitled.
Appellant argues that Superior Court expanded the scope of the duty of good faith and fair dealing announced in Dercoli by broadly applying it to a factual situation where the insurer did not act in any manner to discourage the insured from obtaining legal counsel.
In this case, the record is totally devoid of any indication that the insurer voluntarily assumed to act as the insured’s counsel. In fact, there is no allegation nor any evidence in the record to suggest that Appellant induced Appellee to refrain from retaining counsel, that Appellant made any promises to Appellee, or that Appellant in any way voluntarily transformed itself into a legal advisor.
We find this case factually similar to Taglianetti v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, 503 Pa. 270, 469 A.2d 548 (1983). Taglianetti involved a case where a widow filed a claim for survivor’s benefits under the Workmen’s Compensation Act six years after her husband’s death. The claimant *538received a check representing three months of death “gratuity” benefits shortly after her husband’s death in April, 1973. Two months later, the claimant requested information from her late husband’s employer as to any widow’s benefits due her. Unidentified employees informed her that there were no other benefits apart from life insurance and the death gratuity that she received. The Plaintiff did not seek advice from any other source and claimed that she did not learn of her potential entitlement to work-related benefits until 1978, when she read a newspaper account of a case regarding this Court’s decision in two other “heart attack” cases. On April 3, 1979, the Plaintiff filed a claim alleging that the statute of limitations was tolled because her late husband’s employer failed to notify her of her right to file a claim for death benefits. This Court refused to impose an affirmative duty upon an employer to apprise an employee or claimant of all available benefits. We held that in the absence of evidence of fraud, intentional deception, or the making of misleading statements, the employer had no affirmative duty to apprise a compensation claimant of any or all available benefits.
Although the opinion announcing the judgment of the court in Dercoli, expressed the view that this Court’s prior decision in Taglianetti should be overruled,6 Justice Papadakos, joined by Justice McDermott wrote separately to make clear that he did not agree with the proposed overruling of Taglianetti. In reaffirming the principle of Taglianetti, Mr. Justice Papadakos wrote:
In Taglianetti, supra, we agreed with the contention that an employer was under no legally imposed affirmative duty to provide information of possible worker’s compensation benefits to a deceased employee’s spouse where there was no evidence of fraud, intentional deception, or the making of misleading statements.... [In Dercoli, ] Once the insurers *539knowingly and purposefully talked the widow out of seeking independent legal counsel, the insurers themselves voluntarily placed themselves in the position of protecting the widow and obtaining for her all benefits that were reasonably due under the facts and state of law known to the insurers.... Our majority opinion does not transform insurance companies into legal service advisors for claimants, as feared by the dissent. On the contrary, in this case, the insurers themselves voluntarily transformed themselves into legal advisors to the widow.... Dercoli 520 Pa. at 481-482, 554 A.2d 906.
Because the Dercoli opinion in support of overturning Taglianetti commanded the allegiance of only two members of this Court, this view is without precedential authority.7 Commonwealth v. Covil, 474 Pa. 375, 378 A.2d 841, 844 (1977); Mt. Lebanon v. County Board of Elections, 470 Pa. 317, 368 A.2d 648 (1977). Notwithstanding this confusion expressed in Dercoli Dercoli is not inconsistent with Taglianetti. Rather, we find that Dercoli was not the creation of a new duty, but simply an application of the principles enunciated in Taglianetti.
We reaffirm our earlier rulings that in the absence of evidence of fraud, intentional deception, or the making of misleading statements, the employer has no affirmative duty to apprise a compensation claimant of any or all available benefits. This holding is in accord with our previous decisions in D’Ambrosio v. Pennsylvania National Mutual Casualty Insurance Company, 494 Pa. 501, 431 A.2d 966 (1981), and Smith v. Harleysville Insurance Company, 494 Pa. 515, 431 A.2d 974 (1981), where this Court declined the opportunity to create a judicial remedy for bad faith conduct which occurs under the No-Fault Act.
It is undisputed that because the Appellee’s action for work loss benefits was not commenced until almost six years after her son’s death it is barred by the No-Fault Act’s *540statute of limitations.8 The fundamental and long-standing rule in Pennsylvania has been that a lack of knowledge, mistake or misunderstanding does not operate to toll the statute of limitations. Sachritz v. Pennsylvania National Mutual Casualty Insurance Company, 293 Pa.Super. 483, 439 A.2d 678 (1981), aff'd, 500 Pa. 167, 455 A.2d 101 (1982).9 If, however, the insurer fraudulently or deceptively lulls the insured into inaction, the principle of estoppel will operate to prevent the insurer from claiming the defense of untimeliness when the insured’s failure to timely file a petition has resulted from the insurer’s own actions.
In the present case, the record is devoid of any evidence that Keystone acted to defraud the Appellee. There is absolutely no evidence from which it could be reasonably interpreted that Keystone’s words or conduct lulled the Appellee into a false sense of security. We are not confronted here with an insurer’s actions which fostered an insured’s erroneous belief that a claim has been or will be processed. To the contrary, the record unequivocally indicates that there was no discussion related to post-mortem survivor’s benefits or the filing of a claim. Moreover, any claim that Appellant deceptively lulled the Appellee into inaction is fruitless as the Appellee’s estate *541was only potentially entitled to benefits at the time she filed her original claim for benefits.10
The Order of Superior Court vacating the Order of the trial court is reversed and the Order of the Court of Common Pleas for Dauphin County granting Appellant’s motion for Summary Judgment on June 2, 1989, is reinstated.
LARSEN, J., did not participate in the consideration or decision of this case.
McDERMOTT, j., did not participate in the decision of this case.
CAPPY, J., files a Dissenting Opinion in which PAPADA-KOS, J., joins.
. In orders entered on May 16, 1989, the court granted Appellant's motion for summary judgment as to Appellee’s individual claim; denied on various grounds, all of the petitions to intervene; and denied the motion for class certification as no representative plaintiff remained to lead the class.
. Pursuant to the trial court's orders to produce documents without regard to the existence of the work product doctrine and privilege, Keystone stamped "confidential" and produced the following document from the Arthur Reeher Company which was addressed to Mr. Sal Liberto, Keystone Claims Manager:
This will supplement our previous report dated 10-10-80 and acknowledge our Harrisburg Branch cc of 10-16-80, and our phone conversation of 10-20-80 along with serving as our closing report. As you have indicated in our telephone conversation of 10-20-80 that Mary Miller (mother of the deceased insured) would be entitled to survivors benefits which according to your Philadelphia office would involve a monthly check of $135.00 until the $5,000 survivors benefit is exhausted [sic] we have notified Mrs. Miller that she will be receiving monthly payments shortly in that regard. In addition, we made no mention to Mrs. Miller as discussed pertaining to possible benefits for lost wages and will merely await developments in that regard.
In light of the above, our activity in the York area would now appear to be complete while our Harrisburg Branch, follows further in their investigation and handling. Thereofre, [sic] we are taking liberty of retirring [sic] our file and submitting our service invoice for your consideration.
We again thank you.... (R. 170a).
. Appellee also argued that Keystone’s failure to provide her with a notice of rejection tolled the statute of limitations and that the limitations period was tolled because Keystone allegedly misrepresented the law to Appellee. Apparently the Appellee did not argue that Keystone had an affirmative duty of good faith and fair dealing that obligated Keystone to explain all potential benefits as Dercoli was not decided until March 3, 1989.
. The court ignored Keystone’s later payments of survivor’s benefits ending on April 30, 1982, for these purposes since those payments were not for loss arising otherwise than from death.
. Superior Court also quashed the appeals of the remaining petitions to intervene and those parties have not sought leave to appeal.
. “We believe that Taglianetti was wrongly decided in that the decision in that case tends to relieve insurers and similar entities of the obligation to deal fairly, honestly, openly and in good faith with lay-claimants and non-experts who may be entitled to benefits and who are the very people the insurers have obligated themselves to protect.” 520 Pa. at 479, 554 A.2d at 910. (Opinion of Larsen, J.).
. Only former Mme. Justice Stout joined in the opinion announcing the judgment of the court.
. The no-Fault Act provides the following limitations period for actions to recover benefits:
(1) If no-fault benefits have not been paid for loss arising otherwise than from death, an action therefor may be commenced not later than two years after the victim suffers the loss and either knows, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have known, that the loss was caused by the accident, or not later than four years after the accident, whichever is earlier. If no-fault benefits have been paid for loss arising otherwise than from death, an action for further benefits, other than survivor’s benefits, by either the same or another claimant; may be commenced not later than two years after the last payment of benefits.
40 P.S. § 1009.106(c)(1);
. In Sachritz, the plaintiff was a survivor who received some no-fault benefits from her deceased husband's insurer, but apparently had not been advised as to the possibility of a claim for post-mortem work loss benefits and failed to file a timely claim for them. This Court affirmed the Superior Court’s finding that the insured's lack of knowledge of the estate’s potential claim for post-mortem work loss benefits does not toll the statute of limitations on her claim.
. On September 22, 1980, at approximately the same time the Miller estate's claims were being processed, this Court decided the companion cases of Allstate Insurance Company v. Heffner, and Pontius v. United States Fidelity and Guaranty Company, 491 Pa. 447, 421 A.2d 629 (1980). Heffner concerned a claim for work loss benefits brought by the survivor of a deceased victim. Pontius concerned a claim for work loss benefits brought by the administrator of a deceased victim’s estate. In each case, this Court affirmed the Superior Court’s reversal of the trial court’s grant of judgment on the pleadings in favor of the insurer. Although these decisions held that survivors of deceased victims are entitled to payment of work loss benefits, it was not until December 30, 1983, three months after the Appellee received her last benefits, and more than a year after the statute of limitations expired that this Court held that an estate is entitled to post-mortem work loss benefits. Freeze v. Donegal Mutual Insurance Co., 504 Pa. 218, 470 A.2d 958 (1983).

=== CASE 9736919 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:59.212516+00 ===

CAPPY, Justice,
dissenting.
I am constrained to dissent.
On August 12, 1980, John R. Miller died in a motor vehicle accident. At that time he was the named insured on a Pennsylvania No-Fault Insurance Policy issued by Appellant, Keystone Insurance Company (“Keystone”). Keystone was immediately notified of its insured’s fatality. Keystone, through its agent and without specific demand, voluntarily undertook to investigate and pay funeral, collision and surviv- or’s loss benefits to Appellee, Mrs. Miller, the unrepresented mother of the named insured on the policy. However, at this time neither Keystone, nor its agent who allegedly assisted *542Mrs. Miller in presenting her claim to Keystone, informed Mrs. Miller concerning the potential for recovery of postmortem work loss benefits under the No-Fault Act1 or of the recent appellate activity concerning such recovery, which was unfavorable to Keystone.2
Six years later, after learning of entitlement to post-mortem work loss benefits arising out of her son’s fatal accident, Mrs. Miller filed a claim on behalf of her son’s estate, seeking those benefits from Keystone, plus interest and counsel fees. The gravamen of her Complaint was that Keystone had breached its duty of good faith and fair dealing in knowingly misleading her into believing that she had no valid claim for work loss benefits, the representation upon which she had justifiably relied to her detriment. The trial court subsequently granted summary judgment in favor of Keystone on the basis that Mrs. Miller’s Complaint was filed after expiration of the applicable statute of limitations.
On appeal, the Superior Court vacated the summary judgment entered below upon a determination that there existed some evidence for the imposition of the duty of good faith and fair dealing announced by this Court in Dercoli v. Pennsylva*543nia National Mutual Insurance Company, 520 Pa. 471, 554 A.2d 906 (1989), which tolled the statute of limitations. It held that the Dercoli duty of good faith and fair dealing imposed an affirmative obligation upon an insurer to inform its insured that it has knowledge of the possibility of a claim for recovery and that it is no longer acting in the interests of its unrepresented insured in this matter where:
(1) the insurer had assumed the responsibility for processing its insured’s claims; (2) the insurer knew that the insured was relying exclusively on its advice and counsel; and (3) the insurer had knowledge regarding an additional claim for benefits to which [the insured] was entitled and it failed to disclose such information.
Miller, 402 Pa.Super. at 223, 586 A.2d at 941. Despite the soundness of this holding, the Majority herein concludes that the Superior Court erroneously interpreted and impermissibly expanded the holding in Dercoli in this instance. I disagree.
The Majority concludes that Dercoli was carefully limited to situations where the insurer “actively fostered the insured’s erroneous belief,” and involved a situation where a “knowing and purposeful misrepresentation was critical” to the existence of a duty to disclose all available benefits. On this basis the Majority then determines that the Superior Court improperly expanded the scope of the Dercoli duty by broadly applying it to a factually distinguishable situation. It finds that here, in contrast to the situation in Dercoli, Keystone did not voluntarily assume or transform itself into a position of legal advisor, did not act in any manner to discourage Mrs. Miller from obtaining legal counsel, and did not make any promises to Mrs. Miller. The Majority then goes on to conclude that the matter sub judice is governed by Taglianetti v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, 503 Pa. 270, 469 A.2d 548 (1983). This is error.
Unlike the Majority, I cannot conclude that the existence of the duty in Dercoli necessarily turned on, or should turn on, an affirmative undertaking of an insurance company to advise and counsel its insured in the insured’s claim for benefits. It is my strong belief that the presence of such evidence in *544Dercoli only provided further support for the imposition of the long recognized duty owed by an insurance company to deal with the insured fairly and in good faith, see Fedas v. Insurance Company of the State of Pennsylvania, 300 Pa. 555, 151 A. 285 (1930), a duty that this Court reasonably determined to include, in a “non-adversarial setting,” a “duty of full and complete disclosure as to all of the benefits and every coverage that is provided by the applicable policy or policies along with all requirements, including any time limitations for making a claim.” Dercoli, 520 Pa. at 478, 554 A.2d at 909. My interpretation is further supported by this Court’s statement in Dercoli that “[t]his is especially true where the insurer undertakes to advise and counsel the insured in the insured’s claim for benefits.” Id. (Emphasis added).
Furthermore, by interpreting Dercoli as applying only to the situation where an insured voluntarily assumes to act as “legal advisor” for its insured, the Majority fails to acknowledge that the assumption of such a “role” by the insurer would give rise to a duty much greater than that of good faith and fair dealing. It would support the existence of a fiduciary duty, the highest standard of duty implied by law — a duty arising from the relationship of legal advisor, which implies and necessitates great confidence, trust, candor and the highest degree of good faith to act, and advocate, for the benefit of the other as to matters within the scope of the relationship.
Such a limitation is also contrary to the responsibility implicitly imposed upon insurers and their agents by the No-Fault Act itself, which had a primary purpose of, inter alia, insuring that a claimant would not need an attorney to secure basic benefits. This purpose was effectuated through a non-adversarial scheme, which placed the burden on the insurer to investigate and pay claims, and encouraged claimants to place their trust and reliance in their insurance companies to see to it that claims were handled properly and that they received all benefits to which they were entitled.
Finally, and most importantly, I simply cannot condone the Majority’s attempt to minimize and mischaracterize the alleged relationship of cooperation and trust apparently existing *545between Keystone, its agent and Mrs. Miller in this instance, by misplaced reliance upon Taglianetti. In Taglianetti, it was an employer’s insurance company, an unquestionably formidable adversary, who was relieved of an affirmative duty to apprise a deceased employee’s wife oí all available workmen’s compensation benefits. I agree that in that instance, there is no Dercoli duty of good faith and fair dealing absent fraud, intentional deceit or misleading statements with regard to the claimant’s interest. However, in the case sub judice, the insurance company is not an adversary, nor does it represent an adversary. In fact, the insurance company was the insurer of the claimant’s deceased son and now represents the interest of the claimant, the personal representative of the son’s estate. There simply is no adversarial relationship either real or imagined. Taglianetti does not apply to these facts.
Therefore, under the circumstances as alleged and argued by Mrs. Miller, a non-adversarial scenario, I would hold that, pursuant to its duty of good faith and fair dealing, Keystone had an affirmative obligation to disclose to its insured: that it had knowledge of the possibility of a claim for recovery; that the potential for an adversarial relationship existed; and that it was no longer acting in the interests of its unrepresented insured in this matter. In my opinion, this requirement would be a minor obligation given the alleged relationship of the parties that had theretofore involved a spirit of cooperation and trust.3
*546Accordingly, based upon the foregoing, I would affirm the decision of the Superior Court.
Thus, I respectfully dissent.
. No-fault Motor Vehicle Insurance Act, 40 P.S. §§ 1009.101-1009.701, repealed.
. In 1980, this Court held that survivors of deceased victims of motor vehicle accidents were entitled to post-mortem work loss benefits pursuant to the Pennsylvania No-fault Act, Allstate Insurance Company v. Heffner, 491 Pa. 447, 421 A.2d 629 (1980), and impliedly determined that such recovery also extended to the deceased victim's estate. Pontius v. U.S.P. & G., 491 Pa. 447, 421 A.2d 629 (1980). As determined by the Superior Court, it cannot be denied that the insurance industry in this Commonwealth was aware of this appellate activity, and an internal memorandum prepared by Keystone to Mrs. Miller’s claim representative regarding the information disclosed to her provides some evidence that Keystone was aware of the unfavorable appellate activity in this area. Miller v. Keystone Insurance Company, 402 Pa.Super. 213, 229, 586 A.2d 936, 944 (1991). Moreover, it is clear that neither Heffner and Pontius, nor this Court's express determination that a deceased victim’s estate is entitled to recover for work-loss in Freeze v. Donegal Mutual Ins. Co., 504 Pa. 218, 470 A.2d 958 (1983), represented a "change” in the law of Pennsylvania. To the contrary, these cases merely decided what the No-fault Act had always required, and furthermore, served to dispel an incorrect interpretation of the Act being advanced by insurers.
. Contrary to the position of the Majority, I believe that, if Mrs. Miller can establish a basis for the duty that I and the Superior Court have described, Keystone’s breach thereof would serve to toll the running of the statute of limitations in this matter under the principle of estoppel. My review yields no basis for the Majority’s conclusion that Mrs. Miller cannot establish that she was fraudulently or deceptively lulled into a false sense of security, given the alleged actions, omissions and relationships of the parties, and the limited record developed prior to entry of summary judgment. To further support the dismissal of this claim on the basis that there was no discussion between Mrs. Miller and Keystone related to post-mortem survivor’s benefits or the filing of a claim simply begs the question.
In addition, the Majority's attempt to further dismiss Mrs. Miller's claim on the basis that the "estate” possessed only a potential entitlement to benefits at the time Mrs. Miller filed her original claim for benefits is seriously flawed. As thoroughly described by the Superior *546Court herein, while this Court did not finally put to rest the issue of an estate’s claim for work-loss benefits until Freeze v. Donegal Mutual Ins. Co., 504 Pa. 218, 470 A.2d 958 (1983), Freeze did not change the law of Pennsylvania. It merely enforced what the No-fault Act had always required, and essentially only provided what this Court had implied in the Heffner-Pontius cases. Moreover, the question is not whether Keystone's insureds were able to recover between the Heffner-Pontius cases and the Freeze decision, but rather, whether Keystone had an obligation to inform them of the potential for recovery and that it was no longer acting in the interest of its unrepresented insureds. Finally, it is clear that as of the date of this Court's decision in Freeze, only three months had elapsed since Mrs. Miller received her last benefits, and quite conceivably a full year remained before the estate’s claims would have been time barred. 402 Pa.Super. at 230-232, 586 A.2d at 944-45.

=== CASE 9736920 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:01.948464+00 ===

OPINION
LANSING, Judge.
A Commissioner’s representative from the Department of Jobs and Training determined that relator voluntarily quit her job without good cause attributable to the respondent employer. Relator seeks review of the Commissioner’s decision, claiming she had good cause to quit as a result of harassment by a fellow employer. We reverse.
FACTS
Joan Wetterhahn was employed by the Kimm Company as a packer. In November 1987, Wetterhahn resigned from her job, claiming that Kimm had failed to take adequate measures to protect her from verbal harassment by a co-worker.
Wetterhahn applied for unemployment compensation benefits, and a hearing was conducted by a referee from the Department of Jobs and Training. At the hearing, Wetterhahn testified that her co-worker, Steve Varga, continuously swore and yelled at her. Another former employee corroborated Wetterhahn’s claim, testifying that Varga exploded into temper tantrums all day long, usually directing his anger towards Wetterhahn.
Wetterhahn testified that she complained to a foreman, her union steward Ed Alex, and Robert Boddy, Kimm’s production manager. She also raised the problem at company meetings. According to Wetter-hahn, she was told that Boddy and the foreman would keep an eye on Varga, but no other action was taken to solve the problem.
Alex testified that Varga had caused trouble for 25 years. While Alex was aware of Wetterhahn’s concerns, he explained that in the absence of a formal grievance1, there was nothing he, as union steward, could do.
Robert Boddy, Kimm’s production manager, admitted that he was aware of Var-ga’s behavior, and met with him twice to discuss it. Boddy claimed he had no means of curtailing Varga’s behavior; however he also testified that he could have stopped Varga’s behavior by applying Kimm’s graduated disciplinary procedure. Alex agreed that there were steps Kimm could have taken:
[T]hey could give [Varga] a verbal warning, a one-day suspension, two-day, three-day, and then termination. Those, that is what the company can do and has done to other employees.
Following the hearing, the referee concluded that Wetterhahn had failed to meet her burden of proving that she had good *6cause, attributable to Kimm, to resign. On appeal, a Commissioner’s representative affirmed, concluding that Kimm was not responsible for the situation and did not treat Wetterhahn unreasonably or arbitrarily.
ISSUE
Did the Commissioner’s representative err by determining that Varga’s harassment did not constitute good cause for Wetterhahn to resign?
ANALYSIS
An individual who voluntarily resigns from employment is disqualified from receiving unemployment compensation benefits unless he or she can prove that the resignation was with “good cause attributable to the employer.” Minn.Stat. § 268.09, subd. 1(a) (Supp.1987); Zepp v. Arthur Treacher Fish & Chips, Inc., 272 N.W.2d 262 (Minn.1978).
In reviewing the Commissioner’s factual findings, this court is limited to determining whether there is evidence reasonably tending to sustain the findings, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the decision. White v. Metropolitan Medical Center, 332 N.W.2d 25, 26 (Minn.1983). We take no issue with the Commissioner’s factual findings.
Once the facts are determined, however, the question whether an employee had good cause to quit is one of law, which this court may independently review. Porrazzo v. Nabisco, Inc., 360 N.W.2d 662, 664 (Minn.Ct.App.1985). We disagree with the Commissioner’s conclusion that Kimm’s actions in response to Wetterhahn’s complaints were sufficient. We conclude as a matter of law that Wetterhahn had good cause to resign, because of Kimm’s inadequate response to her complaints.
“Good cause attributable to the employer” does not require that the employer’s actions be negligent or wrongful, Hanson v. IDS Properties Management Co., 242 N.W.2d 833, 835 n. 1 (Minn.1976); Neubert v. St. Mary’s Hospital & Nursing Center, 365 N.W.2d 780, 782 (Minn.Ct.App.1985); the question is whether the employee has left employment “due to factors or circumstances directly connected” with the employment. Helmin v. Griswold Ribbon & Typewriter, 345 N.W.2d 257, 261 (Minn.Ct.App.1984) (quoting Hessler v. American Television & Radio Co., 258 Minn. 541, 557, 104 N.W.2d 876, 887 (I960)). In Ferguson v. Department of Employment Services, 247 N.W.2d 895 (Minn.1976), the supreme court cited the following test:
[T]he circumstances which compel the decision to leave employment must be real, not imaginary, substantial, not trifling, and reasonable, not whimsical; there must be some compulsion produced by extraneous and necessitous circumstances. The standard of what constitutes good cause is the standard of reasonableness as applied to the average man or woman, and not to the supersensitive ***.
Id. at 900 n. 5.
Harassment by a co-worker may constitute good cause to quit where the employer had notice of the harassment, but failed to take timely and appropriate measures to prevent it. See, McNabb v. Cub Foods, 352 N.W.2d 378 (Minn.1984); Tru-Stone Corp. v. Gutzkow, 400 N.W.2d 836 (Minn.Ct.App.1987).
In Tru-Stone, we affirmed the Commissioner's determination that an employee had good cause to quit due to harassment which consisted of taunting, name calling, derogatory remarks, and uncomplimentary pictures with names and profanities written underneath. The Department claims Tru-Stone is distinguishable, because there the employee was singled out for harassment, whereas Varga subjected employees other than Wetterhahn to the same behavior. We do not believe this is a material distinction. The fact that an individual has harassed several employees should not disqualify one of those employees from receiving unemployment compensation benefits, if the employer’s response to the situation was inadequate.
The Department argues that Kimm’s response to Wetterhahn’s complaints was adequate. There is definite and undisputed evidence, however, that Kimm had a gradu*7ated disciplinary procedure which the company failed to apply to Varga, despite the fact that Wetterhahn complained on several occasions. Boddy’s own admission that this procedure existed contradicts Kimm’s claim that in the absence of a formal grievance by Wetterhahn there was nothing Kimm could do.
There is no suggestion in the record that Wetterhahn was overly-sensitive to the situation; rather, the testimony indicated that other employees were offended by Varga’s language and several had requested and obtained transfers. Because there were no available positions for which Wetterhahn qualified, she was ineligible for transfer.
Finally, we note that Varga was promoted to Wetterhahn’s “leadman.” While not actually a part of management, the position was supervisory in nature. In Tru-Stone, a section leader’s harassment of an employee was imputed to the employer. There, the court relied on McNabb, which held that a manager’s knowledge should be imputed to an employer where the manager “performs basically a ‘first level supervisory and managerial function’.” Tru-Stone, 352 N.W.2d at 383.
DECISION
Kimm failed to take adequate measures to protect Wetterhahn from harassment by her co-worker; therefore, Wetterhahn had good cause to resign.
Reversed.
NIERENGARTEN, J., dissents.
. Wetterhahn testified that she did not file a grievance because she was warned by Varga not to, and because there were no other available positions for which she was qualified. This testimony was confirmed by Alex.

=== CASE 2208360 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:29.313997+00 ===

253 Cal. App. 2d 1000 (1967)
[fn. *]HARRY SILVER, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
BEVERLY HILLS NATIONAL BANK, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 29957.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Five.
Aug. 29, 1967.
Greenberg, Shafton & Bernhard, Herbert A. Bernhard and Arthur Karma for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Loeb & Loeb and Howard I. Friedman for Defendant and Respondent.
HUFSTEDLER, J.
Appellant Silver filed a complaint seeking damages against Atlantic- Pacific Auto Leasing, Inc. ("Atlantic-Pacific") for breach of contract and against Beverly Hills National Bank ("National Bank") for a declaration of the respective interests of Silver and National Bank in certain equipment leases of which Atlantic-Pacific was lessor. Judgment was entered in favor of Silver against Atlantic-Pacific in the sum of $26,677.49, less certain credits, following Atlantic-Pacific's default, from which portion of the judgment *1002 there is no appeal. Following motions for judgment on the pleadings made both by Silver and National Bank, judgment was rendered declaring that Silver owned a divided one-half interest in the described leases and equipment and that Silver had no interest in the other half of the same leases and equipment as to which National Bank owned a security interest.
The two instruments upon which Silver's claims rest are two written contracts between Silver and Atlantic-Pacific, copies of which were incorporated into the complaint.
The first agreement, dated May 3, 1963, recited that Atlantic-Pacific wanted to sell and Silver wanted to buy "a divided [sic] one-half (1/2) interest" in a lease between Atlantic-Pacific, as lessor, and Harris & Carr, Inc., as lessee. Following the recitals are the following covenants:
"1. By this document Atlantic-Pacific sells and transfers to the Second Party a divided one-half (1/2) interest in the above described lease, and a divided one-half (1/2) interest in the property attached hereto as exhibit 'B', for a total of $33,379.10."
"2. It further covenants and agrees with the Second Party that the said Second Party has an absolute right to $639.32 on the 20th day of May, 1963, and the 20th day of each and every succeeding month during the entire term of the said lease, and Atlantic-Pacific guarantees that it will remit this amount on the day due without regard to the Lessees compliance with the payment schedule called for in the said lease."
"3. That Second Party has a divided one-half (1/2) interest in the residual of $5,114.54, and Atlantic-Pacific covenants and guarantees that within thirty (30) days from the end of the lease period to pay to the Second Party the sum of $2,557.27."
"In consideration of the above covenants, Second Party hereby covenants and agrees as follows:"
"1. That he will remit to Atlantic-Pacific at the time of the execution of this document, $33,379.10."
"2. That he will refrain from interfering with the services and management of the above described lease."
"3. That he will look solely to Atlantic-Pacific for the carrying out of the provisions of this Agreement."
"4. Both parties to this Agreement hereby covenant and agree that in the event Atlantic-Pacific shall fail to carry out the terms of this Agreement as set forth, any such failure shall be deemed a material breach of this Agreement, and the *1003 Second Party shall have a right to look to the above named Lessee, and the above described lease, as well as Atlantic- Pacific and all collateral, for the enforcement of his rights herein." [Italics added.]
The second agreement, dated May 14, 1963, recites that Atlantic-Pacific wants to sell and Silver wants to buy a divided one-half interest in 25 listed leases between Atlantic-Pacific, as lessor, and the named lessees. Following the recitals, the May 14 contract contains covenants substantially the same as those in the first agreement, except for the description of the property which is the subject of the agreement and the addition of a clause stating:
"5. Both parties to this Agreement hereby covenant and agree that Atlantic-Pacific shall file liens on the various chattels involved in exhibits E and J hereto, showing the Second Party as the mortgagee to the extent of his divided one-half (1/2) interest in the residual as set forth in the above exhibits."
The claim of National Bank stems from an agreement entitled "Assignment' between National Bank and Atlantic-Pacific, dated June 6, 1963. The assignment states in part that Atlantic-Pacific assigns to National Bank as security for specified antecedent indebtedness owed by Atlantic-Pacific to National Bank "all of Assignor's right, title and interest in and to ... [t]he personal property leases herein below described (copies of which are attached hereto) and the personal property described therein. ... Assignee does not assume any liability under any of the leases assigned to it either by virtue of this Assignment or by virtue of the receipt of any payments it may hereafter receive thereunder." The assignment further provided: "Assignee shall have all of the rights in connection with this Assignment that would accrue to it had Assignor executed a general collateral pledge agreement in favor of Assignee in the form attached hereto ... except such rights as are inconsistent with the specific terms of this Assignment. ...""
Annexed to the assignment was a list of the same leases  [fn. 1] and equipment which were the subject of the two agreements between Silver and Atlantic-Pacific.
Silver and National Bank argued in the trial court and here argue that the Silver agreements are clear and unambiguous, but Silver says the agreements clearly mean one thing, and National Bank says they clearly mean another. *1004
Silver has advanced a variety of different constructions of the two agreements. In his complaint Silver averred that the effect of the agreements was to assign to him all of Atlantic-Pacific's right, title and interest in the several leases as security for the performance of Atlantic- Pacific's obligations to him, that upon default of Atlantic-Pacific all rentals became payable to him until the default was completely cured, and that National Bank's assignments were subsequent and subordinate to his own. In the joint pretrial statement the parties agreed that Silver purchased a half interest in all of the various personal property leases (the "Silver half") and that he was entitled to receive one half of all rentals paid by the various lessees. Silver thereupon contended that Atlantic-Pacific assigned him a security interest in the remaining half of the property (the "Atlantic-Pacific half") and all of the rentals until such time as the total payments contemplated by the two agreements were fully paid to him. When the motions were heard, Silver claimed that Atlantic-Pacific assigned him the Atlantic-Pacific half as security for Atlantic-Pacific's "guarantee" to pay Silver the monthly payments and half the "residuals," which assignment became effective as soon as Atlantic-Pacific defaulted. Silver did not then contend that Atlantic-Pacific assigned Silver all the rents in the event of Atlantic- Pacific's default, excepting only as such assignment is embraced in the claimed assignment of the Atlantic-Pacific half as security. On appeal Silver sometimes contends that the agreements assigned him the Atlantic- Pacific half as security for accrued and unpaid sums owed by Atlantic-Pacific to Silver and as security for future sums to become due during the lives of the leases and thereafter at the end of the leasehold terms.
National Bank has consistently urged that although Silver's interest in the Silver half, however that interest should be properly characterized, is superior to National Bank's interest, Silver owns no interest whatsoever in the Atlantic-Pacific half, and that National Bank, succeeding to Atlantic- Pacific's interest, owns the Atlantic-Pacific half as security for Atlantic- Pacific's indebtedness to it.
[1a] At the time the trial court ruled upon the respective motions for judgment on the pleadings, the court had before it the opposed interpretations of both parties in respect of the Atlantic-Pacific half. The court could not grant either motion unless the court could determine as a matter of law from the face of the pleadings that the agreements were susceptible *1005 solely of the interpretation placed upon the documents by the respective moving party. Thus, to grant National Bank's motion the court must have decided not only that the agreements were unambiguous but also that the sole interpretation to which they were susceptible was that urged by National Bank.
[2] A motion for judgment on the pleadings is in the nature of a general demurrer. For the purpose of ruling on the motion, the averments of the pleading against which the motion is directed are deemed true and the moving party admits the untruthfulness of his own allegations insofar as they have been controverted. (MacIsaac v. Pozzo (1945) 26 Cal. 2d 809, 812-813 [161 P.2d 449].) The admissions thus made for the purpose of ruling on the motion vanish as soon as the motion is ruled upon. (Hale v. Gardiner (1921) 186 Cal. 661, 665 [200 P. 598].) [3] A motion for judgment on the pleadings is an appropriate means of obtaining an adjudication of the rights of the parties in a declaratory relief action if those rights can be determined as a matter of law from the face of the pleading attacked, together with those matters of which the court may properly take judicial notice. (Wilson v. Board of Retirement (1957) 156 Cal. App. 2d 195, 200-201 [319 P.2d 426].)  [fn. 2]
[1b] Silver's agreements with Atlantic-Pacific are bristling with ambiguities and uncertainties. The following are among the many uncertainties in the agreements:
Both agreements use the neologism "divided half interest." The term has no specific common or legal meaning. Did the parties intend that there should be a conveyance of some present interest in identifiable property to Silver? If they did, the manner of the intended division must be ascertained outside the face of the contracts since neither contract makes any division of the assets and neither provides any formula by which a division should be made. On the other hand, did the parties intend the word "divided" to mean "undivided"? Even though Atlantic-Pacific and Silver have agreed that Silver owns "a divided interest" we cannot properly interpret the significance of that agreement without knowing what "divided half interest" means. Moreover, it is extremely difficult *1006 to characterize the Atlantic-Pacific half unless we know how to define Silver's half.
Both agreements use the word "guarantees" in describing the obligation of Atlantic-Pacific to make the specified payments to Silver. Silver sometimes suggests that the word "guarantees" was used in the technical sense that Atlantic-Pacific agreed to answer for the debt or default of another, namely, the lessees' obligations to pay rent. But the two agreements contemplate not only the payment of rent but other kinds of payments in which Atlantic- Pacific is the primary obligor, such as the payment of "residuals." In the context of these agreements does the word "guarantees" mean anything more than "promises"?
The provisions of the paragraphs numbered 4 are especially troublesome. Those paragraphs give Silver "a right to look to the above named Lessee[s], as well as Atlantic-Pacific and all collateral, for the enforcement of his rights herein," in the event Atlantic-Pacific defaults. Does the language mean that Atlantic-Pacific thereby assigned to Silver a security interest in the Atlantic-Pacific half in the event of default, as Silver contends? Or does the clause merely state the condition upon which Silver's enjoyment of his "divided half interest" vests, as National Bank contends? Although National Bank's construction of the instruments is more persuasive than is Silver's, we cannot say that National Bank's interpretation is the only reasonable construction to which the agreements are susceptible.
Oral evidence is plainly admissible to explain these contracts.  [fn. 3] [4] "When a contract is in any of its terms or *1007 provisions ambiguous or uncertain, 'it is primarily the duty of the trial court to construe it after a full opportunity afforded all the parties in the case to produce evidence of the facts, circumstances and conditions surrounding its execution and the conduct of the parties relative thereto.' (Barlow v. Frink, 171 Cal. 165, 172 [152 P. 290].) ... [5] 'It is a settled rule that when the language employed is fairly susceptible of either one of two constructions contended for without doing violence to its usual and ordinary import an ambiguity arises where extrinsic evidence may be resorted to for the purpose of explaining the intention of the parties ... (Balfour v. Fresno Canal & Irr. Co., 109 Cal. 221 [41 P. 876].)' " Walsh v. Walsh (1941) 18 Cal. 2d 439, 443 [116 P.2d 62]. (See also Beneficial etc. Ins. Co. v. Kurt Hitke & Co. (1956) 46 Cal. 2d 517, 524-525 [297 P.2d 428].) [6] Judgment entered in favor of National Bank following its motion for judgment on the pleadings cannot be sustained unless Silver is estopped from challenging National Bank's interpretation of the agreements. National Bank argues that Silver is foreclosed by the doctrine of invited error from claiming on appeal that the agreements are ambiguous because he himself urged that the agreements were unambiguous when he moved for judgment on the pleadings. The difficulty with this argument is that the error Silver invited was not the error of which he complains on appeal. Silver unsuccessfully invited the court to hold that the contracts were susceptible solely of the interpretation he placed upon them. The court properly rejected his motion. Silver is not bound on appeal by an argument he unsuccessfully advanced in the trial court solely for the purpose of obtaining a ruling on his motion for judgment on the pleadings.
The judgment is reversed.
Kaus, P. J., and Stephens, J., concurred. *1008
Evidence is not admissible either in support of or in opposition to a motion for judgment on the pleadings. However, the trial court was apprised that in the event Silver's motion for judgment on the pleadings was denied, evidence to explain the instruments was available. If the case had been tried, a very different situation would have been presented. For example, if Silver had introduced the documents into evidence and rested without the production of any evidence to aid in the interpretation of the instruments and if National Bank had likewise presented no evidence, both the trial court and the appellate court would be obliged to select the most reasonable interpretation of the agreements even though both of them were riddled with ambiguities. (See Parsons v. Bristol Dev. Co. (1965) 62 Cal. 2d 861, 865-866 [44 Cal. Rptr. 767, 402 P.2d 839].)
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Reporter's Note: This case was previously entitled, "Silver v. Atlantic-Pacific Auto Leasing, Inc."
[fn. 1]  1. Except one lease, which was the subject of a subsequent assignment.
[fn. 2]  2. The court properly takes judicial notice of its own records in a particular case. (Witkin, Cal. Evidence (2d ed. 1966)  169, pp. 155-156.) The court could therefore properly have taken judicial notice of the joint pretrial statement containing the matters of fact and law agreed upon by the parties. See also Flores v. Arroyo (1961) 56 Cal. 2d 492, 496-497 [15 Cal. Rptr. 87, 364 P.2d 263].
[fn. 3]  3. Silver's counsel closed his argument for judgment on the pleadings by saying: "We feel that the contracts are clear and unambiguous. We are still prepared, if you should decide that the word 'collateral' is not clear to you, we have witnesses here, we have the attorney who prepared the document. We have Mr. Harry Silver, who is one of the parties to the document present, and we also have the attorney who handled the immediate correspondence and communications with the bank." [Italics added.]

=== CASE 2207924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.837639+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 151 (1988)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Roger Arthur THOMPSON, Petitioner, Appellant.
No. C1-87-2475.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 30, 1988.
C. Paul Jones, State Public Defender, Susan K. Maki, Asst. State Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., James B. Early, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Bruce F. Gross, Cottonwood Co. Atty., Windom, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
OPINION
AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
In State v. Thompson, 427 N.W.2d 266 (Minn.App.1988), the court of appeals affirmed the felony theft conviction of defendant, Roger Arthur Thompson. We granted the defendant's petition for review not because we disagree with the ultimate decision of the court of appeals but in order to expand upon the court of appeals' analysis of two of the issues. These issues are: (1) whether a criminal defendant has a right to be present at an in-chambers hearing to determine the competency of a child as a witness and (2) whether a trial judge *152 ordinarily should obtain the defendant's permission before instructing the jury that it is not to draw any adverse inference from the defendant's decision not to testify.
Late one night in November of 1983 defendant, accompanied by his stepson, went to a store in Windom and stole a log splitter valued at $1,325. Defendant dismantled the splitter, discarded some parts with serial numbers on them and other parts, and concealed the rest of the parts in a garage on his property. In the fall of 1986 a neighbor of defendant reported to the sheriff that he had found a motor and pump buried on his property just 120 feet from defendant's property line and 200 feet from defendant's out-buildings. The sheriff talked to defendant's wife, who had separated from defendant and had obtained an order barring defendant from the property. She let the sheriff search the garage. He found some of the parts of the stolen log splitter. Later the stepson, then age 11, showed the sheriff more of the parts. The stepson also testified against defendant at trial. The dealer positively identified the log splitter as one stolen from his place of business.
In addition to addressing the issues that we address, the court of appeals held (1) that the evidence of defendant's guilt was sufficient; (2) that the prosecution was not barred by the applicable statute of limitation, Minn.Stat. § 628.26(d) (1982); and (3) that defendant's estranged wife validly consented to the search by the sheriff. We agree with the court of appeals' conclusions with respect to these issues.
1. The first of the two issues that we address in detail is the issue relating to the right of a criminal defendant to be present at a hearing to determine the competency of a child witness. The trial court conducted its examination of the stepson, age 11, in the presence of defendant's attorney but in defendant's absence. Since the defendant's attorney did not request that defendant be allowed to be present or object to defendant's absence, the court of appeals should have held simply that the issue was forfeited. United States v. Gagnon, 470 U.S. 522, 529, 105 S. Ct. 1482, 1485-86, 84 L. Ed. 2d 486 (1985) (a defendant who does not assert his right to be present at a particular in-chambers hearing may not claim it for the first time on appeal from a conviction of guilt). Addressing the merits of the issue, the court of appeals held that it was proper to conduct the competency examination in defendant's absence. State v. Thompson, 427 N.W.2d 266, 269 (Minn.App.1988). In so holding, it relied on its own decision in Moll v. State, 351 N.W.2d 639 (Minn.App.1984), and the United States Supreme Court's decision in Kentucky v. Stincer, 482 U.S. 730, 107 S. Ct. 2658, 96 L. Ed. 2d 631 (1987), holding that a defendant does not have a right under the federal constitution to attend an in-chambers competency examination of a child.
The court of appeals' analysis is accurate as far as it goes: the exclusion of a defendant from an in-chambers hearing to determine the competency of a child witness does not violate the confrontation clause or the due process clause of the federal constitution. Kentucky v. Stincer, 482 U.S. 730, 107 S. Ct. 2658, 96 L. Ed. 2d 631 (1987).[1] However, Minn.R.Crim.P. 26.03, subd. 1, gives a criminal defendant a right to be present at "every stage of the trial." The United States Supreme Court has recognized that the right to be present under Fed.R.Crim.P. 43 (on which Minn.R. Crim.P. 26.03, subd. 1 is based) is broader than the right to be present under the federal constitution. United States v. Gagnon, 470 U.S. 522, 527, 105 S. Ct. 1482, 1484-85, 84 L. Ed. 2d 486 (1985). Further, in Kentucky v. Stincer, 482 U.S. 730, 107 S. Ct. 2658, 2664, 96 L. Ed. 2d 631 (1987), the United States Supreme Court expressly said that "a competency hearing may well be a `stage of trial.'" Because we believe *153 that a competency hearing is a "stage of the trial" under Minn.R.Crim.P. 26.03, subd. 1, we conclude that a criminal defendant has a right to be present at a hearing to determine the competency of a witness, even a child witness. Therefore, if defendant or his attorney had asserted defendant's right to be present in this case, it would have been error for the trial court to deny defendant that right and we would have to determine whether or not the error was prejudicial.
2. The other issue we address in detail is whether a trial judge ordinarily should obtain a criminal defendant's permission before giving CRIMJIG 3.17, which instructs the jury not to draw any adverse inference from the defendant's decision not to testify.[2] The United States Supreme Court has held that a trial court does not violate the federal constitution by giving such an instruction, even over the defendant's objection. Lakeside v. Oregon, 435 U.S. 333, 340, 98 S. Ct. 1091, 1095, 55 L. Ed. 2d 319 (1978). In the same case, the court also said that it "may be wise for a trial judge not to give such a cautionary instruction over a defendant's objection" and that "each State is, of course, free to forbid its trial judges from doing so as a matter of state law." Id.
Although we held in State v. Larson, 358 N.W.2d 668, 671 (Minn.1984) that the trial court there was justified in giving such an instruction over the defendant's objection since defense counsel "opened the door" by his closing argument, we also said, "Notwithstanding Lakeside, we believe that the trial court generally should leave it up to the defendant and his attorney to decide whether they want such an instruction." Further, the comment to CRIMJIG 3.17, which reflects current practice among trial judges in Minnesota, provides that the trial court should not give the instruction unless the defendant himself requests it.[3]
The court of appeals' decision in effect says that the trial court need ask only the defendant's attorney, not the defendant himself, if he wants such an instruction. State v. Thompson, 427 N.W.2d 266, 269 (Minn.App.1988). Disagreeing with this, we conclude that the comment to CRIMJIG 3.17 not only reflects current practice among most trial judges but is the better practice. Accordingly, we hold that a trial judge ordinarily should obtain a criminal defendant's permission before giving CRIMJIG 3.17. Further, a record should be made, either by defense counsel on his own or at the trial court's insistence, regarding the defendant's preference in the matter. It does not follow, of course, that the defendant is entitled to a new trial simply because the record on appeal is silent as to whether the defendant and his attorney wanted the instruction, and in this case we readily agree with the court of appeals' ultimate conclusion that the defendant is not entitled to a new trial on this ground.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Cf., State v. Cermak, 350 N.W.2d 328, 333 (Minn.1984), a child sex abuse case that preceded the Supreme Court's decision in Stincer in which we referred in passing to the right of a defendant to be present at a hearing to determine the competency of a child witness as a "constitutional" right.
[2]  CRIMJIG 3.17 provides:
The state must convince you by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant is guilty of the crime charged. Defendant has no obligation to prove himself innocent. Defendant has the privilege not to testify in his own defense. This privilege is guaranteed him by the federal and state constitutions. You should not draw any inference from the fact that defendant has not testified in this case.
10 R. Hodsdon, Minnesota Practice, CRIMJIG 3.17 (1985).
[3]  The comment states:
This instruction should not be given without the clear consent and insistence of the defendant himself. If such an instruction is requested by counsel for the defendant, the judge should require the defendant himself to state on the record that he wishes to have such an instruction given. State v. Rosen, 280 Minn. 550, 158 N.W.2d 202 (1968).
10 R. Hodsdon, Minnesota Practice, CRIMJIG 3.17, comment (1985).

=== CASE 2207880 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:24.375802+00 ===

146 Wis. 2d 198 (1988)
430 N.W.2d 604
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Charles D. EDWARDSEN, Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 87-2443-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs July 5, 1988.
Decided August 3, 1988.
*200 On behalf of the defendant-appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Mark Lukoff, first assistant state public defender.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Donald J. Hanaway, attorney general and Christoper G. Wren, assistant attorney general.
Before Scott, C.J., Brown, P.J., and Nettesheim, J.
BROWN, P.J.
Defendant appeals from a threecount judgment of conviction: possession of cocaine with intent to deliver, battery to a peace officer, and attempting to disarm a peace officer. He makes four *201 claims of error. He argues that the prosecution acted vindictively in adding the "attempt to disarm" charge following defendant's successful appeal of the possession and battery convictions. See State v. Edwardsen, 135 Wis. 2d 208, 400 N.W.2d 18 (Ct. App. 1986) (hereinafter Edwardsen I). He argues that the prosecution cross-examined a defense witness using evidence suppressed in Edwardsen I, thereby committing prejudicial error. He argues that the trial court erroneously ruled that a potential defense witness could assert a privilege not to testify, thereby depriving defendant of his right to call witnesses on his own behalf. Finally, he argues that the prosecutor's closing argument violated defendant's constitutional right to remain silent by impermissibly commenting on defendant's failure to testify. We reject all four claims of error and affirm.
Some of the pertinent facts have been previously set out in Edwardsen I. Edwardsen was a passenger in Stacy Steber's car when she was stopped for speeding. During the course of the stop, defendant and the constable came to blows and defendant grabbed for the constable's firearm. Defendant and his niece were subsequently arrested, Steber's car was searched, and two ounces of chunky cocaine were found.
While in custody, defendant received assurances that he could make incriminating statements with impunity. The statements made included admissions of defendant's familiarity with a drug dealer. The police gave the information to the district attorney's office in connection with their allegations against Edwardsen.
The sheriff's office requested that the prosecution issue the three charges of which defendant presently stands convicted. However, the prosecution instead *202 agreed that if defendant waived his preliminary hearing, the state would not charge him with "attempt to disarm." This agreement was kept. Defendant then moved to suppress certain statements and admissions made while in custody. He lost the motion and pled no contest. We reversed in Edwardsen I, suppressed the statements, and remanded for a new trial.
After remand, the state added the charge of attempting to disarm a peace officer. The defendant had a preliminary hearing on all three counts and was bound over for trial.
At the trial, defendant appeared pro se with standby counsel. He made his own closing argument, but did not take the stand.
I. VINDICTIVE PROSECUTION
[1]
We begin our analysis of this issue by reiterating that the prosecutorial function is quasi-judicial. As such, it encompasses an "almost limitless" discretion to charge or not. State ex rel. Unnamed Petitioners v. Conners, 136 Wis. 2d 118, 129, 401 N.W.2d 782, 786 (1987). In general, the prosecuting attorney is answerable to the people of the state and not to the courts or the legislature as to the way in which he exercises the power to prosecute criminals. State v. Karpinsky, 92 Wis. 2d 599, 608, 285 N.W.2d 729, 734-35 (1979). Among the electorate's, and therefore the prosecutor's, concerns is the safety of the people from particular perpetrators, and one means of protection is incarceration of criminals. Charging decisions are therefore legitimately based upon, among other things, the penalties available upon conviction. Karpinsky, *203 92 Wis. 2d at 610-11, 285 N.W.2d at 736, citing United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114, 125 (1979).
[2]
On the other hand, we also recognize the constitutional problems that can arise when a defendant, exercising his legal right to an appeal, obtains a second trial of previously decided issues. Institutional dislike of retrialsrather than legitimate concerns for the public welfaremight subconsciously motivate a vindictive judicial or prosecutorial response to a defendant's exercise of his right to obtain a retrial of a decided question. United States v. Goodwin, 457 U.S. 368, 376-77 (1982). Yet to punish a person because he has done what the law plainly allows him to do is a due process violation of the most basic sort. Id. at 372. Therefore, the United States Supreme Court holds that a presumption of vindictiveness attaches to a prosecutor who increases charges when, as in the instant case, the state is pursuing a second conviction for the same course of conduct following a defendant's successful appeal. Id. at 376, citing Blackledge v. Perry, 417 U.S. 21 (1974). The parties do not dispute that Blackledge applies here[1] and that a presumption *204 of vindictiveness arises under the facts of this case. The defendant claims that the Blackledge presumption is irrebuttable. We disagree.
While the Blackledge Court did not spell out a procedure for overcoming the presumption of prosecutorial vindictiveness, such a procedure was clearly contemplated. The Supreme Court wrote: "[T]his would clearly be a different case if the state had shown that it was impossible to proceed on the more serious charge from the outset." Blackledge, 417 U.S. at 29 n. 7. The Supreme Court later stated: "[W]e note that the Blackledge presumption is rebuttable. The state had ample opportunity below to attempt to rebut it but did not do so. Its only argument has been that Blackledge should not apply." Thigpen v. Roberts, 468 U.S. 27, 32 n. 6 (1984) (citations omitted). We conclude that the Blackledge presumption of vindictiveness is rebuttable. Other courts are in accord. See, e.g., United States v. Taylor, 749 F.2d 1511, 1513 (11th Cir. 1985), and cases cited therein.
Although we address for the first time the scope of the Blackledge doctrine as it affects Wisconsin cases, we observe that our supreme court has discussed the analogous federal presumption of judicial vindictiveness where the trial court increases a defendant's sentence following appeal or successful motion to withdraw a guilty plea. State v. Stubbendick, 110 Wis. 2d 693, 329 N.W.2d 399 (1983).[2] The court determined that the federal presumption is consistent with Wisconsin's doctrine of abuse of sentencing discretion. Id. at 699, 329 N.W.2d at 402. The court reiterated that failure to state sufficient reasons for any sentence *205 constitutes an abuse of discretion. Id. The requirement of reasoned exposition safeguards the defendant from impermissible judicial vindictiveness. Id.
[3]
As we have noted, the prosecutorial function is quasi-judicial and encompasses a wide latitude in charging decisions. We think it clear that vindictiveness constitutes an abuse of prosecutorial as well as judicial discretion. Therefore, a requirement analogous to that set forth in Stubbendick is mandated when the prosecutor increases charges following a successful appeal. The requirement is that the prosecutor give sufficient reasons for the increase on the record.
In this case, the prosecutor did put his reasons on the record. His rationale for adding a charge previously bargained away was the loss of evidence and the possible sentencing consequences of that loss. His explanation was as follows:
[I]t was determined that the State was seeking a particular disposition of this case. Recognizing Mr. Edwardson's [sic] past criminal record, we thought it would be adequate to convict Mr. Edwardson [sic] on two charges, the possession with intent to deliver and the battery to peace officer [sic]. Since that time, of course, some of our evidence, when we're coming back for retrial, has been suppressed by the Court of Appeals.
The posture of the case now is such that we do notare not as confident of a possible conviction on Mr. Edwardson [sic] for these two charges because a substantial portion of our evidence has been suppressed.
Edwardsen claims that this is not an adequate reason, but we hold that it is.
*206 In a case cited by the state, the Eleventh Circuit dealt with a similar prosecutorial explanation for new charges following a successful appeal. Taylor, 749 F.2d at 1514. In that case, Taylor was convicted of possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance following a bench trial. The court of appeals found the evidence inadequate to support the conviction, holding it sufficient only to support a conviction for simple possession. Taylor no longer faced the fifteen-year exposure that the state had originally anticipated. The state therefore indicted Taylor on new charges resulting from the same "spree of activity" as the original delivery charge. Id. at 1513.
As here, the prosecutor in Taylor denied a vindictive motive for the new charges, and stated that the decision to indict on new charges was "based primarily on his view of an equitable and appropriate sentence for Taylor's criminal conduct." Id. at 1514. Such a sentence had been obtainable on the initial charge alone; it was no longer obtainable after the court of appeals' conclusion that the state had not made an adequate record for proving intent to deliver. The Taylor court held:
Under these circumstances, the district court correctly concluded that the prosecutor's motivation for indicting Taylor on additional charges was to secure a conviction and sentence commensurate with his assessment of Taylor's criminal conduct and not to penalize him for taking an appeal.
Id.
[4]
In our case, the state had similarly shown a primary concern for an "equitable and appropriate" punishment for Edwardsen. Edwardsen's criminal *207 record was lengthy and had been considered when the charging decisions were made. When abundant, persuasive evidence virtually assured significant exposure to incarceration, the state was willing to forego a third conviction on the defendant's record. When the evidence was suppressed, the state lost the unparalleled significance and persuasive effect that a confession can have on the presentation of a case. Ammunition for obtaining a punishment suiting the state's view of the defendant and his conduct was thus significantly depleted. The state therefore added a charge, thereby replenishing the resources for obtaining the same punishment for the same defendant for the same spree of activity as had been possible before suppression of evidence. The stated and evident motive is punishment, not for appealing, but for the criminal actsfor which the state, if not the trier of fact, had significant proof.
We note that in Wisconsin, prosecutors are neither expected nor encouraged to pile up every possible accusation against a defendant. They are instead charged with evaluating both the defendant and the course of conduct with a view towards administering justice, constructing a conviction and possible sentence commensurate with the alleged criminal activity and the perpetrator. See Karpinsky, 92 Wis. 2d at 607-09, 285 N.W.2d at 734-35. In the present case, loss of evidence after appeal changed the equation. We think the prosecutor here made an adequate showing of his legitimate concerns regarding appropriate punishment sufficient to overcome the presumption of vindictiveness.[3]
*208 II. DENIAL OF RIGHT TO CALL WITNESSES
Defendant next asserts that he was denied his constitutional right to call witnesses on his own behalf when the court erroneously ruled that Steber had a constitutional privilege not to testify. We have scoured the record and can find no such ruling by the trial court.
The record reveals that defendant wanted Steber's direct testimony on certain matters but wanted to preclude cross-examination on others. The court ruled on this issue:
[O]nce the witness took the witness stand and began to testify in regard to events that are all connected, even though they're separate charges, that she would be required to answer all questions and she could not in the middle of her testimony take the fifth amendment as to certain questions but not as to others.
Clearly, this is a ruling that if Steber were to testify, she could not assert her fifth amendment privilege in the middle of that testimony; it is a far cry from a ruling that Steber had a constitutional privilege not to testify at all.
Defendant did request a ruling from the court as to Steber's right to assert her constitutional privilege *209 not to incriminate herself by testifying. The court solicited argument on the issue from both prosecution and defense. The district attorney argued that Steber could not invoke the fifth amendment because she had been convicted by the State of Wisconsin for a crime arising out of the same series of events about which she would testify. Defendant argued that Steber had the right to invoke the fifth amendment, citing possible federal prosecution.
The court deferred ruling on this issue. Instead, it took up a related question, and again solicited argument, specifically asking: "What is your position in regard to that, assuming, Mr. [Prosecutor], the Court rules she is properly asserting her Fifth Amendment right?" (Emphasis added.) Discussion of the related issue continued, but a ruling on Steber's privilege not to testify was never forthcoming, because the defendant never made the decision to call Steber as a witness. The trial court's last words on the subject, prior to the close of evidence, were: "You can talk to Stacy Steber. First find out whether she's going to assert her Fifth Amendment privileges. And then I will have to make a ruling in regard to those matters that have been brought up."
Defendant never called Steber and never got a ruling on her testimonial privilege. Therefore, the question of her privilege is now being presented for the first time on appeal. Generally, we do not review issues first raised on appeal. State v. Washington, 142 Wis. 2d 630, 635, 419 N.W.2d 275, 277 (Ct. App. 1987). We decline to do so here.
Even if the trial court had ruled that Steber had a testimonial privilege, defendant would be estopped from claiming error. Before the trial court, defendant argued the existence of a privilege. On appeal, he *210 adopts the state trial attorney's position in opposition. This presents a classic case of judicial estoppel. Id.
III. CLAIM OF IMPROPER AND PREJUDICIAL CROSS-EXAMINATION USING SUPPRESSED EVIDENCE
The prosecutor admittedly cross-examined defense witness Brian MinkEdwardsen's nephew and former housemateusing information from statements previously suppressed by this court in Edwardsen I. Specifically, he asked Mink if the defendant was going to see R. V., a drug dealer. A contemporaneous objection was made and sustained; Mink did not answer the question and no further related questions were asked. We find no reversible error in this exchange.
[5]
Generally, an improper but unanswered question is not sufficient error to require reversal on appeal. Genova v. State, 91 Wis. 2d 595, 621, 283 N.W.2d 483, 495 (Ct. App. 1979). Where the trial court gives a curative instruction, we may concludeas did the trial court herethat any possible prejudice has been erased. Id. at 622, 282 N.W.2d at 495.
[6]
In the instant case, the court sustained defendant's objection to the question. It had earlier instructed the jury to draw no inferences from sustained objections. In its charge to the jury, the court directed the panel to disregard any unanswered questions. We presume that a jury acts in accord with a properly given admonitory instruction. State v. Pitsch, 124 Wis. 2d 628, 645 n.8, 369 N.W.2d 711, 720 (1985).
*211 [7]
Defendant also alleges the commission of prejudicial error when the state asked Mink: "[d]id [defendant] ever tell you that he was going to compress cocaine into chunks at any time?" Defendant argues that this question too had its source in the suppressed evidence and therefore should not have been asked.
We do not think that this question by the prosecutor warrants a reversal on appeal. First, we note that defendant did not raise a contemporaneous objection to the question. Instead, the question was asked and answered, and the witness was dismissed. The objection was not voiced until after all of the evidence was in. Failure to make a timely objection to the admissibility of evidence waives the objection, and even an error based on an alleged constitutional right may so be waived. State v. Damon, 140 Wis. 2d 297, 300, 409 N.W.2d 444, 446 (Ct. App. 1987).
Second, the record does not support defendant's position that the question was derived from the suppressed statements. After the close of the evidence, defendant moved for a mistrial based on the prosecutor's "drug dealer" question, discussed supra. The prosecutor admitted that this information was derived from the suppressed evidence. After the mistrial was denied, defendant moved for a mistrial based on the "compressing cocaine" question. The prosecution did not admit, however, the derivation of the question and the defendant made no alternative showing.
"It goes without saying that an adequate record is necessary for review of the issues raised on appeal." State v. Perry, 128 Wis. 2d 297, 300, 381 N.W.2d 609, 610-11 (Ct. App. 1985), aff'd, 136 Wis. 2d 92, 401 N.W.2d 748 (1987). We are constrained by the record; factual matters asserted in argument but not appearing *212 in the record cannot be considered. Sedlet Plumbing & Heating v. Village Court, Ltd., 61 Wis. 2d 479, 483, 212 N.W.2d 681, 683 (1973).
Third, two ounces of cocaine were found under Edwardsen's seat pursuant to a lawful search of Steber's car. Constable Haas testified that the cocaine found was a chunky substance. There exists a legitimate basis for exploring with defense witnesses' questions regarding Edwardsen's experiences with chunky cocaine. This basis is unconnected to the confession; it is information from a search that took place independent of the confession. No doctrine bars the prosecution from using evidence obtained during the course of a lawful search. See Muetze v. State, 73 Wis. 2d 117, 130, 243 N.W.2d 393, 399 (1976).[4]
IV. PROSECUTOR'S COMMENTS ON DEFENDANT'S FAILURE TO TESTIFY
Finally, Edwardsen complains that his constitutional right to remain silent was violated by the prosecution's commenting on defendant's failure to testify during closing argument. We find no constitutional violation.
Edwardsen, not standby counsel, made the closing argument for the defense. Edwardsen told the jury: "I didn't testify because he [Constable Haas] testified for me. He's lying from A to Z." In his rebuttal argument, the prosecutor said:
[Edwardsen] indicated at one point that he didn't have to testify becauseI believe he said Officer Haas testified for him. Perhaps, ladies and gentlemen, that was not the only reason Mr. Edwardson [sic] did not testify. As I indicated to *213 you before, when a person testifies, both sides are then entitled to ask questions of the individual. Perhaps Mr. Edwardson [sic] did not want me to ask him any questions. Perhaps because he was afraid of the answers which he would be required to give.
Standby counsel objected, but was overruled. The prosecution made no further arguments in this vein.
[8, 9]
Generally, a defendant's right not to testify cannot be eviscerated by a prosecutor's comment on his silence. Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609, 614 (1965). However, the rule barring such comment is not absolute. The United States Supreme Court has held that when defendant's counsel focuses attention on defendant's silence, some prosecutorial reflection on that silence does not violate constitutional prohibitions. Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 595 (1978). Following Lockett, the federal court of appeals for the Third Circuit held that where a defendant does not take the stand, but makes a closing argument that encompasses an unsworn statement of factual reasons for not testifying, the prosecution does not violate the defendant's constitutional rights by responding to the defendant's words. Bontempo v. Fenton, 692 F.2d 954, 958-59 (3d Cir. 1982).
In Bontempo, as in the instant case, defendant did not take the stand. In Bontempo, as in the instant case, defendant made a closing argument to the jury. In both cases, defendant gave a factual reason for not testifying: Bontempo asserted that his memory was impaired as a result of brain damage, id. at 957; Edwardsen asserted that Constable Haas testified for defendant and lied from A to Z. In both cases, the prosecution then suggested another reason for defendant *214 not testifying: that the defendant had thereby avoided answering or discussing questions pertinent to the case. The Bontempo court concluded that the prosecution had not violated fifth amendment constraints:
Even if the prosecutor's remarks did constitute comment on the failure to take the stand, they did not amount to a constitutional violation. As the district court found, Bontempo "stridently directed the jury's attention to his own failure to testify." He even offered an unsworn excuse. At that point, the issue was in the jury box, if it had not been there before. Jurors, after all, cannot help remembering that the defendant did not testify. To say that the prosecution violated Bontempo's rights by calling the jury's attention to something he had already argued is to retreat from reality. Bontempo had made the point himself. If it was prejudicial, additional prosecutorial comment did not make it more so. Indeed, Bontempo's explanation for his failure to testify, untested by cross-examination, was probably more helpful to his cause then ignoring the matter altogether.
Id. at 959.
[10]
We fully concur. When a defendant, pro se, comments on his own silence and gives factual reasons for that silence, he cannot be heard to complain when the prosecution presents other explanations to the jury. At such a juncture, defendant himself has called attention to his silence, and the prosecution is doing no more than commenting on the unsworn testimony, and not on the defendant's right to silence.[5]
*215 Defendant misplaces reliance on our holding in State v. Johnson, 121 Wis. 2d 237, 358 N.W.2d 824 (Ct. App. 1984). In that case, as here, defendant did not testify but did argue to the jury. The prosecution, in his opening statement, reminded the jury that only testimony under oath constitutes evidence, a statement "in precise keeping with the thrust of the standard instruction concerning arguments of counsel." Id. at 247-48, 358 N.W.2d at 829. We held that such a comment was permissible, and stated that it did not cross over into the forbidden area of comment on an accused's failure to testify. Id. at 248-49, 358 N.W.2d at 829. We then noted the impossibility of drawing a bright line for all cases between permissible and impermissible comment and concluded that determinations of whether a prosecutorial comment violates constitutional rights must be made case by case. Id. at 249, 358 N.W.2d at 830.
In the instant case, the prosecution's comment constituted no more than a pertinent and measured reply to defendant's calling attention to his own failure to testify. As such, the comment did not violate constitutional prohibitions safeguarding defendant's right to remain silent.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  The Fifth Circuit distinguishes Blackledge, which concerned increasing defendant's charges to a felony from a misdemeanor, from cases such as this one where new charges were added stemming from the same spree of activity as the original charges. United States v. Krezdorn, 718 F.2d 1360 (5th Cir. 1983). In such a case, the Fifth Circuit places the initial burden on defendant to make out a prima facie case for vindictiveness. We are unpersuaded by its analysis. Where the prosecutor "ups the ante" on defendant after conviction and appeal, we think Blackledge and Goodwin mandate a presumption of vindictiveness. See Krezdorn, 718 F.2d at 1370 (Goldberg, J., dissenting). Another rule may well apply to pretrial prosecutorial decisions, but that issue is not before us.
[2]  Stubbendick court expressly noted that the question of prosecutorial vindictiveness was not before it. State v. Stubbendick, 110 Wis. 2d 693, 705 n. 3, 329 N.W.2d 399, 405 (1983).
[3]  As stated in the facts, supra, pp. 201-02, defendant waived his preliminary hearing on the original two counts in exchange for the prosecutor's agreement to forego the third charge. After we reversed defendant's convictions on the two charges, and after the state had added the third charge, defendant requested a preliminary hearing on all three counts. His motion was granted, and a preliminary hearing on all three counts was afforded him. Since defendant was returned to his prebargain position when the bargain was withdrawn, we find no fundamental unfairness in the proceedings. State v. Beckes, 100 Wis. 2d 1, 7, 300 N.W.2d 871, 874 (Ct.App. 1980).
[4]  If "compressing cocaine into chunks" has some technical meaning, that meaning is not in evidence here.
[5]  A different issue is presented, of course, if a pro se defendant naively informs the jury of specific legal reasons for not testifying, or of legal principles that should guide their understanding of the trial. See, e.g., Elizondo v. State, 545 S.W.2d 453, 455 (Tex. Crim. App. 1976) (holding that a defendant's statement that the jury is the judge of witness credibility does not open the door to otherwise forbidden prosecutorial comment).

=== CASE 9736921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:01.955825+00 ===

NIERENGARTEN, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. Although I may disagree with the decision of the referee and the Commissioner’s representative, I would affirm because the “narrow standard of review” on appeal requires this court to defer to the Commissioner’s factual findings. See Reserve Mining Co. v. Gorecki, 316 N.W.2d 547, 549 (Minn.1982); see also, Nyberg v. R.N. Cardozo & Brother, Inc., 243 Minn. 361, 364, 67 N.W.2d 821, 823 (1954). The Commissioner’s findings must be reviewed in a light most favorable to the decision and cannot be disturbed “if there is evidence reasonably tending to sustain them.” Reserve Mining Co., 316 N.W.2d at 549. The record before this court contains evidence which reasonably supports the Commissioner’s findings.
Viewed in a light most favorable to the decision, the record shows the employer did take steps to curb Varga’s objectionable behavior by meeting with Varga on at least two occasions and discussing the problem with him. The extent and frequency of Wetterhahn’s complaints and the employer’s response to her complaints were established largely by testimony which was neither conclusive nor definitive. Under these circumstances, I would defer to the fact-finder’s unique opportunity to judge the credibility of witness testimony. See Nyberg, 243 Minn. at 365, 67 N.W.2d at 824; Tumquist v. Amoco Oil Co., 397 N.W.2d 442, 444 (Minn.Ct.App.1986). In light of the record on appeal, I cannot conclude Wetterhahn met her burden of proving her resignation was for “good cause attributable to the employer.” See Minn.Stat. § 268.09, subd. 1(a) (Supp.1987); Marz v. Department of Employment Services, 256 N.W.2d 287, 289 (Minn.1977); see also Larson v. Department of Economic Security, 281 N.W.2d 667, 669 (Minn.1979) (the employee had a duty to inform his employer of alleged harassment to allow the employer an opportunity to correct the situation; the employer could not be charged with having caused the employee’s termination if the employer was not informed). I would affirm the Commissioner’s decision.

=== CASE 2207960 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.158632+00 ===

1 N.Y.3d 532 (2003)
802 N.E.2d 1083
770 N.Y.S.2d 685
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
JIAN JING HUANG, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued October 15, 2003.
Decided November 24, 2003.
*533 Office of the Appellate Defender, New York City (Daniel A. Warshawsky and Richard M. Greenberg of counsel), for appellant.
Robert M. Morgenthau, District Attorney, New York City (Morrie I. Kleinbart and Mary C. Farrington of counsel), for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges G.B. SMITH, CIPARICK, ROSENBLATT, GRAFFEO and READ concur in memorandum.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be reversed and the case remitted to that Court, with directions to dismiss the appeal taken to that Court.
Arguing a misapprehension of his immigration status based on information provided by his attorney, defendant moved to withdraw his plea of guilty, after sentence had been pronounced in open court. In the alternative, he moved to vacate his plea under CPL 440.10 (1). Without describing the steps that are involved or what constitutes the entry of judgment, both parties concede that judgment had not been entered. Trial court treated the motion as a CPL 220.60 (3) application and granted it, giving defendant back his plea. "In the alternative," the court also granted the CPL 440.10 motion.
*534 The People appealed, contending that because sentence had been imposed, Supreme Court lacked the authority to treat defendant's motion to withdraw his plea as a CPL 220.60 application, and, further, that relief pursuant to CPL 440.10 was unavailable because judgment had not been entered. Without deciding the specific procedural posture of the case, the Appellate Division rejected defendant's ineffective assistance claim on the merits.
In appealing trial court's determinationwhether properly made under CPL 220.60 (3), or, alternatively, not expressly authorized by the CPLthe People sought review of a nonappealable order. As the parties agree, moreover, judgment had not been entered, and thus no appeal could lie from the "alternative" CPL 440.10 ruling. Accordingly, the Appellate Division had no jurisdiction to entertain the People's appeal (see CPL 450.20).
Order reversed, etc.

=== CASE 9736922 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:08.764082+00 ===

ROTH, J.
In 1890 II. L. Williams (Williams) executed a duly recorded declaration of trust (Williams Trust) wherein certain real property in Summerland, County of Santa Barbara (hereinafter referred to as “Temple Site”) was conveyed to three trustees “for, the establishment of and as a site for the building of a Spiritual Temple to be by them held until the establishment of an organized society in Summerland devoted to the promotion of Spiritualism, whereupon said Trustees hereinabove named shall upon the written request of myself or of my successors in title convey said land and premises to the governing board or body of said society or to one or more trustees whom said society may appoint, subject to such conditions and limitations only . . . .”
Williams died in 1892 or 1893, and his estate was distributed in 1929.
Prom time to time successor trustees were named for the three original trustees by order of the Superior Court of California in and for the County of Santa Barbara, and defendants Milton Duncan, Steven Granaroli, Jr., and Jack Lambert now are and were the duly appointed successor trustees at the time of the commencement of this action.
On July 1, 1960, the Attorney General as plaintiff filed a complaint against Summerland Spiritualist Association (Summerland), a California nonprofit corporation, and the three trustees named above to enforce the Williams Trust, alleging it to be a charitable trust, that the individual defendants then were successive trustees thereof and hold title to the Temple Site as such trustees, that Summerland qualifies to be successor trustee of the trust assets to carry out the trusts’ charitable purposes, that plaintiff is charged with the *379supervision and enforcement of charitable trusts, and prayed that the court make appropriate orders for the transfer of the Temple Site to Summerland to carry out the trust purposes provided for by the trust instrument, and that if such trust purposes could not reasonably be accomplished, the court apply the doctrine of cy pres and order the transfer of the real property to a qualified trustee for the accomplishment of comparable charitable purposes.
The default of the individual defendants was entered. Summerland filed its answer, admitting the allegations of the complaint and prayed that it be appointed successor trustee of the Temple Site to carry out the above mentioned charitable purposes.
Naomi M. Morgan (Naomi), a stepdaughter of Williams and other stepchildren of Williams and members of their family filed a complaint and two amended complaints in intervention, alleging the Williams Trust to be invalid, and, among other things, that interveners (respondents) are heirs-at-law of the parties entitled to take the Temple Site under the decree of distribution of Williams’ estate, that circumstances in Summerland have changed and that no public use could then be made of the Temple Site which would be “commensurate” with the intent of Williams as expressed in the Williams Trust, and that they were then in actual possession of the Temple Site and had been by themselves and their predecessors in actual, exclusive and adverse possession thereof continuously for five years prior to the filing of plaintiff’s complaint and had paid all taxes assessed against that property during the five-year period.
The issues presented in opposition to the complaint by the other pleadings and during the trial were that respondents had acquired title to the Temple Site by prescription; the trust was invalid; Summerland had, in allowing a great lapse of time since it had knowledge of respondents’ prescriptive possession, waived its rights and allowed its claim to become stale; that the original purpose of the trust had failed and that the doctrine of cy pres is not applicable.
The court concluded that the trust was valid, but that the purpose thereof had failed and that the doctrine of cy pres did not apply.
The court also found: “... that by the long delay and lapse of time plaintiff and defendants and their predecessors have acquiesced in the possession and claims of said interveners. ...” There is no evidence that the Attorney General *380knew respondents were making or intended to make a claim of adverse possession.
Further, it has been held that even the lapse of many years is no bar to an action by the Attorney General.
In Brown v. Memorial National Home Foundation, 162 Cal.App.2d 513, the court said at page 534 [329 P.2d 118, 75 A.L.R.2d 427]:
“. . . the proper administration of a benevolent trust, especially the prevention of departures from its legitimate objects and the redressing of breaches and repudiations of the trust, are matters of large public interest which preclude application of the doctrine of laches and estoppel and particularly so in an action brought by the attorney general. ‘No length of diversion from the plain provisions of a charitable trust will prevent restoration to its true purpose.’ (William Buchanan Foundation v. Shepperd (Tex.Civ. App.) 283 S.W.2d 325, 336.)  ‘The lapse of many years is no bar to such action. “Generally it is true that no length of time of diversion from the plain provisions of a charitable foundation will prevent its restoration to its true purpose.” ’ (Shattuck v. Wood Memorial Home, supra, 319 Mass. 444 [66 N.E.2d 568, 573].) To the same effect, see Trustees of Andover T. Seminary v. Visitors of Theological Inst., 253 Mass. 256. [148 N.E. 900, 918].”
We are of the opinion laches does not apply to any facts that can be found from the evidence disclosed by the record in this ease.
It is clear and undisputed from the testimony that Williams started the town of Summerland as a spiritualistic colony. It is also clear from the trust that the purpose thereof as expressed therein was to provide the Temple Site for a spiritualist temple in Summerland, California, and to benefit spiritualism in that city. Naomi testified that she has resided in Summerland, California “off and on” from 1901, 1902, or 1903, and that she didn’t think that there had been any spiritualist there for “a good many years.” The president of the board of directors testified that Summerland had been active in Summerland, California but that it had moved to Santa Barbara in 1948 or 1949, because a majority of its members then were in Santa Barbara and that it conducted services every Sunday with a regular minister. A member of Summerland testified that it had a creed or doctrine in which they believe, that at the time of its move to Santa Barbara, there were only about four or five of its members left in Summerland, California, and that there no longer is an organ*381ized society of spiritualists in that city. It thus would appear that although the specific purpose of the "Williams Trust, as expressed therein, of benefiting spiritualism in Summerland, California, cannot be accomplished, that Williams had a general charitable intent, to wit: the promotion of spiritualism, and that the case at bar is one in which the doctrine of cy pres can and should be applied.
The court found as a fact that respondents had acquired title by adverse possession in that interveners were in the actual exclusive and adverse possession of the Temple Site for more than five years, particularly the period from 1939-1945.
It is settled that property held for a public use cannot be acquired by adverse possession. (County of Yolo v. Barney, 79 Cal. 375 [21 P. 833, 12 Am.St.Rep. 152]; Board of Education v. Martin, 92 Cal. 209 [28 P. 799].)  It seems to us that property held under a charitable trust would have the same immunity.  That property conveyed to a trust for charitable use is for a public use seems to be implicit in the law which charges the Attorney General with the duty and responsibility of enforcing the terms and supervising the management of all such trusts. (Brown v. Memorial National Home Foundation, supra, 162 Cal.App.2d 513, 535-537.)
However, the finding of adverse possession is not supported by the evidence.
All parties agree that the law on the subject of prescription, is succinctly set forth in the ease of Dimmick v. Dimmick, 58 Cal.2d 417, 421-422 [24 Cal.Rptr. 856, 374 P.2d 824] as follows: “In an action to quiet title based on adverse possession the burden is upon the claimant to prove every necessary element: (1) Possession must be by actual occupation under such circumstances as to constitute reasonable notice to the owner. (2) It must be hostile to the owner’s title. (3) The holder must claim the property as his own, under either color of title or claim of right. (4) Possession must be continuous and uninterrupted for five years. (5) The holder must pay all the taxes levied and assessed upon the property during the period. (Laubisch v. Roberdo, 43 Cal.2d 702, 706 [1] [277 P.2d 9]; West v. Evans, 29 Cal.2d 414, 417 [1] [175 P.2d 219].)” (Clark v. Stotts, 127 Cal.App.2d 589, 592 [274 P.2d 172].)
It is settled that the presumption of ownership is with the paper title and clear evidence must be produced to *382overcome that presumption. (Wareham v. Randolph, 184 Cal.App.2d 218, 225 [7 Cal.Rptr. 483].)
It is settled too that the burden of proving all of the essential elements of adverse possession rests upon the person relying thereon and it cannot be made out by inference but only by clear and positive proof. (Clark v. Stotts, supra; Hahn v. Curtis, 73 Cal.App.2d 382, 389 [166 P.2d 611].)
Respondents predicate adverse possession upon the following facts:
In 1944 Mr. Ray F. Lambert made arrangements for the use of the “Temple Site” when he leased the property in the city of Summerland, known as “The Becker estate.” The Becker estate comprised property which was all around the “Temple Site.” Mr. Lambert farmed the property but he was uncertain as to whether he last used it in 1947 or 1948. Lambert made his lease with Mr. Worsley Morgan, the stepson of H. L. Williams. It was a written lease, (nothing is said as to its duration) and provided that Lambert was to pay one-fourth of the crops to the Morgan-Becker Estate as rental for the use of the land. Before the crops were harvested, however, Lambert and Morgan agreed that Lambert would pay $750 per year and Lambert did pay that amount by check to Worsley Morgan in the year 1944. After 1944 Mr. Ray F. Lambert leased the same property from Naomi. He testified he leased it from her in 1945 and 1946 but didn’t remember whether he leased it in 1947.
Mr. Frank Miller, farmed the subject property in 1943, the year immediately preceding the first year that Lambert farmed it. Miller leased the property from Worsley Morgan.
Mr. Ray F. Lambert testified that “... a Japanese fellow by the name of Joe [spelled Dyo], or something like that ...” worked the land immediately prior to Miller, to wit: immediately prior to 1943. Mr. Lambert did not know how long Dyo worked the land but it was for more than a year and that Dyo used it continuously during the time he had it.”
Mr. John F. Lambert testified that in January 1942 the Dyo family was farming the subject property. He did not recall when Dyo first farmed the subject property, but he did recall that Dyo farmed it in 1941 and was farming it in January of 1942 when he, John F. Lambert, left for the service.
Mrs. Lucille Morgan testified that she overheard a conversation between her husband, Worsley Morgan, and Dyo regarding a lease of the property in which Dyo asked her husband for permission to farm the vacant land, and he was *383given permission to farm it by Worsley Morgan. Mrs. Lucille Morgan however did not recall the terms under which Dyo entered this property. She placed the time of the conversation between her husband and Dyo as “probably three or four years” before the beginning of the Second World War.
There is also evidence that prior to the time Dyo farmed the subject property, it was farmed by Mr. Tom Mayfield, but it appears that the property was vacant for a few years between the time that Mayfield farmed it and Dyo farmed it.
It also clearly appears from the record and the court took judicial notice of the fact that Dyo did not farm the subject property in 1942 and that he went to a camp pursuant to Civilian Exclusion Order No. 13 from Headquarters of the Western Defense Command and Fourth Army, Presidio of San Francisco, California, dated April 23, 1942. The court also took judicial notice of Civilian Exclusion Order No. 14 excluding “... all persons of Japanese ancestry, both alien and non-alien, be excluded from ... Counties of ... Santa Barbara ...” and certain Executive orders which permitted the Secretary of War and the Military Commanders “... to prescribe military areas from which persons may be excluded. ’ ’
There is no evidence that Dyo, a Japanese, violated the orders referred to which were applicable to the area of Santa Barbara where the property is located and it must be assumed that he complied therewith.
Insofar as payment of taxes is concerned, the record shows that the subject property was placed on the assessment roll and assessed by the Tax collector to the estate of H. L. Williams. The record further shows that the taxes of the subject property were paid by Naomi Morgan from an account of the estate of Agnes S. Becker.
There is a real question too as to whether the holding of Naomi Morgan can be tacked to the holding of her brother Worsley Morgan.
We have been cited to no case which impels a conclusion or finding that the mere fact that Worsley Morgan and Naomi Morgan were brother and sister, and that Naomi Morgan paid taxes on the property out of an account from the Agnes Becker estate establishes that privity of estate between Worsley and Naomi existed which is required to establish tacking. (Code Civ. Proc., § 326; St. James Church v. Superior Court, 135 Cal.App.2d 352, 362 [287 P.2d 387]; Sorensen v. Costa, 32 Cal.2d 453, 461-462 [196 P.2d 900].)
*384Even if tacking be assumed, the facts reflected by the record as outlined do not show a continuous five-year possession as required by law.
A review of the evidence relative to adverse possession shows that the respondents have not met the high standard of proof imposed upon them, that is, they have not proven adverse possession by the required “clear and positive proof.’’
The judgment is reversed and the trial court is directed to enter judgment in favor of defendant Summerland Spiritualist Association, a nonprofit corporation; wherein, among other things, Summerland Spiritualist Association will be appointed trustee of the property described in the Williams Trust and said property will be transferred to Summerland Spiritualist Association as trustee, to be held by said trustee for the purposes described in the Trust.
Kincaid, J. pro tern.,* concurred.
Retired judge of the superior court sitting pro tempore under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:10.745106+00 ===

*451Archer, J.
We granted leave to appeal to decide whether the threshold requirements of MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1)1 apply when a motorist seeks benefits for noneconomic loss under the uninsured motorist provision of his no-fault policy. As a preliminary issue, we must determine the scope of tort liability of any uninsured motorist for noneconomic damages arising from an automobile collision.
We hold that uninsured motorists are subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement. MCL 500.3135; MSA 24.13135. On the basis of the insurance agreement between the parties at bar, we hold that the insured party is not entitled to damages for noneconomic loss unless his injuries meet the threshold set forth in § 3135. Therefore, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand this case to the trial court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
i
On April 9, 1981, the vehicle of defendant-appellee Gregory J. Hill was struck from the rear by an uninsured motorist. Mr. Hill filed a claim with his automobile insurance provider, plaintiff-appellant Auto Club Insurance Association (acia), for damages for noneconomic loss suffered as a result of the collision. This claim was pursuant to the fol*452lowing provision of his no-fault insurance contract with acia:
Uninsured Motorists Coverage.
We will pay damages for bodily injury which an insured person is legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of an uninsured motor vehicle. Bodily injury must be caused by accident and arise out of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of the uninsured motor vehicle.
Mr. Hill’s claim was denied. Pursuant to a clause in the insurance policy, the dispute was submitted for arbitration. The arbitration panel awarded defendant $11,000, inclusive of damages for noneconomic loss.
The acia petitioned the Circuit Court of the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit to vacate the award of the arbitration panel. The petition asserted that the defendant had not alleged that he sustained injuries that met the threshold requirements as set forth in § 3135 for receipt of damages for noneconomic loss.2 Defendant Hill responded with *453a petition to affirm the award. The latter petition was granted.
Plaintiff sought relief in the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals affirmed the finding of the circuit court.3 Plaintiff-appellant’s subsequent motion for rehearing was denied.
The acia now seeks relief in this Court. We granted leave to appeal limited to the issue whether the threshold requirements of MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1) apply when an insured motorist seeks benefits for noneconomic loss under the uninsured motorist provision of a no-fault policy.4_
*454II
In order to give proper effect to §3135,5 this Court must enforce the clear and unambiguous language of the statute as drafted by the Legislature. In Browder v Int’l Fidelity Ins Co, 413 Mich 603, 611; 321 NW2d 668 (1982), this Court stated:
A basic rule of statutory construction is that where the Legislature uses certain and unambiguous language, the plain meaning of the statute must be followed. [Citations omitted.]
This Court may not impose its view of the best *455means to achieve a legislative purpose. In construing a statute, this Court must discern the intent of the Legislature in enacting the relevant provision. In doing so, we must first look to the language of the statute itself. Thornton v Allstate Ins Co, 425 Mich 643; 391 NW2d 320 (1986). After considering the language and general scope of the act, we may determine legislative intent in light of the purpose it seeks to accomplish or the evil it seeks to remedy. Longstreth v Gensel, 423 Mich 675; 377 NW2d 804 (1985).
A
Section 3135(1) of the no-fault act provides:
A person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss . . . only if the injured person has suffered . . . serious impairment of body function .... [MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1).]
This section unambiguously governs liability for noneconomic loss, as distinguished from damages for economic loss which the no-fault insurer is liable to pay under §§ 3107 to 3110 of the act.6 Bradley v Mid-Century Ins Co, 409 Mich 1, 62; 294 NW2d 141 (1980). The section also clearly specifies to whom its terms apply. The Legislature did not qualify the term “person” with any distinction *456between persons insured and those who are uninsured.7
In contrast, § 3135(2) governs general tort liability. It applies only where the required no-fault coverage is in effect: "[T]ort liability arising from the ownership, maintenance or use [of a properly insured vehicle]8 is abolished” except under certain specific enumerated circumstances, including damages for noneconomic loss "as provided and limited in subsection (1).” MCL 500.3135(2)(b); MSA 24.13135(2)(b).
Defendant-appellee Hill contends that the exception to the abolition of tort liability in § 3135(2)(b) circumscribes the scope of tort immunity granted in § 3135(1). He argues that the reference to *457§ 3135(1) in § 3135(2)(b) imposes a requirement of no-fault insurance for immunity from tort liability for below threshold noneconomic loss. We find no basis for adopting such a strained construction of the tort immunity granted in § 3135(1).
B
There is no qualification in the language of § 3135(1) referring to § 3135(2). Although the same general subject, i.e., tort liability, is treated in both subsections, they apply to two distinct types of liability. Subsection (1) governs immunity from tort liability for noneconomic loss. Subsection (2) abolishes general tort liability with several enumerated exceptions.
The reference in § 3135(2)(b) to § 3135(1) does not change the meaning of § 3135(1) itself. That reference limits the subsection 2(b) exception from the abolition of tort liability for noneconomic loss to above-the-threshold noneconomic loss. Thus, the reference to § 3135(1) merely obviates the need to enumerate the circumstances under which tort liability for noneconomic loss is excepted from the general abolition of tort liability contained in § 3135(2). In other words, if not for the reference to § 3135(1) in § 3135(2)(b), the latter subsection would read: "damages for noneconomic loss, if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement.”
If the Legislature had intended to qualify the tort immunity granted in § 3135(1) by requiring proper no-fault insurance,9 it could have expressly done so as it did with respect to the tort immunity granted in § 3135(2). __
*458C
Our construction of § 3135 is consistent with the policies and legislative purpose underpinning its promulgation.
The basic goal of the personal injury provisions of the no-fault insurance act is to provide individuals injured in motor vehicle accidents assured, adequate and prompt reparation for certain economic losses. Babbitt v Employers Ins of Wausau, 136 Mich App 198; 355 NW2d 635 (1984). This Court has held, however, that the Legislature’s purpose in establishing the alternative criteria of death, permanent serious disfigurement or serious impairment of body function as prerequisites for collection of noneconomic damages, "was simply to weed out from the tort system claims for injuries less severe than the criteria.” Byer v Smith, 419 Mich 541, 546; 357 NW2d 644 (1984). The Legislature intended to bar “any recovery whatsoever for noneconomic loss unless the injury is serious and [to relieve] the courts of the burden of litigation where the injury is not serious.” Id. at 545.
m
In addition to its consistency with this Court’s interpretation of legislative policy, we find direct support in case law for our construction of § 3135.
In Bradley v Mid-Century Ins Co, supra, the Court resolved a series of companion cases involving certain contractual limitations in uninsured motorist endorsements of automobile insurance policies. In parts ii and in of the Bradley opinion, the Court discussed the relationship between uninsured motorist coverage and first-party benefits under the no-fault act.
*459A
In part n of Bradley, the Court discussed and decided whether uninsured motorist coverage under more than one policy could be stacked to provide recovery for damages sustained in an accident which occurred after the enactment of the no-fault act and the simultaneous repeal of the uninsured motorist amendment of the Insurance Code, MCL 500.3010; MSA 24.13010. Bradley, supra at 46-60. The plaintiff in part ii, Gary Davidson, argued that "antistacking provisions” contained in his automobile insurance policy were violative of public policy. The Court held that the clauses at issue were enforceable. Id. at 54.
In discussing the purposes and policy involved in promulgation by the Legislature of the no-fault insurance act, the Court made several observations relevant to resolution of the issue at bar. The Court analyzed the purpose of uninsured motorist coverage before and after the passage of the no-fault act. Prior to promulgation of the act, uninsured motorist coverage was designed to protect the integrity of the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Fund. Id. at 52. Under the no-fault system, however, uninsured motorist coverage is a substitute for residual liability insurance. The Court stated:
[U]ninsured motorist coverage . . . provides some compensation in cases where the victim has suffered severe (above-the-threshold) injuries and there is no residual liability coverage to provide compensation for pain and suffering and excess economic loss.
We are persuaded that the Legislature repealed the uninsured motorist amendment not because it assumed there would be no uninsured motorists, but because after the passage of no-fault a person *460injured by an uninsured motorist had a source of recovery for all damages except pain and suffering and excess economic loss.
True, no-fault benefits may be insufficient to fully compensate one injured by a negligent uninsured motorist. But no accident victim is permitted, under the no-fault act, to recover for below threshold pain and suffering .... [Id. at 52-54.]
Thus, in part ii of Bradley, this Court distinguished between loss compensable by the basic no-fault benefits, i.e., economic loss, and damages for pain and suffering and excess economic loss, compensable in cases of "severe (above-the-threshold) injuries.”
B
In part m of its opinion, the Bradley Court addressed the question whether an insurer could offset first-party benefits paid under the no-fault act from the policy limits of uninsured motorist protection without regard to the total damages that would be payable by the uninsured motorist or the nature of those damages, i.e., economic or noneconomic. This Court reiterated its view that uninsured motorist coverage under the no-fault act is a substitute for residual liability insurance:
Under the no-fault motor vehicle liability act an insured may collect from his insurer for work loss and medical expenses without regard to fault. He may sue the negligent tortfeasor for excess economic loss and, if the threshold of injury is met, for noneconomic loss. The statute requires that motorists carry residual liability insurance in addition to no-fault insurance to provide a source of recovery to persons severely injured as a result of driver negligence. If a motorist is uninsured he *461may be sued for all economic loss as well as above-threshold non-economic loss.
A purpose of the no-fault act is to provide a contractual right of action against one’s own insurer for wage loss and medical expenses arising from a motor vehicle accident. A tort action for non-economic and excess economic loss was preserved in cases of severe loss. The Legislature has thus divided an injured person’s loss into two categories — loss for which the no-fault insurer is liable and loss for which the tortfeasor is liable. No-fault insurance provides security for the first type; uninsured motorist coverage, which presupposes that the insured is entitled to recovery under the tort system, provides security for the second type — it is offered to protect against being left with a worthless claim against an uninsured motorist. [id. at 61-62. Emphasis added.]
Because of this distinction between economic losses compensable under basic no-fault coverage and those losses compensable pursuant to an uninsured motorist endorsement, the Court held that the set-off clause could not be enforced in the manner that the insurer sought:
In providing insurance against the uninsured motorist, the insurer promises the insured that his right of action for greater than threshold injuries will not be worthless if the tortfeasor turns out to be uninsured.
If the tortfeasor is insured or otherwise collectible, the insurer paying no-fault benefits has a statutory right to reimbursement for benefits theretofore paid by it only out of a recovery for those economic losses. So, too, if the insurer contracts to make good for an uninsured motorist— coverage complementary and supplementary to the basic no-fault policy and standing in the place of third-party residual liability insurance — the insurer and the insured should have corresponding rights relative to amounts recoverable under an *462uninsured motorist endorsement; the insurer should be permitted a set-off only to the extent a recovery duplicates benefits it has already paid.
The insured is entitled to payment under the "all sums recoverable” language of the uninsured motorist endorsement for all economic and above the threshold non-economic loss for which an uninsured motorist would be liable. [Id. at 63-64. Emphasis added.]
Because the set-off clause failed to note the distinction between types of damages, the Court found the clause to be either defectively ambiguous or inconsistent with the reasonable expectations of the insured. Id. at 60-61.
Defendant-appellee argues that the Bradley Court’s description of the nature and scope of uninsured motorist coverage is mere dicta. We disagree. This Court’s conclusion that the set-off clause was unenforceable was squarely on the basis of the differences between first-party no-fault benefits and compensation for noneconomic losses pursuant to uninsured motorist coverage. We found that the insurer’s interpretation of the policy would nullify the effect of uninsured motorist coverage in precisely those situations in which it was intended to apply:
Unless voluntarily purchased uninsured motorist coverage provides meaningful protection for severe, above-threshold, injuries without regard to what the insurer is required to pay under the mandatory no-fault coverage, it serves no apparent purpose in the context of a no-fault statute mandating the payment of benefits. If the set-off were enforced in the manner the insurers seek, no-fault benefits paid would reduce uninsured motorist coverage dollar for dollar. As soon as the insurer has paid out $20,000 in no-fault benefits, there would be no recovery whatsoever under the uninsured motorist endorsement. [Id. at 64.]
*463We find this Court’s interpretation of the nature and scope of uninsured motorist coverage in Bradley to be consistent with our interpretation of the extent of immunity from tort liability granted in § 3135(1) of the no-fault act.
c
Defendant-appellee asserts that in Citizens Ins Co v Tuttle, 411 Mich 536; 309 NW2d 174 (1981), the Court defined the scope of tort liability for noneconomic damages to include compensation for below-threshold injuries. In that case, Mr. Tuttle’s cow, which was running loose on the highway, was involved in a collision with a tractor and trailer. Citizens Insurance Company brought an action in tort against Donald Tuttle to recover the cost of repairs paid to its insured for damages resulting from the collision. This Court was faced with the question whether tort liability arising out of conduct other than the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle was abolished by the no-fault act. We held that the tort liability abolished by the no-fault act is only such liability as arises out of the tortfeasor’s ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle. This does not include tort liability which arises out of other conduct, such as the negligent keeping of cattle. Id. at 546-547.
Defendant-appellee supports his argument on the basis of the following language in Tuttle:
Moreover, subsection (2) abolishes tort liability arising from the ownership, maintenance or use only of vehicles for which the required no-fault insurance or other security has been obtained. The policy apparently expressed in so conditioning the abolition of tort liability upon the obtaining of no-fault coverage is that a person is to be relieved of tort liability only upon participating, through the *464payment of premiums, in a system for spreading the costs of compensating vehicular injuries without regard to fault. To extend the abolition of tort liability to non-motorist tortfeasors would be to incorporate into the no-fault system the costs of providing personal protection insurance benefits to motorists, passengers and pedestrians injured by non-motorist tortfeasors without incorporating offsetting premiums from non-motorist tortfeasors, since non-motorist tortfeasors are not required to purchase no-fault insurance with respect to their conduct as non-motorists.
. . . The non-motorist tortfeasor is the equivalent of the uninsured motorist and should be treated similarly. Both are outside the basic no-fault system of allocating the costs of accidents and both remain subject to tort liability. [Id. at 546-547. Emphasis added.]
Defendant-appellee asserts that the uninsured motorist in this case has paid no premium and has not supported the underlying no-fault act. He argues that the acia, standing in the shoes of the uninsured motorist, is therefore outside the basic no-fault system and should remain subject to liability for damages without regard to the threshold requirements of § 3135.
We find this argument to be unpersuasive. The question before the Court in Tuttle involved the liability of a nonmotorist tortfeasor. The Court analogized the nonmotorist tortfeasor to an uninsured motorist who enjoys no tort immunity for economic damages because he has not contributed to the insurance premium pool which funds first-party economic benefits. Id. at 546-547. We find this rationale to be limited to liability for economic damages.
The analogy in Tuttle was on the basis that "[b]oth [the nonmotorist tortfeasor and the unin*465sured motorist] are outside the basic no-fault system of allocating the cost of accidents and both remain subject to tort liability.” Id. This basis for withholding tort immunity for economic damages does not apply to noneconomic damages because recoveries for noneconomic damages are not provided by the basic no-fault system for allocating the cost of accidents. There is no logical basis for imposing greater liability for noneconomic damages upon a person because of his failure to fund the basic no-fault system, which pays for only economic damages.10
Indeed, in § 3102 of the act, the Legislature has provided penalties for those who own or operate motor vehicles without the required security. MCL 500.3102; MSA 24.13102. Also, the owner or registrant of an uninsured motor vehicle cannot collect first-party benefits if that motor vehicle is involved in an accident. MCL 500.3113(b); MSA 24.13113(b). This express provision of penalties for violation of the terms of the no-fault act indicates that the Legislature has expressed the extent to which it will punish violators. Without an express authorization for penalties in addition to those found in §§ 3102 and 3113 of the act, we decline to construe the statute in a manner that would further penalize uninsured motorist tortfeasors.
iv
The insurance agreement between the parties at bar provided that in the event of a collision with an uninsured motorist the defendant would be entitled to "damages for bodily injury which an insured person is legally entitled to recover from *466the owner or operator of an uninsured motor vehicle.” An uninsured motorist is not liable for noneconomic loss unless the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant in this case is not entitled to damages for noneconomic loss unless his injuries meet the threshold requirement.11
CONCLUSION
We hold that, pursuant to MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1), uninsured motorists are subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement. Our review of the terms of the insurance agreement upon which the defendant’s claim was based compels us to hold that he is not entitled to compensation for his noneconomic loss unless his loss meets the threshold requirement. We reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand this case to the trial court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Riley, C.J., and Brickley, Boyle, and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Archer, J.
A person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss caused by his or her ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement.
In DiFranco v Pickard, 427 Mich 32; 398 NW2d 896 (1986), this Court established a standard for determining whether a particular injury constitutes a serious impairment of bodily function sufficient to qualify for damages for noneconomic loss. A serious impairment of body function under the no-fault act need not be an impairment of the entire body function or of an important body function. The threshold requires inquiry into what body function, if any, was impaired because of injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident, and whether the impairment was serious. The focus of the inquiry is not on the injuries, but on how the injuries affected a particular body function. The Court stated:
In determining whether the impairment was serious, several factors should be considered: the extent of the impairment, the particular body function impaired, the length of time the impairment lasted, the treatment required to correct the impairment, and any other relevant factors. An impairment need not be permanent to be serious. [Id. at 39-40.]
Auto Club Ins Ass’n v Hill, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided February 23, 1987 (Docket No. 85828). The issues considered by the Court of Appeals were essentially two-fold: (1) whether an uninsured motorist who does not contribute to the no-fault reparation system is entitled to the same tort immunity for below threshold injuries as a motorist who contributes to the no-fault reparation system, and (2) whether an arbitration decision may be vacated where a split of authority exists, precluding any substantial error of law apparent on the face of the award and where the result is legally sound.
There were two separate rationales. The per curiam opinion held that the limitations on liability contained in the no-fault act "are available only to those who have obtained the required no-fault insurance or other security.” Id. at slip op, p 4. The Court reasoned that the insurer had stepped into the shoes of the uninsured motorist, thereby losing the protections of the act’s limitations of liability. In a separate opinion, Judge Danhof concurred in the judgment on the basis of the absence of clear error in the arbitration panel’s decision. Judge Danhof stated:
[Bjecause there is a split of authority in our Court, I cannot say that the arbitrator made an error of law in following Jones v DAIIE, 124 Mich App 363; 335 NW2d 39 (1983), lv den 418 Mich 878 (1983) [holding that the threshold does not apply to uninsured motorists]. [Id. at slip op, p 5.]
In an apparent reconciliation of the two rationales for upholding the judgment of the court below, the per curiam opinion stated:
Further, in so holding, we cannot find that the arbitrators made an error of law in following Jones. [Id. at slip op, p 4.]
429 Mich 858 (1987).
The relevant portions of the no-fault act are as follows:
(1) A person remains subject to tort liabUity for noneconomic loss caused by his or her ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disñgurement.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, tort liability arising from the ownership, maintenance, or use within this state of a motor vehicle with respect to which the security required by section 3101(3) and (4) was in effect is abolished except as to:
(a) Intentionally caused harm to persons or property. Even though a person knows that harm to persons or property is substantially certain to be caused by his or her act or omission, the person does not cause or suffer such harm intentionally if he or she acts or refrains from acting for the purpose of averting injury to any person, including himself or herself, or for the purpose of averting damage to tangible property.
(b) Damages for noneconomic loss as provided and limited in subsection (1).
(c) Damages for allowable expenses, work loss, and survivor’s loss as defined in sections 3107 to 3110 in excess of the daily, monthly, and 3-year limitations contained in those sections. The party liable for damages is entitled to an exemption reducing his or her liability by the amount of taxes that would have been payable on account of income the injured person would have received if he or she had not been injured.
(d) Damages up to $400.00 to motor vehicles, to the extent that the damages are not covered by insurance. An action for damages pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in compliance with subsection (3). [MCL 500.3135; MSA 24.13135. Emphasis added.]
The dissent cites the Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act as the model for the Michigan no-fault act. It is true that a different result than that reached today would be required pursuant to the provisions of the uniform act. It is also true that in drafting the Michigan no-fault act, our Legislature adopted the uniform act almost word for word. However, in a major departure, the Legislature added § 3135(1), which has no counterpart in the uniform act. In crafting this totally new provision to govern liability for noneconomic loss, the Legislature made clear its intention to create a threshold so that persons sustaining minor injuries would be compensated only for economic loss.
In dissent, Justice Cavanagh argues that use of the word "remains” in § 3Í35(1) indicates that § 3135(2) excludes uninsured motorists from the benefit of the tort immunity granted in § 3135(1). He states:
Only those — insureds—whose tort liability has been abolished under subsection (2) could have liability for noneconomic loss that "remains” under subsection (1). Persons whose tort liability has not been abolished — uninsureds—could not have liability that "remains.” [Post, p 468.]
We disagree for several reasons. First, as stated in the text, the Legislature did not qualify its use of the term "person” when it designated those who would receive the benefit of the tort immunity granted in subsection (1). Second, the Legislature clearly stated that such a " 'person’ remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss . . . only if the injured person [meets the threshold].” Third, Justice Cavanagh adopts an overly restrictive meaning of the term "remains.” It is doubtful that the Legislature would use such a circuitous means of distinguishing between insured and uninsured motorists in subsection (1) when it could have easily and more clearly made this distinction by using a term or phrase other than "person,” which is the broadest legal term of art possible for reference to those legal entities subject to damage suits for noneconomic loss caused by ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle. Fourth, subsection (1) precedes subsection (2) and is separate from the enumerated exceptions to the abolition of tort liability found in the latter provision. This indicates that subsection (1) is independent of subsection (2) .
As required by MCL 500.3101(3), (4); MSA 24.13101(3), (4).
See n 8.
The dissent also cites Citizens Ins Co v Tuttle, albeit without explanation. Post, p 470. No attempt is made in the dissent to respond to the distinctions we find between this case and the circumstances in Tuttle.
Mr. Hill did not argue, in this Court or in the courts below, that his insurance agreement with the acia was defectively ambiguous for failing to explicitly exclude liability for damages for noneconomic loss unless the injury sustained were above the threshold requirements of § 3135.

=== CASE 9736925 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:10.752724+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
(dissenting). The no-fault automobile liability act abolishes tort liability respecting an insured vehicle except for noneconomic loss greater than the statutory threshold: death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement.1_
*467The question presented is whether a person who suffers noneconomic loss less than the statutory threshold caused by the negligent use of an uninsured vehicle may recover under the uninsured motorist coverage of an automobile insurance policy.
The majority holds that the act abolishes tort liability for noneconomic loss below the statutory threshold without regard to whether the vehicle is insured. We would hold that tort liability is not abolished as to an uninsured vehicle and that the defendant may recover from his insurer under the uninsured motorist coverage.
Subsection (2) of § 3135 of the act, stating that tort liability is abolished as to an insured vehicle, and subsection (1), stating that an owner remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss "only” if a loss greater than the threshold has occurred,* 2 should be read together and harmonized. Subsection (2) speaks specifically to the question whether an owner of an uninsured vehicle is relieved of tort liability, and states that he is not. That specific provision should and can be given effect by regarding the language of subsection (1) (providing that a person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss only if a greater than threshold *468injury has occurred) as applicable only where tort liability has been abolished as provided in subsection (2).
Only those — insureds—whose tort liability has been abolished under subsection (2) could have liability for noneconomic loss that "remains” under subsection (1). Persons whose tort liability has not been abolished — uninsureds—could not have liability that "remains.” A person not within the intendment or scope of subsection (2) (abolishing tort liability) is not within the intendment or scope of subsection (1) (liability for noneconomic loss that remains); an uninsured is not within the intendment or scope of subsection (2) and hence is not within the intendment or scope of subsection (1).
The no-fault act, as this Court has observed,3 is modeled on the Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act which expressly,4 and on examination of the commentary5 clearly, provides — more *469clearly we agree than the Michigan act — that the provision of the act abolishing tort liability does not apply to the owner of an uninsured motor vehicle involved in an accident.
It may seem incongruous that an injured person who has uninsured motorist coverage may recover for below the threshold noneconomic loss when the driver of the other vehicle was at fault and the vehicle was uninsured, while no recovery below the threshold may be obtained if the other vehicle was insured. Such incongruity is the result of the language of the uninsured motorist rider to the injured person’s automobile insurance and does not justify the majority’s construction of the no-fault act to correct this possible incongruity in the underwriting of uninsured motorist coverage.6
*470Our attention has been directed by the parties to statements in Bradley v Mid-Century Ins, 409 Mich 1, 62; 294 NW2d 141 (1980), and Citizens Ins Co v Tuttle, 411 Mich 536, 546-547; 309 NW2d 174 (1981). Neither the statement in Bradley (tending to support the insurer) nor those in Citizens (tending to support the insured) were necessary to decision in those cases,7 and did not decide the issue in the instant case, an issue of sufficient difficulty to have justified plenary consideration in the instant case by this Court.
We would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Levin, J., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
(1) A person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic *467loss caused by his or her ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, tort liability arising from the ownership, maintenance, or use within this state of a motor vehicle with respect to which the security required by section 3101(3) and (4) was in effect is abolished except as to:
(b) Damages for noneconomic loss as provided and limited in subsection (1). [MCL 500.3135(1), (2)(b); MSA 24.13135(1), (2)(b).]
See n 5 of the majority opinion for the complete text.
See Citizens Ins Co v Tuttle, 411 Mich 536, 546; 309 NW2d 174 (1981).
(a) Tort liability with respect to accidents occurring in this State and arising from the ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle is abolished except as to:
(1) liability of the owner of a motor vehicle involved in an accident if security covering the vehicle was not provided at the time of the accident;
(7) damages for noneconomic detriment in excess of [$5,000], but only if the accident causes death, significant permanent injury, serious permanent disfigurement, or more than 6 months of complete inability of the injured person to work in an occupation. "Complete inability of an injured person to work in an occupation” means inability to perform, even on a part-time basis, even some of the duties required by his occupation or, if unemployed' at the time of injury, by any occupation for which the injured person was qualified. [Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act, 14 ULA 63, § 5.]
The rationale for denying the tort exemption to persons *469failing to comply with the requirement of providing security (Section 7) is that such persons have not contributed to the payment of basic reparation benefits which are intended to replace much of existing tort liability. For example, the State is not empowered to require that the United States government post security for the payment of basic reparation benefits. The United States’ obligation to pay the victims of accidents involving government motor vehicles is limited to paying "tort claims, in the same manner, and to the same extent as a private individual under like circumstances” (28 USC 2674). Under the provisions on security covering the vehicles (Section 7), the United States government may elect to provide security for its vehicles. If the United States provides security, it would be exempt from tort liability. But, under this paragraph, if it elected not to do so, it would continue to be liable in tort "to the same extent as a private individual” who had not complied with the security requirement. This paragraph retains tort liability only for the owner of the unsecured vehicle, since, under the provisions on security covering the vehicle, only the owner is required to furnish such security. The driver of an unsecured vehicle who is not the owner is not liable in tort under the tort action retained by this paragraph. The owner’s vicarious liability under owner-consent statutes or principles of the law of agency is retained, however, as if the driver’s tort liability had been retained as well. [Commissioners’ Comment, 14 ULA 65-66, § 5(a)(1).]
The Kentucky Court of Appeals has held that the § 5(a)(1) thresh*470old of the umvara does not bar an insured’s action to recover under the uninsured motorist provision of an automobile policy for pain and suffering resulting from injuries sustained in a collision with an automobile negligently driven by an uninsured motorist. Hanover Ins Co v Blincoe, 573 SW2d 930 (Ky App, 1978).
The Supreme Court of North Dakota faced the same issue in Steenson v General Casualty Co, 397 NW2d 461, 462 (ND, 1986). The statute provided:
Secured person exemption.—
1. In any action against a secured person to recover damages because of accidental bodily injury arising out of the ownership or operation of a secured motor vehicle in this state, the secured person shall be exempt from liability to pay damages for:
a. Noneconomic loss unless the injury is a serious injury.
The court concluded:
There is nothing expressed in these statutes to suggest that recovery on the uninsured motorist coverage is limited by the threshold requirements of the separate no-fault statute. [Id., p 463.]
Wisdom too often never comes, and so one ought not to reject it merely because it comes late. [Henslee v Union Planters Nat’l Bank, 335 US 595, 600; 69 S Ct 290; 93 L Ed 259 (1949) (dissent of Frankfurter, J.).]

=== CASE 9736926 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:12.546443+00 ===

DOYLE, Judge.
This is an appeal1 by Larry Pitt, Esquire, from an order of the Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Board) affirming a referee’s decision which denied him an award for counsel fees.
The relevant facts are as follows. Pitt represented Arnold McEachin (Claimant) in a workmen’s compensation matter from September 1988 to April 1990. Claimant signed a contingent fee agreement providing that Pitt would receive 20% of all awarded compensation. In April, 1990, Claimant discharged Pitt and chose a new attorney, Anthony Witlin.
In January 1991, the referee granted Claimant’s claim petition and awarded benefits. The referee also awarded counsel fees at Claimant’s direction to Witlin in the amount of 20% of benefits awarded to Claimant. Pitt appealed nunc pro tunc the referee’s decision and also filed a “Petition for Approval of Counsel Fees Pursuant to Section 501 of the Workmen’s *62Compensation Act”2 with the Board. The Board remanded the entire matter to the referee for farther proceedings and ordered him to issue findings of fact and conclusions of law on payment of attorney’s fees and costs. Without taking additional evidence, the referee issued a second opinion affirming his original opinion and stating that “the Worker’s Compensation Act is not designed to involve itself in fee disputes between different attorneys representing the Claimant or the Defendant.” The Board affirmed this judgment. Pitt appealed and contends that the referee, erred as a matter of law in awarding all attorney fees to one attorney without issuing specific findings of fact distinguishing the amount and degree of difficulty of work by participating counsel.
In this appeal, we address for the first time a question never before presented: Where a claimant fires one attorney and hires another and the referee, in addition to granting the claimant’s petition for benefits, awards counsel fees, does the referee also have jurisdiction to decide a fee dispute between the lawyers and may he apportion the counsel fees?
The answer to the question lies in the realization that the only case in controversy that was before the referee to resolve was Claimant’s claim petition for compensation under Section 301(c) of the Act.3 That statutory cause of action carried with it a statutory requirement that the referee approve “all counsel fees, agreed upon by claimant and his attorneys for services performed in matters before any referee or the board ... providing the counsel fees do not exceed twenty per centum of the amount awarded.”4 (Emphasis added.) That independent cause of action is distinct from any claim which a discharged lawyer might assert against his former client, or that client’s subsequent counsel, over his discharge and replacement. Pitt, before this Court, is not representing a party to the worker’s compensation claim and litigation, but himself, litigating in his own interest a cause of action which is either a *63common law claim for breach of contract, or a claim on principles of quantum meruit, or an equitable claim for damages under a theory of unjust enrichment.
Under any theoiy, however, neither the Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, nor the referee, is vested with authority to adjudicate such an issue, nor does the Board or referee have any particular expertise in this area of the law. Quite the contrary, if Claimant’s defense here is that his first attorney, Pitt, breached his duty of professional representation, it places the referee and Board in an area completely foreign to their expertise. Moreover, it is possible that Claimant himself might be obligated to the discharged attorney on grounds totally different from, and perhaps even in conflict with, Pitt’s representation of him before the worker’s compensation adjudicative tribunals. A client always has the right to discharge a lawyer at any time, with or without cause, but if the reason for the discharge is because counsel would not pursue an imprudent or repugnant objective, or refuses to engage in reprehensible conduct, there could be liability for counsel fees apart from the ordinary considerations in a worker’s compensation case. See Pennsylvania Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.16 (1988). We conclude therefore that Pitt, as a litigant, lacked the direct interest in the subject matter being litigated to confer standing in the resolution of the worker’s compensation claim of Claimant. William Penn Parking Garage Inc. v. City of Pittsburgh, 464 Pa. 168, 346 A.2d 269 (1975). We strongly suggest that, if at all possible, Pitt’s claim for counsel fees should voluntarily be submitted to the appropriate committee of the bar association where all three interested parties could be heard and the dispute resolved expeditiously.
There are as well other major impediments that would deny Pitt standing to litigate his claim for counsel fees in this case. First, Pitt’s “appeal nunc pro tunc” was not timely filed. The first opinion of the referee, dated January *6415, 1991, was circulated On January 31, 1991.5 Pitt filed his “appeal nunc pro tunc” on April 19, 1991, well beyond the twenty days within which he had to file his “appeal.” See Section 423 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 853. Such a failure is jurisdictional. Pittsburgh Moose Lodge No. 46 v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Grieco, Jr.), 109 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 53, 530 A.2d 982 (1987).
In his “appeal nunc pro tunc” Pitt asserts that the referee failed to forward a copy of the decision to him and that he filed the appeal nunc pro tunc immediately after he became aware of the decision. On the bottom of the appeal form, where it requires the designation of the “name of [the] party taking [the] appeal (Claimant or Defendant),” Pitt typed in “Claimant,” which was clearly a misnomer. We conclude that the reason Pitt was not sent a copy of the referee’s award or was not otherwise notified of the referee’s decision was because he was not a party in the case, nor did he represent a party in the case. Simply stated, he was not entitled to notice.
At the same time Pitt filed his “appeal nunc pro tunc,” he also filed with the Board a “Petition for Approval of Counsel Fees Pursuant to Section 501 [77 P.S. § 1021] of the Worker’s Compensation Act.” The Board remanded both the matter of the petition for counsel fees and the appeal nunc pro tunc to the referee “for further proceedings and issuing of findings of fact and conclusions of law on payment of attorney’s fees and costs.”6 The referee, without taking additional evidence, concluded all matters before him by a decision and order dated October 22,1991, “circulated” October 23,1991. However, the *65referee made only three findings of fact in that decision, which essentially stated that he “adopted” his previous findings of fact and conclusions of law from his previous decision of August 30, 1991, which decision is nowhere in this record. The referee’s order merely denied the “claim for attorney fees by Larry Pitt, Esquire.” No other reason or explanation was given by the referee regarding the basis upon which the referee awarded 100% of the 20% counsel fee to attorney Witlin, and nothing to attorney Pitt. The Board, in the appeal by Pitt, merely affirmed the decision of the referee and explained that “nothing in the prior remand order of this Board required that additional hearings be held.” Although this answered the only allegation of error raised by Pitt in his second appeal to the Board,7 it fails completely to articulate any reasoning for the division of the attorney’s fee.
With regard to Pitt’s separate petition, nowhere under any provision of the Act is a claimant’s former attorney given statutory leave to file such a petition. Section 501 of the Act is an old carryover provision adopted in 1915 as part of the original workmen’s compensation statute and which, for all practical purposes, has been replaced by Section 442 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 998. Technically Section 501 provides a procedure for an attorney to assert an “enforceable lien — against the amount paid as compensation.” It requires that the fee agreement be first filed with the Department of Labor and Industry. Nowhere in Pitt’s petition is it alleged that he properly filed such an agreement with the Department. Furthermore, there could not be a claim for counsel fees under both Section 442 of the Act, the issue on appeal, and under Section 501. Of particular note is the fact that nowhere in Pitt’s brief to this Court is Section 501 of the Act even mentioned or obliquely referred to. Of further note is that Pitt’s argument on his entitlement to a “reasonable” fee rests entirely on case law dealing with the award of counsel fees against the employer for an unreasonable contest under Sec*66tion 440 of the Act, which is an issue not present in this appeal.
In conclusion therefore, we quash Pitt’s appeal in this case on the grounds that Pitt lacks standing and because his appeal was untimely filed. Section 423 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 853. Pitt’s petition to the Board is likewise quashed for those same basic reasons as well as for the additional reasons stated, viz., that there is no statutory basis for such a petition by a claimant’s former counsel and, even assuming there was such a basis, the issue has been abandoned. Pa.R.A.P. 2116; General Electric Co. v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Valsamaki), 140 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 461, 593 A.2d 921, petition for allowance of appeal denied, 529 Pa. 626, 600 A.2d 541 (1991).
ORDER
NOW, December 29, 1993, the petition for review of Larry Pitt, Esquire, in the above-captioned matter is hereby quashed.
. This case was reassigned to the opinion writer on September 15, 1993, after reargument was granted, and the case was directed to be submitted on briefs to the Court en banc.
. The Pennsylvania Workmen’s Compensation Act (Act), Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended, 77 P.S. 1021.
. 77 P.S. § 411.
. Section 442 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 998.
. The referee’s decision and order are dated January 15, 1991, but a computer cover sheet states that the date of "circulation” was January 31, 1991, which we take to mean the date of mailing notice as required under Section 406 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 717, to begin the period of time within which an appeal must be filed. See Section 423 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 853; Riley Stoker Corp. v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, 9 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 533, 308 A.2d 205 (1973).
. The Board further granted a supersedeas regarding the attorney’s fees and costs, and ordered SEPTA to hold all such fees and costs in escrow "until further order by the Referee and this Board.”
. Pitt states in his appeal "the referee failed to hold any hearings or accept any evidence in this matter which was specifically remanded to the referee by the Workmen's Compensation Appeal Board.”