=== CASE 2221760 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.715779+00 ===

53 Ill. App. 2d 72 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 337
Mary Ellen Ludwig, et al., Mary Ellen Ludwig and Vinetta M. Mead, Appellants,
v.
Mabel Sommer, et al., All Minors and William J. Reardon as Guardian of the Estates of Vincent William Turner, et al., All Minors, Appellees.
Gen. No. 64-17.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
November 16, 1964.
*73 Edwin V. Champion, of Peoria, and Harlington Wood, Jr., of Springfield, for appellants.
Arthur B. Copeland, of Peoria, for appellees, and William J. Reardon, of Pekin, for certain defendants-appellees, and pro se.
CARROLL, J.
This is an action for interpleader brought by plaintiff, Thomas E. Kirby, manager of a tract of land known as the Gumm Farm, in which he asked the *74 Circuit Court to determine the person or persons entitled to receive certain income from said farm which was then in his possession. Joined as defendants were the children and grandchildren of Vincent P. Turner, Sr., deceased, who owned a one-third interest in the Gumm Farm at the time of his death.
Disposition of Turner's interest in said farm was made by the fourth paragraph of his Last Will and Testament, which is in pertinent part as follows:
"To my wife, Emma Coon Turner, the net income from my undivided one-third (1/3) interest in the Gumm Farm, Kilbourne Township, Mason County, Illinois, for and during her natural life, and at her death to revert back to my heirs, then living."
The controversy in this case arises from the conflicting claims to the Gumm Farm income advanced by the surviving children of the testator and those made by his grandchildren.
The testator had four children. Two of these children, Mary Ellen Ludwig and Vinetta Mead, are surviving. They joined in an answer to the complaint, claiming the exclusive interest to the income from the farm. The other two children of the testator, Robert Turner and Vincent Turner, Jr., are deceased. Robert was born of the testator's first wife and Vincent, Jr. of the testator's second wife. The children of Robert joined in an answer and the children of Vincent, Jr. joined in a separate answer. In these answers all of said grandchildren claimed that they, together with the surviving children of the testator, have an interest in the income of the farm.
The cause was heard on the pleadings and stipulation of facts and as a result the court held that the testator's two children each has a one-fourth interest in the Gumm Farm and that each of the grandchildren *75 has the per stirpes share of their deceased parent. From this ruling Vinetta M. Mead and Mary Ellen Ludwig have appealed.
Appellants contend that the issues in this proceeding were determined by a prior decree entered by the Circuit Court of Peoria County in a suit to construe the Will of Vincent P. Turner, Sr., deceased. This suit was brought in September of 1934, or about a year after the testator's death. The decree in that case recites that it was the intention of the testator, Vincent P. Turner, that "Each of his said four children should take a vested interest in the real estate specifically devised to them at the date of the death of said testator except as to their interest in the premises described as the Gumm Farm, which is a contingent interest dependent upon their survivorship of the widow, Emma Coon Turner." Said decree further recited that it was the intention of the testator that his interest in the Gumm Farm "should be taken only by those of his heirs who should survive his widow ... and that the interest of his said children in ... the Gumm Farm, should be contingent upon their survivorship of the widow..."
In 1953 a suit to partition the Gumm Farm was filed in the Circuit Court of Mason County and culminated with a decree which set off and allotted the one-third interest owned by the testator at his death in accordance with the testator's will, as construed in the above described proceedings in the Circuit Court of Peoria County.
Appellants assert that in said prior decree construing the will the court held that the testator intended that only his children should share in the remainder interest in the Gumm Farm and that under the doctrine of res judicata such decree is conclusive and binding upon the children of Robert S. Turner and Vincent P. Turner, Jr. who are defendants in the instant case.
*76 As to those grandchildren of the testator who were not made parties to the prior suit because they were not in existence, it is nevertheless contended that they were fully represented in such suit by their parents; that their interest therein was identical with that of their parents; and that under the doctrine of virtual representation, the decree is binding upon the grandchildren's interest.
[1] The doctrine of virtual representation, as it is applied to successive estates or interests, was clearly set forth in Weberpals v. Jenny, 300 Ill. 145, 155, 133 NE2d 62. The court there stated that:
"Where it appears that a particular party, though not before the court in person, is so far represented by others that his interests receive actual and efficient protection, the decree may be held to be binding upon him. It must appear that he stands in the same situation as parties before the court and that he has a common right or interest with them, the operation and protection of which will be for the common benefit of all and cannot be to the injury of any."
[2] Obviously such doctrine is not applicable to the facts in the case at bar. How can it be said that there exists a community of interest between those to be bound and their representatives when the current position of such representatives is that those they represented have no interest in the property? Mortimore v. Bashore, 317 Ill. 535, 148 N.E. 317.
Having concluded that the prior decree in the will construction case is not res judicata against the grandchildren of the testator, the remaining question is whether the court below correctly construed the will of Vincent P. Turner, Sr. We are of the opinion that it did.
*77 [3] The devise in question was to "heirs." Normally, this term is considered to mean the persons on whom the law casts inheritance. Pereboom v. Cloyd, 317 Ill. 85, 147 N.E. 382. This term may, however, be construed to mean children or grandchildren, but such meaning cannot be assigned unless it clearly appears that it was employed by the testator in that sense. Freudenstein v. Braden, 397 Ill. 29, 72 NE2d 832.
Appellants argue that the testator did not use the word "heirs" in its technical sense when devising the remainder interest in the Gumm Farm, but used it as being synonymous with "children," his intention being that the remainder was to be taken by those of his children who survive the life tenant. There are, therefore, two Subpoints to this argument of the defendants: first that the word "heirs," as used in the testator's will, was used synonymously with children; and second, that, if the word "heirs" was used by the testator in its technical sense of meaning those who would be entitled to inherit if the decedent had died intestate, then those heirs should be determined as of the time of the testator's death. (The only "heirs" of the testator at the time of his death were his second wife and four children. The wife and two of the children are now deceased and only the two appellants, children of the testator, survive.)
In support of their position that the time for determining the heirs of the testator should be at the date of his death, appellants rely principally on Comisky v. Moore, 26 Ill. 2d 494, 187 NE2d 256. In the Comisky case, the testator devised separate 160-acre farms to each of his seven sons for life and disposed of the remainder interest in such farms by the following language: "... to have and to hold the same for and during the term of his natural life, with remainder to his children in fee, but if he should die leaving no lawful children, then the same shall revert to my estate *78 and be equally divided among my surviving children, they each to take a life estate in their several parts so reverting, if any, with remainder in fee to their children...." The Circuit Court construed the words "surviving children," as used in the will, to refer to those children surviving the testator rather than those that survived an intermediate life tenant. On appeal the trial court's construction of the will was affirmed and in reviewing the law applicable to determining the time referred to by a testator, where vesting of a devise follows termination of a life estate, the Supreme Court had this to say:
"The determination of the time of reference intended by the testator where words of survivorship are used in a devise or bequest of a remainder, after an intervening life estate, is a subject that has caused much difficulty among the courts. Several jurisdictions have taken the position that, presumptively, these words refer to the death of the testator. (Estate of Nass, 320 Pa 380; Aldred v. Sylvester, 184 Ind 542; Sturgis v. Sturgis, 242 Mich. 52), and, where the limitation over at the termination of the life estate is to lineals, against a construction that would result in the disinheritance of an heir. (Estate of Nass, 320 Pa 380.) These policies have been recognized and, under certain circumstances, followed by this court. (See, e.g., Pontius v. Conrad, 317 Ill. 241; Hartwick v. Heberling, 364 Ill. 523.) Although at one time the Illinois law in this area appeared somewhat uncertain (compare Thompson v. Adams, 205 Ill. 552, with Murphy v. Westhoff, 386 Ill. 136), it is now well settled in this state that words of survivorship in the limitation of a remainder presumptively have reference to the termination of the intermediate estate. Harris Trust & Savings *79 Bank v. Jackson, 412 Ill. 261 (1952); O'Connell v. Gaffney, 23 Ill. 2d 611.
"However, this is only a rule of construction founded upon the presumed intent of the Testator and an intent expressed by the Testator that the words of survivorship should be referred to the date of his death would be given effect. We feel that such an intent has been expressed in this case."
The court concluded that it was the intention of the testator that the surviving children that are to be the remaindermen should be determined as of the date of the death of the testator and not as of the date of the death of the life tenants.
[4] Appellants argue that in the instant case, as in the Comisky case, the words "revert back" indicate that the testator must have intended for the remaindermen to be determined as of the death of the testator. Since in will construction cases, the guiding light is the intention of the testator, an examination must be made of the facts which the court considered in the Comisky case. Referring to the language of the will the court stated, "It was provided that if the life tenant should die leaving no lawful children `then the same shall revert to my estate and be equally divided between my surviving children.' This language clearly indicates that the decedent was thinking of at least his estate as of the date of his death and not the death of the life tenant. In each of the seven devises of testator's farms `revert' is used on two occasions, once before providing for new life estates in his surviving children and once afterwards.... it appears clear that when the testator referred to his estate as of the date of his death he must also have been considering his surviving children, all of whom were specifically named in the will, as of that date."
*80 The similarity, therefore, between Comisky and the instant case is that the word "revert" is used in both.
[5] If the use of the word "revert" were the only indication we had as to the testator's intention, we might be inclined to agree with appellants that the Comisky case is controlling. However in the will of Vincent Turner, Sr. there are other words which furnish a dependable clue to the testator's intention. The phrase in question states that the remainder was "to revert back to my heirs, then living." (Emphasis supplied.) We think the words "then living," as used by the testator, indicated his intention that his interest in the Gumm Farm should go to his heirs living at the death of Emma Coon Turner, the life tenant for the reason that he used the word "then" as an adverb of time, referring to the death of said Emma Coon Turner. Bergendahl v. Stiers, 8 Ill. 2d 257, 133 NE2d 280; Sloan v. Beatty, 1 Ill. 2d 581, 116 NE2d 375. If he had intended that only his children should share in the Gumm Farm interest then there would have been no occasion to use the words "my heirs, then living." Since the testator saw fit to direct that the persons who were to share in the Gumm Farm should be determined as of the date of the termination of the Emma Coon Turner life estate the trial court had no choice other than give effect to his expressed intention.
For the reasons indicated the decree of the Circuit Court of Tazewell County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
ABRAHAMSON, P.J. and MORAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221761 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.756056+00 ===

53 Ill. App. 2d 447 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 671
Americana Nursing Homes, Inc., an Illinois Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
City of Rockford, a Municipal Corporation, and Roy Hunt, as Building Inspector of the City of Rockford, Defendants-Appellees, and Joseph H. Kiegel, et al., Intervening Defendants-Appellees. Appeal of Franz J. Petritz, Defendant-Appellee.
Gen. No. 64-26.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
December 3, 1964.
Charles H. Davis and Sam J. Cannariato, both of Rockford, for appellant.
Reno, Zahm, Folgate & Skolrood, of Rockford (Ralph S. Zahm, of counsel), for appellee.
MORAN, J.
The plaintiff is a contract purchaser of a "L" shaped piece of land in the City of Rockford. At the time of *448 the execution of the contract, a portion of the land was zoned "C" Residential and the remainder of the tract zoned "A" Residential. Under the zoning ordinance of the City of Rockford, convalescent or nursing homes are permitted in the "C" classification but not in the "A" classification. The plaintiff desired to use the entire tract for convalescent or nursing home purposes and made application to the corporate authorities of the City of Rockford to rezone that portion of the premises which was zoned for "A" Residential purposes to "C" Residential purposes. The plaintiff's petition for rezoning was denied and thereafter plaintiff filed its complaint herein for declaratory judgment, challenging the validity of the zoning ordinance of the City of Rockford insofar as it prohibited the use of a portion of the premises in question for convalescent or nursing homes.
Thereafter, the trial court permitted the principal defendant and other nearby property owners to intervene.
Subsequently, the trial court entered a declaratory judgment finding that the zoning ordinance of the City of Rockford was unreasonable and void as applied to the premises in question insofar as it prohibited the use of said premises for the purpose of erecting and operating a convalescent or nursing home. The trial court directed that the plaintiff was entitled to use said premises for such purposes in accordance with the detailed provisions of the declaratory judgment for the construction and maintenance of a convalescent and nursing home, including all off-street parking areas. The declaratory judgment concluded "That this Court shall retain jurisdiction of this cause until the terms of this declaratory judgment have been fully complied with and for the purpose of entering such other and further Orders as may be hereafter required." *449 Fulton Street, which adjoined plaintiff's premises on the North, was only 30 feet in width at the time of the entry of the declaratory judgment and subsequent to that time, at the request of the City of Rockford, the plaintiff dedicated 30 more feet for street purposes. The City thereupon widened and paved Fulton Street to its full width.
Thereafter, plaintiff commenced the installation of its off-street parking facilities, but prior to their completion and on or about November 5, 1963, it was determined by various experts engaged by the plaintiff and by the defendant, City of Rockford, that additional off-street parking areas would be necessary, located, however, upon the premises which was the subject of the declaratory judgment but not covered in the detailed parking areas set forth in the declaratory judgment.
On November 5, 1963, some fourteen months after the entry of the declaratory judgment herein, plaintiff filed a petition in the trial court to modify the declaratory judgment so as to permit the revision and rearrangement of the off-street parking facilities and to add certain facilities in accordance with the recommendation of the traffic and planning experts.
Notice of the filing of the petition for modification was given to the defendants, including the interveners, and thereafter, defendants filed their special and limited appearance challenging the jurisdiction of the trial court to modify its original declaratory judgment. The trial court found that it had jurisdiction and thereupon defendant elected to stand upon his special and limited appearance and refused to offer any testimony in connection with plaintiff's petition for modification and the plaintiff offered evidence showing the necessity of the revision and rearrangement of the off-street parking facilities, and in accordance with that evidence *450 the trial court entered an order modifying the declaratory judgment and authorizing the additional off-street parking facilities.
The defendant appealed from this order and the case is presented to this court on the agreed statement of facts in lieu of a report of proceedings and as set forth in the agreed statement of facts, the only question presented to this court is "Did the Circuit Court of Winnebago County have jurisdiction to enter the order modifying the original declaratory judgment after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of the entry of such original declaratory judgment?"
Counsel for both parties in this case have presented the court with excellent briefs and an exhaustive discussion of the point in controversy. After a thorough analysis, this court finds that it must answer the single question presented in the affirmative.
Subsection (3) of Section 57.1 of Chapter 110 of the Illinois Revised Statutes provides as follows: "(3) If further relief based upon a declaration of rights becomes necessary or proper after the declaration has been made, application may be made by petition to any court having jurisdiction for an order directed to any party or parties whose rights have been determined by the declaration to show cause why the further relief should not be granted forthwith, upon reasonable notice prescribed by the court in its order." The historical and practice note to the above section indicates that further relief may include an assessment of damages or other affirmative relief obtainable by petition in the same action and in the same court in which the declaratory relief was obtained. Obviously, had the petition in question been presented in the original complaint, the trial court would have had jurisdiction to entertain the petition and grant appropriate relief. The defendant's sole contention is that the trial court lost jurisdiction upon the expiration of thirty (30) *451 days from and after the declaratory judgment. However, it seems clear that the purpose of the statute aforesaid is to permit the trial court to grant appropriate relief in furtherance of its original judgment where necessary.
[1] In a similar case, Burgard v. Mascoutah Lumber Co., 6 Ill. App. 2d 210, 127 NE2d 464, the Appellate Court for the Fourth District considered the statutory provision for further relief and said "Our statutory provision for `further relief' clearly is not limited to relief previously asked for but contemplates something further `based upon a declaration of right.' Accordingly, we hold that the statute permits a party to petition for such further relief as may be appropriate after the declaration of rights, although not previously prayed for by a complaint or counterclaim."
[2] In the case at bar, the trial court considered the zoning ordinance of the City of Rockford and found it invalid insofar as it prohibited a convalescent and nursing home and related facilities, including off-street parking on the premises in question. The issue as to additional off-street parking facilities was not presented to the trial court in the original suit nor was it apparently considered by the parties. Thereafter, a need became apparent and a petition was presented. However, the same property was involved and the trial court had already concluded in its declaration of rights that the zoning ordinance of the City of Rockford was invalid insofar as it prohibited the use proposed by the plaintiff on that property. Therefore, the action of the trial court in connection with the present petition was merely to grant further relief based upon the declaration of rights.
In addition to the authority granted the trial court in the Declaratory Judgments Act, there is additional authority to grant relief from final orders after thirty (30) days from their entry and within two (2) years *452 from their entry in Section 72 of Chapter 110 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. This section grants broad authority to the trial court without regard to the nature of the order or decree from which relief is sought. It has been held, however, that Section 72 cannot be used to again put in issue questions previously adjudicated, Stanley v. Bank of Marion, 23 Ill. 2d 414, 178 NE2d 367, and Southmoor Bank & Trust Co. v. Willis, 15 Ill. 2d 388, 155 NE2d 308. However, in the case at bar, the plaintiff's petition presented a new question not previously adjudicated, namely the need for additional parking facilities and their proper placement in accordance with the circumstances of the case. Therefore, the trial court had adequate additional authority for its order of modification in Section 72 of Chapter 110 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
In essence, if we accept the theory of the defendant, we would require the plaintiff to file a new suit in the trial court seeking the relief prayed for in the petition. The only effect of this procedure is to double the present litigation. In the case of Frederick v. Maggio, 23 Ill. App. 2d 292, 162 NE2d 590, the Appellate Court for the First District had occasion to consider this question and found "The goal is to streamline the procedure for post-judgment relief. In this way courts already overburdened with litigation will not be further burdened with business that other courts can, with complete justice, more expeditiously dispose of." In the case at bar, the trial court had jurisdiction of all of the parties. The defendant could have litigated all issues in the trial court in connection with plaintiff's petition for modification. However, the defendant chose not to do so but rather relied upon his special appearance. The defendant has had his day in court and had a complete remedy in the trial court. No useful purpose would be served by multiplying the litigation. *453 The trial court had adequate authority to modify its previous order.
The judgment is therefore affirmed.
Affirmed.
ABRAHAMSON, P.J. and CARROLL, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.788839+00 ===

31 Ill. 2d 551 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 535
MARGARET SUFFOLK et al., Appellees,
v.
RALPH CHAPMAN et al.  (GERALD HERBERT LESLIE SWEET et al., Appellants.)
No. 38607.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 24, 1964.
*552 WINSTON, STRAWN, SMITH & PATTERSON, and WILLIAM A. McSWAIN, both of Chicago, (ARTHUR D. WELTON, JR., THOMAS S. TYLER, and EDWARD J. WENDROW, of counsel,) for appellants.
WILSON & McILVAINE and JOHN B. ANGELO, both of Chicago, (CALVIN F. SELFRIDGE, CLARENCE E. FOX, and JOHN B. ANGELO, of counsel,) for appellees.
Order affirmed.
Mr. CHIEF JUSTICE KLINGBIEL delivered the opinion of the court:
This case presents the question whether personal jurisdiction over expected adverse parties is necessary in a proceeding to perpetuate testimony. Margaret Suffolk and certain other descendants of Levi Z. Leiter, deceased, filed their original petition in the circuit court of Cook County on March 18, 1964, praying for an order to take her deposition concerning the circumstances surrounding the decedent at the time he made his will. Most of the named defendants are nonresidents and were not served with summons in this State. They appeared specially and moved to dismiss on the ground that the court had no jurisdiction over them. The court denied the motions and authorized the deposition to be taken. Defendants' appeal comes directly to this court because a constitutional question is involved.
Margaret Suffolk, 84 years of age, is the last surviving child of the testator, Levi Z. Leiter. He died in 1904 leaving a widow and four children. His will established a residuary trust for their benefit, to be terminated upon the death of the last surviving child. According to the present petition *553 certain descendants have intimated that they consider the distribution provisions ambiguous and that it will be necessary to obtain a judicial construction thereof. The petition further alleges that Margaret Suffolk was living in the testator's household at the time of the execution of his will, that she was familiar with his personal and financial affairs in his relation with his family, and that she is the only person now living and known to petitioners who is aware of the circumstances surrounding the testator when he made the will.
Insofar as it is pertinent section 39 of the Evidence Act provides that where a person desires to perpetuate the remembrance of a matter necessary to the security of an estate he may file a petition setting forth his interest in the subject, the fact intended to be established, the names of all others interested therein, and the name of the witness proposed to be examined. The section further provides that "the procedure for the giving of notice to interested persons, including unknown owners, and the manner of taking the deposition shall be that provided by the rules of the Supreme Court now or hereafter in effect for the taking of depositions for the perpetuation of testimony." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 51, par. 39.
Supreme Court Rule 21 provides for an order to take depositions before action, if the court is satisfied that the perpetuation of the testimony may prevent a failure or delay of justice. The plaintiff is required, in his petition, to show "(1) the facts which he desires to establish by the proposed testimony and his reasons for desiring to perpetuate it, (2) the names or a description of the persons interested or whom he expects will be adverse parties and their addresses so far as known, and (3) the names and addresses of the persons to be examined." The Rule further reads as follows: "The petitioner shall serve upon each person named or described in the petition as respondent a copy of the petition, together with a notice stating that the *554 petitioner will apply to the court, at a time and place designated in the notice, for the order described in the petition. Unless a shorter period is fixed by the court, the notice shall be served either within or without the State at least 20 days before the date of hearing, in the manner provided for service of summons. If service cannot with due diligence be made upon any respondent named or described in the petion, the court may by order provide for service by publication or otherwise. For persons not personally served and not otherwise represented, the court shall appoint an attorney who shall represent them and cross-examine the deponent. If any respondent is a minor or incompetent or not yet in being, a guardian ad litem shall be appointed to represent his interests." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 110, par. 101.21.
It is not disputed that the notice provisions have been complied with, nor is it contended that they were insufficient to afford defendants an opportunity to participate in the proceedings. What the defendants maintain is that in the absence of jurisdiction either in personam or in rem, notice itself is not enough to support the order of the court, that it is beyond the power of the State to authorize proceedings against nonresidents upon such service.
The law has long been settled that to subject a nonresident to personal liability or obligation it must be shown that he has had some form of contact with the State. (Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 2 L.ed.2d 1283.) But the requirements are constantly shrinking  since modern transportation and communication make it far less burdensome for the nonresident to defend  especially where the State of the forum "has a manifest interest in providing effective means of redress." (McGee v. International Life Ins. Co. 355 U.S. 220, 2 L.ed.2d 223.) And where it is not sought to impose any personal liability or obligation there seems to be little reason for requiring the contacts necessary for, personal jurisdiction.
*555 Insofar as we have been able to discover, the question presented in this case has not heretofore been considered, either in this State or elsewhere. Proceedings to perpetuate testimony have long been recognized, however. The substance of our section 39 has existed in Illinois since 1819, and the United States Supreme Court has pointed out that bills of this nature were known as an independent branch of equity jurisdiction before the adoption of the Federal constitution. (Arizona v. California, 292 U.S. 341, 347, 78 L.ed. 1298, 1300.) Congress has provided for the exercise of this jurisdiction by the Federal courts, and as the court said in the case cited "The sole purpose of such a suit is to perpetuate the testimony."
Respondents insist that no res is involved or subject to the court's jurisdiction and that the proceeding therefore cannot be one in rem so as to support the substituted-service provisions. The conclusion is then urged that jurisdiction must exist in personam to enable the court to proceed, and that since it is conceded that no such jurisdiction was obtained over these nonresidents they are not bound by the order. We cannot accept the argument. The manifest object of taking these depositions is to prevent failures and delays of justice, and it is an express condition to the granting of an order that the court be satisfied that perpetuation of the particular testimony may do so. However the proceeding may be classified with regard to actions in rem and those in personam, we think the general power of Illinois to provide an effective administration of justice in its courts, and its evident interest in doing so, establishes beyond doubt the specific power to order depositions for the present purpose even though expected parties may be nonresidents, provided that full opportunity is accorded them to appear and cross-examine.
Restrictions on the jurisdiction of State courts arise from territorial limitations on the power of the respective States. (Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 251, 2 L.ed.2d *556 1283, 1296.) An in rem jurisdiction is founded on physical power, the basis being the presence of the subject property or status within the territorial jurisdiction of the State. (Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 246, 2 L.ed.2d 1283, 1293.) If power is the test of jurisdiction, it is satisfied as well in the present case as it is in an in rem proceeding. The expected litigation will take place in Illinois and the witness is here, fully subject to the process of the court. No personal obligation is sought to be imposed upon defendants nor will the court be obliged in any way to send its process outside Illinois to enforce its order or decree.
A somewhat similar question was presented in Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank and Trust Co. 339 U.S. 306, 94 L.ed. 865. There a New York bank filed a petition for settlement of its account as a common trustee. Such a trustee pools the assets of a number of small trust estates for investment purposes, and the decree sought is binding and conclusive upon everyone having an interest in the common fund. The beneficiaries were numerous and included nonresidents. Pursuant to statutory authority they were given notice only by newspaper publication addressed generally to all parties interested in the fund or the participating estates. Kenneth J. Mullane was appointed special guardian and attorney for persons known or unknown not otherwise appearing who had or might thereafter have an interest in the fund's income. He appeared specially, objecting to jurisdiction. The objections were overruled, and after a final decree was affirmed in the State courts of review the guardian appealed further to the United States Supreme Court. He contended that the proceeding was one in personam in that the decree affected neither title to nor possession of any res but adjudged only personal rights of the beneficiaries to surcharge the trustee for negligence or breach of trust, and that the court was therefore without jurisdiction as to nonresidents.
In rejecting the contention the court declared that *557 "Without disparaging the usefulness of distinctions between actions in rem and those in personam in many branches of law, or on other issues, or the reasoning which underlies them, we do not rest the power of the State to resort to constructive service in this proceeding upon how its courts or this Court may regard this historic antithesis. It is sufficient to observe that, whatever the technical definition of its chosen procedure, the interest of each state in providing means to close trusts that exist by the grace of its laws and are administered under the supervision of its courts is so insistent and rooted in custom as to establish beyond doubt the right of its courts to determine the interests of all claimants, resident or nonresident, provided its procedure accords full opportunity to appear and be heard." (339 U.S. at 312-313, 94 L.ed. at 872.) The court then went on to hold, however, that as to the known beneficiaries a mere newspaper notice was inadequate to afford due process, since it was not reasonably calculated to reach those who could readily be informed by mail.
Of a like tenor, although not dealing with constitutional contentions, is the opinion in De Wagenknecht v. Stinnes, 250 F.2d 414 (D.C. cir. 1957). That case involved a deposition to perpetuate testimony under Federal Rule 27. The Federal Rule provided that the petition may be filed in the U.S. district court in the district of the residence of any expected adverse party. It stated further that 20 days' notice should be served either within or without the district or State in the manner provided in Rule 4(d) for service of summons, "but if such service cannot with due diligence be made upon any expected adverse party named in the petition, the court may make such order as is just for service by publication or otherwise, and shall appoint, for persons not served in the manner provided in Rule 4(d), an attorney who shall represent them, and, in case they are not otherwise represented, shall cross-examine the deponent." The respondents were nonresidents of the district *558 and the court ordered service to be made by mail. The attorney appointed to represent them objected to jurisdiction, but the trial court nevertheless entered an order granting the petition. In affirming the order the Court of Appeals observed "While there are apparently no reported cases on the point, it would appear that if all expected adverse parties are non-resident aliens the proceedings for perpetuation should not fail for lack of a proper district, provided there are proper safeguards as to notice and service of process, or other method of bringing the proceeding to the attention of the non-resident aliens. In such case, and under the above conditions, the filing of the proceeding may be accomplished in any Federal District Court. See 4 Moore Federal Practice, Sec. 27.04 (2d ed.). Here, certainly, there was adequate notice and service; and it is hard to see how, under the circumstances of this case, appellants have been harmed. To hold otherwise might result in a denial of justice." Similar observations are appropriate in the case at bar. There was adequate jurisdiction to order the deposition in question.
Union Solvents Corp. v. Butacet Corp. 2 F. Supp. 375 (D.C. Del. 1933), upon which the defendants rely, is not applicable to the constitutional issues involved here. In that case it was held that substituted service on nonresidents was not sufficient to confer jurisdiction, but the holding was based upon a Federal statute providing, with exceptions not applicable to the case, that "no civil suit shall be brought in any district court against any person by any original process or proceeding in any other district than that whereof he is an inhabitant." The court pointed out that the proceeding was a civil suit in equity brought in a district court by original process, and that two of the three defendants were not inhabitants of the district. There is no comparable statute in the case at bar.
Defendants further contend that Rule 21 violates due process in authorizing the appointment of a guardian ad *559 litem for minor defendants not personally served in Illinois and the appointment of an attorney for the nonresident adults. There is no merit in the contention. The sole purpose of the proceeding is to perpetuate testimony. No personal recovery is sought against any of the defendants, and as we have indicated, the notices required and given were reasonably calculated to inform them of the time and place of the deposition. The provisions for appointing a guardian ad litem and an attorney are additional safeguards of defendants' interests, and regardless of whether or not they are constitutionally necessary defendants cannot complain of their presence.
Defendants also argue that the petition fails to state the facts which the plaintiffs expect to show by the deposition, that an ambiguity in the will, as well as other relevant matters, are not sufficiently alleged therein, and that since minors are involved the "Failure to offer any proof" is reversible error. We have examined all of the contentions and find them to be without merit. The present purpose is not to admit the witness's testimony into evidence or establish that the will is ambiguous. It is merely to preserve the testimony in case a suit to construe the will should be brought some time in the future and extrinsic evidence should become admissible. The petition sufficiently apprised defendants of the subject matter, the proposed scope of the inquiry, and the reasons for making it. Proof of its allegations with the formality of an ordinary lawsuit is not required, the rule providing simply for an order "if the court is satisfied that the perpetuation of the testimony may prevent a failure or delay of justice."
We find no error in the proceedings below, and the order of the circuit court will be affirmed.
Order affirmed.

=== CASE 2221766 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.905314+00 ===

53 Ill. App. 2d 484 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 839
Earlene King, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
City of Chicago, a Municipal Corporation, Defendant-Appellee.
Gen. No. 49,627.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
December 1, 1964.
*485 Arthur S. Gomberg and Philip E. Howard, of Chicago (Samuel Nineberg, of counsel), for appellant.
John C. Melaniphy, Corporation Counsel, of Chicago (Sydney R. Drebin and Harry H. Pollack, Assistant Corporation Counsel, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court:
*486 This was an action for personal injuries sustained by plaintiff as the result of a fall on a public sidewalk. The jury returned a verdict in the amount of $1,000 for plaintiff, although she requested $65,000 in damages and although her medical evidence indicates that she would have been entitled to substantially more than $1,000 if she proved that defendant was liable. Plaintiff's post-trial motion for a new trial on the question of damages alone was denied. The denial of the motion was based on the fact that the trial judge was of the opinion that "the proof as to liability was extremely thin and the jury's verdict in favor of plaintiff for $1,000 was a compromise of liability against damages and that therefore (citing cases), while a complete new trial, if requested, would have been proper, a new trial limited to damages only was not." Plaintiff appeals from this ruling on the ground that, since the jury in fact found defendant liable as charged, a new trial as to damages alone was therefore proper since her medical evidence was uncontradicted and shows that she was entitled to substantially more than $1,000.
Plaintiff's praecipe for record on appeal requested, and the trial judge certified, only that part of the evidence concerning the question of damages. The record consequently contains no evidence relating to the question of defendant's liability.
[1] It is well settled that a court is not justified in ordering a new trial on damages alone where it appears that the damages awarded by the jury were the result of a compromise on the question of liability. Paul Harris Furniture Co. v. Morse, 10 Ill. 2d 28, 139 NE2d 275; Kinsell v. Hawthorne, 27 Ill. App. 2d 314, 169 NE2d 678. Where, on the other hand, the record shows that there was enough evidence for a jury to find a defendant liable, then the court may order a new trial on the question of damages alone where it *487 appears that the jury improperly assessed the amount of the damages. Thus, if the trial court here was in error in denying plaintiff's post-trial motion for a new trial on the question of damages alone, it could have been only because plaintiff had presented enough evidence at trial to enable the jury to find defendant liable, but that the jury improperly assessed the amount of the damages.
Since the trial court's ruling on plaintiff's motion was based on the fact that he felt that the jury's verdict was the result of a compromise of liability against damages, it was incumbent upon plaintiff to show on this appeal that there could have been no such compromise for the reason that defendant's liability was established by her evidence. This could have been done only by plaintiff presenting the record of liability evidence to this court, which she has failed to do.
[2-4] Further, it is well settled that where the determination on appeal of whether a particular decision of the lower court constituted error depends on evidence, and the record on appeal does not show or purport to show all pertinent evidence on which the decision is based, it will be presumed by the reviewing court that the evidence omitted would support the decision of the lower court. Union Drain. Dist. No. 5 v. Hamilton, 390 Ill. 487, 61 NE2d 343; Goldschmidt v. Chicago Transit Authority, 335 Ill. App. 461, 82 N.E.2d 357; ILP Appeal & Error § 715. Upon appeal, every reasonable intendment not negatived by the record will be indulged in support of the judgment. Union Drain. Dist. No. 5 v. Hamilton, 390 Ill. 487, 61 NE2d 343. We are unable to say that the trial court erred in holding that the jury's verdict was a compromise between liability and damages, and in denying plaintiff's motion for a new trial on the question of damages alone.
*488 [5] Plaintiff would place the burden of perfecting the record on appeal as to liability upon defendant for the reason that the question of liability was resolved by the jury against defendant. One who receives an unfavorable verdict at trial, however, is not obligated to appeal if he chooses not to appeal. On the contrary, the burden of perfecting the liability record is upon plaintiff under the circumstances of this case since she, not defendant, is appealing from the trial court's ruling that the question of liability was close and that the jury's verdict of $1,000 represented a compromise between liability and damages, and from its consequent denial of plaintiff's post-trial motion for a new trial on the question of damages alone. The order denying plaintiff's post-trial motion is affirmed.
Order affirmed.
FRIEND and BRYANT, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3784439 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:09.252674+00 ===

The sole question in this case is whether the minimum balances maintained by appellant in the minor bank accounts outside Ohio had a situs in Ohio for the purpose of taxation.
The general rule is that intangibles have a tax situs at the domicile of the owner, and it is well established that the domicile of a corporation is the state of its organization.McBride, Exrx., v. City of Jersey City, 19 N. J. Misc., 637, 22 A.2d 567; Commonwealth v. Mundy Corp., 346 Pa. 482,30 A.2d 878; In re Truscon Steel Co., 246 Mich. 174,224 N.W. 653; Fidelity  Columbia Trust Co., Exr., v. City ofLouisville, 245 U.S. 54, 62 L.Ed., 145, 38 S.Ct., 40; PacificCoast Savings Society v. City of San Francisco, 133 Cal. 14,65 P. 16; Hunt v. Turner, 54 Fla. 654, 45 So. 509; People,ex rel. United Verde Copper Co., v. Feitner et al., TaxCommrs., 66 N.Y. Supp., 769, 54 A.D. 217, affirmed,165 N.Y., 645, 59 N.E. 1129.
Under certain circumstances, deposits of a corporation can, for tax purposes, acquire a situs different from that of the domicile of the owning company. The conditions which must be met under Ohio statutes to establish a situs for deposits of a company other than the domicile of the company are set forth in Sections 5328-1 and 5328-2, General Code, the pertinent parts of which are as follows:
Section 5328-1. "All * * * deposits * * * of persons residing in this state shall be subject to taxation, excepting as provided in this section or as otherwise provided or exempted in this title; * * * and all such property of persons residing in this state used in and arising out of business transacted outside of this state by, for or on behalf of such persons, * * * shall not be subject to taxation. * * *"
Section 5328-2. "Property of the kinds and classes herein mentioned, when used in business, shall be considered to arise out of business transacted in a state *Page 452
other than that in which the owner thereof resides in the cases and under the circumstances following: * * *
"In the case of deposits (other than such as are used in business outside of such other state), when withdrawable in the course of such business by an officer or agent having an office in such other state; but deposits representing general reserves or balances of the owner thereof, maintained for the purpose of his entire business, wherever transacted, shall be considered located in the state * * * under whose laws it is organized, if a corporation, by whomsoever they may be withdrawable. * * *
"The provisions of this section shall be reciprocally applied, to the end that all property of the kinds and classes mentioned in this section having a business situs in this state shall be taxed herein and no property of such kinds and classes belonging to a person residing in this state and having a business situs outside of this state shall be taxed. It is hereby declared that the assignment of a business situs outside of this state to property of a person residing in this state in any case and under any circumstances mentioned in this section is inseparable from the assignment of such situs in this state to property of a person residing outside of this state in a like case and under similar circumstances. If any provision of this section shall be held invalid as applied to property of a nonresident person, such decision shall be deemed also to affect such provision as applied to property of a resident, but shall not affect any other provision hereof."
In order for a deposit to have a tax situs outside Ohio, all the conditions contained in Section 5328-2, General Code, must be complied with. One of the conditions is that the funds must be "withdrawable in the course of such business by an officer or agent having an office in such other state." *Page 453
The record shows that the minimum balances in the instant case were, by company policy and by arrangement with the banks, maintained at all times. One of the appellant's officers stated that the appellant borrowed money when needed, rather than use the funds contained in these minimum balances. The minimum balances were maintained at all times until the stores using the accounts were permanently closed. Then and only then were these minimum balances withdrawn. It is true that branch managers could have, at any time, legally withdrawn these funds. However, under the policy established by the company, this was not done. Clearly, these funds, although withdrawable, were not withdrawable in the course of business, and, therefore, did not meet the condition of Section 5328-2, General Code. Another condition of Sections 5328-1 and 5328-2, General Code, is that the deposits must be used in business in such other state.
In C. F. Kettering, Inc., v. Evatt, Tax Commr., 144 Ohio St. 419,425, 59 N.E.2d 370, this court said:
"Reading Sections 5328-1 and 5328-2, General Code, as they are connected with Section 5498, they mean that Ohio bank deposits of a foreign corporation or other nonresident are to be accorded an Ohio situs for the imposition of franchise taxes where they are used exclusively in business transacted in Ohio and are withdrawable by an officer or agent having an Ohio office." (Italics ours.)
The condition as held in the Kettering case, supra, is that the deposit be used exclusively for business transacted in such other state. It is clear from the record in the instant case that part of the money in these minor accounts was transferred to appellant's Cincinnati office and was used in the general business of the company. The Tax Commissioner held, and it is not controverted, that about 71% of the funds in excess *Page 454
of the minimum balances was sent to the main office at Cincinnati and was so used.
The minimum balances here in question arose from the same sources as the funds in excess of the minimum balances. The funds were placed in the same accounts for the same company, and the minimum balances for which the appellant claims there is no Ohio situs were all a part of these accounts, and it is agreed that certain parts of the deposits made in these accounts were used in the general business of the appellant company.
Maintaining these minimum balances was evidently of advantage to the appellant in the conduct of its business, but since the funds in these minimum balances arose from the same source as the excess, the Board of Tax Appeals did not err in applying the percentage established by the Tax Commissioner and taxing them in the same manner as the excess.
Therefore, the decision of the Board of Tax Appeals is reasonable and lawful and is affirmed.
Decision affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., HART and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
TURNER, MATTHIAS and STEWART, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 2221769 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.972991+00 ===

52 Ill. App. 2d 298 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 100
People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Edward J. McDonald, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 49,607.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
September 29, 1964.
Rehearing denied October 27, 1964.
*299 Thomas J. Maloney, of Chicago (Richard H. Devine, of counsel), for appellant.
Daniel P. Ward, State's Attorney of Cook County, of Chicago (Elmer C. Kissane and Matthew J. Moran, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from an order entered in the Criminal Court of Cook County on February 17, 1964, revoking probation granted the appellant after he had been found guilty of the crime of aggravated battery.
The appellant, Edward McDonald, was found guilty in a trial without jury of the crime of aggravated battery on February 11, 1964, the offense taking place on May 10, 1963, when the appellant stabbed a man five times. The testimony at the trial is in conflict as to whether there was any provocation on the part of the victim, but the court found that the testimony taken even in the light most favorable to the appellant did not show provocation sufficient to warrant his using a knife in his defense. The appellant's claim of self-defense was, therefore, rejected by the court.
The report of the Behavior Clinic describes the appellant as having a "paranoid stance" and continued by stating that he "is probably capable of unprovoked homicidal acting out without forewarning." The report *300 states that a psychologist who examined the appellant considered him a "dangerous individual capable of homicidal aggression and indicated that the patient is a schizophrenic who at present has very superficial controls," although "he knows the nature of the charge and is able to cooperate with counsel."
On February 11, two weeks after the court announced its finding, there was a hearing at which the appellant was placed on probation for five years with the condition:
"That the defendant shall make no further threatening phone calls and upon his release, present himself at the Fairview Hospital, 2828 Prairie Avenue for psychiatric therapy; subject to remain in hospital until hospital submit a report to Judge Barrett before release."
On February 14, three days later, the appellant entered Fairview Hospital, but did not remain there, leaving the same day. There is some confusion as to what occurred when the appellant went to the hospital, but there is no doubt that he did not submit to psychiatric therapy there. On February 17, six days after probation was granted, a hearing was held at which the court revoked the probation and sentenced the appellant from two to five years in the Illinois State Penitentiary.
The appellant was represented by counsel of his own choosing at the trial and at both post-trial hearings.
The appeal states two main points: first, that it was not proper for the court to commit the appellant to a hospital, and second, that the court abused its discretion in revoking the probation. We feel the appellant to be wrong in both his contentions.
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963, Chapter 38, Paragraph 117-2(b), states in relevant part:
*301 "A person admitted to probation may be subject to the following conditions: (5) Perform or refrain from performing such other acts as may be ordered by the court."
The appellant claims that this does not give the court below the power to put as a condition to probation that he enter a mental hospital for treatment.
[1, 2] It is clear that the probation provision lessens the penalty in the discretion of the court, to the benefit of the convicted. We see no reason to impose a strict construction on this provision. Superior Laundry & Linen Supply Co. v. Edmanson-Bock Caterers, Inc., 11 Ill. App. 2d 132, 136 NE2d 610 (1956). The appellant claims the condition to the probation providing that he enter a hospital for psychiatric treatment is an illegal form of imprisonment. The record shows, however, that the above condition was suggested to the court by the appellant's counsel and the appellant expressly agreed to this condition. Paragraph 117-2(b) (5) allows the court discretion in granting probation. This was the case law interpreting the section in force before the new Code was adopted. People v. Molz, 415 Ill. 183, 113 NE2d 314 (1953). It is clear from the use of the word "may" in the corresponding section of the new code. "A person may be admitted to probation ..." Paragraph 117-1(a). We feel the legislature intended no change in the prior law concerning this particular point.
[3, 4] The court was acting within the scope of proper discretion here. The report of the Behavior Clinic said the appellant was suffering from severe mental illness. The court's primary purpose in permitting him to be committed to the Fairview Hospital rather than sent to the penitentiary was to allow the appellant to be rehabilitated. There is adequate evidence *302 from the report that he needed this care. If there was any abuse of discretion in the court below, it was in favor of the appellant, and he is, therefore, in no position to complain of it here.
[5] The court did not abuse its discretion in revoking the probation. At the hearing at which the appellant applied for probation a letter was presented to the court. It read as follows:
"This is to certify that Edward McDonald when released from custody of his mother will be immediately hospitalized at the Fairview Hospital, will be under the supervision of Doctor Maurice L. Stern and will receive adequate supervision and psychiatric therapy during his stay at Fairview Hospital." (Emphasis supplied.)
The letter is signed by Doctor Stern and the administrator of the hospital. At that same hearing the court told the appellant, "You will go into the Fairview Hospital immediately." (Emphasis supplied.) The appellant replied, "Yes, sir." It is clear, therefore, that no delay in the appellant's entering the hospital was contemplated.
The appellant did not go to the hospital immediately, but waited three days before reporting and then did not stay there. We hold this to be a violation of the conditions of the probation.
[6] All judgments and decrees are to be construed in a reasonable manner. Vollenhover v. Vollenhover, 4 Ill. App. 2d 44, 46, 123 NE2d 114 (1955), 49 CJS Judgments p 865 n 38. The fact that the court below did not specifically state that the appellant was to enter the hospital "immediately" can not permit him to avoid the clear meaning of the order. The letter requesting probation and the conversation between the court and the defendant quoted above shows the intent *303 of the order was understood by all parties. The appellant can not come here to say he did not know he was to enter the hospital "immediately" for the record shows the facts are quite to the contrary.
At the hearing at which the probation was revoked, the appellant never claimed he did not understand the order. In fact his attorney admitted that the court's order had not been obeyed. The appellant's claim that he never abandoned his intention to have psychiatric therapy is of no use here. He can not substitute his own judgment of what was to be done for what was ordered by the court, and the appellant showed no reason in the hearing which would excuse his not performing the acts required by the probation.
Equally important, when the court granted probation, it was not aware that the appellant had been charged with aggravated assault arising out of another incident which took place before the crime which was then before the court. A search of the appellant's past record had been made, but for some reason this charge was not included in the report made to the court, though the court seems to have learned of this charge at the time the probation was revoked. The appellant has since been found guilty of this crime as well. Since the fact of this other charge is certainly relevant to the question whether the appellant should have been granted probation, and since there are indications in the record that the court below would not have granted probation had it known of this second charge, we hold the revocation of probation was not an abuse of discretion.
The order is affirmed.
Order affirmed.
BURKE, P.J. and FRIEND, J., concur.

=== CASE 3784441 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:09.295425+00 ===

The subject-matter of this action is a 20-payment life insurance policy issued by the New York Life Insurance Company, plaintiff in error, upon the life of George L. Snyder, the husband of Anna E. Snyder, defendant in error, who was named in the policy as beneficiary. Two full annual premiums were paid by the insured upon the policy. The policy matured, 15 months after its issue, by the death of the insured. Proofs of death were duly made, followed by a demand for the payment of the amount due upon the policy. The insurance company refused payment on the ground that the insured had willfully and knowingly made certain false and fraudulent statements in connection with the procuring of the insurance, the truth of which the insurance company had relied *Page 695
upon in issuing the policy. The insurance company tendered to the beneficiary, who was also the administratrix of the estate of her deceased husband, the return of the full amount of the two annual premiums paid, with interest thereon up to the time of the tender, and demanded the surrender of the policy. The tender and the surrender were both refused. The insurance company brought an action in the court of common pleas, seeking the cancellation of the policy and asking an injunction to prevent the beneficiary from prosecuting an action to recover upon the policy. The insurance company deposited in court the amount of the tender covering the premiums paid. The common pleas court refused the injunction prayed for. That action is still pending, and no hearing has been had upon the merits. The beneficiary then began this action to recover upon the policy. The petition contained the usual allegations in actions of this character. The answer admitted the issue of the policy, the payment of the two annual premiums thereon, the death of the insured, the due proof of death, and that no part of the amount due upon the policy had been paid, and denied the other allegations of the petition. The answer averred that there had been no legal delivery of the policy for the reason that it was stipulated in the application that the insured was not to have the policy if between the time of his medical examination and the issue of the policy he consulted with or obtained treatment from any physician. The answer averred that between the dates mentioned he had consulted with physicians and taken advice and treatment in respect to maladies that he then had and which *Page 696
continued with him until the time of and were the cause of his death.
The second defense of the answer set forth in detail that the insured had willfully and knowingly made certain false and fraudulent statements for the purpose of inducing the company to issue to him the policy in question; that the company had no knowledge of the falsity of these statements, but believed each and all of them to be true. These false statements had reference particularly to the matter of Snyder having consulted with and taken treatment from physicians for physical maladies within a period stated, five years, prior to his application to the company for this insurance.
If the allegations in the answer were in fact true, they were quite sufficient to render the policy void. The reply denied all these claimed false and fraudulent statements. On these issues the case went to the jury. At the close of the evidence the insurance company presented to the court two written instructions to be given to the jury before argument. The court refused these instructions for the reason, then assigned by the trial judge, that they did not correctly state the law. Exceptions were duly taken. These written requests will be again referred to later herein. Thereupon counsel for the beneficiary moved the court to instruct the jury to return a verdict for the beneficiary, in response to which motion the court, after quoting from Sections 9391 and 11494, General Code, said to the jury:
"So far as this court is concerned this court takes the position that, legally, the effort of the insurance company and Snyder to disregard the *Page 697
statute rules of this state, by this waiver in the application for the insurance policy was against public policy and was not binding upon Mrs. Snyder, so the direction of this court is that this jury, under these rules, return a signed verdict in favor of the plaintiff for the amount appearing to be due on this policy, with interest, from the 10th day of August, 1923, to the 5th day of April, 1926, and return it into court."
The jury returned a verdict, as directed by the court, for the full amount due on the policy, and judgment was entered accordingly. A motion for new trial was overruled and exceptions saved. The Court of Appeals affirmed this judgment, and the insurance company prosecutes error to this court.
Numerous errors are assigned as calling for the reversal of the judgments entered in the trial and appellate courts. The most of these errors relate to the excluding of evidence offered by the insurance company showing that the statements of Snyder in his application for insurance, and particularly in that part of his application covered by his answers to the medical examiner of the insurance company, that he had not consulted with or been examined by any other physician with respect to his physical condition at any time within five years prior to the time of such examination, were willfully false. The insurance company called several physicians (some of whom testified by deposition), and by them attempted to show that the answers given by Snyder were willfully and knowingly false and fraudulent, and were made to induce the insurance company to issue this policy of insurance. The trial court held all of this evidence *Page 698
incompetent because the witnesses were disqualified by the provisions of Section 11494 of the General Code.
The examination before the medical examiner, duly signed by Snyder, contained the following:
"The applicant must answer these questions fully and with special care.
"8. Have you ever suffered from any ailment or disease * * * of the stomach or intestines, liver, kidneys or bladder? No.
"9. * * * D. Have you consulted a physician for any ailment or disease not included in your above answers? No.
"E. What physician or physicians, if any, not named above, have you consulted or been treated by, within the last five years and for what illness or ailment? (If none, so state.) None."
The following forms a part of the medical examination found on page 91 of the record:
"I agree, represent and declare, on behalf of myself and of every person who shall have or claim any interest in any insurance made hereunder, that I have carefully read each and all of the above answers, that they are each written as made by me, that each of them is full, complete and true, and that I am a proper subject for life insurance. Each and all of my said statements, representations and answers contained in this application are made by me to obtain said insurance, and I understand and agree that they are each material to the risk and that the company believing them to be true will rely and act upon them.
"I expressly waive, on behalf of myself and of any person who shall have or claim any interest in *Page 699
any policy issued hereunder, all provisions of law forbidding any physician or other person who has heretofore attended or examined me, or who may hereafter attend or examine me, from disclosing any knowledge or information which he thereby acquired."
When the physicians were called and their testimony was excluded, proper offers to prove were made. The trial court was very frank and definite in his rulings upon this evidence. The requests to charge at the close of the evidence, made by counsel for the insurance company, were based upon the state of the case as it would have appeared if this rejected testimony had been admitted. Without this testimony in, the trial court might well have said that there was no evidence in the case justifying the giving of the requests to charge. The real error was prior to the presentation of these requests, in the excluding of the evidence offered. Had the evidence been in, the requests would have been proper, and their rejection would have been prejudicial error against the insurance company.
Counsel for the beneficiary insists that she is not bound by any of the statements in the waiver made by the insured. It is entirely clear that the insured went to the fullest possible limits in his statements and waiver along the line of including everybody who might have or claim to have an interest in this insurance policy. It is claimed by counsel for the beneficiary that it is against public policy to enforce this waiver, in view of the provisions of Section 11494, General Code, and that no waiver is available except it be *Page 700
made in open court at the time of the trial. It is not claimed that there is any decision of this court which definitely decides this question. It is very plain why the insurance company considers the right to secure the doctors' evidence as of the greatest value. In the first place, if the physician were permitted to testify, he would not have the same incentive to misrepresent that the insured might have. Furthermore, the physician has the full statement of the insured made to him, and, supplementing this, his own observation and tests made to determine the truth about the then real physical condition of the insured. After full disclosure made by the patient, the physician may know much more about the extent of the malady from which the patient is suffering than the patient can possibly know himself. It is therefore of the highest importance that the insurance company know to what extent, if at all, an applicant has consulted with and procured advice and treatment from other physicians. And it is clearly important that the insurance company have the right to learn what medical advice and treatment the policy holder subsequently may take after the policy is issued. It may well be that later medical examinations and treatments will disclose the presence of maladies of long standing, and thereby establish the fact that they existed prior to the taking out of the policy. In fact, in this case the insurance company tendered the testimony of a physician, Dr. O.H. Schettler, who was consulted by the insured less than three months before the death of the insured, and to whom witness made a statement concerning a malady that he had been suffering *Page 701
from for 18 months last past, as shown by the offer to prove. This statement of the insured to Dr. Schettler was excluded, as was also the doctor's testimony with reference to the condition of the insured at the time, and the doctor's further evidence with reference to the findings made by him when performing an autopsy upon the body of the insured less than 30 days thereafter.
It is not necessary to go further in pointing out the importance of this class of testimony when offered to support the defense of claimed fraud and misrepresentation in the procuring of a life insurance policy. It is entirely self-evident that evidence of this character is of the highest importance in supporting such a defense, and its exclusion, when competent, is prejudicial error.
The controlling question in this case is whether the waiver executed by the insured, as shown on page 91 of the record, above quoted, is available in support of a defense against the policy when sought to be enforced by the beneficiary. If it is, then the judgments entered herein must be reversed and the case remanded for a new trial. While there are some cases to the contrary, the very great weight of authority supports the claim that such waiver is available against the beneficiary. We cite the following: 6 Ruling Case Law, Section 108, p. 109; 25 Ruling Case Law, Section 272, p. 1040; Ausdenmoore et al.,Exr's., v. Holzback, 89 Ohio St. 381, 382, 383, 106 N.E. 41;Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Long, 12 Ohio App. 252; MichiganMutual Life Ins. Co. v. Whittaker, Adm'r., 7 Cow. C., (N.S.), 1, 18 Cow. D., 688; Foley v. Royal Arcanum, 151 N.Y. 196,45 N.E. 456, 56 Am. St. Rep., 621; *Page 702
5 Wigmore on Evidence, (2d Ed.), 2388; 40 Cyc., 2400;Adreveno v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Ass'n., (C. C.), 34 F., 870; Trull v. Modern Woodmen of America, 12 Idaho 318,85 P. 1081, 10 Ann. Cas., 53; Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Brubaker,78 Kan. 146, 96 P. 62, 18 L.R.A., (N.S.), 362, 130 Am. St. Rep., 356, 16 Ann. Cas., 267; Sovereign Camp, Woodmen of theWorld, v. Farmer, 116 Miss. 626, 77 So. 655; Fuller v.Knights of Pythias, 129 N.C. 318, 40 S.E. 65, 85 Am. St. Rep., 744; Bryant v. Modern Woodmen of America, 86 Neb. 372,125 N.W. 621, 27 L.R.A., (N.S.), 326, 21 Ann. Cas., 365;National Annuity Ass'n. v. McCall, 103 Ark. 201,146 S.W. 125, 48 L.R.A., (N.S.), 418; Modern Woodmen of America
v. Angle, 127 Mo. App., 94, 104 S.W. 297; Maine v. MarylandCasualty Co., 172 Wis. 350, 178 N.W. 749, 15 A. L. R., 1536;Cromeenes v. Sovereign Camp, W. O. W., 205 Mo. App., 419,224 S.W. 15; Wm. Laurie Co. v. McCullough, 174 Ind. 1477,90 N.E. 1014, 92 N.E. 337, Ann. Cas., 1913A, 49; Grand Rapids Ind. Rd. Co. v. Martin, 41 Mich. 667, 3 N.W. 173; New YorkLife Ins. Co. v. Wertheimer, (D.C.), 272 F., 730; New York LifeIns. Co. v. Goerlich, (C.C.A.), 11 F.2d 838; MetropolitanLife Ins. Co. v. Willis, 37 Ind. App. 148, 76 N.E. 560;Dahlquist v. Denver  R. G. Rd. Co., 52 Utah 438, 174 P. 833;Keller v. Home Life Ins. Co., 95 Mo. App., 627, 69 S.W. 612; 5 Joyce on Insurance (2d Ed.), Section 3820-A.
We have no hesitancy in saying that it is not against public policy, nor in violation of the terms or spirit of Section 11494, General Code, to enforce such a waiver. To hold otherwise would be to *Page 703
open wide the doors of both fraud and suicide with respect to the procuring of life insurance policies, and it would jeopardize the soundness and safety of life insurance in general. No sound reason appears why a policy of insurance, attended by an agreement and waiver such as in this case, should not be enforced when the evidence sustains the claim that the policy was procured by false and fraudulent statements, knowingly made, to induce the issue of the policy, when neither the insurance company nor its agent knew of the falsity of the statements made by the insured. To enter a judgment in favor of the insured, after excluding the evidence of physicians with respect to his physical condition at the time of the taking out of the policy, is not in furtherance of justice. Surely the insurance company has a clear right to say to an applicant for insurance, "We will not issue a policy of insurance to you unless you give to the company full and complete authority to acquire any information, which any physician may now possess or may hereafter possess concerning the state of your health at the time of taking out the policy." It will be noted that the statement made by the insured, immediately preceding the waiver, is very broad indeed. No terms could be broader in scope. And then immediately thereafter follows the waiver, equally broad in scope. This language needs no interpretation. It is simple, plain, positive, and embraces the entire subject-matter to which the language refers. Any attempt to construe such language so as to destroy its scope and meaning is wholly unwarranted. No such attempt was made by the trial court or the Court of Appeals. They met the issue *Page 704
squarely and held it was against public policy to enforce such a waiver against the beneficiary.
For the purpose of determining the rights of the parties to this action under this insurance policy, this agreement and waiver, deliberately entered into between the insured and the company, must be read as the law of this case. It is the plain duty of the courts to enforce contracts which parties have made for themselves. We cannot agree with the conclusions reached in this case by the trial court and the Court of Appeals.
It follows by what has been said that the judgments of the lower courts must be reversed, and this cause must be remanded for a new trial in accord with this opinion.
Judgments reversed and cause remanded.
MARSHALLL, C.J., DAY, ALLEN, ROBINSON, JONES and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur. *Page 705

=== CASE 9739990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:20.016724+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court. This appeal is from a judgment entered in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, February 21, 1963, on a jury verdict finding for the defendantsappellees in plaintiff-appellant’s suit for damages resulting from injuries sustained on appellees’ premises. The central issue which the appellant raises before this court is whether the constant references to what she claims are unrelated injuries and illnesses, and questions concerning her mental condition deprived her of a fair trial. In July of 1958 the appellant was working as a waitress in the Blackhawk Restaurant in Chicago. On that date she slipped while at work, sustaining a severe injury to her neck and shoulder, the treatment of which required several operations. Dr. Robert McElvenny of Chicago treated the appellant for. both this injury and the injury presently before this court. She was still recuperating from this first fall almost two years later on March 3, 1960, when she claims she incurred the injury on which this suit is based. According to the appellant, she was, on March 3, 1960 a tenant in the first floor apartment of a building located at 3939 North Janssen Avenue, Chicago, and owned by the defendants. On that date, shortly after noon, a neighbor came to the appellant’s apartment and asked her to look after her baby while she went to the store. The neighbor gave the appellant the back door key to her apartment, and about 20 minutes later, the appellant went upstairs to look in on the baby, using the open back stairway of the apartment building. The appellant testified at the trial that when she went to look at the baby, she was wearing laced oxford nonskid work shoes which she had worn as a waitress, and that while climbing the stairs, she observed that it was icy and snowy between the first floor landing where she lived and the second floor landing where the neighbor lived. She claims there was an overhanging gutter in that area, which gutter was cracked or rusted so that water leaked from the gutter and froze on the stairs and landing when the weather was cold enough. There was testimony from the appellant and from others who. had lived in the building that the janitor had not cleaned off the back stairway for quité some time. The appellant testified that as she was coming back down the stairs, after having looked in on the baby, she slipped and fell, thereby injuring her back. It is for the injuries resulting from this fall that the appellant brought her suit in the court below. The appellees set up several defenses to the complaint. They denied any negligence and alleged that the appellant was eontrihntorily negligent. They denied that she ever fell on the back stairway and claim that the injury of which she complains was caused by the fall which she incurred while working as a waitress at the Blackhawk Restaurant almost two years before. At the trial, the appellees adduced evidence from several residents of the apartment building that the back stairway was kept clean of ice and snow during the period the appellant claims she fell. The janitor of the building testified that he particularly remembered the day because it was his son’s birthday, and that he recalled cleaning the stairs that day. During the trial, the appellees cross-examined Mrs. Marut and Dr. McElvenny at some length about the fall which took place at the Blackhawk Restaurant in 1958, and the resulting injuries. The only evidence the appellees brought out on this matter was in these cross-examinations. On her cross-examination the appellant denied that she ever complained of pains in her low back before March of 1960. Dr. McElvenny testified that there was no connection between the fall at the Blackhawk Restaurant and the injury to the lower back of which the appellant complains here. On these cross-examinations, the appellees brought into evidence the record of the Industrial Commission, which heard the appellant’s claim relating to her fall at the restaurant. These hearings took place both before and after the accident complained of here. In testimony before the Commission taken on March 7, 1960, four days after the accident, her doctor represented to the Commission that in his opinion the appellant would be unable to return to work as a waitress due to the injury she sustained from her fall at the Blackhawk Restaurant in 1958 The appellant had testified before the Commission a few days before her second accident to the effect that her physical condition was not at all good. This testimony was used by the appellees for the purpose of discrediting some or all of the testimony given by Mrs. Marut and her doctor. The basic point complained of here, is that the attorney for the appellees was permitted, over objection, to question the appellant and her doctor about a possible connection between the injury to the' upper back resulting from the fall at the Blackhawk Restaurant, and the injury to the base of her spine which the appellant claims resulted from the fall down the back stairs of the building owned by the appellees. The appellant does not deny that the appellees had a right to cross-examine concerning the prior accident if they can show some relationship between the two injuries. When the appellant objected at the trial that a proper basis had not been laid for the cross-examination concerning the previous accident, the attorney for the appellees said that he would connect the first injury to the latter. The appellant claims that this was never done, and therefore, the testimony pertaining to the earlier fall should have been stricken and the jury instructed to disregard such matters. The appellant also complains of references to her mental state made during the cross-examination, claiming that such material was totally irrelevant and should not have been permitted. The appellees respond to these claims, saying that both the appellant and her doctor had testified at the trial as to her previous medical history, and therefore, the appellees were entitled to cross-examine these witnesses in depth about all factors relating to these matters. They also claim that aside from the matter being raised on direct examination, the material concerning the appellant’s prior condition of health as testified to before the Industrial Commission was relevant to rebut and impeach the claim that the appellant was in fairly good health before her second fall and would have been able to return to work shortly after March 3, 1960, but for her second accident. In addition, the appellees say that the disputed cross-examination was relevant to show that the appellant’s claimed total disability was not a proper claim, and that, in fact, she was on March 3, 1960, suffering from a permanent disability. As further grounds for admitting this material, it is claimed that the evidence before the Industrial Commission shows the appellant’s physical condition to have been so weak that it establishes a case of her contributory negligence in undertaking to negotiate stairs which she claims were icy and snowy.  We hold that evidence was improperly before the jury in that there was no testimony tending to connect the two injuries. The jury should have been instructed to disregard certain portions of the testimony of the appellant and of her doctor. I.  During the course of direct examination, the appellant gave the following testimony: “Q. Mary, did you injure your neck in the year 1958? “A. Yes, sir, I did. “Q. Where did that happen? “A. At the Blaekhawk Restaurant. “Q. Were you employed at the time ? “A. I was. “Q. Do you recall the exact date of that occurrence ? “A. Offhand, no. Somewhere in July. “Q. At the time of injuring your neck in that occurrence, did you sustain any injuries to the low back area at the time? “A. No, sir. “Q. Do you know the name of the doctor that took care of you for the injuries to your neck? “A. Dr. McElvenny. Robert McElvenny.” This is the testimony the appellant gave on direct examination concerning the fall she took at the Blackhawk Restaurant. It seems clear from the pleadings in this case that the appellees were going to try to prove that the injuries the appellant claimed she suffered when she fell down the back stairs did not result from that fall, but were the result of the fall she took at the Blackhawk Restaurant almost two years before. As the trial progressed, this is exactly what happened. The appellant was, therefore, trying to protect herself by bringing out the fact of the previous accident before the appellees could do so on cross-examination. Had they waited until the 1958 verdict was raised on cross-examination, it might appear to the jury that the appellant was trying to conceal it. The strategy used by the appellant is a common one, and we do not feel that in protecting herself she waived the right to insist that the injuries be connected to one another by acceptable evidence. The appellees, nevertheless, claim that the cross-examination was appropriate as being within the scope of topics covered on direct examination and, in support of this theory, they cite the case of Muscarello v. Peterson, 20 Ill2d 548, 170 NE2d 564 (1960). In that case the Supreme Court said: “The rule is, of course, a familiar one that cross-examination of a witness should be confined to matters brought out upon direct examination. (Hansen v. Miller, 145 Ill 538.) But in determining the scope of the ‘matter’ testified to on direct examination the rule is not to be given a narrow or technical application. (West Chicago St. R. R. Co. v. Reddy, 69 Ill App 53.)” We are not in disagreement with that rule. The purpose of cross-examination is to get at the truth, and too strict a limit on the scope of cross-examination will hamper rather than help to achieve this end. We do, however, feel that the appellees have misapplied this rule in their argument, for this rule, in our opinion, assumes that the direct testimony and the cross-examination will be on matter relevant to the case at bar. We feel that Mrs. Marut’s first accident has not been shown by the appellees to be relevant on the question of causation of the injury of which she complains here.  There is an Illinois case quite similar to the case at bar. In Caley v. Manicke, 29 Ill App2d 323, 173 NE2d 209, (1961) reversed on nonevidentiary grounds 24 Ill2d 390, 182 NE2d 206, (1961), cited by both sides in this case, the court dealt with a question of the relevancy of prior accidents. In laying down guidelines for dealing with this problem, the court said: “Relevancy described evidence that has a legitimate tendency to prove or disprove a given proposition that is material as shown by pleadings. (See 1 Wigmore on Evidence, 3d Ed, Sec 2.) That intervening and contributory causes are material to the issue of proximate cause is implicit in the very nature of things, and taken as a matter of course in actions of this kind. They are material propositions that may be proved. The question here is whether the evidentiary facts offered by defendant did prove either one or both of them. Relevancy has been defined as a tendency to establish a fact in controversy, or to render a proposition in issue more or less probable. To be probable, evidence must be viewed in the light of logic, experience and accepted assumptions concerning human behavior.” We feel that the cross-examination elicited by the attorney for the appellees failed to render the proposition in issue more or less probable. We find nothing in the record from which a legitimate tendency to prove or disprove the proposition that the appellant’s injuries were caused by a prior accident can be drawn. The claim that the injury was caused by a prior' accident is an affirmative defense and the appellees had the burden of proof on this point. Caley v. Manicke (supra). To show how the appellees failed to elicit evidence to prove their claim, we quote from the cross-examination of the appellant, Mary Marut: “Q. Isn’t it a fact, ma’am, that before the Industrial Commission, that you testified that you were completely incapacitated at that time? “A. At that time, yes, but I was gradually getting better. There’s miracles in everything, and I wish to God I had a miracle in my back. “Q. We can appreciate that, Mrs. Marut. “A. Yes, I wish. “Q. We can appreciate that. Now, Mrs. Marut, you were having trouble with your arms? “A. Not with my arms. With my arm. “Q. With your arm ? “A. That’s right. “Q. And you were having trouble— “A. So therefore they took the bursas out. “Q. All right. “A. And with the therapy I was getting better gradually. “Q. Then after they took the bursa out,—that was as a result of this fall at the Blackhawk Restaurant? “A. That’s correct. “Q. And then your left elbow swelled up, isn’t that right? “A. That’s correct. And I worked all the way with it. “Q. All right. Then after that operation, then they performed another operation and fused the vertebrae in the cervical region of your spine; isn’t that right? “A. That’s correct. “MR. LISCO [Attorney for the appellant]: Judg’e, may I be assured by counsel that he will attempt to tie up any reference to a cervical fusion with the occurrence that is the subject matter of this litigation? “THE COURT: Are you going to connect this, counsel? “MR. SCHAFFENEGGER [Attorney for the appellees] : Yes, your honor. “THE COURT: All right. “MR. SCHAFFENEGGER: Not medically, but by testimony. “MR. LISCO: Did you say “Not medically?” “MR. SCHAFFENEGGER: Well, I’m not a doctor.” This is some of the testimony the appellant gave on cross-examination concerning the condition of her upper back. Part of the record of the testimony she gave before the Industrial Commission a few days before her second accident was read into the record, and there were further questions about her condition before the accident. At various times, counsel for the appellant renewed his objection to this line of questioning, unless the two injuries were shown to be connected. The Court overruled these objections. Clearly, nothing was elicited on this cross-examination which shows any connection between the injury sustained in the fall in the Blackhawk Restaurant and the injury to the appellant’s lower spine which she says she sustained when she fell down the stairs in the appellees’ building. II. We now turn to the testimony given by the appellant’s doctor, Robert McElvenny. On direct examination by the appellant’s attorney, the following testimony was given: “Q. . . . Would you tell us whether or not this lady was under your care for any condition prior to March 3rd, 1960 ? “A. Yes, she was. “Q. And for what reason or purpose was she under your care prior to that date, sir? “A. Well, the first time I saw Mary Marut was in 1958 when she came in from falling on a wet floor with a great big bursa on her elbow, on her left elbow. She also complained then of some pain in her left shoulder. “Q. Now, Doctor, you have seen Mary Marut from 1958 up to the time that you say you saw her in connection with her low back in March of ’60? “A. Oh, yes. “Q. Do you know, Doctor, whether or not Mary Marut had any time from 1958 up to the time of March 4th, 1960, ever complained of any low back pain to you? “A. No, never. The Doctor then described the treatment he gave as a result of the appellant’s fall in the Blackhawk Bestaurant in 1958. This treatment included three operations. The Doctor was then asked: “Q. Now, Doctor, did the injury to her neck have any relation to loss of use of the leg, right or left? “A. No. “Q. Did it have any connection, sir, with radiating pain from the low back to either leg, right or left? “A. No.” The Doctor then read an X-ray taken of the appellant a- year before the accident. It was an X-ray taken for the bowel, but the Doctor said he could see the lower spine of the appellant in the film, and testified that while the film was not good for details, the bone appeared normal. The Doctor also testified that he operated on the appellant three times for the injury to her lower spine. He said that the preoperative X-rays showed that there was some congenital defect in that area of the spine, but that the injury of which the appellant complains was not caused by this congenital defect, bnt by a trauma such as the fall of which she complains. On cross-examination the Doctor again testified that the injury was traumatic in its origin and not congenital. He then gave the following testimony: “Q. Doctor, do you have an opinion, based upon a reasonable degree of medical and surgical certainty, whether or not the condition of ill-being, namely, the pain that this patient has been constantly complaining of of [sic] might or could be connected with her fall of March 3, I960? “A. Yes. “Q. What is your opinion ? “A. It could be connected. “Q. Do you have an opinion, Doctor, based upon a reasonable degree of medical and surgical certainty, whether or not the condition of the herniated nucleus pulposus might or could be connected with her fall of March 3,1960? “A. I have. “Q. What is your opinion in connection with that? “A. It could be connected. “Q. Do you have an opinion, Doctor, based upon a reasonable degree of medical and surgical certainty whether or not this patient’s injury to her cervical spine in 1958 had anything to do with her present complaints of low back injury today—or low back complaints today? “A. I have. “Q. What is your opinion? “A. No. . . . “Q. So the fall at the Blackhawk restaurant [sic] resulted in a swelling of the left shoulder—of the left elbow, it was of such severity, she developed a scalenus anticus syndrome where you had to section that muscle, and you had to perform a fusion of her cervical spine? “A. She had a ruptured disk. “Q. And she had a ruptured disk at that time? “A. On her cervical spine, yes, sir. “Q. So the fall she had at the Blackhawk Restaurant was of sufficient intensity and magnitude to require her to have three operations, isn’t that right? “A. Yes. “Q. And when she fell, she fell on her buttocks, didn’t she ? “A. I have no note of that in my notes.” The attorney for the appellees then read into the record testimony given, by Doctor McElvenny at the Industrial Commission on. March 7, 1960. In that testimony, the Doctor had stated: “This woman fell backwards. This Woman collapsed hitting her left elbow, her buttocks, and then went backwards like this (indicating). A fall was taken mainly on her left buttock, left foot, her left elbow, and then, the sudden stop, and the acceleration of her body, do have . . .” The cross-examination continued: “Q. So the impact of that fall was closer to the lumbar spine than it was to the cervical spine, wasn’t it, Doctor? “A. No sir. It all came to the cervical spine and the upper shoulder region. A hip is not a back. You know that. “Q. Anatomically, Doctor, the lumbar spine is closer to the buttock than the cervical spine, isn’t'that right? “A. Oh, sure. That’s what saved it.” (Emphasis supplied.) Continuing the cross-examination, the Doctor testified concerning the treatment he gave the appellant for the injury resulting from the fall she took in 1958—the injury to the cervical region of the spine. Later, a discussion arose as to the difference between the cervical region of the spine (that part which runs through the neck) and the lumbar region (the lower back): “A. There’s no difference between the back and the neck. It’s back pain and it runs from your head to your tailbone. “Q. So, it is the entire spine, is that right? “A. The back, of course. “Q. And the fact there was a cervical operation, that is still an operation in the back, is that right? “A. Exactly. “Q. There could be a connection between the cervical area, the lumbar area, and the thoracic area, and that is the back? “A. Yes, it better be connected.” What the Doctor said in this last answer is that all the areas in the back are connected to one another anatomically. He did not say that the, injuries the appellant sustained in the cervical area and the lumbar area of her spine were in any way connected. We cannot seriously accept the appellees’ contention that this is testimony on the part of the Doctor that the injuries were or might have been connected. On redirect examination, the Doctor testified first, that the injury of which the appellant complains was caused not by a congenital defect, but by a trauma, such as a fall. The appellant’s attorney then conducted the following examination: “Q. . . . Now, you heard reference to the fact that this lady allegedly fell on her buttocks in an accident at her place of employment. Now, Doctor, I ask you again, is there any reference at all in any of your treatment, from the time you saw this patient in 1958 until the time you saw her after March of 1960, any reference at all to any condition in the low hack area? “A. None, nor could we find it in the hospital records. . . . “Q. Is there any relationship, in your opinion, Doctor, with the patient’s present complaint of low hack injury and the complaint of low back pain to the cervical injury she sustained in 1958 ? “A. No, sir, there is no relationship.” • On recross-examinátion, the following testimony was given: “Q. Doctor, you say that there was no relationship between this fall in 1958 and the condition of her cervical spine, the condition in her lumbar spine ? “A. I didn’t say that, sir. I said there was no relationship between the trouble in her cervical spine and her lumbar. “Q. But you are not saying that the fall could not have caused this condition to her lumbar spine back at the Blackhawk Restaurant? “A. I know we never had any complaint referable to it until when she appeared in 1960.” Is there anything in the Doctor’s testimony that would allow the jury to believe that the injury of which the appellant was complaining resulted from the fall she took in 1958? We think not. The appellant had never complained of a low back injury to the Doctor who had treated her for the injury to her upper spine for almost two years before the accident of which she complains here. Doctor McElvenny then testified that the former injury had no connection with the latter. He could not say that the injury of which the appellant complains was caused from a fall down the stairs on March 3, 1960, because he was not there. He did testify, however, that the injury was caused by a trauma such as a fall and he also said quite clearly that the injury to the cervical spine had nothing to do with the injury to the lower portion of the back. The Doctor was asked questions designed to make him raise the possibility that the two injuries were connected, but he clearly said that they were not connected. It was admitted that the Doctor testified before the Industrial Commission that when the appellant fell at the Blackhawk Restaurant, she fell on her foot, elbow and buttock, but he also clearly stated at the trial that the buttock saved the lower spine from any injury in that fall. The Doctor then stated once again that there was no connection between the two spinal injuries. We believe that unless the appellees adduced some further evidence concerning the relationship between the two injuries there was nothing in these two cross-examinations that would allow the jury to infer that these injuries were connected. Counsel for the appellees promised that he would connect the two injuries, and this he failed to do. The testimony given by the Doctor on cross-examination, if it had a tendency to prove anything, would show that the injuries were not connected, not that they were. Counsel for the appellees constantly suggested that the two injuries might be connected, but he was not on the witness stand, and the witnesses did nothing but deny that the two injuries were connected. We feel, therefore, that this case falls under the rationale of the Caley v. Manicke decision, (supra). See also Home Life Insurance Co. v. Franklin, 303 Ill App 146, 24 NE2d 874, (1940). Unless some competent witness is willing to testify that the two injuries are connected, or reasonably might be connected,, we do not see how the question of whether the injuries were connected could be before the jury. There was no evidence from which the jury could come to that conclusion. Kantor v. Ash, 137 A2d 661, 215 Md 285 (1958), Krug v. Wanner 145 A2d 612, 28 NJ 174 (1958). The appellees did call a doctor for their side, but he gave no testimony relating to this issue, and nothing he said could even be remotely described as connecting the two injuries. His testimony went only to the degree of disability the appellant had as a result of her first fall. His testimony was relevant to the question of damages, not to the question of causation of the injury to the lower spine.  One of the instructions offered by appellees and given the jury at the close of the case reads in part: “Defendants state that they neither committed or omitted any act which in any way caused or contributed to cause any accident or any injuries, and that if plaintiff suffered any accident or injury, as alleged, said accident and injury were the sole and proximate result of the negligence and want of care of the plaintiff in her own behalf, and state that if the plaintiff has any injury or disability that said injury or disability resulted not from any incident involved in this lawsuit, but that plaintiff was suffering from a previous injury incurred at another time and place” (Emphasis supplied.) There is nothing in the record which would warrant the giving of such an instruction. The record is totally devoid of evidence which would permit the jury to find that the previous injury was in any way connected to the latter. The instructions must be based upon evidence in the case, and a statement of an hypothesis of fact virtually tells the jury that there is evidence from which they may believe in the existence of the fact, and if there is no evidence the instruction is misleading. Jurney v. Lubeznik, 54 Ill App2d 372, 204 NE2d 166, Schlauder v. Chicago & Southern Traction Co., 253 Ill 154, 97 NE 233 (1912). The appellees cite and rely on the case of Kaptain v. Overgaard, 19 Ill App2d 483, 154 NE2d 105 (1958) (Abst.). We have read the text of this opinion and find that it is not controlling in the case at bar. In that case, the plaintiff had sued for damages arising, out of an automobile accident. The defense showed, among other things, that she had divorced her husband and that in her complaint to that divorce, she alleged that her husband had dragged her down some steps. The decision in that case simply restates the general rule that a plaintiff may be cross-examined as to prior injuries. There is nothing in that decision that suggests that there had been no connection made between the two injuries. There is nothing in that opinion to suggest that the question of relevancy was even raised. We do not see how we can be bound by an opinion that does not deal with the problem before us.  We hold, therefore, that this evidence was inadmissible to show that the injury of which the appellant complained was caused from her fall at the Blackhawk Bestaurant, and that it was error for the court below to give this instruction. III. The appellees next claim that this evidence is admissible for purposes other than to show a connection between tbe two injuries. They state in their brief, “Cross-examination about [appellant’s] prior condition of health and testimony before the Industrial Commission was relevant to rebut and impeach plaintiff’s contention that as of March 3, 1960, her condition of health was fair, that she shortly would be able to return to work as a waitress, and that she fell on March 3,1960.”  It is quite true that at the hearings before the Industrial Commission the appellant’s doctor said that he did not think she would be able to return to work as a waitress: “The reason I object to her doing waitress work, again, is the transient weaknesses that she will have; the danger of spilling on people is very important.” “Point Two is I do not consider her balance excellent any more. I do not consider her endurance good. I do not think mentally she is fit for it. These are four basic reasons, and this endurance plus her balance plus her mental condition plus the danger to others, I think, eliminates her as a trusted employee in the work of a waitress.” This evidence is admissible as going to the question of the appellant’s damages. She had testified that she earned a certain amount of money each week and that she planned to return to work as a waitress at the time of her second accident. This testimony shows that she could not have returned to work as a waitress, and shows that her earning power may have been reduced by the first accident with which the. appellees here had nothing whatsoever to do.  Such evidence is also admissible to show that the appellant’s claimed total disability was not due solely to the second accident. The evidence quoted above is relevant and highly probative of the proposition that all the appellant’s disability did not arise from this latter accident, but none of this evidence has anything to do with causation of the injury to the lower spine.  Other evidence from the Industrial Commission which was read into the record at the trial shows that the appellant told the Commission that her hands and arms were very weak, that she could do only light cooking, and that the neighbors had to come in to wash and set her hair. The appellees say that this was relevant to show that the appellant was guilty of contributory negligence in attempting to negotiate the icy steps when she did not have enough strength to hold on to the bannister if she should fall. We agree with this contention. It was proper for the court to permit this evidence to go before the jury. Finally, the appellant objects to the references to her mental condition which were made at the trial. The question of the appellant’s mental state first arose on cross-examination of her Doctor in the reading of the transcript of proceedings of the Industrial Commission into the record. This dealt with the Doctor’s testifying that one of the reasons he did not think that the appellant could return to work as a waitress was that she was no longer “mentally fit” for the work. This testimony, as we noted before, is admissible insofar as it bears on the question of damages.  Other references to the appellant’s mental state were made to show that she had imagined illnesses and wanted the operations which resulted from the second fall. None of this material was followed up or brought to any conclusion. The probative value of it is, therefore, nonexistent while the prejudice arising from such references to the appellant’s mental condition is great. We feel, therefore, that the evidence resulting from this questioning as well as all evidence concerning a bladder condition the appellant had should have been stricken and the jury instructed to disregard it. It was error for the court below not to do so. We hold, therefore, that the testimony elicited at the trial which went to a connection between the injuries to the cervical spine and the injuries to the lumbar spine should have been stricken by the Court below and the jury instructed to disregard it. We hold that the instruction telling the jury that the appellees claimed that Mrs. Marut’s injuries were caused by a previous fall should not have been given, for the jury could imply from this that there was evidence from which to conclude that she had so injured herself. The record is devoid of testimony which would support such a conclusion. We hold that it was not error to permit the appellees to show that Mrs. Marut had been injured before for the purpose of proving to the jury that all the damages she claims to have sustained were not caused by the fall of March, 1960. We hold that the court below should have stricken references to the appellant’s seeking operations and to her so-called “claustrophobia” when it became apparent that there was to be no evidence offered which would back up these claims. The judgment of the Circuit Court is reversed and the cause is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Judgment reversed and cause remanded with directions. FRIEND, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739991 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:20.022883+00 ===

BURKE, P. J., dissenting: There was conflicting testimony on the issue of liability. The jury was required to resolve this issue before considering damages. Every reasonable intendment not negatived by the record will be indulged in support of the judgment. The burden is on the appellant to point out reversible error. Under the instructions we assume that the jury found against plaintiff on the issue of liability and had no occasion to consider the question of damages. I do not think that the defendant can justly complain about the cross-examination. The scope of a cross-examination is largely within the discretion of the trial court. The cross-examination should not be unduly confined. Plaintiff and her physician in their direct-examination testified about her fall at the restaurant, the three operations relating to her cervical spine, her condition of health just prior to March 3, 1960, the three operations that followed and her September, 1960 hospitalization for a gall bladder condition, indicating which conditions they thought related to the March 3, 1960 fall. The defendants had the right to cross-examine these witnesses about all factors relating to these matters. Plaintiff’s other injuries and conditions in fact occurred and related closely in time and location to her low back condition and since the fusion to that area was in part required by preexisting congenital defects, defendants were entitled to a wide latitude on cross-examination within the discretion of the trial judge. No abuse of that discretion has been shown. See Caley v. Manicke, 29 Ill App2d 323, 173 NE2d 209. The cross-examination about plaintiff’s prior condition of health and testimony before the Industrial Commission was relevant to rebut and impeach plaintiff’s testimony supporting her contention that as of March 3, 1960 her condition of health was fair, that she shortly would be able to return to work as a waitress and that she fell on March 3, 1960. The disputed cross-examination was also relevant to show that plaintiff claimed total disability and that a period of time of that disability was and would be due in part to causes other than the March 3, 1960 fall. Evidence relating to diagnoses that plaintiff’s condition was partially psychosomatic in nature was also relevant. Under the evidence presented in this case wide latitude was properly permitted. No abuse of discretion has been shown. I think that the judgment should be affirmed.

=== CASE 2221772 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:20.081183+00 ===

52 Ill. App. 2d 394 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 73
Anna M. Gass and George W. Gass, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Marilyn Carducci, Defendant, and State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company, a Corporation, Garnishee-Appellant.
Gen. No. 49,424.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
October 27, 1964.
*395 *396 Querrey, Harrow, Gulanick & Kennedy, of Chicago (John T. Kennedy, of counsel), for appellant.
*397 John G. Phillips, of Chicago (John G. Phillips, of counsel), for Anna M. Gass and George W. Gass, plaintiffs-appellees. Orner & Wasserman, of Chicago (Norton Wasserman, of counsel), for Marilyn Carducci, defendant-appellee.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court:
This was a garnishment action filed by Anna M. Gass and George W. Gass as plaintiffs against State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company as garnishee. On motion of plaintiffs, Anna Gass and George Gass, and the original defendant, Marilyn Carducci, the court entered a summary judgment in favor of the plaintiffs and against the garnishee, from which this appeal is taken.
Prior to September 29, 1956, garnishee issued a policy of automobile liability insurance to Marilyn Carducci and her husband. On September 29, 1956, Anna Gass, the mother of Marilyn Carducci, was a passenger in the Carducci automobile; she was seriously injured when thrown from the automobile as Mrs. Carducci attempted a sudden left turn. George Gass and Anna Gass brought an action for the injuries thus sustained and Anna Gass recovered a verdict of $50,000, while George Gass recovered a verdict of $7,000 for loss of services and consortium. Attorneys designated by garnishee defended the action for Mrs. Carducci, but she retained her own counsel when advised to do so by the garnishee's counsel because the ad damnum clause of the complaint exceeded the coverage limits of the liability policy. The garnishee's counsel did however handle the defense of the action. After certain testimony was given by Mrs. Carducci at the personal injury trial, garnishee's attorney gave her an oral reservation of rights under the policy on the grounds of noncooperation, which was subsequently given to her in writing by letter the day before the judgments were *398 entered on the verdicts. On appeal to this court (Gass v. Carducci, 37 Ill. App. 2d 181, 185 NE2d 285) the judgments were affirmed; a Petition for Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court was denied.
On May 2, 1963, plaintiffs instituted this garnishment action against State Farm by the filing of an affidavit and the statutory interrogatories to garnishee. Garnishee filed a jury demand and verified answers to the interrogatories denying the indebtedness. Plaintiffs then filed an unverified reply, alleging that garnishee had issued a policy of insurance to Marilyn Carducci against whom judgments had been entered and that garnishee did have in its possession a contract of insurance belonging to the said judgment debtor. Plaintiffs requested an immediate hearing upon the issues presented by the answers to the interrogatories and the reply made by the plaintiffs.
On September 12, 1963, plaintiffs filed a motion for summary judgment. Hearing on the motion was held on September 26, 1963, at which time plaintiffs were allowed to file nunc pro tunc as of July 6, 1963 and upon agreement between counsel for the parties, discovery interrogatories to garnishee, to which verified answers were filed by garnishee on September 5, 1963. These interrogatories asked, among other questions not important here, whether garnishee had issued a policy to and had defended the personal injury suit brought by plaintiffs against Marilyn Carducci, and whether the refusal of the garnishee to pay the judgments was based upon the lack of cooperation of Marilyn Carducci. The verified answers of garnishee recited, among other things, that a policy had been issued, that the garnishee had defended the personal injury suit, and that the garnishee refused to pay the judgments by reason of the breach by Marilyn Carducci of the assistance and cooperation clause of the policy.
*399 The motion for summary judgment was predicated on the ground that the answers to the interrogatories had removed any material or factual issues from the case and that there was, therefore, no triable issue. According to the motion, these answers established as a matter of law that there was no lack of cooperation, and that even had there been noncooperation, the garnishee had not been prejudiced thereby, and had waived any coverage defense founded thereon.
Garnishee filed no counteraffidavits, nor attempted to amend its answers to the interrogatories. The court concluded that there was no triable issue as a matter of law since there was no lack of cooperation as a matter of law. The court entered judgment against garnishee in the sum of $32,000, representing the $7,000 recovered by George Gass for loss of services and consortium and the $25,000 insurance policy "per person" coverage limit constituting one-half of the $50,000 recovered by Anna Gass.
[1, 2] Garnishee first maintains that a motion for summary judgment, made under Section 57 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 110, § 57), is not available in garnishment proceedings, for the reason that Section 43(a) of the Garnishment Statute (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 62, § 43(a)) requires an immediate trial of the issues where the judgment creditor contests the truth or sufficiency of the garnishee's answers; that the answers to the statutory interrogatories in the instant case show that there is an issue of fact; and that a trial of the issue must therefore be had. While it is true that Section 43(a) requires a trial where issues of fact arise in a garnishment proceeding, it does not necessarily follow that a trial must be had in all garnishment actions. Proceeding to trial where no issue of fact or genuine issue of material fact is presented would be both wasteful and frivolous. The purpose of a motion for summary judgment is to test whether there is a genuine and material issue of *400 fact. Kruse v. Streamwood Utilities Corp., 34 Ill. App. 2d 100, 180 NE2d 731. Further, the Illinois Civil Practice Act (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 110, § 1) specifically states that its provisions control in all cases at law and in equity, except, among others, in garnishment proceedings where the procedure to be followed is incorporated into the separate statute relating to garnishment actions; where, however, that separate statute is silent concerning a given matter of procedure, then the Civil Practice Act again controls. Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 110, § 1. Nowhere in the Garnishment Statute is there any mention of motions for summary judgment, either allowing or disallowing their use. Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 62, §§ 32-52. It therefore follows that, in a proper case, a motion for summary judgment is available in garnishment proceedings.
[3-7] The defense of noncooperation alleged by garnishee as a bar to recovery, and upon which its claim to a trial of the issue is predicated, is contained in the answer to Interrogatory Number 10, which states:
"The lack of cooperation of Marilyn Carducci is based upon her testimony at the trial differing from her other statements, and her refusal to sign her statement, her refusal at the trial to discuss matters pertaining to the case with her counsel, Corwin D. Querrey, and her insistence through her counsel, John C. Mullen, without regard to liability that State Farm pay its entire policy to her mother."
Interrogatory Number 10 requested garnishee to "detail in each instance of such alleged lack of cooperation" the manner in which Marilyn Carducci allegedly failed to cooperate. Taken together or individually, the instances of noncooperation set out in the answer to the interrogatory present no genuine issue of fact *401 as to lack of cooperation. Garnishee's brief states that the matter of Marilyn Carducci's trial testimony differing from her other statements relates to the fact that she was unable to remember in her earlier statements who closed the door on her mother's side of the car but then testified at the trial that she, Carducci, closed it. The fact that a person suffers a lapse of memory and then subsequently remembers cannot be considered noncooperation. Secondly, Mrs. Carducci's failure to sign statements made to garnishee's counsel, who by the way was Mrs. Carducci's counsel as well, cannot be considered noncooperation; the mutual trust between attorney and client precludes the necessity of a signed statement by the client. Thirdly, garnishee's brief also states that Mrs. Carducci's refusal to discuss matters pertaining to the trial with her counsel related to the trial testimony concerning the closing of the door. It is difficult to see how this refusal could have prejudiced garnishee. See Gass v. Carducci, 37 Ill. App. 2d 181, 185 NE2d 285. Finally, the fact that Mrs. Carducci's personal counsel suggested that garnishee settle the case for $25,000 cannot be considered as noncooperation; settlement of adverse claims without court action is favored by the law and garnishee does not even intimate that this was a figure out of line with the injuries suffered in the accident. Also, garnishee was requested by Interrogatory Number 10, to "detail in each instance" the alleged lack of cooperation; the answer, as it stands, which was signed by garnishee's claims superintendent, does not contain a single concrete instance of lack of cooperation.
[8, 9] Garnishee further argues that the interrogatories and answers thereto of July 6, 1963, are merely part of the discovery process and cannot serve as a basis for a summary judgment. This argument, however, overlooks the fact that Supreme Court Rule 19-11(4) allows the use of interrogatories as evidence in the same manner as depositions of adverse parties. *402 Further, summary judgment may be based upon depositions. Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 110, § 57(3).
The argument raised by garnishee to the effect that the court should have proceeded to trial immediately upon garnishee's denial of indebtedness and plaintiffs' contest thereof through their reply is unavailing. Plaintiffs shortly thereafter elected to file additional interrogatories which garnishee chose to answer; the filing of the interrogatories and garnishee's answers thereto, nunc pro tunc as of July 6, 1963, was assented to by garnishee's counsel. With this additional evidence the court correctly found that a trial was unnecessary and allowed plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment.
[10-12] Secondly, garnishee argues that the court was in error by granting a judgment in the principal sum of $32,000, which amount included the $7,000 judgment in favor of George Gass for loss of services and consortium. The policy of insurance limits recovery to $25,000 for damages arising out of bodily injury sustained by one person in any one accident, which includes damages for care and loss of services arising out of bodily injury. Appellees argue that George Gass is entitled to recover the $7,000 in this garnishment action since his claim in the personal injury action is based upon loss of services and consortium and since he falls within the "sustained by one person in any one accident" clause. With this proposition we disagree. Garnishee's contract of insurance covering Marilyn Carducci was a standard automobile liability policy. The term "one person" contained therein has repeatedly been construed by the courts to mean "one person injured" and that it applies to all damages sustained by all persons as the result of injury to one person; they have rejected the contention that the "one person" limit merely deals with the loss suffered by any one person. See 150 ALR *402a 1154. Nor does this construction of "one person" render the "$50,000 for each occurrence" clause a nullity as garnishee suggests; "$50,000 for each occurrence" pertains to a situation where more than one person is directly injured in a single occurrence. The court was in error in allowing the recovery of the $7,000 on behalf of George Gass for loss of services and consortium against garnishee.
Finally, the argument presented by garnishee that the case is improperly entitled and that a judgment rendered under the present title may result in a second recovery against garnishee by Marilyn Carducci is a formal objection only. All interested parties were in court, including Marilyn Carducci, and were represented by counsel; res judicata would preclude an illicit second action such as garnishee anticipates. Cohen v. Schlossberg, 17 Ill. App. 2d 320, 150 NE2d 218.
The judgment for $25,000, with interest thereon from May 4, 1961, in favor of Anna M. Gass and against the garnishee, is affirmed and the judgment for $7,000 in favor of George W. Gass and against the garnishee is reversed.
Judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part.
FRIEND and BRYANT, JJ., concur.
SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION ON MOTION TO MODIFY AND CLARIFY OPINION
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court:
Appellees filed a motion in this court on November 20, 1964 to modify and clarify an opinion filed by this court on October 27, 1963, General Number 49424. Jurisdiction of this court in this matter is predicated upon Ill Rev Stats 1963, chap 77, §§ 82, 83 and 84, which permits the filing of a motion to vacate or *402b modify any judgment, order or decree within 30 days of its rendition.
Appellees suggest that the part of the opinion affirming the judgment in favor of Anna M. Gass and reading "The judgment for $25,000, with interest thereon from May 4, 1961, in favor of Anna M. Gass and against the garnishee, is affirmed ..." be modified to read "The garnishment judgment in favor of Anna M. Gass for $25,000, with interest from May 4, 1961 on the entire judgment of $50,000 against the garnishee's insured, is affirmed ...," in accordance with the judgment of the trial court.
The garnishee's contract of insurance reads in part:
"... As respects the insurance afforded by the other terms of this policy under coverages A and B the company shall: ... pay all expenses incurred by the company, all costs taxed against the insured in any such suit and all interest accruing after entry of judgment until the company has paid, tendered or deposited in court such part of such judgment as does not exceed the limit of the company's liability thereon; ..."
[13] The Illinois Supreme Court, interpreting an insurance contract clause consisting of wording identical to the above provision in the case of River Valley Cartage Co., Inc. v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 17 Ill. 2d 242, 161 NE2d 101, held that such wording obligated the insurance company to pay interest on the entire judgment rendered against its insured, rather than merely on that part of the judgment for which the insurance company is liable under its limits of liability clause, until such time as the company pays, tenders or deposits into court such part of the judgment which it is obligated to pay under the terms of the contract. The River Valley case is clearly determinative of the question as to the amount of interest *402c to be paid by the garnishee insurance company herein under the terms of its contract.
Secondly, it has been brought to the court's attention that the garnishee herein tendered the sum of $29,406.23 to the appellees on November 20, 1964. Appellees maintain that this was not a proper tender so as to toll the running of the interest on the judgment, for the reason that appellees "were not informed that a tender would be made which was contrary to law and contrary to the undisputed agreement of the parties in the trial court." Whether there was a proper tender to stop the accrual of interest after November 20, 1964 should be decided by the trial court because the problem arose subsequent to the appeal.
The last paragraph of the opinion is modified to read that the garnishment judgment in favor of Anna M. Gass for $25,000, with interest from May 4, 1961, on the entire judgment of $50,000 against the garnishee's insured, is affirmed and the judgment for $7,000 in favor of George W. Gass and against the garnishee is reversed. The mandate is recalled and withdrawn and a new mandate will issue.

=== CASE 9739992 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:20.955565+00 ===

Pfaff, J.
The appellant, William David Johnson, was charged with having committed an act of delinquency, adjudged to be a juvenile delinquent, and committed to the Indiana Boys’ School. A motion for new trial was overruled, and this appeal follows.
It is argued that the court did not acquire jurisdiction of the person of the minor or of his parents; that there was a failure to issue or serve summons upon the minor or his parents, and that there was no waiver thereof.
The petition was filed by the Probation Officer on May 9, 1963, alleging that the act was committed on May 6, 1963. Said petition set forth, among other matters, that the minor was in the care and custody of his mother and father, stating their names and addresses, and asked that summons be issued requiring them to appear. Trial was had on the following day.
Section 9-3209, Burns’ 1956 Replacement, provides as follows:
“After a petition shall have been filed and after such further investigation as the court may direct, unless the parties hereinafter named shall voluntarily appear, the court shall issue a summons reciting briefly the substance of the petition, and requiring the person or persons who have the custody or control of the child to appear personally and bring the child before the court at a time and place stated----- ” (Emphasis supplied)
It is further provided by §9-3210, Burns’ 1956 Replacement :
“ ... It shall be sufficient to confer jurisdiction if service is effected at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time fixed in the summons for the return thereof.”
*530The principal question presented is whether the court acquired jurisdiction of the person. No question is presented as to the court’s jurisdiction of the subject matter or of the particular case.
While the record in this case is not as clear as it might be, appellee does not seriously dispute the fact that no summons was ever issued or served.
The Supreme Court in Harris et ux. v. Souder, Supt., etc. (1954), 233 Ind. 287, 290, 119 N. E. 2d 8, has ruled upon the effect of the absence of the issuance and service of summons in the following language:
“ ... As parents, they had an interest in the custody and welfare of their child, and in the absence of waiver or statutory exceptions, without summons the court acquired no jursidiction over the juvenile or his parents. In Ford v. State (1952), 122 Ind. App. 315, 104 N. E. 2d 406, the Appellate Court held that lack of notice under §9-3209, Burns’ . . . made the judgment void. We agree with this construction.”
In the case before us, the court’s entry on the date of trial contains the following:
“Comes now the Court, William David Johnson a juvenile is present in Court and accompanied by his father, William Johnson and represented by an attorney, Wayne Thornburg, a member of this bar.”
It will be noted from the wording of the entry that the minor, and not his father, was the one represented by an attorney. The record proper shows nothing as to the presence of the mother, but the bill of exceptions containing the evidence discloses that she was called and testified as a defense witness.
Appellee argues that there was such jurisdiction of the person in view of the actual presence of the minor and his parents and the fact that no objection was made *531in any manner contesting such jurisdiction; that there was a voluntary appearance and any error was hot prejudicial in view of such presence. Appellee quotes at length from Watson, etc. v. Dept. of Public Welfare (1960), 130 Ind. App. 659, 165 N. E. 2d 770, but that case differs from the present one in that there a summons was actually issued and served (though it may have been defective) and the sole parent was not only present in court but came with an attorney who entered his appearance for such parent. Neither does the case of In Re Pierson (1943), 114 Ind. App. 195, 51 N. E. 2d 91, aid appellee. There a summons was issued for both the minor and his parents, and trial was had less than twenty-four hours after service, but at the time specified in the summons. The opinion does not disclose any failure to serve the summons. The court found that there was a voluntary consent to proceed with the matter without delay.
The principles which control our decision in the present case are set forth by the Supreme Court in the case of Eaton, Treasurer v. Union County National Bank (1895), 141 Ind. 159, 40 N. E. 693, and the cases there cited. The Supreme Court at page 163 said:
“ ... As said in Kuntz v. Sumption, 117 Ind. 1: 'A man may be subpoenaed as a witness in an action pending against him, but unless he is summoned or notified as a party, under some law authorizing a summons or notice, the proceedings are utterly void.’ With no knowledge of the pendency of proceedings against him, the presence of a defendant in open court and his responses to inquiries by the court do not constitute an appearance. Merkee v. City of Rochester, 20 N. Y. Supreme, 157.
“The presence in court of one who is not served with process can not be regarded as a waiver of the notice required by law, without some . step or action on his part signifying a willingness that the question tendered by the *532complainant may be submitted to and determined by the court. ‘There must be some formal entry, or plea, or motion, or official act to constitute an appearance.’ McCormack v. First National Bank, etc. 53 Ind. 466; Scott v. Hull, 14 Ind. 136.”
An appearance must constitute a part of the record, and whether there is an appearance must be determined from the record. McCormack v. The First National Bank of Greensburgh et al. (1876), 53 Ind. 466; Scott and Another v. Hull and Others (1860), 14 Ind. 136. As this court said in Newton, Administrator v. Pence (1894), 10 Ind. App. 672, 677, 38 N. E. 484:
“ ... It can not be said to constitute an appearance for the record to recite merely that ‘now come the defendants.’ ”
Based upon the above authorities, we conclude that there was no appearance by the minor’s parents in this case and no waiver of the issuance and service of summons, and the court therefore lacked jurisdiction of the person.
We need not decide the effect of the failure to serve summons upon the minor, but do note the following dictum in Harris et ux. v. Souder, Supt., etc., supra, at p. 292:
"... In the absence of express statutory authority, neither the infant, nor his guardian ad litem, can waive issuance and service of process, nor may either admit an issue against the infant in a suit at law or in equity____”
See also annotation in 90 ALR 2d 293.
Judgment reversed.
Kelley, P. J., concurs, Mote, J., concurs in result.
Hunter, J., concurs in result with opinion to follow.

=== CASE 9739993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:20.961329+00 ===

*533Concurring Opinion.
Hunter, J.
I concur only in the result reached in the main opinion and agree that the judgment should be reversed. However, I believe there are questions in this appeal that are not recognized by the main opinion that should be discussed by this court. The reasons are therefor discussed at length hereinafter.
Some of the matters discussed here are not presented by the appellant in a precise manner and ordinarily this court does not search the record for reversal. Nevertheless, where the interests of minors are involved, we are permitted to do so. McCord v. Bright (1909), 44 Ind. App. 275, 87 N. E. 654. Also, the above rule is supported in Flanagan, Wiltrout and Hamilton, Indiana Trial and Appellate Practice, §2783, at p. 363 which states:
“While the court is not required to search the record for errors it is not so restricted that it must close its eyes to what is clearly before it. (citing John’s Cash Furniture Stores v. Mitchell (1955), 126 Ind. App. 231, 125 N. E. 2d 827, transfer denied 2/20/58; Franklin v. Hunt (1961), 132 Ind. App. 575, 178 N. E. 2d 464.)”
The present juvenile statute as amended was adopted originally in 1945 and sets forth the procedural steps necessary to bring an alleged delinquent child before a juvenile court. The section of the statute relative to information, investigation and petition as amended by the Acts of 1959 is found in Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated (1964 Cumulative Pocket Supplement) and reads as follows:
§9-3208 “Information — Investigation — Petition. Any person may and any peace officer shall give to the court information in his possession that there is within the county or residing within the county, *534a dependent, neglected or delinquent child. Thereupon, the court shall, as far as possible, make preliminary inquiry to determine whether the interest of;the public or of the child require that further action be taken. Whenever practicable such inquiry shall include a preliminary investigation of the home and environmental situation of the child, his previous history and the circumstances of the condition alleged and if the court shall determine that formal jurisdiction should be acquired, shall authorize a petition to be filed by the probation officer. : . . . Such petition shall be verified and shall contain a statement of the facts constituting such dependency, neglect or delinquency as defined in ■this act (%%9-3201 — 9-3225) . . . (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §8, p. 1724; 1959, ch. 76, §1, p. 155.)” (my emphasis)
Further, the juvenile act provides relative to the matters of summons — notice—custody of child in Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, 1956 Replacement §§9-3209 and 9-3210 as follows:
§9-3209 “Sumons — Notice — Custody of child. —After a petition shall have been filed and after such further investigation as the court may direct, unless the parties hereinafter named shall voluntarily appear, the court shall issue a summons reciting briefly the substance of the petition, and requiring the person or persons who have the custody or control of the child to appear personally and bring the child before the court at a time and place stated...
If it appears that the child is in such condition or surroundings that his welfare requires that his custody be immediately assumed by the court, the judge may cause to be endorsed upon the summons an order that the officer serving the same shall at once take the child into custody. (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §9, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis)
§9-3210 “Service of summons. — Service of summons shall be made personally by the delivery of attested copies thereof to the persons summoned: Provided, That if the judge is satisfied that it is *535impracticable to personally serve such summons^ or the notice provided for in the preceding section (§9-3209), he may order service by registered mail addressed to their last known addresses. It shall be sufficient to confer jurisdiction if service is effected at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time fixed in the summons for the return thereof .. . (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §10, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis)
Other sections of the juvenile act pertinent to the matters discussed herein are set forth as follows:
“§9-3211 Failure to obey summons — Procedure.— If any person summoned, notified or subpoenaed as herein provided shall, without reasonable cause, fail to appear in person, ... In case ... it shall be made to appear to the judge that the service . . . or the welfare of the child requires that he shall be brought forthwith into the custody of the court, a warrant may be issued against the parent or guardian, or the court may by interlocutory decree order that immediate custody of the child be taken. (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §11, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis) §9-3212. “Release of children taken into custody.— ... In every such case the officer taking the child into custody shall immediately report the fact to the court and the case shall then proceed as provided in this act. (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §12, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis)
§9-3222. “Detention of child — Place.—No child under eighteen (18) years of age shall be detained in any prison, jail or lockup, nor shall such child be brought into any police station, vehicle or other place where such child can come in contact or communication with any adult convicted of crime or under arrest and charged with crime: Provided, That a child, whose habits or conduct are deemed such as to constitute a menace to other persons, may, with the consent of the judge or chief probation officer, be placed in a jail or other place of detention for adults, but in a room or ward separate from adults: . . . (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §22, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis)
*536For the purpose of clarity, the only court entries that appear in the record as revealed by the transcript are as follows:
“ ... on the 9th day of May, 1963, the said William F. Lawler, Jr. Prosecuting Attorney for Madison County Circuit Court, filed an affidavit in this behalf, ...” and which striking the caption reads as follows:
“AFFIDAVIT FOR DELINQUENCY NO. 9061-J
Robert G. Simmons, Probation Officer for Madison County, Indiana respectfully represents to the Court as follows:
That said child was born on or about the 16th day of April 1947.
That the father of said child is William Johnson, and the mother of said child is Ruth Johnson, residing at 803 West 17th Street, Anderson, Indiana (and that the person having custody, control, supervision or guardianship of said child is William & Ruth Johnson, residing at 803 W. 17th St., Anderson, Indiana, in Madison County, Indiana.)
That said child did unlawfully commit an act of delinquency in this:
(1) That said juvenile did on or about the 6th day of May 1963, in a rude and insolent manner, unlawfully touch the person of Deloris McCotry, age 13, and did remove her clothing, fondle and caress her body with intent to gratify sexual desire.
contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided.
WHEREFORE, your Petitioner prays that summons issue to the said parents or Guardian of said child, requiring them and the child to appear before the Juvenile Court and show cause why said child should not be dealt with, pursuant to the Juvenile Court laws of the State of Indiana; and that the Court shall hear and determine the matters herein set forth, and shall enter such judgment and orders as the Court may deem best, and as will *537best serve the welfare of said child and the citizens of this community and the State of Indiana.
ROBERT G. SIMMONS
Robert G. Simmons, Probation Officer
Subscribed and sworn to before me, this 9th day of May, 1963.
My Term expires December 31,1966
RICHARD E. KREEGAR,
Richard E. Kreegar, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney”
“ . . . on the 10th day of May, 1963, the following proceedings were had, ...” and which striking the caption reads as follows:
‘Comes now the Court, William David Johnson a juvenile is present in Court and accompanied by his father, William Johnson and represented by an attorney, Wayne Thornburg, a member of this bar.
Comes now the Court and this cause in (sic) submitted and the evidence is heard. The Court now finds that William David Johnson is a juvenile delinquent and he is sentenced to the custody of the Board of Trustees of the Indiana Boys School, until discharged by law/ ”
At most the “affidavit of delinquency” could only be construed as a verified information. Also, it is readily apparent after even a casual reading of the record as above set forth, that there is a complete absence of court entries from the filing of the affidavit (or information) on the 9th day of May, 1963 to the hearing and findings of May 10, 1963. There is clearly a hiatus in the record as no entries appear between the original filing of the affidavit (or information) and the child’s subsequent appearance before the court and consequent hearing and findings.
Burns’ §9-3208, supra, clearly indicates that certain steps must be taken by the court between a presenta*538tion of “information” concerning a child’s alleged acts of delinquency and a hearing to determine the same, even assuming that the affidavit as filed constitutes the “information” as contemplated by the statute. On the record in this cause, the hiatus is exemplified by the omission of the following procedural steps required by said section:
(1) There is no record of a preliminary inquiry to determine whether further action should be taken by the court;
(2) there is no record that any preliminary investigation was made prior to such an inquiry relevant to the home, the environmental situation, previous history and the circumstances of the alleged delinquency; and
(3) there is no record that the court made any determination that it should acquire formal jurisdiction over said child.
Further, there is non-compliance with said section in that there are no facts appearing of record that the court ever authorized or directed the Probation Officer to file a verified petition containing a statement of the facts constituting the alleged act or acts of delinquency. Although the main opinion apparently refers to the affidavit (or information) as the “petition”, it is my opinion that it should not be so construed. Cursory examination of the affidavit (or information) filed in this cause reveals that in the body thereof it is drawn in the style of an affidavit charging a criminal offense.1 This is the only pleading filed with the court and presumably the subsequent hearing was based upon such *539filing. Clearly, such a proceeding is not within the purview of the Juvenile Act.
The principal question presented by the appellant in this appeal relates to the court’s alleged failure to acquire jurisdiction over said child in that there was no summons issued. In response to this question, the appellee stresses the point that the voluntary appearance (so characterized) by the child and his father on May 10, 1963, constituted a waiver of the issuance and service of summons. However, since it is my view that there was no petition filed there could be no voluntary appearance that would confer jurisdiction over said child pursuant to Burns’ §9-3209, supra. The facts concerning the alleged voluntary appearance are interesting, to say the least. The record indicates that the child William David Johnson was apprehended and taken into immediate custody by the police on May 6, 1963, and first transported to the juvenile detention center where he was questioned at some length and then removed to the county jail. On May 10 while still in the custody of the sheriff, he was taken to court. There seems to be very few of the aspects of a so-called “voluntary appearance”. In this regard it should be borne in mind that there is nothing appearing of record that would justify the child’s incarceration in the county jail. Moreover, there is nothing in the record indicating the court ordered immediate custody. Summons was never ordered issued nor any notice ordered by mail in lieu thereof, consequently there is no record, and indeed there could be none made by the court authorizing the apprehension and the immediate taking into custody of said child. In fact, the appellee admitted both in oral argument and in the reply brief filed that no summons or notice was ever issued or served. No petition having been ordered by court and none having been filed, it necessarily fol*540lows that there could be no voluntary appearance for such an appearance could only be made after the filing of a verified petition. The statute is clear that after the filing of the petition, a summons or notice by mail shall be issued by the court for said child and his parents, unless there shall have been a voluntary appearance made. Burns’ §9-3209, supra.
The act establishing juvenile courts in our state and outlining the procedures to be followed creates special statutory proceedings and the provisions of the statute must be followed. Board of Childrens Guardians of Marion County v. Gioscio (1936), 210 Ind. 581, 585, 4 N. E. 2d 199; Shupe v. Bell et al. (1957), 127 Ind. App. 292, 141 N. E. 2d 351; Ford v. State (1952), 122 Ind. App. 315, 104 N. E. 2d 406.
§9-3207 clearly states in part as follows:
“A person subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court under this act 9-3201 et seq. may be brought before it by either of the following means and no other.” (my emphasis)
“a. By petition praying that the person be adjudged delinquent...”
The only exception authorized by statute is in the proviso added by amendment in 1959 to §9-3208, supra, which permits the county welfare department to file petitions asking for wardship of dependent and neglected children.
§9-3208, supra, implements §9-3207, supra. The legislative implementation is clear and specific. In a construction of the above two sections this court stated:
“It was the intent of the legislature in such cases as the one before us that if the Judge of the Juvenile Court believed there was in his county, a delinquent . . . child and that he further believed that formal jurisdiction should be acquired, the *541court shall authorize a petition to he filed by the probation officer of the court, and no one else,” Shupe v. Bell, supra, (my emphasis)
It is therefore clear that the filing of such petition may only be ordered by the court. Likewise the intent of the legislature is equally clear that there can be no ultimate action by the court except by the information first being given to the court. Consequently, the initial step necessary to invoke the jurisdiction of the court is the information. This court has previously decided in construing §9-3208, supra, that it authorizes an investigation to determine:
(1) Whether a petition alleging delinquency shall be filed;
(2) whether further action shall be taken, and
(3) whether the court shall proceed to a trial of the question. Kessler v. Williston (1947), 117 Ind. App. 690, 75 N. E. 2d 676.
Further, this court has stated it was the intent of the legislature in matters of delinquency that the court must first believe and determine that it shall acquire formal jurisdiction and then by proper order authorize and direct the filing of a verified petition by the probation officer and no one else. Shupe v. Bell, supra.
The act clearly indicates that jurisdiction shall be acquired in a special way and therefore a strict compliance with its provisions particularly as to commencement and notice, must be adhered to. Shupe v. Bell, supra; 82 C. J. S., Statutes §395, pp. 945-946 supports the above rule in the following way:
“ ... Statutes which take away, change or diminish fundamental rights, statutory remedies for rights unknown to the common law, and statutes which provide new and extraordinary remedies, must be *542construed strictly both as to the cases embraced within their terms and as to . . . methods to be pursued” (my emphasis)
Statutory requirements have been held to be jurisdictional for more than one hundred years in Indiana. Borders v. Williams (1900), 155 Ind. 36, 38, 57 N. E. 527; Farlow v. Hougham (1882), 87 Ind. 540; Albee v. May (1846), 8 Blackford 310.
Brown on Jurisdiction, 2d Edition, p. 19, §3a enunciates this rule:
“If the jurisdiction of the court is derived from statutory authority, in a proceeding not in accordance with the ordinary proceedings of the common law ... in such cases the rule is more strict, and the facts conferring jurisdiction must appear of record.” (my emphasis)
It is readily apparent why the special procedure in all aspects outlined in the statutes must be carefully and scrupulously followed. Proceedings under the act are civil in nature, yet they are not triable by jury. Such proceedings are summary in character and often are conducted in chambers, the records are made upon special minute dockets and are recorded by the clerk of the court in separate and special order books, the proceedings and records are confidential in nature and not open to the public except upon order of the court. Shupe v. Bell, supra; Marion County Board of Childrens Guardians v. Gioscio, supra; State ex rel. Bryant et al. v. Warrick Circuit Court (1953), 232 Ind. 655, 115 N. E. 2d 742.
The Supreme Court of Indiana has recognized that the duty to follow statutory provisions is most clear as to the courts. It has been said that:
*543"... to the judicial department as the most conservative of all the coordinate branches of government, is entrusted the high duty of declaring and enforcing the law as it exists and upon the officers of that department rests, more strongly than upon the officers of other departments, the solemn obligation to unwaveringly abide by the established principles of law ...” Board of Childrens Guardians v. Gioscio, supra; citing Robertson v. State (1887), 109 Ind. 79, 10 N. E. 582.
“No facts appear of record in this case to indicate the court’s compliance with essential provisions of the Act from commencement to commitment. Therefore, the commitment of the child, William David Johnson, as a delinquent is clearly void. Harris et ux. v. Souder, Supt., etc. (1954), 233 Ind. 287, 290, 119 N. E. 2d 8; Board of Children's Gdns. of Marion Co. v. Gioscio, supra; Ford v. State, supra.”
It seems imperative that some comment should be made upon the lack of guidelines for the trial courts under the case law of Indiana relevant to the present Juvenile Court Act of 1945 as amended. It should be recognized that under the former Juvenile Court Act of 1903 as amended, the case law tended toward the rule that all procedural steps necessary to sanction a juvenile trial court’s ultimate jurisdiction, judgment and disposition were presumed to have been followed in the absence of a clear showing to the contrary. See In Re Pierson (1943), 114 Ind. App. 195, 51 N. E. 2d 91. However, it should be recognized that the prior statutes set forth but few procedural steps; and perhaps the need for precise procedural steps was not deemed to be necessary considering the sociological problems of that era.
The modern problems of delinquency must be discussed in a context of conflicting but progressive theories. There are new causes, effects and remedies be*544ing advanced. These include corrective and rehabilitative methods, as well as probation, parole and supervision as protective deterrents, instead of the “punishment-alone” theory of yesterday. The social problems of today present a different picture than before for many reasons. Therefore, this court and the trial courts should keep upper most in mind the basic principle and purpose of the modern Juvenile Act because it is geared toward these new principles. The first section of the Juvenile Act reads as follows:
§9-3201. Purpose and basic principle. — The purpose of this act (§§9-3201 — 9-3225) is to secure for each child within its provisions such care, guidance and control, preferably in his own home, as will serve the child’s welfare and the best interests of the state; and when such child is removed from his own family, to secure for him custody, care and discipline as nearly as possible equivalent to that which should have been given by his parents.
The principle is hereby recognized that children under the jurisdiction of the court are subject to the discipline and entitled to the protection of the state, which may intervene to safeguard them from neglect or injury and to enforce the legal obligations due to them and from them. (Acts 1945, ch. 356, §1, p. 1724.)” (my emphasis)
The jurisdiction for commitment of delinquent children to a state institution can only be justified on the parens patriae power of the state. 29 Ind. Law Journal 475, 481 (1954). Thus, the statute must be interpreted to conform to the principles essential for the valid exercise of that power. In furtherance of that interpretation, I would agree with the statement found in 29 Ind. Law Journal, supra, at p. 484 where it is said that:
“Parents should not be deprived of the custody of their children unless it is conclusively proved in the *545juvenile court that by reason of their incompetency the best interests of child require state intervention.”
This procedure seems to be called for in §9-3208 Burns’ as amended which provides in part that:
“ . . . inquiry shall include a preliminary investigation of the home and environmental situation of the child...”
In addition, under Burns’ §9-3201, a basic principle of this act is “ ... to secure for each child . . . such care, guidance and control preferably in his own home ...” The omission of a preliminary investigation into the home, as seen in this case, is most serious because in addition to violating the Act, it deprives such, child of a right to which he is entitled. In this light, it has been stated that fair treatment must be accorded in such proceedings, and the omission of inquiry into the home and environment might be a violation of. such fair treatment requirement. Pee v. United States (C.A. D.C. 1959), 274 F. 2d 556, 559.
It is agreed that proper administration of justice requires that juvenile courts should efficiently and speedily dispose of pending matters of delinquency as fairly and justly as possible by orderly judicial process. However, this must be accomplished within the procedural framework of the statutes. Such a disposition is not only commendable, it is also a necessity. Nevertheless, such a process should not lead us to condonation by way of judicial affirmance, of undue haste and precipitancy in dispositions of pending matters. Where the courts’ jurisdiction of cases does extend to children “the legal obligations due to them” as a “basic purpose and principle” is inviolate. It is only by a demonstrative devotion to such purposes and principles that the juris*546diction conferred upon juvenile courts may be justified in law.
Therefore, no matter how strongly the judge or the public may emotionally be impelled, no matter how much the ultimate judgment of the court may be justified upon evidence prematurely and illegally obtained, no matter how impatient the public or the judge may be with the frustration of momentary delays occasioned by compliance with orderly judicial process under the law, our courts at all levels must declare clearly and unequivocally that all of the legal obligations due such children and all of the protective safeguards for their “welfare and best interests” as well as those of “the state” shall be adhered to strictly. The principles of such an important and basic statutory provision cannot be cast aside; nor can any straying from the legislative guideposts be justified under a guise of “state paternalism”, for juvenile court procedure has not been so socialized, nor does the Act contemplate that individual rights are so diminished. In Re Coyle (1951), 122 Ind. App. 217, 101 N. E. 2d 192.
Lest we be considered to be devoted to a so-called enlightened position of “molly-coddling” or “wrist-slapping”, we hasten to state that; Jurisdiction by any court can never be attained when there is non-compliance with the governing statute; nor can jurisdiction be asserted upon the whim or caprice of the judge of the court; nor should jurisdiction and ultimate commitment depend upon a hearsay report by a probation officer or a social worker. Therefore, the ultimate disposition should be based upon the fair treatment under the law. Pee v. United States, supra, at p. 559. In the matter before us, it would appear that such tenet has not been followed.
*547In order to affirm the trial court in this cause we would in effect lend judicial sanction to the old axiom that “the end must justify the means”. This we cannot and should not do.
For all of the foregoing reasons, I believe that this cause should be reversed.
Note.—Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 895.
. The “affidavit for delinquency” filed by the Prosecuting Attorney might be considered to be a proper information preparatory to a waiver of jurisdiction over the subject child from the Juvenile Court to a court of criminal jurisdiction.

=== CASE 9739994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:22.746375+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court. This is an appeal from a judgment of $277.30 entered against the defendant, Hospital Service Corporation, on February 18, 1963, in the Municipal Court of Chicago; and from a judgment of $61 entered against the defendant, Illinois Medical Service, on February 18, 1963, in the Municipal Court of Chicago. Claims for interest were denied in each case. The defendants are commonly known as Blue Cross and Blue Shield respectively. Both judgments were in favor of plaintiff, Marian Erickson; and since both judgments arise out of claims associated with the same illness, the cases have been consolidated.  We are called upon to determine whether plaintiff received “hospital service” within the meaning of and as defined in her Blue Cross certificate, and, again, whether Miss Erickson received “general medical care” in a hospital as defined by her Blue Shield certificate. The pertinent section of the Blue Cross certificate reads: “I(o). ‘Hospital service’ means receiving a member who has been referred by a physician into a Plan hospital only as a bed patient in a room containing accommodations for two, but not more than four, bed patients, if available, and providing care for all types of cases, whether acute, chronic or pre-existing conditions, when necessary to and concurrent with service for conditions requiring and receiving hospital bed care. It includes such service during the basic and supplemental periods, provided the member is under the care and treatment of a physician and as long as the physician declares that such service is necessary ...” (Emphasis supplied.) The pertinent section of the Blue Shield certificate reads: “111(C)(1) If the medical treatment of a beneficiary shall require, and such beneficiary shall receive, three or more consecutive days of hospital bed care, the Plan will pay the attending participating physician the amount of his fee for each visit limited to one visit per day, . . .” (Emphasis supplied.) Plaintiff, Marian Erickson, suffered from acute rhinitis for which she had been unsuccessfully treated by her physician, Dr. Randolph, for fourteen years. Acute rhinitis is a nasal condition marked by acute congestion of mucous membrane of the nose, dryness, increased mucous secretion, impeded respiration and some pain. On July 9, 1959, Dr. Randolph found the rhinitis condition unchanged and discovered that there was almost complete nasal obstruction, plaintiff only occasionally being able partially to breathe through one side of her nose. Under the direction of Dr. Randolph she was admitted to Swedish Covenant Hospital on August 2, 1959, where she remained until August 19, 1959. Treatment during this period consisted of a five-day fast, during which she was allowed only spring water to drink and salt in moderation, but no foods. Following the fast, she was given one food at a time and observed for evidence of reaction. After being tested with fifteen foods in the order of probability associated with rhinitis, she was given a diet of uncommon foods selected from the market because of their known content of insecticide residues and other chemical additives and contaminants. As a result of these tests Miss Erickson was advised to avoid foods that are notoriously chemically contaminated by spray residues or phenolic resin lining of tin cans, fumigated foods, and other chemically contaminated foods. Miss Erickson’s condition has improved since her hospitalization. Dr. Randolph believed that hospitalization was required in order to obtain controllable environmental factors. Treatment on an out-patient basis had in the past been largely unsuccessful. It was also required because acute emergencies sometimes arise in the course of fasting, with nausea and vomiting occurring in about ten per cent of the patients and with one-half of these cases requiring intravenous feedings. Other reactions which Dr. Randolph testified were common in testing of this nature were dehydration, tendencies to become stuporous, passing out, asthma, hives, eczema, headache and depressions. Defendants offered no evidence oral or documentary before the lower court. On appeal they urge that during Miss Erickson’s stay in the hospital she received none of the services commonly understood to be components of “bed care.” She was able to walk about as she pleased; care for her own personal hygiene; took and recorded her own pulse; and did not receive any medications. The key to appellants’ argument concerns the definition of “hospital service” under the Blue Cross certificate. This in turn depends upon the meaning of “bed patient” and “bed care” as used in the definition. No case has defined these terms. Appellants suggest that the term “confined to bed” has been defined and that we should adopt that definition by implication. In Lewis v. Liberty Industrial Life Ins. Co., 166 So 143 (La, 1936), a case in which the curatrix of an insane woman sought to collect disability insurance for a period during which she was confined in a state hospital, the court had occasion to define the term “necessarily confined to bed.” In determining that the present disability was outside of that term, the court said at 145: “Buling Case Law, vol 14, p 1318, reads: £A requirement that the insured be confined to his bed also means that the insured must be substantially bed-ridden.’ ” (( “In the instant case the insured has at no time been confined to her bed as a result of her affliction. . . .” In Interstate Life & Accident Co. v. Spurlock, 16 Tenn App 250, 64 SW2d 75 (1933), where a blind man attempted to recover under a policy providing “by reason of illness necessarily confined to bed,” the court in denying liability stated the following at 78: “In the policy in the case at bar it is provided that weekly benefits for sickness, where £the insured has been, by reason of illness, necessarily confined to his bed and there visited professionally by a duly licensed and practicing physician,’ shall be paid by the company. Under this provision, three things must concur to enable the insured to recover: (1) Illness, (2) confinement to the bed, and (3) there be visited professionally by a physician. By no stretch of the imagination can it be said that plaintiff was confined to his bed. To come within the policy, he must be confined to his bed the greater part of the time every day during his illness. 6 Cooley’s Briefs on Insurance (2d Ed) 5550. . . .” In Washington Nat. Ins. Co. v. Curry, 97 SW2d 525 (Tex Civ App 1936), where a man blinded as a result of an accident sought compensation under a policy with a “confined to bed” clause, the court stated at 526: “. . . The illness disability provision of the policy is conditioned, among other things, that the insured shall be ‘under the care of a physician and necessarily confined to bed.’ The clause ‘confined to bed’ in such cases must not be given a literal construction. It is evident, we think, that the clause means that, the disability by reason of illness must reach that extent and be that severe, as ordinarily the party afflicted would be confined to bed. The term ‘confined to bed’ evidently depicts only the extent of the illness, an evidentiary condition, and should not be literally applied by a court or jury.” The three above cases all interpret one phrase and yet they do not reach substantial accord on its meaning. The cases do agree however: (1) that the facts of the case determine the particular application; (2) that the contract of insurance should not be extended by implication; (3) where two meanings are ascertainable in their “plain, ordinary and popular sense” the policy will be construed in favor of the insured. The cases cited by both parties here, of course, echo these same rules. The term “hospital bed care” on its face is not as limited as “confined to bed.” Appellants would have us hold that there are certain services inherent in the term such as need for nursing aid, inability to handle personal hygiene,, inability to walk around, and need for medication. It would be impossible to spell out in a policy the limits of treatment for a particular disability, but the term “bed care” in its literal meaning does not necessarily require any of the above things. The whole phrase only implies requiring a hospital bed and being administered to therein. The term confinement as used in the above cases certainly goes further and implies a limitation of activity to the bed while in the hospital. That factor just is not present in the term which we are construing either expressly or by implication. It is apparent that the intention of the parties to the contract was to leave to the doctor a good deal of discretion in determining when hospital service was necessary and required and what the limits of that service should be. In this case Dr. Randolph unsuccessfully treated the plaintiff for many years. He then placed her in the hospital as a bed patient and treated and observed her intensively with substantially the same procedures which he had used through the years. He testified that this was necessary and he explained why the results which he obtained in the hospital were satisfactory where his previous efforts had failed. Because one doctor cures by medication while another cures by determining allergies should have no effect on the term “bed care” so long as both methods are recognized medical practices and some of the treatments are required to and did occur in bed. The defendant drew the document construed here and it did not seek to limit its liability beyond this point. We believe that the plaintiff received “bed care” within the clear meaning of the definition of “hospital service” as spelled out in the Blue Cross certificate. In construing the term “general medical care” under the Blue Shield certificate we run into substantially the same problem with the term “hospital bed care.” The above reasoning also applies. The plaintiff was required to be hospitalized by her doctor, she was assigned to a bed within the meaning of the term in the policy and received some of the treatments for which she was hospitalized while in bed and under the direction of her doctor. She has received “hospital bed care” within the terms of the Blue Shield certificate.  During the course of the proceedings plaintiff introduced evidence over objection that two other patients in plaintiff’s room became nauseous, vomited and were given intravenous feedings during the course of plaintiff’s fasting period. Defendants maintain that such evidence was irrelevant and improper because not related to proof of plaintiff’s claim under either certificate. We disagree. Plaintiff had to show that Dr. Bandolph required her to receive “bed care.” Over objection Dr. Bandolph testified that acute emergencies often occur in the course of fasting and that this was one reason that Miss Erickson was required to be hospitalized. To bolster this argument plaintiff showed that two women, who, although not suffering from rhinitis, were fasting in a program similar to hers, were nauseous, vomited and required intravenous feedings. This was not at all collateral hut was directly related to an essential element of plaintiff’s case. If this testimony were offered to show that the plaintiff herself suffered similar reactions or to imply such a thing it would not have been admissible. Sanitary Dist. of Rockford v. Johnson, 343 Ill 11, 174 NE 862 (1931) and Missouri & Illinois Coal Co. v. Reichert, 119 Ill App 148 (1905), cited by defendants, both lay down principles applicable to cases of this latter type.  The plaintiff has asked for interest on her judgment in accordance with the terms of the Interest Act (Ill Rev Stats c 74, § 2). It is clear that an insurance policy is a written instrument within the meaning of the interest statute. See Lewis Mach. Co. v. Aztec Lines, 172 F2d 746, 750 (1949). She should receive her interest at the statutory rate unless its running has been otherwise tolled. Plaintiff’s ex-Mbit (4) was a copy of a bill paid tbe hospital by plaintiff on October 7, 1959. Exhibit (5) is a copy of a bill paid to Dr. Randolph on October 8, 1959. Plaintiff should not have been required to pay these bills and she has been deprived of the use of her money for that reason. The judgment is affirmed in part and reversed in part and cause remanded with directions to enter judgment against the Hospital Service Corporation for $277.30, plus interest thereon at the rate of five (5) per cent per annum from the date of the payment by the plaintiff to the date the judgment is entered, and a judgment of $61.00, plus interest at the rate of five (5) per cent per annum against the Illinois Medical Service from the date paid by the plaintiff to the date the judgment is entered. Judgment affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded with directions, on rehearing. BURKE, P. J. and FRIEND, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221785 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:20.375504+00 ===

31 Ill. 2d 529 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 540
NORTHTOWN BANK OF DECATUR et al., Appellants,
v.
CONRAD F. BECKER, Director of Financial Institutions, et al., Appellees.
No. 38455.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 24, 1964.
*530 LORD, BISSELL & BROOK, of Chicago, and GIFFIN, WINNING, LINDNER & NEWKIRK, of Springfield, for appellants.
LE FORGEE, SAMUELS, MILLER, SCHROEDER & JACKSON, of Decatur, (THOMAS W. SAMUELS and E. WAYNE SCHROEDER, of counsel,) for appellee, Citizens National Bank of Decatur.
HENRY F. TENNEY and LYMAN W. HULL, both of Chicago, for amicus curiae, Illinois Bankers Association.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SCHAEFER delivered the opinion of the court:
This action was instituted to restrain the organization of three proposed banks in Decatur upon the ground that they would be branch banks in violation of the Bank Holding Company Act and the Banking Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, 16 1/2, pars. 73, 106.) The trial court granted a part of the injunctive relief sought but denied the balance. The Appellate Court dismissed the plaintiffs' appeal on the ground that no justiciable controversy existed. (45 Ill. App. 2d 112.) This court granted leave to appeal.
Certain officers, directors and employees of the Citizens National Bank of Decatur filed applications for permits to organize three state banks in Decatur. The plaintiffs, Northtown Bank of Decatur and Millikin National Bank of Decatur, competitors of Citizens, filed this action to enjoin the Director of Financial Institutions from approving the applications and from issuing charters to the proposed banks. The Director and Citizens were made defendants. The complaint further prayed that the applications be declared void and that Citizens and its officers, agents and employees be enjoined from taking further steps to obtain permits or *531 charters for the new banks. Because the names of the three proposed banks  Citizens North Decatur Bank, Citizens East Decatur Bank and Citizens South Decatur Bank  were deceptively similar to the name Citizens National Bank of Decatur, the trial court enjoined the Director from issuing permits to organize the banks under those names, but denied all other injunctive relief sought by the plaintiffs. It is from this denial of relief that plaintiffs have appealed.
The plaintiffs' position is that although it is proposed to organize three separate banks, each with a separate corporate structure, the separate corporations would actually be no more than a facade behind which Citizens will engage in branch banking. In support of this position they point out that each of the applications for a permit lists as the managing officer a different vice president of Citizens, and that the evidence shows that each of those men would continue to serve as a vice president of Citizens after the new banks were organized. They also emphasize statements made in a letter signed by the Chairman of the Board of Directors and the President of Citizens, and mailed to its depositors. The letter stated that "as affiliates of the Citizens National Bank, they [the three new banks] will have many advantages such as experienced banking management and operating efficiencies not available to most such new institutions", and that Citizens would be "strengthened by providing more convenient services to all of the people of the community through these new banks."
Because we are of the opinion that the judgment of the Appellate Court dismissing the appeal was correct, it is not necessary to discuss the evidence in detail, or to express any opinion as to whether or not operations conducted in the manner described in the letter to Citizens' depositors would violate the statutory prohibition against branch banking.
The Banking Act prescribes separate and distinct steps to be taken in the organization of a new bank. The first of these steps is the filing of an application for a permit to *532 organize. The application must be signed by at least five applicants who are residents of this state, and filed with the Director of Financial Institutions. It must contain information as to the character and financial worth of each applicant, state the name, location and proposed management of the new bank, and furnish prescribed information regarding the stock to be issued and other details of the bank's capital structure. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 109.) Section 10 of the Act provides that "Upon the filing of an application for a permit to organize, the Director shall investigate the truth of the statements therein and shall consider the proposed bank's capital structure, its future earnings prospects, and the general character of its proposed management, and * * * the Director shall not approve the application and issue a permit to organize unless he shall be of the opinion and finds: (1) That the proposed capital meets the requirements of this Act; (2) That the future earnings prospects are favorable; (3) That the general character of its proposed management is such as to assure reasonable promise of successful operation; and (4) That the name of the proposed bank is not the same as or deceptively similar to the name of any other bank then operating in this State." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 110.
If a permit to organize is granted, the applicants may proceed to obtain subscriptions to the capital stock of the bank, and when the capital and preferred stock are fully subscribed for, a meeting of subscribers is to be called for the purpose of electing directors. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 111.) The directors so elected may then proceed to qualify themselves as directors, elect one of their number president, make and adopt by-laws, appoint officers and fix their salaries, "furnish to the Director lists of the stockholders and copies of any other records the Director may require," collect stock subscriptions, and report the organization *533 to the Director. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 112.
Section 13 provides that "When the directors have organized as provided in Section 12 of this Act, and the capital stock and the preferred stock, if any, together with a surplus of not less than ten per cent of the capital, and a reserve for operating expenses of at least five per cent of the capital, shall have been all fully paid in and a record of the same filed with the Director, he shall by himself or some competent person of his appointment, make a thorough examination into the affairs of the proposed bank, and if satisfied that all the requirements of this Act have been complied with, and that no intervening circumstance has occurred to change the Director's findings made pursuant to Section 10 of this Act, * * * he shall issue a charter authorizing the bank to commence business as authorized in this Act. * * * The Director may, in his discretion, withhold the issuing of said charter when he has reason to believe that the bank is organized for any purpose other than that contemplated by this Act * * *." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 113.
When this case was heard in the trial court the applications for permits to organize the three banks were awaiting action by Conrad F. Becker, who was then Director of Financial Institutions. It appears that he had in fact decided to approve one of the applications. But the issuance of a permit to organize does not enable a proposed bank to commence business. It only authorizes the applicants to proceed with the other steps required by the Act. Nor does the issuance of a permit to organize mean that in the future a charter authorizing the bank to commence business will necessarily be granted. The decision to issue a permit to organize and the decision to issue a charter are distinct acts, and it appears that the Director so understood. In a letter to the plaintiff Northtown Bank he said that while he had *534 seen nothing "that would even sound like branch banking" during his consideration of the applications for permits to organize, "I can only advise you that we will make a thorough investigation, along with the F.D.I.C., before any of these charters are granted, but what our position will be, at this moment I am unable to determine."
Insofar as the complaint seeks to have the applications for permits to organize declared void, and to enjoin the Director and Citizens from taking any further action with regard to them, the circuit court correctly found that the plaintiffs were not entitled to injunctive relief since "there is no clear and convincing evidence that plaintiffs will be irreparably injured or damaged by the issuing of these three permits under names not deceptively similar to any other bank in the State of Illinois."
In all other respects the plaintiffs' suit is premature. At this point no permits to organize have yet been issued. No stock has been subscribed, no directors or presidents elected, no officers appointed, no by-laws adopted, and of course no reports concerning these matters have been submitted to the Director as the statute requires. Until these steps have been completed the Director can not make the thorough investigation into the affairs of the proposed banks that is required. It is only after such an investigation that he may properly determine whether the proposed banks have been "organized for any purpose other than that contemplated by" the Banking Act.
The plaintiffs have argued that unless injunctive relief may be had to prevent the issuance of a permit to organize a bank, no effective remedy is available. This proposition is based upon section 50 of the Banking Act, which provides: "Except by the authority of the Director, represented by the Attorney General, no complaint shall be filed or proceedings commenced in any court for the dissolution or for the winding up of the affairs or for the appointment of a receiver for *535 any state bank on the grounds: * * * (3) That its business is being conducted in an unlawful, fraudulent or unsafe manner." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 16 1/2, par. 150.
It is unrealistic, the plaintiffs say, to assume that the Director of Financial Institutions, who has approved the organization of a proposed bank, would subsequently institute an action challenging the legality of its operations. And since they read the statute as prohibiting the maintenance of such an action by anyone else, they argue that there is no method by which a violation of the statutory prohibitions against branch banking may be reached. What was said in People ex rel. Benefit Ass'n of Railway Employees v. Miner, 387 Ill. 393, 402, with respect to a somewhat similar provision of the Insurance Code, is, we think, a sufficient answer at the present time: "Petersen [the complaining party] may have his remedy by application to the Director of Insurance, requesting the bringing of such a suit, or correction of the evil he says exists. It cannot be presumed that the Director, upon proper showing, would refuse to take such action as may be required to remedy the situation. * * * In American Surety Co. v. Jones, 384 Ill. 222, it was held, citing People ex rel. Gosling v. Potts, 264 Ill. 522, that mandamus will lie to compel the Director of Insurance to do his duty under the statute."
The judgment of the Appellate Court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739996 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:24.131417+00 ===

Mr. Justice Daily delivered the opinion of the court: After a bench trial in the circuit court of Rock Island County, the defendant, Eagle Food Centers, Inc., was found guilty of conducting a lottery in violation of section 28 — 1(a)(7) °f the Criminal Code of 1961, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 38, par. 28 — 1(a)(7),) and was fined $200. The judgment was affirmed by the Appellate Court, (46 Ill. App. 2d 24,) and, upon defendant’s petition, we have granted leave to appeal. The single question presented is whether a cash award scheme conducted by defendant was in fact a lottery within the definition of section 28 — 2 (b) of the Code, which states: “A ‘lottery’ is any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 38, par. 28 — 2(b). The facts were stipulated and show that defendant operated 13 retail food markets in Rock Island County. In connection with this business it put into operation a “game” known as “Split the Dollar,” the format of which was as follows: Each time a person visited one of defendant’s stores he could obtain free of charge a cardboard coin which, upon being split open, revealed one of five numbers, vis., 1-2-3-6-9. When a person had collected the combination of numbers 1-9-6-2 or 1-9-6-3, he became eligible for a cash award of $1 on the first combination or $100 on the second, and was awarded such a prize provided he could answer a question correctly. More difficult questions were asked of those eligible to win the $100 award, but the record does not contain examples of either type question. It was necessary to visit one of defendant’s stores to obtain the split dollars, distribution being limited to one to each person per visit, but it was not necessary for a person to make a purchase or to pass through the check-out counter. The purchase of merchandise added nothing to the chance of winning a prize; food prices had not been raised, nor had the quantity or quality been lowered to compensate for prizes; and the money given away came from the profits of the store. The purpose of the program was to attract new customers and to stimulate more frequent visits and purchases by established trade. Prior to the adoption of the Criminal Code of 1961 there was no statutory definition of a “lottery” in this jurisdiction; however, our courts aligned themselves with the universally accepted views: (1) that there are three elements essential to the existence of a lottery, viz., chance, consideration and a prize; and (2) that there is no lottery if any one of these elements or ingredients is missing. (See: Iris Amusement Corp. v. Kelly, 366 Ill. 256, 261; Federal Communications Com. v. American Broadcasting Co. 347 U.S. 284, 291, 98 L. ed. 699, 706; 54 C.J.S., Lotteries, sec. 2a; 34 Am. Jur., Lotteries, sec. 3.) The parties here correctly agree that our statute has codified the common law, at least to the foregoing extent, and are also in accord that defendant’s promotion embodies the elements of prize and chance. Dispute arises, however, as to whether the element of consideration is present, an issue which, in turn, requires a determination of what the legislature intended when it said “* * * persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes, * * *.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 38, par. 28 — 2(b). Our statute does not define “consideration,” but courts considering lottery cases have defined it in different ways and many of those definitions are now urged upon us. As is pointed out in 54 C.J.S., Lotteries, sec. 2(c)(2), some authorities hold that the presence or absence of consideration is “measured by the usual test applicable in the law of contracts,” and hence need not be a direct monetary consideration, but “may consist of a benefit to the person conducting the scheme, or an inconvenience or disadvantage to the promisee.” (E.g., Furst v. A. & G. Amusement Co. 128 N.J.L. 311, 25 A. 2d 892; Affiliated Enterprises, Inc. v. Waller, 40 Del. 28, 5 A.2d 257. Contra: Commonwealth v. Wall, 295 Mass. 70, 3 N.E.2d 28; Yellow-Stone Kit v. State, 88 Ala. 196, 7 So. 338.) The People urge that this contract definition and concept of consideration must be read into our statute and, on this basis, contend that even though there is no direct monetary consideration paid, either the increased profits and sales enjoyed by defendant, or, (as the Appellate Court seems to have held,) the time and effort expended by customers to obtain the split dollars, is sufficient to supply the element of consideration. For our part, we do not believe the statute is susceptible of the technical construction urged. By well settled principles of law, a criminal or penal statute is to be strictly construed in favor of an accused, and nothing is to be taken by intendment or implication against him beyond the obvious or literal meaning of such statutes. (People v. Kirkrand, 397 Ill. 588; People v. Lund, 382 Ill. 213.) This is so, according to Sutherland, Statutory Construction, 2d ed., vol. II, sec. 520, because “the penal law is intended to regulate the conduct of people of all grades of intelligence within the scope of responsibility,” and it is therefore “essential to its justice and humanity that it be expressed in language which they can easily comprehend; that it be held obligatory only in the sense in which all can and will understand it.” And apart from the principle of strict construction, we are, as in the case of civil statutes, bound to the rules which require us to give effect to a legislative intention expressed in clear and unambiguous terms and forbid us from altering the plain meaning of the words employed by forced or subtle construction. Our statutory definition of a lottery, in clear and unambiguous terms, refers to persons who “have paid or promised consideration” for a chance to win a prize. Given their plain and accepted meanings, these words do not admit to a construction or comprehension that the necessary consideration may be found in benefits flowing to the promisor. Their natural purport is, rather, that the consideration must flow from the one who is given the opportunity to win a prize by chance. Similarly, we do not believe that the statutory language admits to a construction that consideration may be found in mere physical inconvenience or disadvantage to the promisee. The words “paid” and “promised” have no reference to consideration of such nature, and in our opinion contemplate money or a thing of value since, as one court has observed, the “general purpose of lottery statutes is to prevent members of the public from being cheated and defrauded of their money in return for a mere chance to receive something which may or may not be of greater value than the sum which they have invested.” Affiliated Enterprises, Inc. v. Rock-Ola Mfg. Corp. (N.D. Ill.) 23 F. Supp. 3. To borrow a phrase from Federal Communications Com. v. American Broadcasting Co. 347 U.S. 284, 294, 98 L. ed. 699, 708, where the construction of the Federal lottery statute was being considered, we believe “it would be stretching the statute to the breaking point,” to construe it as meaning to embrace the technical concepts of consideration applicable in the law of contracts. Not only would violence be done to the rule of strict construction, but, in our opinion, criminal conduct would be made to depend upon intendment and implication rather than express and understandable legislative direction. In short, if the technical concepts of consideration relied upon by the People are to prevail, the statute must read much plainer than it does and the remedy must come from the legislature rather than the courts. Based upon the language used in our statute to define a lottery, we hold that the element of consideration may not be found in the indirect benefits accruing to defendant, or in the physical efforts expended by its customers to obtain the split dollars. Under defendant’s “game” or “scheme” there was no “payment” or “promise” of money or other thing of value by any person for a chance to win. No purchase was required, and even those purchasing were required to pay nothing over and above the amount necessary to pay for merchandise actually received. The chance to win was therefore entirely free, and the necessary consideration contemplated by the statute was lacking. Accordingly, the judgments of the circuit court of Rock Island County and of the Appellate Court are reversed. Judgments reversed.

=== CASE 9739997 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:24.135633+00 ===

Mr. Justice Schaefer, dissenting. I agree that the definition of lottery in the new Criminal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 38, par. 28 — 2(b)) is a codification of the common law. It seems to me that this court’s decision under the common-law definition should therefore be considered in the present case. In Iris Amusement Corp. v. Kelly, 366 Ill. 256, the court considered a scheme called “bank night,” in which the only requirement for participation was presence outside the sponsoring motion picture theater and the holders of lucky numbers were awarded cash prizes. The court held that this scheme was a lottery. The opinion stressed that “bank night” involved all the evils of lotteries and that most people would buy tickets admitting them to the theater. The Kelly case is close to the present one. Certainly most “Split the Dollar” participants will patronize the defendant’s store. This scheme, like bank night, preys on “* * * cupidity, envy, jealousy and temptation — the very things sought to be avoided by that enlightened public policy of most of the world which has outlawed lotteries.” Iris Amusement Corp. v. Kelly, 366 Ill. at 267. The majority relies on Federal Communications Com. v. American Broadcasting Co. 347 U.S. 284, which held that radio “give-aways” which conditioned participation on listening to the program were not lotteries. But there the Court expressly distinguished schemes like the present one which requires the participant to leave his home. Apparently the Court was adopting a test based on substantial effort. (347 U.S. at 295, n. 15.) Even if the statutory definition of lottery requires more than consideration in the contractual sense, the substantial effort required in the present case fulfills the requirements for a lottery. In my opinion we should follow the Kelly case, and the judgment should be affirmed. Mr. Justice Underwood joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739998 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:26.435371+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Plaintiff fell from his bicycle and was injured when the front tire of the bicycle struck a hole in a paved bicycle path in defendant township. He sued the township, alleging liability under the highway exception to governmental immunity.
Defendant moved for summary disposition, maintaining that the bike path was not a “sidewalk” on a highway within the meaning of MCL 691.1401(e); MSA 3.996(101)(e). The circuit court granted the motion, but the Court of Appeals reversed, finding that the path is on the highway within the meaning of subsection (e) and that it qualifies as a sidewalk for purposes of the highway exception to governmental immunity.
*459We conclude that the bike path did not qualify as a “sidewalk.” Thus, governmental immunity applies, and the defendant was entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
i
On September 12, 1995, at about 4:30 P.M., plaintiff was riding his bicycle on a paved bicycle path in defendant Grand Haven Charter Township. The front tire of his bicycle struck a hole in the path, causing him to fall to the pavement. Plaintiff sustained various injuries, including a fractured arm and hip. At the site of plaintiffs fall, the eight-foot-wide path is approximately thirty feet from Lakeshore Drive within the 100-foot road right of way. Photographic exhibits in the record show the path running through wooded lots and parallel to Lakeshore Drive. The path is separated from the roadway by trees, brush, and other forms of vegetation.
Plaintiff brought this action against the township, seeking damages for his injuries. He alleged that defendant negligently maintained the bike path and that he was entitled to recover for his injuries under the highway exception to governmental immunity. MCL 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102).
Following discovery, the defendant moved for summary disposition. It argued that the highway exception did not apply because the path was located outside the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular travel. The circuit court granted the motion in an oral opinion from the bench, and then elaborated in a written opinion denying plaintiffs motion for reconsideration, explaining:
*460Plaintiff has recognized the application of governmental immunity by bringing this action under the statutory exception found in 691.1402. However, that exception does not by definition include bicycle paths. Plaintiff argues that there is no difference between a bicycle path and a sidewalk. This Court disagrees. A sidewalk is generally recognized as a paved pathway for pedestrian traffic along side a highway or street. A bike path is a paved path designed and intended for bicycle travel. The fact that bicyclists and rollerbladers may use a sidewalk or pedestrians and rollerbladers may use a bike path does not change the characteristic or purpose of either one any more than the use of a street by pedestrians, bicyclists or rollerbladers make the street a sidewalk or bike path.
This Court does tend to agree with plaintiff in principle that there does not seem much logical difference to making an immunity exception' for defective sidewalks but not bike paths that are “on any highway” as both are intended to be used for non-vehicular travel. The Legislature recognized that a distinction exists between sidewalks and bicycle paths in authorizing townships to construct both as public improvements. See MCL 41.722(l)(g) Bicycle Paths and (k) Sidewalks [MSA 5.2770(52)(l)(g), (k)]. The Legislature had the opportunity to also amend the definition of highways to include bicycle paths “on a highway” but has chosen not to.
Because the Supreme Court has ruled the immunity is broadly given with narrowly drawn exceptions it is improper for this Court to add bicycle paths to the list of exceptions.
The plaintiff appealed, and the Court of Appeals reversed.1
*461n
The highway exception to governmental immunity is found in MCL 691.1402(1); MSA 3.996(102)(1):
Each governmental agency having jurisdiction over a highway shall maintain the highway in reasonable repair so that it is reasonably safe and convenient for public travel. A person sustaining bodily injury or damage to his or her property by reason of failure of a governmental agency to keep a highway under its jurisdiction in reasonable repair, and in condition reasonably safe and fit for travel, may recover the damages suffered by him or her from the governmental agency. . . . The duty of the state and the county road commissions to repair and maintain highways, and the liability for that duty, extends only to the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular travel and does not include sidewalks, crosswalks, or any other installation outside of the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular travel.
The definition of “highway” in MCL 691.1401(e); MSA 3.996(101)(e) includes sidewalks:2
*462“Highway” means every public highway, road, and street which is open for public travel and shall include bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks, and culverts on any highway. The term highway does not include alleys, trees, and utility poles. [Emphasis added.]
The Court of Appeals noted that another panel had recently considered the meaning of the phrase “sidewalks ... on any highway” in Stabley v Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Park Authority, 228 Mich App 363; 579 NW2d 374 (1998). It involved a “hike-bike trail” that meandered through a park, in some places running parallel to the road, in others running through the wooded interior of the park, and at some points crossing the road that ran through the park. Id. at 364. The Stabley Court looked to dictionary definitions of “sidewalk”:
According to Webster’s New World Dictionary, a “sidewalk” is “a path for pedestrians, usually paved, along the side of a street.” The American Heritage Dictionary: Second College Edition defines “sidewalk” as a “walk or raised path for pedestrians along the side of a road.” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1992) defines “sidewalk” as “a usu. paved walk at the side of a roadway.” In Black’s Law Dictionary (6th ed), “sidewalk” is defined as “[t]hat part of a public street or highway designed for the use of pedestrians.” [228 Mich App 367.]
The Stabley Court also noted the definition of “sidewalk” in the Motor Vehicle Code as “that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.” MCL 257.60; MSA 9.1860. The Court noted that we have looked to definitions in the Motor Vehicle Code to interpret terms also found in the governmental immunity statute. See Roy v *463Dep’t of Transportation, 428 Mich 330; 408 NW2d 783 (1987).
The Stabley Court said that the cases have applied the highway exception where the injury is sustained on a sidewalk “adjacent” to or “along” a road. It found that the highway exception did not apply because the injury did not occur on the portion of the trail adjacent to the roadway, but rather on a portion that ran through the wooded interior of the park.
Applying Stabley, the panel in the instant case viewed the phrase “sidewalks ... on any highway” as denoting “a paved way dedicated to the use of pedestrians that runs alongside and adjacent to a public roadway and within the right of way of the roadway.” 230 Mich App 710.
The Court concluded that the basic requirements were met. The path was located within the right of way of Lakeshore Drive. At the point where plaintiff fell, the path runs alongside and adjacent to the road.
The remaining question was whether the path qualified as a sidewalk. Defendant maintained that the path was created as a bicycle path. See MCL 41.722(l)(g); MSA 5.2770(52)(l)(g) (authorizing townships to construct, maintain, and improve bicycle paths). The Court said that to the extent that the path was dedicated to the use of bicyclists and not pedestrians it would not appear to be a sidewalk. However, the hike-bike trail in Stabley was the functional equivalent of this path. The photographic exhibits show numerous footprints in the snow3 covering the bicycle path, indicating that pedestrians used it. The *464Court said that there was no indication that defendants either posted the trail for bicycle use only or restricted access to bicyclists. Since the only difference between the trail in Stabley and the instant path was the label assigned to the paths by the governmental agency having jurisdiction, the Court concluded that the path qualified as a sidewalk at the point where plaintiff was injured, and thus fell within the highway exception.
m
We have held that the highway exception is a narrowly drawn exception to a broad grant of immunity. An action may not be maintained under the highway exception unless it is clearly within the scope and meaning of the statute. Scheurman v Dep’t of Transportation, 434 Mich 619, 626-627, 630; 456 NW2d 66 (1990). Thus, in order for the plaintiff to proceed, the path on which he was injured must constitute a “sidewalk.”
It is a fundamental principle of statutory construction that the words used by the Legislature should be given their common ordinary meaning. People v McIntire, 461 Mich 147, 153; 599 NW2d 102 (1999). As the dictionary definitions of that term cited in Stabley indicate, as commonly understood, a sidewalk is a path for pedestrians along the side of a road. The Legislature has in a number of statutes distinguished between the sidewalks and bike paths, and recognized bicycle paths as a distinct category. MCL 750.419; MSA 28.651, MCL 257.679a; MSA 9.2379(1). Therefore, while a paved way’s proximity to a highway is a necessary condition for determining that it is *465a sidewalk under the highway exception to governmental immunity, it is not a sufficient condition. While the Stabley panel justifiably relied, in part, on the distance between the injury and the highway in that case to reach the right result, the panel in this case erred by concluding that the lack of such distance was dispositive. Regardless of its proximity to a highway, a bicycle path is simply not a sidewalk.
The plaintiff’s complaint in this case describes the location of the injury as a bicycle path. Where plaintiff fell, the bike path was approximately thirty feet from the roadway and separated from the road by trees and brush. At that point, the bicycle path was within the right of way of Lakeshore Drive. However, the fact that at the particular location where this injury took place was one where the bicycle path was relatively close to the road does not convert the bicycle path into a sidewalk. Nor does the fact that pedestrians sometimes walk on the path change its character.4
*466IV
Thus, we conclude that the circuit court properly ruled that the bicycle path did not come within the highway exception to governmental immunity and that the defendant was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstate the judgment of the Ottawa Circuit Court.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred.
230 Mich App 705; 584 NW2d 641 (1998).
Under MCL 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102) the duty of the state or county road commissions extends only to the improved portions of the highway designed for vehicular travel and does not include sidewalks and certain other installations. That limitation does not apply to governmental units like the defendant township.
In the context of state defendants, we have twice considered whether bicycle paths were within the highway exception, holding that they were an installation outside the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular traffic, and thus not within the exception. Gregg v State Hwy Dep’t, 435 Mich 307; 458 NW2d 619 (1990); Roy v Dep’t of Transportation, 428 Mich 330; 408 NW2d 783 (1987).
We note that the Legislature has recently amended the governmental immunity statute to limit the liability of municipalities for injuries occurring on a “sidewalk, trailway, crosswalk, or other installation” outside the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular travel. See MCL 691.1402a; MSA 3.996(102a), added by 1999 PA 205. The amendment applies to causes of action arising on or after its effective date, December 21, 1999, and thus does not apply to this case.
The photographs were taken in winter. There was no snow on the path at the time of the plaintiffs injury.
The dissent expresses concern that “municipalities might be encouraged to classify all paths as ‘bicycle paths’ to avoid liability.” Post at 469. First, there is no issue of a sham labeling in the present case. Rather, it is undisputed that the path at issue is truly a bicycle path. Indeed, plaintiff even referred to the path as a bicycle path in his complaint. Also, unlike a typical sidewalk, the present bicycle path is not continuously aligned with a particular street. While plaintiff in effect argues that a single path can be both a bicycle path and a sidewalk, our conclusion is that these are distinct and mutually exclusive legal categories. In any event, we consider it plain that the question whether a path is a “sidewalk!] • on any highway” for purposes of the statutory highway exception to governmental immunity is determined by an objective analysis of the facts, not by the labels attached by a municipality. This opinion cannot reasonably be understood as authorizing a municipality to avoid potential liability by a sham labeling of all its sidewalks as “bicycle paths.”

=== CASE 9739999 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:26.439947+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I depart from the majority’s analysis and bold conclusion that “a bicycle path is simply not a sidewalk.” Ante at 465. Instead, I believe that the Court of Appeals arrived at a reasonable conclusion and properly applied the definition of “sidewalk” used in Stabley v Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Park Authority, 228 Mich App 363; 579 NW2d 374 (1998). Accordingly, I adopt the following portion of the Court of Appeals opinion:
The highway exception is a narrowly drawn exception to the broad grant of immunity for governmental units. Scheurman v Dep’t of Transportation, 434 Mich 619, 630; 456 NW2d 66 (1990). No action may be maintained under the highway exception unless it is clearly within the scope and meaning of the statute. Id. For purposes of the highway exception, the term includes “sidewalks ... on any highway.” Thus, the narrow issue of first impression presented for our consideration is whether the bicycle path at issue is a “sidewalk” within the meaning of the highway exception to governmental immunity.1
*467A panel of this Court recently addressed the meaning of the phrase “sidewalks ... on any highway.” In Stabley v Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Park Authority, 228 Mich App 363; 579 NW2d 374 (1998), this Court was asked to determine whether a paved path designated as a “Hike-Bike Trail” that meandered through the Stoney Creek Metropolitan Park, in some places running parallel to the road, in other locations running through the wooded interior of the park, and at some points crossing the road that ran through the park, constituted a “sidewalk on any highway” for purposes of the highway exception. The Court concluded that the defendants were entitled to immunity, opining:
“According to Webster’s New World Dictionary, a ‘sidewalk’ is ‘a path for pedestrians, usually paved, along the side of a street.’ The American Heritage Dictionary: Second College Edition defines ‘sidewalk’ as a ‘walk or raised path for pedestrians along the side of a road.’ Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1992) defines ‘sidewalk’ as ‘a usu. paved walk at the side of a roadway.’ In Black’s Law Dictionary (6th ed), ‘sidewalk’ is defined as ‘[t]hat part of a public street or highway designed for the use of pedestrians.’
“Furthermore, the Supreme Court has looked to definitions set forth in the Michigan Vehicle Code to ascertain the meaning of terms shared by the Michigan Vehicle Code and the governmental immunity statute. See Roy v Dep’t of Transportation, 428 Mich 330, 338-340; 408 NW2d 783 (1987). In the Michigan Vehicle Code, the term ‘sidewalk’ is defined as ‘that portion of a street between the curb lines, or lateral lines of roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.’ MCL 257.60; MSA 9.1860.
*468“There are no published Michigan cases that expressly construe the phrase ‘sidewalks ... on any highway.’ However, the highway exception has been applied where the injury was sustained on a sidewalk ‘adjacent’ to or ‘along’ a county road. See Listanski v Canton Twp, 452 Mich 678, 682; 551 NW2d 98 (1996). Moreover, in Campbell v Detroit, 51 Mich App 34, 35-36; 214 NW2d 337 (1973), this Court determined that a sidewalk alongside a street that had been closed for some time and was being removed for an urban renewal project was not a sidewalk ‘on any highway’ because the street was not open for public travel, as required by the statutory definition of highway.
“In light of the foregoing, we conclude that linking the word ‘sidewalk’ with an adjacent road is in accord with the common and approved usage of the word. See USAA Ins Co v Houston General Ins Co, 220 Mich App 386, 391; 559 NW2d 98 (1996). Plaintiff’s fall did not occur on the portion of the trail that runs adjacent to the roadway, but rather on the portion that runs through the wooded interior of the park. Because plaintiff’s fall did not occur on a pedestrian way that ran alongside a public roadway, plaintiff’s fall did not occur on a ‘sidewalk’ within the meaning of MCL 691.1401(e); MSA 3.996(101)(e). Consequently, defendants are entitled to immunity. [Stabley, supra at 367-369.]”
Thus, pursuant to Stabley, the phrase “sidewalks ... on any highway” denotes a paved way dedicated to the use of pedestrians that runs alongside and adjacent to a public roadway and within the right of way of the roadway.
Here, the path is located within the right of way of Lake-shore Drive. At the point where plaintiff fell, the path runs alongside and adjacent to Lakeshore Drive.2 Accordingly, the path is “on any highway” within the meaning of MCL 691.1401(e); MSA 3.996(101)(e). However, the question remains whether the path qualifies as a sidewalk within the defective highway exception. According to defendant, the path was created as a bicycle path. See MCL 41.722(l)(g); MSA 5.2770(52)(l)(g) (a township is authorized to construct, maintain, and improve bicycle paths). To the extent that the path was dedicated to the use of bicyclists and not to pedestrians, the path does not appear to be a sidewalk *469within the meaning of the highway exception. Stabley, supra. Nevertheless, the “Hike-Bike Trail” in Stabley appears to be the functional equivalent of the path in this case. The photographic exhibits in the record show numerous footprints in the snow covering the bicycle path. Clearly, pedestrians as well as bicyclists use the path. There is no indication in the record that defendant either posted the trail as being for bicycle use only or restricted access to the path to bicyclists only. The only difference between the “Hike-Bike Trail” in Stabley and the instant path is the label assigned the paths by the respective governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the paths. Accordingly, we conclude that the path qualifies as a sidewalk for purposes of the highway exception at the point where plaintiff fell.3 Consequently, defendant is not entitled to immunity. Listanski, supra.
[Hatch v Grand Haven Twp, 230 Mich App 705, 708-711; 584 NW2d 641 (1998).]
The Court of Appeals in this case essentially held that simply because it was labeled a bike path did not prevent the path in question from being a sidewalk. If the label had compelling significance, municipalities might be encouraged to classify all paths as “bicycle paths” to avoid liability. This would result in an unwarranted circumscription of MCL 691.1401(e); MSA 3.996(101)(e), because sidewalk paths that are “on any highway” would no longer be “sidewalks” as defined in the statute. The Stabley definition of “sidewalk” prevents this apparent anomaly from occurring.
*470I would endorse the Stabley definition and, accordingly affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Although our Supreme Court has twice visited the question whether the highway exception extends to bicycle paths, see Gregg v State Hwy Dep’t, 435 Mich 307; 458 NW2d 619 (1990), and Roy v Dep’t of Transportation, 428 Mich 330; 408 NW2d 783 (1987), these *467opinions are inapposite because neither case addresses whether a bicycle path is a sidewalk. Instead, these cases address whether a bicycle path constitutes an installation outside the improved portion of the highway designed for vehicular traffic. The liability of the state and counties is limited under MCL 691.1402(1); MSA 3.996(102)(1) to only the improved portions of highways designed for vehicular traffic. Cox v Dearborn Heights, 210 Mich App 389, 392; 534 NW2d 135 (1995); Davis v Chrysler Corp, 151 Mich App 463, 468-469; 391 NW2d 376 (1986).
Thus, this case is factually distinguishable from Stabley, supra. In Stabley, the plaintiffs fall did not occur on the portion of the trail adjacent to the roadway, but rather on the portion of the trail that runs through the wooded interior of the defendant park.
Stabley, supra, implies that only the precise location at which an injury occurs is relevant in determining whether a given area constitutes a “sidewalk ... on any highway” for purposes of the highway exception to governmental immunity.

=== CASE 2221798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:20.700359+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 424 (1999)
238 Mich. App. 515
David SHARP, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CITY OF LANSING, Defendant-Appellee.
Docket No. 205160.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted September 14, 1999, at Lansing.
Decided November 16, 1999, at 9:00 a.m.
Order Denying November 16, 1999.
Released for Publication February 23, 2000.
*426 Hankins & Flanigan, P.C. (by Jayne M. Flanigan), Okemos, for the plaintiff.
Plunkett & Cooney, P.C. (by Mary Massaron Ross and David K. Otis), Detroit, for the defendant.
Before: TALBOT, P.J., and FITZGERALD and MARKEY, JJ.
Order Denying Special Panel November 16, 1999.
*425 ORDER
Sharp v. City of Lansing, Docket No. 205160. The November 16, 1999, opinion in this matter has been reviewed pursuant to MCR 7.215(H). A majority of the judges polled have determined that a special panel should not be convened to resolve any potential conflict with Cole v. General Motors Corp., 236 Mich.App. 452, 600 N.W.2d 421 (1999). Therefore, a special panel will not convene.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff David Sharp appeals as of right from a circuit court order granting summary disposition to defendant city of Lansing in this reverse discrimination action. Plaintiff also challenges the trial court order denying his motion for leave to file a second amended complaint. Plaintiff alleged, in his first amended complaint, that defendant violated the Civil Rights Act, M.C.L. § 37.2101 et seq.; MSA 3.548(101) et seq., and the Equal Protection Clause of the Michigan Constitution, Const. 1963, art. 1, § 2. Defendant argued below that approval of an affirmative action plan by the Michigan Civil Rights Commission acts as a "safe harbor" and insulates defendant from claims of discrimination. The trial court agreed that defendant was shielded from plaintiff's discrimination claim for hiring decisions based on the approved affirmative action plan. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
Plaintiff, a Caucasian male, filed this action in 1995. Plaintiff asserted that, each year since 1990, he had applied for a vacant position or positions as a firefighter with defendant's fire department, but that his applications were rejected because of race, sex, and national origin. In his first amended complaint, plaintiff alleged generally that defendant's hiring decisions and policies violated the Civil Rights Act and Const. 1963, art. 1, § 2, and he sought damages, injunctive relief, and employment as a firefighter. Plaintiff did not raise separate claims under the Civil Rights Act and the Michigan Constitution. Rather, plaintiff challenged defendant's rejection of plaintiff's employment applications, argued that defendant was discriminating against him, and alleged that there was no rational basis for defendant's voluntary affirmative action plan.
Defendant moved for summary disposition on the ground that it was using an approved affirmative action plan for its hiring decisions. While defendant's motion was pending, plaintiff moved for leave to file a second amended complaint to add a claim that defendant discriminated against applicants based on residency.
The trial court granted defendant's motion for summary disposition of plaintiff's claims under the Civil Rights Act and Const. 1963, art. 1, § 2 and found that there was no genuine issue of fact regarding defendant's use of the approved affirmative action plan for hiring decisions. The trial court concluded that defendant's use of an approved plan shielded defendant *427 from discrimination claims pursuant to Victorson v. Dep't of Treasury, 439 Mich. 131, 482 N.W.2d 685 (1992).[1] The trial court denied plaintiff's motion for leave to file a second amended complaint. Plaintiff's subsequent motion for rehearing or reconsideration was also denied.
In reviewing this case, we note as a threshold matter that the trial court incorrectly characterized defendant's motion for summary disposition as a "hybrid" of MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10). A motion under MCR 2.116(C)(8) tests the legal sufficiency based on the pleadings alone. Spiek v. Dep't of Transportation, 456 Mich. 331, 337, 572 N.W.2d 201 (1998). A motion under MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests the factual support for a claim and requires consideration of proofs submitted or filed in the action to determine if a genuine issue of material fact exists to warrant a trial. Spiek, supra at 337, 572 N.W.2d 201. In this case, the trial court looked beyond the pleadings and went on to conclude that plaintiff's claim failed as a matter of law, MCR 2.116(C)(8), only after finding no genuine issue of material fact, MCR 2.116(C)(10). For purposes of our review, we will treat the motion as having been decided under MCR 2.116(C)(10). Gibson v. Neelis, 227 Mich.App. 187, 190, 575 N.W.2d 313 (1997).
On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in failing to consider evidence that defendant's affirmative action plan violates the Equal Protection Clause. Plaintiff asserts that there is no evidence of past discrimination against minorities and that the plan was not narrowly tailored, does not meet its objectives, and tramples on plaintiff's rights. The trial court relied solely on Victorson, supra, as authority for granting summary disposition to defendant. Plaintiff argues that even if defendant's affirmative action plan was approved under the Civil Rights Act, M.C.L. § 37.2210; MSA 3.548(210), the plan should be subject to review under the Michigan Constitution.
Since the time of the trial court's decision in this case, a panel of this Court, in Cole v. General Motors Corp., 236 Mich. App. 452, 600 N.W.2d 421; 600 N.W.2d 421 (1999), decided that an employer is insulated from liability under the Michigan Civil Rights Act whenever it would be insulated from liability under title VII. We are required by MCR 7.215(H) to follow the rule of law set out in Cole. Because plaintiff does not challenge the constitutionality of the Civil Rights Act itself, but only the validity of defendant's affirmative action plan and the actions of defendant employer, we believe that the ruling in Cole effectively resolves plaintiff's claim in this case. Were it not for the Cole decision, however, we would reach a different result.
First, if we were working on a clean slate, we would agree with plaintiff that even an approved voluntary affirmative action plan must be subject to constitutional review. An individual's equal opportunity rights are "constitutionally guaranteed ... and legislatively articulated." Heurtebise v. Reliable Business Computers, 452 Mich. 405, 436, 550 N.W.2d 243 (1996) (Cavanagh, J.). The Michigan Civil Rights Act, by constitutional mandate, carries out the constitutional protections afforded in Const. 1963, art. 1, § 2:
No person shall be denied the equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his civil or political rights or be discriminated against in the exercise thereof because of religion, race, color or national origin. The legislature shall implement *428 this section by appropriate legislation.
As the means of implementing the constitutional protection, the Michigan Civil Rights Act provides that an employer subject to the act
may adopt and carry out a plan to eliminate present effects of past discriminatory practices or assure equal opportunity with respect to religion, race, color, national origin, or sex if the plan is filed with the commission under rules of the commission and the commission approves the plan. [MCL 37.2210; MSA 3.548(210).]
Nothing in the language of either the constitution or the statute suggests that a discretionary affirmative action plan provides absolute protection to the employer or that it is not subject to constitutional review. Cf. Middleton v. Flint, 92 F.3d 396, 404 (C.A.6, 1996); Maitland v. Univ. of Minnesota, 155 F.3d 1013, 1016 (C.A.8, 1998).
Second, we would hold that, despite what would occur in an action brought under title VII, an employer is not automatically granted immunity under the Michigan Civil Rights Act just because its voluntary affirmative action plan has been approved by the Michigan Civil Rights Commission.
Title VII specifically bars "any action or proceeding based on any alleged unlawful employment practice" if the employer proves that it acted in good faith and in reliance on an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission opinion. 42 U.S.C. 2000e-12(b). The Michigan Civil Rights Act, however, contains no such provision. Our Legislature is presumed to have knowledge of existing laws, Nemeth v. Abonmarche Development, Inc., 457 Mich. 16, 576 N.W.2d 641 (1998), and could have included the title VII language and created immunity for employers if it had intended to do so. Except for Cole, we would not create an immunity clause where the Legislature chose not to do so.
Plaintiff also argues on appeal that the trial court failed to consider evidence that the affirmative action plan utilized by defendant was not approved by the Michigan Civil Rights Commission. Plaintiff argues that the plan was changed by defendant's periodic review of the plan and revision of its hiring goals. We do not agree. Plaintiff has not established that defendant fundamentally changed the affirmative action plan itself when it engaged in the annual review process specifically required by the approved plan.
Next, plaintiff contends that the Michigan Civil Rights Commission exceeded its authority when it approved defendant's affirmative action plan in 1987, because the affirmative action plan delegates discretionary acts to defendant. Plaintiff argues that the commission improperly delegated decision-making authority to defendant. There is no merit to this issue. Defendant's ministerial activities, carried out to execute the approved plan, did not involve an improper delegation of authority.
Plaintiff argues that the Michigan Civil Rights Commission was required by M.C.L. § 24.285; MSA 3.560(185) to make findings of facts and conclusions of law. There is no merit to this claim. MCL 24.285; MSA 3.560(185) does not apply to the commission's approval of defendant's affirmative action plan because the approval was not a "contested case" as defined in M.C.L. § 24.203(3); MSA 3.560(103)(3). See Martin v. Stine, 214 Mich.App. 403, 409-410, 542 N.W.2d 884 (1995).
Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in failing to give him an opportunity to complete discovery before ruling on defendant's motion for summary disposition. Specifically, plaintiff argues that the trial court should have waited until defendant answered plaintiff's request for admissions. We note, however, that plaintiff did not oppose defendant's motion for summary disposition on this ground, even though the outstanding request for admissions *429 was discussed at the hearing regarding defendant's motion for summary disposition. Hence, this issue is not properly before us. Peterman v. Dep't of Natural Resources, 446 Mich. 177, 183, 521 N.W.2d 499 (1994). In any event, summary disposition is not premature if the discovery does not stand a fair chance of uncovering factual support for opposing the motion for summary disposition. State Treasurer v. Sheko, 218 Mich.App. 185, 190, 553 N.W.2d 654 (1996). Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that summary disposition was premature in this case.
Finally, plaintiff claims that the trial court erred in denying his motion for leave to file a second amended complaint to add a discrimination claim based on residency. A trial court's decision regarding a motion to amend pleadings is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Weymers v. Khera, 454 Mich. 639, 654, 563 N.W.2d 647 (1997). The trial court must specify its reasons for denying the motion; failure to do so requires reversal unless the amendment would be futile. Ben P. Fyke & Sons v. Gunter Co., 390 Mich. 649, 656-657, 213 N.W.2d 134 (1973); Dowerk v. Oxford Twp., 233 Mich.App. 62, 75, 592 N.W.2d 724 (1998); Dampier v. Wayne Co., 233 Mich.App. 714, 736, 592 N.W.2d 809 (1999).
Here, the trial court granted defendant's motion for summary disposition and then, "for the aforementioned reasons," denied plaintiff's application for leave to file a second amended complaint. The grant of defendant's motion for summary disposition does not preclude amendment of plaintiff's complaint. Formall v. Community Nat'l Bank, 166 Mich.App. 772, 783, 421 N.W.2d 289 (1988). The trial court did not specify a particularized reason for denying plaintiff's motion and, absent a showing that amendment would be futile, its failure to do so requires reversal. Dampier, supra at 736, 592 N.W.2d 809. We express no opinion regarding whether defendant's claims of delay and prejudice would justify the trial court denying plaintiff's motion.
The trial court's grant of summary disposition for defendant is affirmed; the trial court's denial of plaintiff's motion to amend is reversed. We do not retain jurisdiction.
FITZGERALD, J., concurring.
I concur in the result only.
NOTES
[1]  Victorson involved an unapproved, rather than an approved affirmative action plan. Our Supreme Court has never held that an employer has blanket immunity under an approved voluntary affirmative action plan. The trial court is not alone, however, in assuming that an employer is shielded from liability under an approved plan, in reliance on Victorson's holding that an employer is not automatically guilty of discrimination merely because its plan has not been approved.

=== CASE 2221800 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:20.744214+00 ===

31 Ill. 2d 587 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 470
PETER A. MURGIC, Appellant,
v.
GRANITE CITY TRUST & SAVINGS BANK.  (ILLINOIS STATE TRUST COMPANY, Appellee.)
No. 38603.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 24, 1964.
MAURICE DAILEY, of Granite City, for appellant.
JOSEPH COHN, of East St. Louis, and NICK D. VASILEFF, of Madison, for appellee.
Appellate Court reversed; circuit court affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HOUSE delivered the opinion of the court:
This case again involves the effect to be given joint tenancy bank accounts. Plaintiff, Peter A. Murgic, the surviving joint tenant, brought this action against the depositary bank for the proceeds of a savings account in his name and one Mike Yurkovich. Illinois State Trust Company, administrator of Yurkovich's estate, was interpleaded and appealed to the Appellate Court, Fifth District, from a *588 judgment on the jury's verdict in favor of Murgic. The Appellate Court reversed (46 Ill. App. 2d 334) and we granted leave to appeal.
Yurkovich and Murgic went to the bank to open a joint account. A bank official explained the nature and effect of such an account stating that either could draw on it and that upon the death of either the then balance would go to the survivor. In the course of the conversation Yurkovich said that he had no relatives in this country, that in the past he had sent funds, food and other things to relatives in Croatia but after a trip to visit them he felt they were not deserving of further consideration, that Murgic was his closest friend, and that he wanted him to have the funds. Thereupon Yurkovich deposited $12,500 in their joint names and they both signed a joint account agreement. After passing the pass book back and forth and having some discussion as to who should hold the book, Yurkovich retained it. Yurkovich later deposited $13,500 additional in the account without Murgic's knowledge.
Since there seems to be some difference of opinion among the courts of the State on the degree and burden of proof required of a claimant adverse to the deposit agreement, we will, therefore, give further consideration to this issue.
The case In re Estate of Schneider, 6 Ill. 2d 180, pointed out the difficulty of applying the common-law concept of joint tenancy and doctrines governing gifts of intangible personalty, and carefully analyzed the legal effect of a joint-tenancy account as between the owners of a joint account. The possibility of creating joint accounts through statutory enactment was neither raised nor passed upon. It was noted that the "contract theory", typified by Illinois Trust and Savings Bank v. VanVlack, 310 Ill. 185, and the line of cases following it, was for the purpose of meeting the objection that the statutes then in effect did not permit *589 joint tenancies in personal property. The fallacy of the contract theory was pointed out and it was repudiated in favor of a gift theory. It was held that a deposit agreement sufficiently manifests a donative intent to establish ownership in the survivor, but that this manifestation of intent does not preclude the introduction of evidence tending to establish a contrary intention by the depositor of the funds. The evidence in that case established that the account was set up solely for the convenience of the depositor and it was held that his personal representative was entitled to the proceeds of the account upon his death.
The next case on the subject before this court was Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill. 2d 62, and the problem was examined in the light of the statutes. Statutory provisions appear in a separate chapter entitled "Joint Rights and Obligations," (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, chap. 76,) and it was recognized that they were not enacted for the sole purpose of institution protection, but that they also conferred property rights in the designated owners of the account. It was held that creation of accounts having the incidents of joint tenancy in intangibles under the statutes vested legal title in the joint tenants "and compliance with the appropriate statutory requirements dispenses with the necessity of applying common-law principles governing creation of joint tenancies." (Frey v. Wubbena, p. 70.) It was then pointed out on the authority of Schneider that the courts may look behind the form of the transaction to determine the parties' rights as between the joint tenants. The opinion went on to say that there was a presumption of donative intent and that the burden is upon one questioning the gift to overcome the presumption by clear and convincing proof.
Defendant asserts the inapplicability of Wubbena because a father-child relationship existed and that in such case a presumption of donative intent may be indulged in, and that, traditionally, clear and convincing proof has been *590 required to overcome the presumption. The presumption of donative intent in that case arose from the relationship of the parties and the contract, while here the presumption is based upon the parties having executed an agreement in compliance with the statute. The real question then is who has the burden of proof and the degree of proof required where the presumption is the result of contract.
There has been much confusion in this area on the part of the courts of the several States (including Illinois,) most of which appears to stem from attempts to apply traditional concepts to joint accounts. Various solutions have been advanced. The one apparently adopted by the Appellate Court in this case may be classified as a "limited" or "shifting" presumption. Under this theory the burden of going forward, once the proper setting up of the account and death of the joint tenant had been established, was upon the estate and if there was no evidence rebutting donative intent the survivor would take, but if the estate introduced evidence which tended to rebut donative intent the burden would then revert to the survivor to prove by clear and convincing evidence that a gift was intended. Apparently this concept derives from the common-law rule that such a burden devolves upon a person claiming to be the donee of an inter vivos gift.
It is implicit in Wubbena that a prima facie presumption of donative intent exists where the proof shows that the making of the deposit and the execution of the contract is in conformity with the statute. As we stated in recognizing the increased use of joint tenancy accounts and legislative relaxation of rules pertaining to them: "Public policy would seem to require the adoption by the courts of a more liberal and practical view of these common transactions." (Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill. 2d 62, 66.) The legislative policy to treat the joint account as a useful technique for transferring intangibles dictates that the estate or other person *591 claiming against the survivor should have the burden of disproving intent on the part of the decedent, and the degree of proof required to void the presumption should be clear and convincing. This would add certainty to the law and at the same time protect a depositor's estate where the joint account was created without donative intent, for example where the account was opened for the convenience of the depositor as in Schneider. To hold that a lesser degree is required or that the burden shifted would tend to make every joint tenancy account suspect and would promote instability rather than stability of ownership. A personal representative of a deceased joint tenant should not be constantly faced with the risk of charges of mismanagement for failure to litigate each joint account to which it or his decedent was a party.
We hold that an instrument creating a joint account under the statutes presumably speaks the whole truth; and, in order to go behind the terms of the agreement, the one claiming adversely thereto has the burden of establishing by clear and convincing evidence that a gift was not intended. This burden does not shift to the party claiming under the agreement.
The proof established that the account was understandingly created, that Yurkovich knew the funds could be drawn by either, and that the balance in the account would go to Murgic if he (Yurkovich) died first. Two incidents subsequent to creation of the account were mentioned by the Appellate Court. One was the making of a loan by Yurkovich to Murgic and a request for repayment having been made prior to the additional deposit by Yurkovich. The other was the later execution by him of a will containing a general residuary bequest to heirs in Yugoslavia without mentioning the joint account. Neither is of significant help when related back to the time of creation of the account in determining donative intent in the face of Yurkovich's *592 expressed desire and intent that Murgic become a joint owner of the account.
The judgment of the Appellate Court, Fifth Judicial District, is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court of Madison County is affirmed.
Appellate Court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9740000 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:29.23174+00 ===

R. J. Danhof, J.
Plaintiff Nancy Sullivan appeals as of right from an order that granted defendant North River Insurance Company’s motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), thereby dismissing her action for work-loss benefits under the no-fault act, MCL 500.3101 et seq.; MSA 24.13101 el seq.1 We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Plaintiff, a New York resident, was injured in an automobile accident in Michigan on June 27, 1994, while she was a passenger. Plaintiff had quit her job on April 30, 1994, to care for her terminally ill son, and planned to move to Michigan to look for a new job after her son’s death. Plaintiff planned to live in an apartment in her daughter’s home in Michigan and *435was visiting her daughter at the time of the accident. One week after the accident, her son died. Plaintiff moved to Michigan, but did not seek employment, claiming that her injuries from the accident prevented her from working.
Plaintiff filed this action against defendant, the insurer of the vehicle in which plaintiff was injured, claiming that she was entitled to no-fault work-loss benefits. Defendant moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (C)(10), arguing that plaintiff was not entitled to work-loss benefits because she was unemployed at the time of her injury. The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition, apparently pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), holding that plaintiff had failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact regarding her claim for work-loss benefits. We therefore review the trial court’s decision de novo to determine whether any genuine issue of material fact exists that would prevent entry of judgment in favor of defendant as a matter of law. Morales v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 458 Mich 288, 294; 582 NW2d 776 (1998). Also, resolution of this issue requires statutory interpretation, which is a question of law that is reviewed de novo. Yaldo v North Pointe Ins Co, 457 Mich 341, 344; 578 NW2d 274 (1998).
Work-loss benefits under the no-fault act are available for “loss of income from work an injured person would have performed during the first 3 years after the date of the accident if he or she had not been injured.” MCL 500.3107(1)(b); MSA 24.13107(1)(b). In this case, the question presented is whether plaintiff, who was unemployed at the time of her accident, *436may still be entitled to work-loss benefits under subsection 3107(l)(b).2 We hold that the answer is yes.
In MacDonald v State Farm Mut Ins Co, 419 Mich 146, 151; 350 NW2d 233 (1984), our Supreme Court noted that this state’s no-fault act is modeled after the Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act (umvara), and that subsection 3107(l)(b) of our act is “virtually identical” to subsection 1(a)(5) of the umvapa. In addressing the issue whether a person who receives work-loss benefits under the no-fault act is entitled to continuation of those benefits after suffering an unrelated disabling heart attack, the MacDonald Court relied on the following drafter’s comments from subsection 1(a)(5) of the umvapa:
“ ‘Work loss,’ as are the other components of loss, is restricted to accrued loss, and thus covers only actual loss of earnings as contrasted to loss of earning capacity. Thus, an unemployed, person suffers no work loss from injury until the time he would have been employed but for his injury. On the other hand, an employed person who loses time from work he would have performed had he not been injured has suffered work loss. . . . Work loss is not restricted to the injured person’s wage level at the time of injury. For example, an unemployed college student who was permanently disabled could claim loss, at an appropriate time after the injury, for work he would then be per*437forming had he not been injured. Conversely, an employed person’s claim for work loss would be appropriately adjusted at the time he would have retired from his employment.” [.MacDonald, supra at 151 (emphasis added).]
Given the above, the MacDonald Court clearly recognized that a claimant’s entitlement to work-loss benefits is not dependent on being employed at the time of the accident, but rather whether the claimant can prove that, but for the accident, she would have been employed and, as a consequence, would have suffered actual loss of earnings.3 In all cases, the claimant bears the burden of proof of actual loss of earnings. See Nasser v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 435 Mich 33, 49; 457 NW2d 637 (1990).
Here, plaintiff has presented evidence of an extensive work history, including various bookkeep*438ing/comptroller positions dating from her husband’s death in 1975 until 1991. In 1991, plaintiff went to work for her daughter-in-law in New York, but voluntarily left that position in April 1994 to care for her terminally ill son. According to plaintiff, she planned to move into an apartment in the home of her daughter in Michigan after her son’s imminent death, and then “settle down and look for work.” On June 27, 1994, while visiting her daughter in contemplation of moving to this state, plaintiff was injured in the automobile accident that brought about her claim for wage loss. After her son died on July 4, 1994, plaintiff relocated to Michigan. At deposition, plaintiff explained that she had not applied for any work in Michigan since the accident because her injuries had disabled her from writing, typing, and performing bookkeeping work. Since then, however, she had been helping her son-in-law, who is a real estate appraiser, with light office work, although she complained about having “pain all day and all night in my arm and neck, shoulder.” According to an October 1995 letter from her treating physician, plaintiff should expect to suffer slight to moderate pain on a permanent basis.
Viewing the foregoing evidence most favorably to plaintiff, we conclude that she has demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact whether she would have returned to work had she not been injured, and thereby suffered actual loss of earnings because of her injury. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s grant of summary disposition to defendant, and remand for further proceedings.
*439Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Hoekstra, P.J., concurred.
Plaintiff initially filed suit against defendant Crum & Forster Insurance, then amended her complaint to name only defendant North River Insurance Company. Plaintiffs initial claim of appeal was dismissed by this Court for lack of jurisdiction because no order had been entered dismissing plaintiffs claim against Crum & Forster Insurance. Sullivan v North River Ins Co, unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, entered May 15, 1997 (Docket No. 199955). Plaintiff then filed this claim of appeal after correcting the jurisdictional defect. Accordingly, the term “defendant,” as used in this opinion, refers only to North River Insurance Company.
The no-fault act also provides that “work loss for an injured person who is temporarily unemployed at the time of the accident or during the period of disability shall be based on earned income for the last month employed full time preceding the accident.” MCL 500.3107a; MSA 24.13107(1). Plaintiff acknowledges that, because her unemployment was voluntary and not due to the unavailability of work, she was not “temporarily unemployed” for purposes of work-loss benefits under § 3107a. See MacDonald v State Farm Mut Ins Co, 419 Mich 146, 153; 350 NW2d 233 (1984) (holding that “temporarily unemployed” referred to “the unavailability of employment, not the physical inability to perform work”). Plaintiffs claim for work-loss benefits admittedly relies entirely on subsection 3107(1)(b).
In Popma v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 446 Mich 460, 462-463; 521 NW2d 831 (1994), the Michigan Supreme Court addressed the question whether a person working less than full-time is “temporarily unemployed” as that term is used in MCL 500.3107a; MSA 24.13107(1). The Court strongly suggested, in addressing the “inteiplay” between § 3107a and subsection 3107(l)(b), that entitlement to work-loss benefits under the latter provision is dependent on whether a “claimant is working at the time of the accident,” id. at 466, and that a temporarily unemployed claimant may recover work-loss benefits under the former provision when unemployment automatically precludes benefits under the latter, id. at 469. Because Popma was a § 3107a case, we find its discussion of subsection 3107(1)(b) to be obiter dictum. While this Court normally accords deference even to Supreme Court dictum, we cannot do so in this case given the jarring inconsistency between the Popma Court’s suggestion that work-loss benefits under subsection 3107(l)(b) are precluded unless the irvjured claimant is employed at the time of the accident and its express approval of the MacDonald Court’s holding that “[w]ork-loss benefits are not necessarily restricted to a claimant’s wage at the time of the accident.” Popma, supra at 472, citing MacDonald, supra at 151. Rather than distancing itself from the MacDonald Court’s reliance on the umvara commentary to distill legislative intent, the Popma Court expressed its approval. Thus, under the circumstances, we consider the Popma dictum to be neither binding nor persuasive as it may relate to the facts of this case.

=== CASE 9740001 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:29.235664+00 ===

O’Connell, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that a person may recover benefits for lost wages when the person was in fact earning no wages at the time of injury. Moreover, I am troubled by the majority’s refusal to follow the precedent set by our Supreme Court in Popma v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 446 Mich 460; 521 NW2d 831 (1994).
In Popma, Justice Cavanagh, on behalf of our Supreme Court, stated that “[t]he provisions governing the award of work-loss benefits are contingent on the employment status of the claimant at the time of the accident. Section 3107(1)(b) [MCL 500.3107(1)(b); MSA 24.13107(1)(b)] applies when a claimant is working at the time of the accident, while § 3107a [MCL 500.3107a; MSA 24.13107(1)] applies when a claimant is temporarily unemployed.” Id. at 466. Indeed, the Court in Popma held as follows:
By enacting § 3107a, the Legislature intended to remedy the situation in which a claimant is precluded from receiving any work-loss benefits because the claimant is unemployed at the time of the accident. Therefore, § 3107a permits a temporarily unemployed claimant to recover work-loss benefits when they would have previously been automatically precluded from doing so. [Id. at 469 (emphasis added).]
Although Popma involved the interpretation of § 3107a, this analysis regarding the legislative intent behind § 3107a demonstrates that, in order to recover *440under subsection 3107(l)(b), the claimant must be employed at the time of the accident.1 Because plaintiff was not employed at the time of her injury, she is precluded from recovery under subsection 3107(l)(b).
Accordingly, I would conclude that, in order to recover work-loss benefits under subsection 3107(l)(b), a claimant must be employed at the time of the accident causing the injury. However, if the claimant is “temporarily unemployed,” the claimant may seek recovery under § 3107a. Because plaintiff was unemployed at the time of the accident causing her injury and does not claim that she was “temporarily unemployed,” I would affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition to defendant.
The majority recognizes that the Supreme Court “strongly suggested” that the entitlement to work-loss benefits depends on whether the claimant is working at the time of the accident. I believe that the Court did more than “strongly suggest” this proposition—it explicitly stated it. Popma, supra at 466. The majority attempts to thwart this proposition by concluding that it is obiter dictum. “Obiter dictum” is defined as “[a] judicial comment made during the course of delivering a judicial opinion, but one that is unnecessary to the decision in the case and therefore not precedential (though it may be considered persuasive).” Black’s Law Dictionary (7th ed). I cannot discover on what basis the majority concludes that the Supreme Court’s discussion of the legislative intent behind § 3107(a) was not necessary to the decision in Popma. I acknowledge that Popma is a case dealing with a claim under § 3107(a) while the instant case involves a claim under subsection 3107(1)(b); however, I believe that I am bound to follow propositional statements of law rendered by our Supreme Court that were not unnecessary to its resolution of the case in which it made the statements.

=== CASE 9740002 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:29.943246+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal from a judgment of $175,000, entered on a jury verdict in the Circuit Court of Cook County on March 13,1963, against defendant, Midwest Contractors Equipment Company, and from an order entered on April 26, 1963, denying defendant’s post-trial motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial. John Hedge was seriously injured on April 6, 1961, when the handle of an hand winch mounted on the side of an A-frame construction truck spun around and split his skull. At the time of the accident a two-thousand pound “drum shaft” was suspended from a cable over the “A” and attached to a power winch which was not being used. The hand winch was defective since a piece had been severed from the “dog lock,” and a piece of lock or bolt had been inserted between the gears to keep them from spinning. The truck was owned by Al Cohn, d/b/a Aleo Steel Service and had been loaned to John Hedge’s employer, State Wrecking Company, for the purpose of removing steel from the wrecked structures. The truck was turned over to State Wrecking Company in November, 1960. It became defective while being used by State Wrecking Company. Approximately 250 to 300 tons of steel had been lifted by the truck with the makeshift gear lock arrangement prior to the accident. The jury returned a verdict for Aleo Steel Service and it is not a party to this appeal. John Hedge was a crane operator. During March, 1961, his crane broke down necessitating extensive refitting and removal of the drum shaft. The drum shaft was removed from the crane by State Wrecking Company employees and was delivered to the shop of Midwest Contractors Equipment Company for repairs. On April 5, 1961, the repaired drum shaft was picked up from Midwest by a dump truck driven by a State Wrecking Company employee. On April 6, 1961, Ar-lie Abbott, a Midwest mechanic, was dispatched by his foreman to State Wrecking Company to “install” the repaired drum shaft assembly in the crane. State Wrecking Company directed that John Hedge and Thomas Boles (Femmer) should help Arlie Abbott “install” the drum shaft. The drum shaft was still in the dump truck when Abbott arrived. The A-frame truck was used to lift the drum shaft from the dump truck and to transport it to the crane for positioning.  In support of its motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, defendant maintains that John Hedge was contributorily negligent as a matter of law. The manifest weight question has not been raised or argued on appeal. We are, therefore, precluded from considering the jury’s findings that Midwest had a duty to John Hedge and that the accident occurred at a time when the installation procedure was under the control of Midwest. Haas v. Buick Motor Division, 20 Ill App2d 448, 450, 156 NE2d 263 (1959); 6 Nichols Illinois Civil Practice § 6316 (1962). Plaintiff is permanently disabled, unable to work and a chronic hospital case because of the brain injuries suffered from this accident. Defendant has not argued that the verdict is excessive.  In ruling on a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict the single question is whether there is in the record any evidence which, standing alone and taken with all its intendments most favorable to the party resisting the motion, tends to prove the material elements of his case. Lindroth v. Walgreen Co., 407 Ill 121, 130, 94 NE2d 847 (1950); Jines v. Greyhound Corp., 46 Ill App2d 364, 197 NE2d 58 (1964); Romines v. Illinois Motor Freight, Inc., 21 Ill App2d 380, 385, 158 NE2d 97 (1959); 3A Nichols Illinois Civil Practice § 3852 (1961). Where there is an evidentiary basis for the jury’s verdict, the jury is free to disregard or disbelieve whatever facts are inconsistent with its conclusion and the reviewing court’s function is exhausted when that evidentiary basis becomes apparent, it being immaterial that the court might draw a contrary inference or feel that another conclusion is more reasonable. Lindroth v. Walgreen Co. (supra at 134); 3A Nichols Illinois Civil Practice § 3856 (1961). The testimony offered by plaintiff and defendants was contradictory on virtually every main point. Since our decision is dependent upon an interpretation of the facts in plaintiff’s favor we will state the facts in his favor. Plaintiff’s credibility was attacked on several occasions through the use of prior inconsistent statements. His testimony was not impeached on factors vital to his right of recovery. We will omit from the statement of facts testimony on which the plaintiff was impeached by prior inconsistent statements. John Hedge’s story established that he had worked for State Wrecking Company since he was fourteen years old—almost ten years. He had done hand laboring, driven a truck, and run a crane for about one year. He had no mechanical training but was familiar with booms and hoists and knew about pulleys and gears. He had never seen the A-frame truck until a few weeks before the accident after his crane broke. He had driven the truck forward and backward from the cab in and out of the yard and might have used the power winch on a previous occasion. On the morning of the occurrence Hedge worked with the man from Midwest until 10:00 when he left to pay some traffic tickets. After lunch when he returned the drum shaft was suspended from the A-frame truck at a point slightly above the installation area in the crane. When the installation procedure began John Hedge stepped into the cab of the truck, the man from Midwest said “let it down.” The power take off wouldn’t go into gear. After trying to put the power winch in gear for a few minutes, Hedge stepped out of the truck and walked to the left side of the truck. The man from Midwest then said, “winch it down, use the hand winch on it.” Hedge then put his hands on the handle of the hand winch and exerted a little pressure. The accident happened immediately thereafter. Hedge testified: “I did not examine the hand winch before I pulled on the handle. I did not look at the gears at all. I knew that the handle would activate the hand winch. I knew that by looking at it. Just by where it was at. I did not see anything locked between the gears when I grabbed the handle. I didn’t look at them. There was a handle there and I grabbed it. That’s all I did, yes. No one had to remove anything from between the gears before I grabbed the handles. I did not take anything out of the gears before I grabbed the handle. I pulled the handle toward me. I pulled it down. At this time, I was standing facing the crane. I was looking at the crane. I took the handle and pulled toward me. I reached up for it. I did not have any discussion with the man from Midwest, Mr. Abbott, about not attempting to hoist this drum shaft down with the hand winch. He did not tell me to use the power winch to lower it first, and then when the load on the cable was disconnected to lower the hand winch and adjust the angle. I had no conversation with either the man from Midwest or with Femmer (Boles) regarding the danger of grabbing the handle and trying to lower it by hand when the boom shaft was attached to it. The only thing the man from Midwest told me was to winch it down when the take-off wouldn’t work.”  Defendant relies on the proposition that a failure to see what is clearly visible is not such conduct as is compatible with due caution for one’s own safety, or a party has no right to knowingly expose himself to danger and then recover damages for an injury which he might have avoided by the exercise of reasonable and ordinary care. Pantlen v. Gottschalk, 21 Ill App2d 163, 170, 157 NE2d 548 (1959); Munden v. East St. Louis Light & Power Co., 247 Ill App 270, 274 (1928); Albers v. Continental Grain Co., 220 F2d 847 (1955); Withey v. Illinois Power Co., 32 Ill App2d 163, 170-171, 177 NE2d 254 (1961). The question of contributory negligence is ordinarily a question of fact. It is only where no reasonable inference can be made to support the conduct of the plaintiff that it becomes a question of law. The testimony was that the defect in the dog lock was open to one who was looking for it. Taking the story of John Hedge, he knew what a winch was and didn’t have to look at it to work it. He testified lie was looking at the crane. In Trojan v. City of Blue Island, 10 Ill App2d 47, 51, 134 NE2d 29 (1956) a case which involved an accident caused hy an hole in a sidewalk, the court stated: “In other words, she was walking along with her son in a normal fashion, without thought of an accident. A pedestrian may ordinarily assume that a sidewalk is in a reasonably safe condition and he is not absolutely bound to keep his eyes on the sidewalk in search of possible defects.” It was peculiarly for the jury to determine whether John Hedge reasonably should have looked at the winch, and, if he should have, should he also have noticed the defective dog lock. We cannot hold as a matter of law that one has a duty to inspect a mechanism for defects before beginning to operate it.  Defendant also contends that the principle of the above eases applies because the sole purpose of the winch was to adjust the angle of the “A” and that any reasonable man exercising due care as a matter of law would not have attempted to lower a load suspended from the power cable by means of the hand winch. Several witnesses testified for defendant that the winch was only to direct the angle of the “A” and the angle shouldn’t be changed while a weight was suspended. John Hedge’s story was that he was directed to use the hand winch, and didn’t know the functions of the individual cables. Moreover, he had never used the hand winch before. It again was a question of fact whether a reasonable man might believe that a properly working dog lock would catch on a hand winch while a weight was suspended over the “A.” John Hedge testified: “I knew that there were. two mechanisms to this A-frame truck, that one was a power winch and that the other was a set of cables that supported the A-frame. I could see that. I guess I knew that the power winch was right behind the cab. I don’t know. I could see the winch. In looking at the truck, I guess I could tell that the A-frame was held at an angle by a set of pulleys. I didn’t know that the A-frame was held in position by either the hand winch or the power cable. I didn’t know which held what. I didn’t know which set of cables would raise or lower the drum shaft. I never operated the truck before outside of driving around the yard.” The jury might reasonably have believed that John Hedge had not used the winching apparatus previously; did not know the functions of the separate winches; and, acted solely because of the instructions of Arlie Abbott. Defendant has appealed from the order of the court denying its motion for a new trial because: 1. the verdict was the result of sympathy created by certain of plaintiff’s testimony and his attorney’s appeal for sympathy to the jury; 2. prejudicial and self-serving answers to interrogatories were read to the jury; 3. sections of plaintiff’s discovery deposition were improperly read to the jury; 4. the court erred in instructing the jury.  When John Hedge was called for direct examination his attorney asked him his name, whether he was married, and if he had any children. Defendant’s counsel objected. Defendant argues that when John Hedge was allowed to testify that he was twenty-five, was married and had two children, all of his subsequent testimony was prejudicially influenced by these facts. The rule is that where the only damages recoverable are compensatory in nature, the domestic relations, financial standings or circumstances of the parties are irrelevant and often prejudicial. Jones & Adams Co. v. George, 227 Ill 64, 70-71, 81 NE 4 (1907); McCarthy v. Spring Valley Coal Co., 232 Ill 473, 479, 83 NE 957 (1908); Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp., 39 Ill App2d 73, 108, 187 NE2d 425 (1963), revd in part on other grounds, 31 Ill2d 69, 199 NE2d 769 (1964); Falcon v. La Roche, 4 Ill App2d 112, 123 NE2d 587 (abst 1955); 59 ALR2d 371, 374—376. We would be compelled to follow these authorities and find these questions prejudicial were it not that the questions were relevant in this case. As a result of the accident plaintiff sought to show that he had become impotent. It has been held that evidence of the existence of a family may be introduced for this purpose providing that the jury is instructed to disregard the sympathy inducing effects of this information. Postal Tel. Cable Co. v. Likes, 225 Ill 249, 266, 80 NE 136 (1907); Deering Harvester Co. v. Barzak, 227 Ill 71, 76, 81 NE 1 (1907). The questions in this case were not under the circumstances prejudicial since the same information was properly divulged in later testimony in respect to the impotency question. The jury was instructed that neither sympathy nor prejudice should influence them.  Plaintiff’s counsel in his closing argument to the jury stated: “He has been brought to this stage in his life by doctors and by his own strength and inner fortitude. He is here before you today; it is his last chance. He has no more. This is all that is left in life for John. He wants to rehabilitate himself, to raise his family, to provide for them. He has no other opportunity, ladies and gentlemen, than through the device of this trial and your verdict. He has none.” These remarks were not objected to at the time of delivery. Appellant relies upon the principle that objection to these remarks at the time of their utterance would have accentuated by repetition their effect upon the jury. We do not believe that these statements were prejudicial. The existence of a family was properly before the jury. If counsel saw other error in these statements an objection should have been made and ruling secured to preserve the question. Department of Public Works & Bldgs. v. Anastoplo, 14 Ill2d 216, 222, 151 NE2d 337 (1958); Dragstrem v. North Branch Metal Products, Inc., 20 Ill App2d 57, 62, 155 NE2d 358 (1959); 3A Nichols Illinois Civil Practice § 3550 (1961).  Plaintiff’s attorney read interrogatories propounded to John Hedge and answers thereto listing the names of people having knowledge of the events and the names of all doctors who rendered medical services. Defendant charges that Supreme Court Rule 19-11(4) (Ill Rev Stats c 110, § 101.19-11 (4)) was never intended to allow a party to read self-serving statements for the purpose of inducing sympathy. After reading this list plaintiff only produced one medical witness. The listing of the doctors and the production of only one medical witness did have the effect of emphasizing the massive nature of plaintiff’s injuries. Since defendant has made no issue of plaintiff’s injuries and has not charged that the damages were excessive the introduction of this evidence was not prejudicial. The listing of John Boles, a life long friend of plaintiff, as an occurrence witness, without producing him at the trial was not prejudicial. This witness was equally available to both parties. If an inference would be drawn from this it would be that plaintiff did not call him because his testimony would have been adverse.  During the course of the trial John Hedge’s credibility was attacked through the introduction of prior inconsistent statements made at a deposition. The court reporter testified that Hedge had made statements inconsistent with his statements that he had never used the winch truck prior to the day of the accident; that he didn’t know where Femmer (Boles) was immediately before the accident occurred; and that he didn’t know how the drum shaft was raised up with the boom truck on the day of the accident. Hedge’s lawyer was then permitted by the court to cross-examine on material which defendant believes was unrelated to the scope of impeachment. The rule was recently stated in Schmitt v. CTA, 34 Ill App2d 67, 72-73, 179 NE2d 838 (1962): “. . . Proof of the out of court declarations of a witness, in corroboration of testimony given by him on the trial of the case, is, as a general rule, inadmissible, even after he has been impeached or discredited. (Chicago City Ry. Co. v. Matthieson (1904), 212 Ill 292, 297, 72 NE 443.) These rules are not in conflict with Supreme Court Rule 19-10 (4): Tf only a part of a deposition is read or used at the trial by a party, any other party may at that time read or use or require him to read any other part of the deposition which ought in fairness to be considered in connection with the part read or used.’ “As defendant contends, it was never intended by this rule that unrelated questions and answers may be read, which do not explain, modify or reconcile the question and answer upon which a witness may be impeached. However, ‘in fairness’ can be abused, and the interpretation of ‘in fairness’ requires the use of sound discretion by a trial judge. A statement may be repetitious of or bolster up a direct examination statement, and yet may be proper in order to avoid the unfairness and distortion which can result if a party is permitted to read isolated and out-of-context portions of a deposition. Goertz v. Chicago & N. W. Ry. Co. (1958), 19 Ill App2d 261, 271, 153 NE2d 486; Smith v. City of Rock Island (1959), 22 Ill App2d 389, 397, 161 NE2d 369.” See also Annotation: Corroboration—Consistent Statements, 75 ALB2d 909. The trial court is allowed a reasonable discretion in receiving or rejecting evidence of prior declarations of a witness consistent with his testimony after impeachment. 75 ALB2d 918, 923. The three areas read from the deposition by plaintiff’s counsel were irrelevant to the statements on which the plaintiff was impeached. The last statement—“He said use the hand winch”—was not objected to at the time and cannot be relied upon by the defendant upon this appeal. The reading of the question—“Did anybody have to remove anything pushed in between the gears?” A. “No.”—was waived, although objected to, when defendant thereafter introduced another question from the deposition relevant to that very point. The reading of the question—“How much were you suppose to lower the drum shaft?” A. “Six to eight inches.”—although objected to and irrelevant to the impeachment was not prejudicial error because it related to an unimportant aspect of the case and the reading was in no way beneficial to the plaintiff.  The court refused to give defendant’s instruction 20, which stated: “If you find from all of the evidence that it was, or should have been, apparent to the plaintiff if he was in the exercise of due care for his own safety that he used a winch mechanism for a purpose for which it was not designed and intended to be used; and if you further find from all of the evidence that it was, or should have been, apparent to the plaintiff if he was in the exercise of due care for his own safety that such use of said winch mechanism would reasonably be expected to cause injury to him, then you should find the defendants not guilty.” The above instruction constituted an unncessary statement of the necessity of plaintiff being free from contributory negligence in order to recover. There were three other instructions submitted including statements of plaintiff’s duty to be in the exercise of due care. Defendant maintains that failure to give the instruction deprived it of presenting to the jury its theory (Sims v. CTA, 7 Ill App2d 21, 29-30, 129 NE2d 23 (1955)) that it was an improper use of the apparatus to attempt to lower a load by means of the hand winch. This instruction was merely a device for calling specific facts to the attention of the jury. It did not adequately cover all the possibilities and the court did not err in electing to instruct the jury in more general language. Defendant further contends that the court erred in giving plaintiff’s instruction 22. Since the trial conference for the setting of instructions has not been abstracted or preserved in the record it has not been shown that the required objection was made at that time and we are precluded from considering this point. Jackson v. Gordon, 37 Ill App2d 41, 45, 184 NE2d 805 (1962); Stewart v. DuPlessis, 42 Ill App2d 192, 201, 191 NE2d 622 (1963). A consideration of all the instructions demonstrates that the jury was not misled on the case as a whole. Johnson v. Jackson, 43 Ill App2d 251, 259, 193 NE2d 485 (1963); Meyer v. Williams, 15 Ill App2d 513, 522, 146 NE2d 712 (1958); Bunton v. Illinois Cent. R. Co., 15 Ill App2d 311, 329, 146 NE2d 205 (1957). This case was fairly tried, the jury was cognizant of all the issues and returned a verdict supported by the evidence. The judgment is affirmed. Judgment affirmed. BURKE, P. J. and FRIEND, J., concur.

=== CASE 9740003 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:29.949956+00 ===

On Reheabing In our original opinion in dealing with Instruction 22, we said, “Since the trial conference for the setting of instructions has not been abstracted or preserved in the record it has not been shown that the required objection was made at that time and we are precluded from considering this point.” The appellant in its application for rehearing has pointed out that this portion of the record had been preserved and was included in the abstract. We have, accordingly, granted a rehearing on the issue of this instruction. Plaintiff’s Instruction No. 22 given by the Court reads as follows: “You are instructed that if you believe from perponderance [sic] of the evidence that the Defendant Midwest Contractors Equipment Co., Inc., a corporation, was in charge of, or supervised the installation of the drum shaft, at the time and place complained of, then the Midwest Contractors Equipment Co., Inc. through its employee was obligated to exercise reasonable care and caution to inspect the apparatus used in the installation and to exercise reasonable care to determine if the apparatus and method used to accomplish the installation were safe and to warn the plaintiff of any defects in the apparatus about which it, through its employee, had knowledge or of which in the exercise of reasonable care should have had knowledge.” The defendants made certain objections to this instruction at the hearing on instructions, and after the jury returned with its verdict made the following post-trial motion concerning this matter: “There was no evidence to support any of the charges therein contained and no theory of law to support said charges. “The capitalization of the name of the Defendant in the instruction and the designation of ‘a corporation’ drew undue attention of the jury to the status of this Defendant in this suit as against Defendant Cohn. There is no definition contained in the instruction, or any of the instructions, of the term preponderance. The instruction as given imposes a greater burden on Defendant Midwest than was charged by the Plaintiff in his Amended Complaint. The instruction assumes a controverted issue of fact. The instruction is ambiguous and misleading in that neither the term ‘apparatus’ nor ‘installation’ are defined. The Court’s designation of the term ‘you are instructed’ calls undue attention to this instruction and highlights this particular instruction over the other instructions.”  This being the post-trial motion, the defendants cannot raise new grounds for setting aside the verdict for the first time on appeal. Perez v. Baltimore & O. R. Co., 24 Ill App2d 204, 164 NE2d 209 (1960). We will, therefore, discuss the points raised by the defendant in his post-trial motion one at a time to determine whether any error was made when the Court gave the jury this instruction.  The first point complained of is that “the name of the Defendant in the instruction and the designation of ‘a corporation’ drew undue attention to the appellant.” Since the instruction dealt with the appellant’s duty to the plaintiff and not the duty of any other defendant in the trial, the court was correct in using the name of this appellant to aid the jury in distinguishing this defendant at the trial from the other defendant—Al Cohn d/b/a Aleo Steel Service. Nor was the designation of the appellant as a corporation an error. The jury was instructed that a corporation had all the rights of a private individual. It is assumed that a jury follows the instructions given it. People v. DiLella, 52 Ill App2d 403, 202 NE2d 77.  The appellant next urges as error the fact that there was no definition of the word “preponderance” in the instructions. We point to this court’s decision in Scerrino v. Dunlap, 14 Ill App2d 355, 144 NE2d 859 (1957) where we said that the word need not be defined. It is a common word of the English language and the jury is perfectly able to ascertain its meaning without instructions on that point from the Court.  As their third point the appellants say that “the instruction as given imposes a greater burden of Defendant Midwest than was charged by the Plaintiff in his Amended Complaint.” In the complaint as amended the plaintiff dropped the charge that the appellant was under a duty to inspect the apparatus. The instruction as given by the Court raises the possibility the jury could find that a duty to inspect was incumbent on the appellants. This, of course, is wrong. An instruction should never open the possibility that a jury could find something to be a fact on which there was no competent evidence. Marut v. Costello, 53 Ill App2d 340, 202 NE2d 853 (1964). The attorney for the appellant, however, did not raise this point at the hearing on instructions. It has often been held that an appellate court will not reverse a trial court on errors that were not properly urged. Jackson v. Gordon, 37 Ill App2d 41, 184 NE2d 805 (1962), Stewart v. DuPlessis, 42 Ill App2d 192, 191 NE2d 622 (1963). We have read the abstract of the proceedings and note that while Plaintiff’s Instruction 22 was under discussion in the Court’s chambers, no mention was made by the attorney for the appellant of the word “inspect”. The argument at the conference centered on whether the instruction in effect told the jury that the appellant had charge of the installation or not. The appellee’s attorney specifically stated at that time that the instruction was to tell the jury that the appellant had a duty to inspect, and there was nothing-said in the conference about striking that word. We see no reason to send this case back for another trial, incurring additional delay and expense on both sides, where the objection was not made in time for the court to correct its own error.  The appellant goes on to claim that the instruction assumes a controverted issue of fact. It does no such thing. It does not say that the appellant was in the process of installing the drum shaft; it says that if the jury finds that they were in charge, then the appellant had certain duties. This is not error. Ramey v. Baltimore & O. S. W. R. Co., 235 Ill 502, 85 NE 639 (1908), 88 CJS Trial, § 280(b), page 753, and cases there cited.  As a fifth ground for finding error in the giving of this instruction the appellant claims that it is ambiguous and misleading in that neither the term “apparatus” nor the word “installation” are defined. As we said above, words of ordinary usage need not be defined for the jury. Herb v. Pitcairn, 306 Ill App 583, 52 NE2d 543 (1940), reversed on other grounds 377 Ill 405, 36 NE2d 555 (1941).  Finally, the appellant claims that by using the term “you are instructed”, the Court called undue attention to this particular instruction. The question was not urged on appeal and we will not consider it here. Having read all the instructions in this case, we believe the jury was properly instructed. Any false impressions which the jury might have received from this instruction certainly would have been corrected by the jury reading the instructions as a whole. “. . . ‘As we stated in Kavanaugh v. Washburn, 320 Ill App 250, “Modern tendency favors a liberal application of the harmless error doctrine to instructions when it appears the rights of the complaining party have in no way been prejudiced.” This same doctrine was announced in Reivitz v. Chicago Rapid Transit Co., 327 Ill 207, and Palmer v. Miller, 310 Ill App 582.’ “. . . We do not believe that the rulings of the court controvert the modern trend—the now well judicially established principle, as set forth in Duffy v. Cortesi, 2 Ill2d 511, 515, 516 as follows: “ ‘The trend of judicial opinion reveals a reluctance to reverse cases on the ground of technical errors in instructions; hence, courts have reiterated that the instructions will he considered as a whole, and where the jury has not been misled, and the complaining party’s rights have not been prejudiced by minor irregularities, such errors will not be deemed grounds for reversal. (Kavanaugh v. Washburn, 320 Ill App 250; Stephens v. Weigel, 336 Ill App 36; Anderson v. Brown, 340 Ill App 613.)’” Bunton v. Illinois Cent. R. Co., 15 Ill App2d 311, 146 NE2d 205 (1957). We hold, therefore, that there was no prejudicial error committed at the trial by the giving of this instruction. We hold to the result reached in our original opinion.

=== CASE 9740004 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:30.191194+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Petitioner has filed motion for appointment of counsel in this Court to represent him in reviewing the action of the St. Joseph Superior Court, No. 1, growing out of his conviction after a jury trial in such court of the crime of grand larceny for which he was sentenced for a period of one to ten years.
*258■However, from petitioner’s petition and other papers filed, it appears that on or about June 3, 1964, petitioner was paroled and is therefore no longer an inmate, pauper or otherwise, of any penal institution of the State. It further appears from said papers that petitioner has voluntarily absented himself from the State of Indiana and the jurisdiction of this Court and that he is presently residing at 821 Fourth Street, in the city of Madison, State of Illinois.
As this Court’s jurisdiction is limited by the territorial boundaries of the State of Indiana and this Court has no authority to appoint counsel to perform duties outside the State of Indiana, the petition for appointment of counsel is now denied.
Achor, J., dissents without opinion.

=== CASE 9740005 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:30.195978+00 ===

On Rehearing
Per Curiam.
Petitioner has filed a petition for rehearing from an order filed on November 2, 1965, dismissing his petition for a writ of certiorari. Petitioner by his petition for a writ of certiorari sought to obtain review of the trial court’s denial of his “Verified Petition for a Writ of Error Coram Nobis.” The trial court treated the “Verified Petition for a Writ of Error Coram Nobis” as a belated motion for new trial under Rule 2-40, Rules of the Supreme Court of Indiana. The basis of petitioner’s “Verified Petition for a Writ of Error Coram Nobis” and Petition for Writ of Certiorari is that his counsel committed “gross neglect” in failing to include certain points in the motion for new trial and in failing to make proper objections to certain matters during the trial.
The following facts show that the Petition for Writ of Certiorari has no merit.
Petitioner was indicted and tried by jury on five counts, including burglary and armed robbery. On April 1, 1958, petitioner was convicted of only the lesser included offense of *259grand larceny and was sentenced from one to ten years in the Indiana State Prison.
Petitioner retained his own counsel who represented petitioner at the trial. The counsel retained by petitioner also prepared and filed a timely motion for new trial in the cause and prosecuted an appeal to this court, all by petitioner’s own choice. On appeal, this court affirmed the conviction of grand larceny in an opinion filed March 30, 1959. See Griffith v. State (1959), 239 Ind. 321, 157 N. E. 2d 191.
Petitioner made no complaint or objection to his counsel’s conduct of the proceedings until after his conviction was affirmed by this court. It is well established that after the proceedings have terminated, a deféndant in a criminal case cannot for the first time object to his self-chosen counsel’s management of the case. United States v. Hack (7th Cir. 1953), 205 F. 2d 723, 726, 727, cert. denied 1953, 346 U. S. 875, 74 S. Ct. 127, 98 L. Ed. 383. The Seventh Circuit in United States v. Hack, supra, at pp. 726, 727, 205 F. 2d, quoted the following from Burton v. United States (1945), 80 U. S. App. D. C., 208, 151 F. 2d 17, 18:
“ * * There are few trials free from mistakes by counsel. After judgment and on appeal, errors in judgment as to the conduct of the defense are easy to point out. Here the appellant selected his counsel and made no objection to his conduct of the case during trial. Under such circumstances it is well settled that error in judgment, incompetency or mismanagement of the defense by counsel is generally not ground for a new trial. * * *’ ”
This reasoning is even more compelling in the present case, where petitioner made no objection to his counsel’s management of the case until after his conviction was affirmed on appeal.
In adddition, as stated above, petitioner’s principal ■ complaint and objection is that his counsel failed to include certain points in his motion for new trial. In State ex rel. Macon v. Orange Circuit Ct. (1962), 243 Ind. 429, 185 N. E. 2d 619, this court held that it was the duty of ..... *260he does not file a motion for new trial it is to be assumed there are no meritorious grounds for a new trial and an appeal. Therefore, the only conclusion to be drawn from petitioner’s counsel not including certain grounds in the motion for new trial is that the counsel was of the opinion that such grounds were not meritorious grounds for a new trial and an appeal. This court stated the following in State ex rel. Macon v. Orange Circuit Ct., supra (at page 430 of 243 Ind., at page 620 of 185 N. E. 2d) :
“No one is better able to determine whether error has occurred which would be grounds for a new trial than such trial counsel.”
The petition is therefore denied.
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 273. Rehearing denied 214 N. E. 2d 795.

=== CASE 9740006 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:31.420759+00 ===

Landis, J.
This is an appeal from an adverse judgment in a paternity proceeding brought under Burns’ §3-623 (1946 Repl.), et seq.,1 and as a result of which appellant, after a jury trial, was adjudged to be the father of a child born to the appellee-petitioner, Eleanor Jean Bender, and was ordered to pay certain prenatal and postnatal expenses of appellee-petitioner and assume the obligations of a father of said child.
This cause comes to us on petition to transfer from the Appellate Court pursuant to Rule 2-23 of this Court, the opinion of the Appellate Court appearing in 194 N. E. 2d 94.
Appellant contends on this appeal that the lower court erred in refusing to grant him a new trial upon the ground of newly discovered evidence, appellant’s motion in this respect stating:
“That this defendant [appellant] has, since the trial of said cause and the verdict was returned, discovered new, competent and material evidence which he could not, with reasonable diligence, have discovered and produced at the trial of this cause and which can now be produced if a new trial of this cause is had, and which is material-to the defendant’s [appellant’s] cause....”
Appellant filed as exhibits with said motion for new trial two affidavits stating in substance that the two affiants had personal relations with appellee during the period when conception could have taken place, and that *188said affiants had no knowledge of the trial on February 8, 1961, but only learned thereof since said time. Appellee filed counter-affidavits of herself and her father in opposition to the previous affidavits and denying the facts contained in such previous affidavits.
We are unable to agree with appellant’s contention that he has made out a case for the reversal of the judgment of the lower court on the basis of the allegedly newly discovered evidence as that would require us to weigh the facts contained in conflicting affidavits.2 This case is distinguishable from Opp v. Davis (1962), 133 Ind. App. 365, 372, 179 N. E. 2d 298, 301, relied upon by appellant, as in that case no counter-affidavits were filed in opposition to the' previous affidavits supporting the motion for a new hearing or new trial. In that case the Court stated at p. 374 of 133 Ind. App., and p. 302 of 179 N. E. 2d:
“In. our opinion the unchallenged and undenied allegations contained in the said affidavit attached to and made a part of appellant’s motion for a new hearing, were sufficient to warrant the court to open the case and hear any additional evidence having a bearing upon whether others than appellant may have had sexual relations with appellee during the period in which conception could have taken place....” (Emphasis ours.)
It should be further pointed out that the supporting affidavits in the Opp case contained allegations as to sexual intercourse with others at the time in question, but the affidavits in the instant case alleged only “personal relations” of others *189with appellee, whatever that may be.3 An affidavit alleging newly discovered evidence should set forth specifically the exact testimony or evidence that would be elicited at a new hearing from the witness or witnesses in question, and should not state the same ambiguously or in a manner requiring inferences to be drawn from it to give it probative force. The instant affidavits were in our judgment also insufficient for this reason.
Appellant has further contended that the court erred in overruling his motion to exclude the child from the courtroom at the hearing of said cause.
The statute4 pertaining to the trial of these proceedings provides:
“The hearing shall be by the court but if either party demands a jury, it shall be by jury. Both the mother and the alleged father shall be competent to testify but the alleged father shall not be compelled to give evidence. The court shall exclude the general public from the hearing, and admit only those persons directly interested in the case, including officers of the court.” (Emphasis ours.)
It is appellant’s argument that the child involved in this case should have been at all times excluded from the courtroom notwithstanding the above statute. We are unable to ignore the plain language of the above statute which, while excluding the general public from these proceedings, specifically provides the court may *190admit those persons directly interested5 in the case. It is difficult to imagine a person more directly interested in the case than the child for whose benefit the action for care, support and maintenance was brought. The fact that this Court has heretofore considered such child in these proceedings to be an interested party is evident from State ex rel. Taylor v. Greene Circuit Court (1945), 223 Ind. 562, 564, 63 N. E. 2d 287, 288, wherein it is stated:
“. . . The purpose of the action in said court was to secure the relief provided for an unmarried mother, her illegitimate child, and other interested persons by ch. 112, Acts 1941, page 301 et seq., approved March 6, 1941, §§3-623 to 3-655, Burns’ 1933 (Supp.), inclusive.
“ . . . There are 36 sections in the act, covering many matters in which such a child or its mother might be interested, . . . (Emphasis ours.)
The child obviously was an interested person within the statute, and in our judgment the court committed no error in overruling appellant’s motion to ex-elude him from the courtroom. See also: Brown v. State ex rel. Pavey (1932), 94 Ind. App. 669, 673, 182 N. E. 263, 264; Price v. State ex rel. Gorden *191et al. (1918), 67 Ind. App. 1, 6, 118 N. E. 690, 692; Lewis v. Hershey (1910), 45 Ind. App. 104, 106, 90 N. E. 332, 333.
Appellant has also complained of the giving of the court’s instruction no. 8 which in substance told the jury they should not take into consideration the appearance of the countenance of the child nor draw any conclusions therefrom but that the jury should look only to the evidence given at the trial.
Appellant’s objection is that this instruction by telling the jury not to take into consideration the appearance of the child or draw any conclusion therefrom, in fact called particular attention to the child.
This instruction correctly states the law as supported by numerous authorities of this jurisdiction (See: La Matt v. The State ex rel. Lucas (1891), 128 Ind. 123, 27 N. E. 346, and Reitz v. The State, on the Relation of Holden (1870), 33 Ind. 187), and was obviously intended to prevent appellant, being prejudiced in the minds of the jury by the presence of the child in the courtroom. If the jury followed the instruction appellant in our judgment would not be prejudiced.
Judgment affirmed.
Arterburn, C. J., and Achor, JJ., concur.
Jackson, J., concurs in result.
Myers, J., dissents with opinion.
. Acts 1941, ch. 112, § 1, p. 301, et seq.
. The authorities are too numerous to require citation upon the point that a reviewing court on appeal cannot properly weigh conflicting evidence in order to reverse the judgment of the lower court. See: 2 I.L.E., Appeals,.§ 577, p. 509.
. The ambiguity of the expression “personal relations” used by appellant is evident from Webster’s International Dictionary (Third Edition, p.. 1916), which defines “relations” as including dealings, affairs, intercourse, or- sexual .union.
. Burns’ § 3-638 (1946 Repl.), Acts 1941, ch. 112; § 16, p. 301.
. The words “person interested” have been held to signify one who has some legal right or who is under some legal liability, that may be enlarged or diminished, by the decree of the court.
See: Ballentine’s Law Dictionary (Second Edition), p. 962. Contrary to the dissent, the words “person interested” used in statutes governing these and other proceedings were not intended to be given a subjective interpretation so as to exclude the recognition of interest of a person of little or no comprehension or intelligence. Otherwise, minors and persons under disability who are obviously without understanding and whose rights have been protected by the law and the state for centuries (27 Am. Jur., Infants, §101, p. 822), would be cut off without recourse to our courts.

=== CASE 9740007 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:31.425427+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Myers, J.
In my opinion the Appellate Court correctly decided this case when it reversed the trial court. *192(Nott v. Bender [1963], Ind. App., 194 N. E. 2d 94.) It cites with approval the case of Opp v. Davis (1962), 133 Ind. App. 365, 374, 179 N. E. 2d 298, 302, 180 N. E. 2d 788, and quotes at length from it concerning the “intimate” nature of paternity cases such as this, and which says in substance that a more liberal approach should be taken by a juvenile court in making extended inquiry as to the truth or falsity of the matter asserted and that “such finding should be predicated upon something more than conjecture, chance, or the mere opinion of the mother that the person charged is the father.”
Here, two affidavits were filed after the trial by two men who stated under oath that each had had “personal relations” with the petitioning mothef at about the same time she claimed the defendant-appellant had had sexual relations with her. One affiant stated that he had had three “social engagements” with appellee beginning June 3, 1959, when he had “personal relations” with her; that a wéek later he “again had relations” with her; and in July he again had “personal relations” with her. These affidavits were attached to the motion for new trial# and .it was claimed that the appellant had no knowledge of this until after the jury had rendered its verdict. He asked for a new trial on the basis of newly-discovered evidence. A counter-affidavit was filed by the appellee which denied that she had had “personal or sexual relations” with either of the two affiants although she claimed she knew them and had been out with one of them on different occasions.
The majority opinion herein attempts to distinguish the Opp case in that there were r. no counter-affidavits filed therein, and that the affidavits which were filed contained allegations as to “sexual intercourse,” while in this case the affidavits alleged only “ ‘personal re*193lations’ of others with appellee, whatever that may be.”
We hope we are not devoid of some sophistication in this modern world in which we live. Yet, indeed, it may be considered a pleasure that we do not have to be informed of sexual acts without the use of four-letter words which seem to be the style today in the field of literature and drama. The restrained choice of words used by affiants in these affidavits should not be misinterpreted by the sophisticate. Even the dictionary says that the word “relations” (used as a noun) means: “sexual union (charged with having — with a woman not his wife).” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged, page 1916. In view of the circumstances of this case, I feel certain my fellow Judges were not entirely ignorant of the meaning of the phraseology set forth in these affidavits. Thus, I am in full accord with the Appellate Court opinion that the affidavits put the trial court on notice that there was other evidence to be considered, and it was an abuse of discretion to have overruled the motion for new trial.
Appellant objected to permitting the child of appellee being brought into court. He also objected to Instruction No. 8 which was given by the court and reads as follows:
“INSTRUCTION NO. 8
“In passing upon the question as to whether or not the defendant, Thomas W. Nott, is the father of the child born to Eleanor Jean Bender on March 9, 1960, you should not take into consideration the appearance of the countenance of the child, nor should you draw any conclusion whatsoever from the appearance of the child. In considering and determining this case you should look only to and consider the oral testimony given in this trial.”
*194These objections were overruled. The baby was born March 9, 1960. The trial was held February 7 and 8, 1961. Thus, the child was about eleven months’ old at time of trial. The majority opinion quotes the statute which says that in paternity hearings, the court shall exclude the general public and admit only those persons “directly interested” in the case, including officers of the court. Burns’ Ind. Stat., §3-638, 1946 Replacement. It then states that:
“It is difficult to imagine a person more directly interested in the case than the child for whose benefit the action for care, support and maintenance was brought.”
First of all, I think it highly speculative that an eleven-months’ old baby could be “interested” in this trial, or any other trial, for that matter. Comprehension of such infants is usually extremely limited. At that age, I think, babies are interested mostly in nutrition, bodily functions, comfort and love from their mothers and, fathers. Thus, this infant could not. fall within the statute. Citing once again Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged,. at page 1178, we find the word “interested” is said to mean: “having curiosity or sympathy aroused”; “having a share or concern in some affair or project”; “liable to be affected or prejudiced”; Concerned, Involved.” These are terms which can only be used in the subjective sense, and they could not apply to an eleven-months’ old baby.
The majority .opinion cites authority for its premise that since a child is an interested party within the statute, there was no error committed in overruling appellant’s motion to exclude him from the court room, I cannot find that the eases cited are in point. None of them have anything to say about permitting the child-to be present in the court room. They merely , rephrase the *195general rule that the mother and child are interested in support and maintenance provisions of statutes pertaining to illegitimate children.
The case of State ex rel. Taylor v. Green Circuit Court (1945), 223 Ind. 562, 63 N. E. 2d 287, was an original action attacking the 1941 Act entitled: “An act concerning children born out of wedlock.” It was held that the Act was not unconstitutional because, as alleged, the title of the Act was not broad enough to cover the subject of the Act.
Brown v. State ex rel. Pavey (1932), 94 Ind. App. 669,182 N. E. 263, concerned a child that was stillborn. Price v. State ex rel. (1918), 67 Ind. App, 1, 118 N. E. 690, involved a void judgment. Lewis v. Hershey (1910), 45 Ind. App. 104, 90 N. E. 332, concerned a claim against an estate by an illegitimate child for money that should have been used for her support and maintenance.
In the second place, the majority opinion upholds the court’s Instruction No. 8 and says that it was “obviously intended to prevent appellant being prejudiced in the minds of the jury by the presence of the child in the court room.” The evidence reveals that the infant was brought into the court room for the voir dire on February 7, 1961, and again for five minutes on February 8, 1961, when he became “fussy” and was taken out by appellee.
It seems absolutely unrealistic to one that a trial court can ask a jury to wipe out from their minds a comparison with features or countenance between an infant and the alleged father thereof after permitting the infant to be brought into the court room and placed directly in front of them. The very nature of the instruction would alert any jury to have some kind of mental reaction as to such comparison and thus create prejudice. I find myself in accord with Judge Carson’s opinion for the Appellate Court wherein he says as *196follows at pages 96 and 96 of 194 N. E. 2d):
“We feel also obligated to comment upon the presence of the child in the courtroom during the trial. While it has been previously held that the presence of the child does not constitute reversible error so long as the trial judge exercises the safeguards outlined by previous decisions of the Supreme Court and Appellate Court of this state, we never the less feel that the ends of justice would be better served if the child were not permitted in the courtroom at any time during the proceedings.”
I would reverse and grant a new trial.

=== CASE 9740008 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:31.429415+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Landis, J.
On rehearing appellant has again contended the child for whom a paternity action is brought is not an interested person and that the court erred in overruling appellant’s motion to exclude said child at all times from the courtroom.
We believe the authorities and discussion in our earlier opinion require the conclusion that the child was an interested person within the statute and as the statute provides the court may admit interested persons the court committed no error in admitting the child in this case. The record here discloses the child was absent from the hearing during much of the proceedings and no attempt has here been made by appellant to show an abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court with reference to the presence of the child at a specified distance from the jury so as to have prejudiced appellant in light of previous decisions of this State.1 Furthermore, as stated in the previous opinion, the jury were instructed not to take into consid*197eration the appearance of the child or draw inferences therefrom.
No contention has been made that the court erred in failing to maintain proper order and decorum in the courtroom.
We must conclude no error on the part of the trial court has been demonstrated.
Petition for rehearing denied.
Arterburn, C. J., and Achor, J., concur.
Jackson, J., concurs in result.
Myers, J., dissents.
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 745. Rehearing denied in 204 N. E. 2d 219.
. Adams v. State, ex rel. (1925, 197 Ind. 80, 149 N. E. 886; LaMatt v. The State, ex rel. Lucas (1891), 128 Ind. 123, 27 N. E. 346.

=== CASE 2221818 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.117542+00 ===

139 Ind. App. 333 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 593
BURRIS
v.
BUIKEMA.
No. 19,705.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed December 9, 1964.
Rehearing denied December 28, 1964.
Transfer denied September 26, 1966.
Hulbert & Marlatt, of Gary, for appellant.
William J. O'Connor, of Hammond, for appellee.
RYAN, J.
This was an action for personal injuries allegedly sustained by the appellee when the automobile in which she was riding was in a collision with an automobile being driven by appellant. Trial was had by a jury, and a verdict was rendered in favor of the appellee. Appellant filed her motion for a new trial, which was overruled, and she now assigns as error the overruling of such motion for a new trial.
In the first part of her argument appellant argues under the assignment that the verdict was not sustained by sufficient *334 evidence and was contrary to law, primarily the question of proximate cause. It is axiomatic that on appeal this court views the evidence most favorable to the appellee, and it is only where the evidence leads us inescapably to a conclusion other than that reached by the jury that we will reverse. In the present case the evidence was in conflict, and viewing the evidence most favorable to the appellee, there was evidence from which the jury could have found as it did, and we are not led by such evidence to inescapably arrive at another conclusion. Under the state of the evidence the question of proximate cause was one for the jury. Wherever there is some reasonable doubt as to the proximate cause, it is a question for the jury, and only becomes a question for the court when the facts are plain and undisputed. Such contention of the appellant is without merit.
Appellant next argues that the court erred in overruling her motion for judgment on the answers of the jury to the interrogatories. Such motion was made after the general verdict was entered. In viewing such contention all reasonable presumptions, inferences and intendments are indulged in favor of the verdict in determining whether the court erred in overruling such motion. Flanagan, Wiltrout & Hamilton's Indiana Trial and Appellate Practice § 1691, p. 329. Applying the rule to this case, we see no reason to reverse.
Appellant further contends that there was error in refusing to give, and also in giving, some of the instructions to the jury. However, it appears that the jury was fully and fairly instructed on the issues, and that no error was committed.
Judgment affirmed.
Carson, J., Clements, J.[1] and Cooper, J., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 202 N.E.2d 593.
NOTES
[1]  While Judge Clements participated in the hearing of oral argument and a conference of the judges, and concurred in the result at the time of the conference, his untimely death occurred before the adoption of this opinion.

=== CASE 2221822 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.188532+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 813 (2000)
258 Neb. 908
LYMAN-RICHEY CORPORATION, a Nebraska corporation, appellant,
v.
NEBRASKA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE et al., appellees.
No. S-98-991.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 3, 2000.
*814 Nicholas K. Niemann, of McGrath, North, Mullin & Kratz, P.C., Omaha, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Attorney General, and L. Jay Bartel, Lincoln, for appellees.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, McCORMACK, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
McCORMACK, J.
NATURE OF CASE
This is an action involving a denial by the Nebraska Department of Revenue (the Department) of a sales and use tax refund claim against the Department; M. Berri Balka, Nebraska Tax Commissioner; and the State of Nebraska. Lyman-Richey Corporation appeals from the order of the district court for Lancaster County upholding the Department's denial of the refund claim. On our own motion, we removed the matter to this court pursuant to our authority to regulate the caseloads of this court and the Nebraska Court of Appeals.
BACKGROUND
Lyman-Richey is a Nebraska corporation engaged in the business of processing, transporting, distributing, and selling various products, primarily concrete. All of the concrete manufacturing by Lyman-Richey occurs either fully or partially in concrete mixers that are attached to truck chassis. On March 29, 1990, Lyman-Richey submitted an application to the Department for a project under the Employment and Investment Growth Act (the Act), Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 77-4101 to 77-4112 (Cum.Supp.1988). Under the Act, if a taxpayer agrees to undertake a project that will result in a minimum investment of $3,000,000 and the creation of 30 new jobs in Nebraska, the taxpayer is eligible to receive certain tax incentives provided under the Act. §§ 77-4104(3) and 77-4105. One such incentive is a refund of all sales and use taxes paid on all purchases of "qualified property" used as a part of the project. § 77-4105(3). Lyman-Richey's application proposed a project related to the "general expansion of [Lyman-Richey's] employment base and various plant and office additions."
Lyman-Richey's application was approved, and the Department and Lyman-Richey entered into an agreement under the Act. See § 77-4104(3) and (4).
Subsequently, Lyman-Richey filed a "Claim for Overpayment of Sales and Use Tax," requesting a refund of sales or use taxes paid on concrete mixers purchased by Lyman-Richey between April and July 1992. Lyman-Richey asserted that the concrete mixers were "qualified property" under what was then § 77-4103(12), now codified at § 77-4103(13) (Supp.1999), and that as an entity eligible to receive tax benefits under the Act, it was entitled to a refund of sales or use tax paid on its purchase of the mixers. The total amount of the claim was $19,293. Lyman-Richey explained in its claim that it had acquired the concrete mixers from a mixer manufacturer and the truck chassis from a truck manufacturer. The mixer manufacturer mounts the mixers to the trucks and then delivers the trucks and the mixers to Lyman-Richey.
The Department denied Lyman-Richey's refund claim. The Department found that the concrete mixers were not "qualified property" as was defined in § 77-4103(12). The Department determined that processing equipment is not defined to be qualified property under the Act and that while much processing equipment meets the criteria for qualified property, a determination that a machine is processing equipment does not mean that it is also qualified property. The Department also found that "[w]hether purchased separately *815 or as one unit, the concrete mixers are, and have to be, a part of the motor vehicle when they are operating. The entire unit is required to be licensed when operated on the highways."
Lyman-Richey appealed the Department's denial to the district court for Lancaster County. The district court found that the Department had not made a finding in accordance with § 77-4103(12), which required that qualified property be "located and used at the project." The district court remanded the case to the Department to resolve the relevance of this language with regard to Lyman-Richey's concrete mixers.
On remand, the Department found that the concrete mixers were "`located and used at the project'" in accordance with § 77-4103(12). The Department reaffirmed its original basis for denying Lyman-Richey's refund claim.
Lyman-Richey subsequently filed a new petition, appealing the Department's denial of the refund claim. The parties agreed that the only issue to be determined by the district court was whether the concrete mixers at issue, each of which was attached to a truck chassis, constituted "qualified property" under § 77-4103(12), or whether they constituted "motor vehicles" excluded from the definition of "qualified property." The district court affirmed the denial of Lyman-Richey's requested refund, concluding as follows:
I am persuaded by the evidence before me that the mixers [Lyman-Richey] bought must be attached to the trucks to work. They are specifically designed this way. The mixers are of no use to [Lyman-Richey] without the trucks and the trucks are of no use to [Lyman-Richey] without the mixers. [Lyman-Richey] bought the trucks and the mixers to function as a unit and that is what they do. The fact that [Lyman-Richey] chose to buy them from separate manufacturers is of no consequence to this fact and has no bearing on whether what [Lyman-Richey] got from its purchases was a motor vehicle as defined by the Act.
In essence [Lyman-Richey] asks that I define motor vehicles to exclude mobile machinery and equipment. I cannot help but note, however, that the Act provides a specific definition of motor vehicles and I cannot rewrite that definition. If the Legislature had wanted to provide a tax break on mobile machinery and equipment such as cement mixers, it could have done so. It didn't and I can't.
Lyman-Richey appeals from the district court's decision.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Lyman-Richey assigns that the district court erred in concluding (1) that because a "unit" is created by the bolting together of a truck (motor vehicle) and a concrete mixer (non-motor vehicle), the unit is to be treated as a motor vehicle; (2) that the concrete mixers were subject to licensing for operation on the highways; and (3) that mobile machinery and equipment does not qualify for the Act's sales and use tax refund.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
Statutory interpretation presents a question of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent conclusion irrespective of the decision made by the court below. Ferguson v. Union Pacific RR. Co., 258 Neb. 78, 601 N.W.2d 907 (1999).
ANALYSIS
The Act provides sales and use tax benefits on "qualified property" used as part of a project approved by the State. See *816 § 77-4105(3). "Qualified property" is defined under the Act as
any tangible property of a type subject to depreciation, amortization, or other recovery under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or the components of such property, that will be located and used at the project. Qualified property shall not include (a) aircraft, barges, motor vehicles, railroad rolling stock, or watercraft or (b) property that is rented by the taxpayer qualifying under the Employment and Investment Growth Act to another person.
§ 77-4103(12).
The Act defines a motor vehicle as "any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer as defined in section 60-301 and subject to licensing for operation on the highways." § 77-4103(8). Neb.Rev.Stat. § 60-301(16) (Cum.Supp.1992) defines "motor vehicle" as
any vehicle propelled by any power other than muscular power, except (a) mopeds, (b) farm tractors, (c) self-propelled equipment designed and used exclusively to carry and apply fertilizer, chemicals, or related products to agricultural soil and crops and other implements of husbandry designed for and used primarily for tilling the soil and harvesting crops or feeding livestock, (d) power unit hay grinders or a combination which includes a power unit and a hay grinder when operated without cargo, (e) vehicles which run only on rails or tracks, (f) off-road designed vehicles, including, but not limited to, golf carts, go-carts, riding lawnmowers, garden tractors, all-terrain vehicles as defined in section 60-2801, snowmobiles, and minibikes, and (g) road and general-purpose construction and maintenance machinery not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property, including, but not limited to, ditchdigging apparatus, asphalt spreaders, bucket loaders, leveling graders, earthmoving carryalls, power shovels, earthmoving equipment, crawler tractors, and self-propelled invalid chairs.
The parties agreed the only issue in this case was whether the mixers when attached to truck chassis constituted "qualified property" under § 77-4103(12), or whether they constituted "motor vehicles" which were excluded from the definition of "qualified property." Lyman-Richey argues that a mixer is a separate, independent piece of manufacturing equipment and that it does not become a motor vehicle when attached to a truck chassis. The Department contends that when a mixer is attached to the truck chassis, it forms an integrated unit and that unit is a motor vehicle.
Statutory interpretation presents a question of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent conclusion irrespective of the decision made by the court below. Ferguson v. Union Pacific RR. Co., supra. In the absence of anything to the contrary, statutory language is to be given its plain and ordinary meaning; an appellate court will not resort to interpretation to ascertain the meaning of statutory words which are plain, direct, and unambiguous. Id.
The parties do not dispute that a truck chassis on its own is a motor vehicle. The question we are faced with is whether a mixer, when attached to a truck chassis, is a motor vehicle excluded from the definition of "qualified property" under the Act. We answer in the affirmative. When a mixer is attached to a truck chassis, it forms an integrated unit, and that unit is a motor vehicle. The mixer is powered by the truck chassis, a motor vehicle. It cannot function and is of no use to Lyman-Richey if it is not attached to the truck chassis. Counsel for Lyman-Richey conceded at oral argument that Lyman-Richey *817 does not use a mixer without a truck chassis; a mixer is used only symbiotically with a truck chassis. When the mixer is attached to the truck chassis, it is dependent on the truck to operate, and therefore, the mixer and the truck form an integrated unit. Lyman-Richey bought the mixers and trucks to function as a unit, and that is what they do. It makes no difference that Lyman-Richey bought the mixers and the truck chassis from different manufacturers. The fact remains that the mixers must be attached to the truck chassis in order to manufacture concrete. Therefore, a unit is created when a mixer is attached to a truck chassis, and that unit is a motor vehicle.
In order for the unit to be a motor vehicle under the Act, two requirements must be met. First, the unit must be a motor vehicle as defined in § 60-301. See § 77-4103(8). Section 60-301 defines a motor vehicle as "any vehicle propelled by any power other than muscular power." The unit created when a mixer is attached to a truck chassis falls under this definition. Second, it must be subject to licensing for operation on the highways. See § 77-4103(8). Neb.Rev.Stat. § 60-331 (Reissue 1988) provides:
The registration fee on commercial trucks ... shall be based upon the gross vehicle weight.... Gross vehicle weight shall mean the sum of the empty weights of a truck or truck-tractor and the empty weights of any trailer, semitrailer, or combination thereof with which it is to be operated in combination at any one time, plus the weight of the maximum load to be carried thereon at any one time.
In registering the truck with the mixer attached, the registration fee is based on the weight of the truck chassis, the mixer, and the load to be carried in the mixer. Therefore, since the weight of the mixer and its load is included in determining the truck's registration fee, the whole unit is subject to licensing for operation on the highways. The unit created when the mixer is attached to the truck meets the definition of a motor vehicle under the Act.
CONCLUSION
When a concrete mixer is attached to a truck chassis, an integrated unit is created, and that unit is a motor vehicle excluded from the definition of "qualified property" under the Act. Lyman-Richey was not entitled to a refund on sales and use taxes paid on the mixers.
AFFIRMED.
STEPHAN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9740009 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:34.625928+00 ===

Landis, J.
Appellant has taken this appeal from the lower court’s judgment denying his petition for writ of error coram nobis wherein appellant sought to set aside his conviction for grand larceny entered some five years previously.
Appellant’s principal contention is that he was heretofore represented by counsel .and was allowed by such counsel to enter a plea of guilty to larceny when the undisputed facts showed he could not have been guilty of larceny but could only have been guilty of conspiracy to commit a felony, embezzlement or forgery, and that his counsel was incompetent in allowing him to enter a plea to a charge that he could not be guilty of.
Appellant’s case on appeal must fail for two reasons.
*199*198It is uncontradicted from the record that although appellant was committed to the Indiana Reformatory *199on his conviction for grand larceny on April 23, 1957, he did not until April 30, 1962, which was five years later as heretofore stated, file his petition for coram nobis in the lower court. If a long or unusual delay occurs before the filing of a petition for writ of error coram nobis (now under our present rules a belated motion for new trial) the petitioner should set forth a valid and reasonable excuse for such delay stating in substance when and how the cause was first discovered, the facts constituting the cause, and why the cause could not have been discovered previously by the exercise of due diligence. Barker v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 267, 274, 191 N. E. 2d 9,13; State ex rel. Casey v. Murray (1952), 231 Ind. 74, 77, 106 N. E. 2d 911, 912; See also: Rule 2-40 of this Court.
As is pointed out in the briefs, appellant in this case, wittingly or unwittingly, waited until after the five year statute of limitations had run before he pointed out in his coram nobis petition that he should have been charged with conspiracy to commit a felony, embezzlement or forgery rather than larceny. He has offered no reason for the delayed filing of his petition for the writ and we must therefore consider that his extréme tardiness in raising the question for a period of five years after his conviction and confinement warranted the lower court’s ruling denying the writ.
It further appears that the evidence upon the coram nobis hearing was conflicting upon the issue attempted to be raised by appellant as to the alleged incompetence of his original counsel, and as this Court may hot weigh such evidence on appeal, appellant’s argument that the evidence established incompetence of counsel is here untenable.
Judgment affirmed.
*200Achor, C. J., and Arterburn, Jackson and Myers, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740010 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:34.629918+00 ===

On Rehearing
Landis, J.
Appellant has filed petition for rehearing contending this Court’s opinion erred in following its recent decision in Barker v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 267, 191 N. E. 2d 9, and in holding that if a long or unusual delay occurs before the filing of a coram nobis petition, the petitioner should give a valid and reasonable excuse for the delay stating when and how the cause was first discovered, the facts constituting the cause, and why the cause could not have been discovered previously by the exercise of due diligence.
In our earlier opinion in this case we further pointed out that appellant, wittingly or unwittingly, waited until the five year statute of limitations had run before he filed his coram nobis petition setting up that he should have been charged with other offenses than grand larceny, the offense with which he stands convicted. Appellant has failed to refute in any manner these facts which as we stated in our earlier opinion, warranted the lower court’s ruling denying the writ. Appellant has asked us to overrule Barker v. State, supra, but as that was a well considered case and was in our judgment based upon correct legal principles, we cannot do so.
Appellant has also asked that we appoint an additional attorney to represent him on his petition for rehearing although the public defender has represented him on this appeal. However, it is not the law that one entitled to be furnished counsel at the expense of the state may nilly-willy compel the courts to discharge competent and conscientious counsel duly appointed to provide him with legal services, or that he has the right to designate the attorney *201who shall be so employed to represent him. See: In re Lee, 1964, 246 Ind. 7, 201 N. E. 2d 696; Wilder v. State (1963) Fla. 156 So. 2d 395.
Appellant’s petition for rehearing is denied and his motion for additional counsel and for extension of time to file additional petition for rehearing is overruled.
Arterburn, C. J., and Jackson, Myers, and Achor, JJ., concur.
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 165. Rehearing denied in 204 N. E. 2d 218.

=== CASE 2221824 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.24724+00 ===

348 Mass. 78 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 249
JOHN BATH & COMPANY, INC. & another
vs.
COMMONWEALTH.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
October 7, 1964.
October 30, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, KIRK, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
Francis P. O'Connor for the petitioners.
Warren K. Kaplan, Special Assistant Attorney General (James W. Bailey, Assistant Attorney General, with him), for the Commonwealth.
WHITTEMORE, J.
The petitioners for writ of error, John Bath & Company, Inc., and Allan W. Bath, its vice-president, seek to have set aside judgments of the Superior Court of May 7, 1962, holding them in contempt for discharging an employee for refusing to work while on jury service. The case was reserved and reported by a single justice.
The complaints for contempt are entitled "Complaint Contempt of Court under G.L.c. 268, § 14A." This statute provides: "No person shall be discharged from or deprived of his employment because of his attendance or service as a grand or traverse juror in any court. Violation of this section by an employer shall be a contempt of the court upon which such person is or has been in attendance or in which he is or has been serving as a grand or traverse juror, and such employer may be prosecuted upon complaint verified upon oath and be punished for such contempt."
The return includes the findings and rulings of the judge of the Superior Court. Ronald K. Larson, the discharged employee, reported for jury service in Worcester on April 2, 1962, having theretofore told his foreman of the call for jury duty. The jury session was to continue to May 4, 1962. On the evening of April 3, the foreman directed Larson to report for work between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 9:15 A.M. each day during his jury service. Larson replied in substance that the circumstances did not permit this and *80 declined to comply. On April 5, Larson received by registered mail a letter on the letterhead of the corporation signed by Bath as "Vice President  Mfg." directing him, on penalty of disciplinary action or discharge, to report for work as ordered by the foreman. There followed two conversations between Larson and Bath, in each of which the direction under penalty of discharge was repeated and Larson protested his inability to comply. The second of these conversations was in the presence of labor union officials at the company plant on April 19. On April 23, Larson received another registered letter from Bath as "Vice President  Mfg." notifying him of his discharge for "repeated insubordination" in failing to obey directions "to report for work mornings from 7:30 A.M.  9:15 A.M. while serving on jury duty."
Larson's place of employment was three miles from the court house in Worcester and about seven miles from his home in Millbury. His workday began at 7:30 A.M. Normally he operated a grinding machine and was subjected to a considerable spattering of oil and an oil mist from the flow of lubricating oil upon the grinding wheel. After any appreciable working time, Larson had oil on his shoes, clothes, and person. There were at the plant no bathing facilities and only limited washing facilities available for employees' use. Hot water was seldom provided.
The judge found that Larson could not have reasonably been expected adequately to perform both his jury duty and the employment requirements and that, under all the circumstances, the conditions imposed by the employer were unreasonable. He stated the view that jurors must be free of compulsory nonjury assignments under threat of discharge inasmuch as any such assignment might interfere with the juror's availability or his peace of mind. The judge construed the statute as a command to those individuals within the corporation who act for it and ruled that the contempt of the corporation was Bath's contempt also. He ruled that the violation of the statute by the petitioners was derogatory of the proper administration of justice. *81 The judge found that both petitioners had wilfully violated the statute.
The review is limited to questions of law apparent on the record. New England Novelty Co. Inc. v. Sandberg, 315 Mass. 739, 747-748, and cases cited (cert. den. 323 U.S. 740; rehearing den. 323 U.S. 815). Hansen v. Commonwealth, 344 Mass. 214, 222. No error is shown.
The petitioners contend that the subsidiary findings show that Larson was discharged for insubordination rather than because of his "attendance or service" as a juror, so that it was error in law to find violation of the statute. They ask us, in effect, as we understand their position, to rule that there was in the requirement that Larson work each day before going to court no necessary interference with jury duty, that it is inferable that the requirement would have been reasonably enforced by the employer so as not to cause any such interference, and that Larson's refusal to comply was not because of anticipated inability, but rather because of an unreasonable insistence on jury duty as an excuse for not working.
The issue, however, is not whether the employee might have worked each morning without impairing his effectiveness as a juror. The issue, as we view it, is whether the work requirements imposed upon the employee risked impairment of that effectiveness. Imposition of such risk was an interference with a juror's primary obligation, his jury service. Such interference was an interference with the proper functioning of the court.
Larson, rightly, as it turned out in view of the judge's findings, acted on the assumption that his "service as a ... juror" was incompatible with his working every day from 7:30 A.M. to 9:15 A.M. When the employer discharged him for not working every day, it discharged him because he had acted rightly to keep his obligation to perform jury service paramount. That was discharge because of "service as a ... juror" within the meaning of the statute.
We do not agree with the petitioners that the sole basis of the judgments below is the judge's conclusion that any *82 work requirement even though it would not risk impairment of the employee's effectiveness as a juror, assuming a discharge for a violation thereof, would be a violation of G.L.c. 268, § 14A. We need not determine whether there might be requirements of an employer for sporadic, emergency or other work by the employee that would be so plainly compatible with the employee's jury service that sanctions could be imposed by the employer.[1] But here the issue is narrowed by the judge's finding that the requirement imposed on Larson was unreasonable. This supports the conclusion that the requirement interfered with the functioning of the court.
The petitioner Bath contends that he was not in contempt of court because the statute makes only a violation by the employer a contempt.
The statute gives legislative recognition to the proposition that discharging an employee because of jury duty would be interference with the court. Apart from the statute's declaration that violation of its terms is contempt, the court would have power to punish such interference. See Cartwright's Case, 114 Mass. 230, 238; New England Novelty Co. Inc. v. Sandberg, 315 Mass. 739, 746; People v. Huggins, 258 Ill. App. 238, 243; People v. Vitucci, 49 Ill. App.2d 171, 172. The officer or employee is himself interfering with the court when he causes the employer to act. See Commonwealth v. Hudson, 315 Mass. 335, 347 (violation of court decree). The Legislature has not undertaken to limit the court's power otherwise existing to deal with Bath's contempt. Such an attempt would raise a serious constitutional question. Opinion of the Justices, 314 Mass. 767, 782.
It is inconsequential that this complaint and the judge's rulings made no reference to the power of the court to punish for a contempt apart from the statute. It is enough *83 that the complaint alleged that Bath, as vice-president of the corporation, discharged Larson because of his service as a traverse juror and that Bath thereby committed a contempt of court, and that the findings establish that Bath did act as the effective agent of the corporation in causing the discharge. In so acting for the corporate employer Bath himself violated the mandate: "No person shall be discharged ... because of his ... service as a ... juror...." See Commonwealth v. Hudson, 315 Mass. 335, 347; Wilson v. United States, 221 U.S. 361, 376-377. The reference to the statute in the title of the complaint can require no more than that Bath's violation of the statute be shown. Woodbury v. Commonwealth, 295 Mass. 316, 323. Such violation was a contempt apart from the statutory specification of the employer's contempt.
The findings of subsidiary facts do not show whether the petitioners knew of the statute. The petitioners do not contend that there was error in law in the judge's finding of wilful violation and we discern none. The finding in context means, we think, that the petitioners, by their intentional acts, assumed the risk of interference with the court and what that might entail.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Certainly, in any case, the course of prudence would be for the employer or employee or both to refer any doubts to the judge to whom the juror is responsible in his paramount obligation and who alone is empowered to excuse a juror from the full performance of the duty to which he has been summoned.

=== CASE 9740011 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:35.986108+00 ===

Hunter, J.
This appeal arises from an. action instituted by appellant Leon Coleman against appellee Morris Mitnick for damages allegedly resulting, - from the alleged false imprisonment and malicious prosecution of Coleman by Mitnick. The first paragraph of appellant’s complaint essentially alleges that appellee “wrongfully and unlawfully imprisoned- Coleman” to appellant Coleman’s damage of one thousand ($1.000) *127dollars. The second paragraph alleges malicious prosr ecution by appellee. Appellee filed an answer in general denial to these paragraphs.
The cause was tried by jury. At the close of all the evidence, defendant Mitniek moved for a directed verdict , with a tendered instruction thereon, which motion was • sustained. Pursuant to such direction, the jury returned á verdict for appellee-defendant, and consistent, judgment was rendered thereon.
The- ‘ 'errors .¿assigned on this appeal include, the charge'that the trial court erred in sustaining appellee’s motion :.for a directed .verdict. The appellant admits that the gravamen ;of,.this appeal is the alleged error in th.e.- directing, of the. verdict. as to false imprisonment.,- 1V,e will .how consider only that question. In considering'-the" propriety of a directed verdict by a .judge in a., case properly triable by jury, certain principles must remain foremost in mind.
The Indiana' Constitution, Art. 1, §20 provides:
“In all civil 'cases', the right, of trial by jury shall remaih-inviolate.”
This -constitutional provision is the floor on which any-ruling on a directed verdict in jury trials must rest. This court has emphatically stated that the above constitutional dictate places
“. . . a heavy restraining hand upon the Courts to deny the .submission of a cause brought in good faith' and based upon a situation involving far reaching and serious consequences to the plaintiff..." Garr v. Blissmer et al. (1961), 132 Ind. App. 635, 177 N. E. 2d 913; Bradford v. Chism, (1963), 134 Ind. App. 501, 186 N. E. 2d 432.
Therefore, especially because of this constitutional ¡mandate, a rule limiting the court’s interpretation must be followed by the trial judge- when considering *128a motion to direct a verdict, thus withdrawing the case from the jury. When considering the motion,
“The court must accept as true all facts which the evidence tends to prove and draw all inferences which the jury might reasonably draw against the party requesting the instruction, and, in case of conflict, the court may consider that evidence only which is favorable to the parly against whom the instruction is requested.” Tuttle v. Reid (1964), 198 N. E. 2d 610, 613 citing Clouse v. Peden (1962), 243 Ind. 390, 186 N. E. 2d 1 and Leader v. Bowley (1961), 132 Ind. App. 528, 178 N. E. 2d 445.
The facts as shown in the evidence most favorable to appellant with the reasonable and legitimate inferences arising therefrom and agreed to by the parties, are as follows:
On a certain day, members of the Fair Share Organization, Inc. approached the appellee Mitniek concerning the employment of a Negro clerk in appellee’s drug store.
Appellee refused, telling them “Just go ahead and picket me.” Three days later, appellant Coleman and others commenced picketing appellee’s place of business. Approximately three weeks after the picketing began, appellee threatened to have the appellant and others arrested. The following day, while appellant was dispensing handbills in front of the drug store, Mitniek came out of his store and told an officer who was present that he, appellee, wanted Coleman arrested. Appellee then told the officer to call a squad car. Coleman was taken to police headquarters where he was detained one hour. During this time, Mitniek was instructed by the desk sergeant to obtain a warrant.
Immediately thereafter, Mitniek appeared before *129the city attorney and signed an affidavit for appellant’s arrest, charging violation of Michigan City Ordinance No. 1390. A few hours after the first arrest, appellant was incarcerated for approximately two hours pursuant to the warrant issued at the instance of Mitnick. Coleman, by his attorney, filed a motion to quash in the criminal proceedings alleging that the ordinance under which Coleman had been arrested was unconstitutional as being violative of the 1st and 14th amendments of the United States Constitution. The municipal court judge sustained the motion, thereby ruling that the ordinance was unconstitutional. Subsequently, Mitnick caused ah appeal to be taken to the LaPorte County Superior Court on the municipal court’s ruling, which appeal was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
Basically, false imprisonment is an unlawful restraint of one’s freedom of locomotion or action without his consent. Batten v. McCarty (1927), 86 Ind. App. 46, 158 N. E. 583; Efroymson v Smith (1902), 29 Ind. App. 451, 63 N. E. 328. We must determine whether the stated facts bring this case within this basic rule.
The Supreme Court has held that a demurrer is sustainable to an affirmative answer in justification in false arrest proceedings, when such answer alleges that the arrest was made pursuant to a statute that is unconstitutional. In this decision, the Supreme Court stated:
. . persons are liable for acts done under an act of' legislature which is unconstitutional and void. All persons are presumed- to know the law, and if they - act under an unconstitutional enact-ment of the legislature, they do so at their peril, and must take the consequences.” Sumner et al. v. Beeler (1875), 50 Ind. 341.
*130Sumner et al. v. Beeler, supra, has been cited with approval in subsequent decisions and has not been.overruled or modified. See Bedford Quarries Co. v. Bough (1907), 168 Ind. 671, 80 N. E. 529; and Oolitic Stone Co. v. Ridge (1910), 174 Ind. 558, 91 N. E. 944.
It is immaterial at which point of time such statute is declared unconstitutional. As stated in Oolitic Stone Co. v. Ridge, supra, at p. 574:
“When a statute is adjudged to be unconstitutional, it is as if it had never been. Rights cannot be built up under it ... it constitutes a protection to no one who has acted under it . . . (It) is to be regarded as having never, at any time, been possessed of any legal force.”
In the case at bar, the ordinance under which the affidavit was signed by appellee was in effect declared unconstitutional by the municipal court judge. We are not here called upon to determine the constitutionality of the ordinance because such question was not- presented at the trial level.'We'therefore assume the unconstitutionality of the ordinance, and neither appellee nor appellant dispute this point. Because of'the unconstitutionality of the ordinance, it follows that the affidavit was void from its inception and charged appellant with no offense. Consequently, the arrest and incarceration of appellant was procured pursuant to illegal process. The facts demonstrate that appellee caused the arrest under illegal, process by procuring a policeman to take custody and to imprison appellant and by signing the void affidavit for appellant’s arrest. Such acts constitute false imprisonment. John’s Cash Furniture Stores, Inc., et al. v. Mitchell (1955), 126 Ind. App. 231, 125 N. E. 2d 827; Batten v. McCarty, supra.
*131*130The record also indicates that the court placed a strict construction upon the complaint and concluded *131that Mitniek did not per se, “imprison” the appellant, but only “caused” the imprisonment. He thus seems to deduce that the evidence did not conform to the pleadings as part of his basis for directing, the verdict.1
It is difficult to detect, under the facts and law of this case, any material difference between the terms “to imprison” and “cause to be imprisoned”. The latter is inclusive in the former. It seems established in this state that he who proximately causes unlawful restraint is liable therefor regardless of his individual activity. Matovina et al. v. Hult (1955), 125 Ind. App. 236, 244, 245, 123 N. E. 2d 893, citing 35 C. J. S., False Imprisonment, §87, pp. 550, 551, and footnote 88, Thus, Mitniek, who primarily participated, “imprisoned” Coleman within the legal definition of false imprisonment. Therefore, proof that appellee caused the unlawful imprisonment was sufficient under the allegation of the complaint stating that appellee “imprisoned”-appellant.
Therefore, for the reasons stated, error .was committed by the trial court in sustaining appellee’s motion for a directed verdict and withdrawing the case from the jury. Hubble v. Brown (1949), 227 Ind. 202, 211, 84 N. E. 2d 891.
Appellant further asserts error in the court’s refusal to admit in evidence the whole of plaintiff’s exhibit No. 5, which is a copy of a news article in the Gary American Newspaper, a publication of wide circulation in'-the vicinity of plaintiff’s residence. The article in its entirety presented a pic*132ture of appellant in jail, an.editorial comment on his being jailed and a headline proclaiming, “FSQ Chairman Jailed in Michigan City, Indiana”.. Thé court admitted in evidence only the picture of appellant in jail. The problem here presented is. whether-the court was legally justified in admitting only the picture and not the whole exhibit.
In actions for false imprisonment, a newspaper article may be admitted-for the purpose of., showing-the fact of publicity given the charge. See Matovina et al. v. Hult, supra, at p. 246; Steward v. Maddox (1878), 63 Ind. 51. However, if the publication states any facts other than those ascertained, from the affidavit made by .appellee charging appellant with violation of.:the said, ordinance, the warrant of arrest, and the fact of. arrest or detention thereunder,.: such additional matters or statements in the news article would; be irrelevant and inadmissible unless shown or established to have been published at instance of appellee. See, Baer v. Chambers (1912), 67 Wash. 357, 121 Pac. 843; Fletcher v. Chicago & N. W. Ry. Co., (1896), 109 Mich. 363, 67 N. W. 330; Duval v. Inland Nav. Co. et al. (1916), 90 Wash. 149, 155 PAC. 768.
The admission of the picture .plus .the .headline should therefore have been allowed into-evidence .because such headline could be separated' from the objectionable editorial comment.
We have thus extended our'review and consideration of the error charged to the trial court in refusing to admit all of appellant’s exhibit No. 5, -to .the. end that some degree of guide may be afforded the court,-and the parties upon a possible re-trial of this, causé.
For all of the foregoing reasons, this case is reversed and remanded to5 the trial court with instructions to grant plaintiff’s motion for -a new trial and *133for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Judgment reversed.
Kelley, P. J., Mote and Pfaff, JJ., concur.
. While explaining his reasons for directing the verdict to the lawyers and jurors, the court stated in part: . . . “My opinion is that pleadings should be pretty specific ... In the first paragraph it was alleged that a certain person imprisoned somebody. There is no proof of that.” (Tr, p. 215)

=== CASE 9740012 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:35.991018+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing.
Hunter, J.
Appellee advances five (5) reasons in his petition for re-hearing of this cause.
The first three (3) reasons in combination allege that this court has failed to consider other questions of error presented by the appellant. This argument is untenable because it is well settled in Indiana appellate procedure that this court will not consider questions unessential to a determination of the appeal. Bowen, et al. v. Stewart, Administrator (1891), 128 Ind. 507, 26 N. E. 168, re-hearing denied 128 Ind. 507, 28 N. E. 73. It is also established that only one prejudicial error need be presented for reversal. Appleby v. State (1943), 221 Ind. 544, 48 N. E. 2d 646, re-hearing denied 221 Ind. 544, 49 N. E. 2d 533; also see Flanagan, Wiltrout and Hamilton, Indiana Trial and Appellate Practice, §361, p. 362. In the instant case, we have reversed on the error that the trial court wrongly directed the verdict of false imprisonment, and reversal on this error alone, is sufficient.
For. his fourth reason, appellee cites Paris v. Strong (1875), 51 Ind. 339 in support of the proposition that proof of “causing to imprison” cannot be made under an allegation of “to imprison”. The Paris case, supra, is not authority for appellee’s proposition in that in the Paris case, supra, plaintiff failed to allege the marriage contract that he was attempting to prove at trial. There was no *134question of an allegation of false imprisonment in the Paris v. Strong case, supra.
Appellee further contends that we have misapplied Sumner, et al. v. Beeler (1875), 50 Ind. 341, for the reason that the holding in the Sumner case, supra, was based upon an arrest pursuant to a statutue which had been declared unconstitution before the arrest and in the instant case, the. ordinance was declared unconstitutional after the arrest. Here again, appellee’s argument is without merit. The Sumner case, supra,, was cited only for authority that proof of an arrest under an unconstitutional statute is prima facie false imprisonment. Oolitic Stone Co. v. Ridge (1910), 174 Ind. 558, 91 N. E. 944 is the authority cited for the proposition that it makes no difference at which time such statute is declared unconstitutional because if the law is unconstitutional, it is deemed to be so from its inception.
Appellee also claims that the instant case contravenes Batten v. McCarty (1927), 86 Ind. App. 462, 158 N. E. 583, for the reason that in the instant case the Municipal Court judge and the City Attorney had the sole duty to determine whether the affidavit charged any offense. But on the contrary, the Batten case, supra, is authority for the instant case in that in the former, appellee was chargeable for false .imprisonment although he apparently performed fewer acts in causing imprisonment under a void affidavit than the appellee in this case.
Therefore, the petition for re-hearing is denied.
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 577. On Petition For Re-hearing Reported in 203 N. E. 2d 834.

=== CASE 3784444 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:09.578011+00 ===

Should the appellee be held legally responsible for the death of Leah Catherine Reed, upon the evidence adduced?
The following material facts are shown by the record:
Route 31 is a state highway, with a concrete surface, running in a general northerly and southerly direction. Some few miles northwest of the city of Marysville, Ohio, in the open country, it is intersected at an angle by a single track of the Erie Railroad, running in a general easterly and westerly direction.
On the night of February 27, 1935, at about ten o'clock, four persons, two young men and two high school girls, one of whom was appellant's decedent, were proceeding north from Marysville over State Route No. 31 in an automobile of the type known as a coupe, all occupying the same seat. One of the young men was driving and they were traveling at an estimated speed of from 30 to 35 miles per hour. It was a dark night but the lights on the automobile were burning brightly and the conveyance was in good mechanical condition.
According to the photographs, attached to the bill of exceptions as exhibits, the highway dips slightly to the south of the crossing, but is practically level for a considerable space just before reaching it. When the vehicle was on this level stretch, its occupants noticed a moving train. Brakes were applied, but the automobile struck the forty-second carback of the locomotive, resulting in the deaths of Miss Reed and the driver.
It appears that appellee had erected a wooden crossarm sign of the usual type on the west side of the highway to the north of the railroad track, which was *Page 34
not visible to travelers on the road coming from the south when a train was occupying the crossing. However, the Highway Department of the state of Ohio had denoted the existence of the track by painting two broad white stripes across the entire width of the highway, to the south of the crossing, between which stripes were the painted letters. "R. R." Nearby, on the east side of the road, was the familiar metal disc with its black cross and bearing the letters "R. R.," around which reflector buttons had been placed, outlining the letters.
The record suggests that all four of the young people involved resided in the general neighborhood and had previously passed the scene of their misadventure, more or less frequently, by automobile or bus.
There is nothing to indicate that the crossing in issue presented any features of unusual danger on the night of February 27, 1935. The impression is given of an ordinary country crossing, with an unobstructed view of appellee's track to the east and west. Under such circumstances, the appellee was not obliged to provide other means of warning than those prescribed by lawful authority. No legal duty rested on it to carry lights or reflectors on its cars, or to maintain lights, watchmen or gates at the crossing for the protection of travelers using the highway.
Appellant relies on Section 8852, General Code, reading as follows:
"At all points where its road crosses a public road, at a common grade, each company shall erect a sign, with large and distinct letters placed thereon, to give notice of the proximity of the railroad, and warn persons to be on the lookout for the locomotive. A company which neglects or refuses to comply with this provision shall be liable in damages for all injuries which occur to persons or property from such neglect or refusal." *Page 35
It is conceded that appellee had erected a sign, as required by the statute, directly to the north of the crossing; but it is contended by appellant that the statute impliedly demands the erection of two signs, one on each side of the crossing, to effectuate the stated purpose.
When the language of this enactment is carefully considered such interpretation is at least questionable. "A sign" — not "two signs" — is the term employed. It must be such a sign as will be visible from both sides of the crossing "to give notice of the proximity of the railroad, and warn persons to be on the lookout for the locomotive." But when the train has arrived and is in occupation of the crossing, it affords an effective danger signal to approaching travelers.
Diligent search has not revealed any decision by this court presenting a combination of facts resembling those in the instant case. However, courts in other jurisdictions have been confronted with similar problems and in most instances have held that where a railroad train is rightfully occupying its track at a highway intersection, the presence of the train is adequate notice to a traveler that the crossing is preempted. Consequently, no additional signs, signals or warnings are required of the railroad company, and negligence cannot be imputed to it by reason of their absence. Dolan v. Bremmer,220 Iowa 1143, 263 N.W. 798, is a case in point supporting this proposition, wherein a number of the leading cases dealing with the question are cited and discussed. Compare, Coleman v.Chicago, B.  Q. Rd. Co., 287 Ill. App. 483, 5 N.E.2d 103;New York Central Rd. Co. v. Casey (Ind.Sup.),14 N.E.2d 714, 716; Bowers v. Great Northern Ry. Co., 65 N.D. 384,  259 N.W. 99, 99 A. L. R., 1443, and annotation beginning at page 1454.
In our opinion, the record discloses no evidence upon which the appellee can be charged with actionable negligence. *Page 36
It was not guilty of any act or omission which can be denoted as a proximate cause of the death of appellant's decedent.
Having reached this conclusion, it becomes unnecessary to discuss the subject of negligence in relation to appellant's decedent or the driver of the automobile.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., MATTHIAS, DAY, WILLIAMS, MYERS and GORMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2221831 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.372874+00 ===

136 Ind. App. 456 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 395
MILLER
v.
FRANKFORT BOTTLE GAS, INC.
No. 19,940.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed December 1, 1964.
*457 Stewart & Richardson, of Lebanon, and Robison & Robison, of Frankfort, for appellant.
Harker, Irwin, Campbell & Hardesty, of Frankfort, for appellee.
COOPER, J.
This cause is an appeal from a proceeding in equity, for injunctive relief seeking to restrain the appellant from engaging in activities alleged to be in competition with the appellee in Clinton County.
It appears from the record that appellant Miller is a former employee of the appellee, Frankfort Bottle *458 Gas, Inc., a corporation engaged in the installation of bottle propane gas tanks, heating equipment, tanks for dryers, the hauling of bulk ammonia, servicing of stoves and water heaters, and the sale and delivery of bottle and bulk propane gas.
A concise statement of the pertinent evidence reveals that the appellant became employed by the appellee prior to October, 1957. On October 15, 1957, the parties entered into a written contract which reads as follows, (omitting caption and signature thereof):
"In consideration of training on bulk bottle gas, and in cylinder bottle gas, and in consideration of training and accesses to customer routes by Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc., I, Bert Miller, do hereby agree not to compete in anyway which will damage the interests of Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc., for a period of five (5) years. And I, Bert Miller, do further agree not to compete with Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc. within the boundaries of Clinton County for the same period of five (5) years from the termination of employment with Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc."
Prior to the execution of the above contract, the evidence also shows that the appellant, as an employee, was being trained by the appellee in the proper operation of a bulk tank delivery truck preparatory to assigning appellant to a delivery route. The training consisted primarily of safety procedures which appellant learned in about a week's time. Thereupon, the appellant began making deliveries to all the firm's regular customers, which numbered around one hundred and fifty.
In February, 1961, the appellant severed his employment with appellee and went to work for another bulk gas firm in the adjoining county (Tippecanoe), and subsequently began calling on his former customers within Clinton County, although it is uncertain whether any *459 customers severed business relations with the appellee due to the appellant's solicitation. It was this activity which the appellee sought to enjoin, and which was temporarily enjoined by the Clinton Circuit Court on April 28, 1961. On May 19, 1961, the cause was venued to Boone County. Thereafter, the Boone Circuit Court issued a permanent injunction in favor of the appellee against the appellant. The pertinent part of the injunction entered by the court reads as follows:
"... that the defendant, Bertie C. Miller, be and is hereby enjoined and prohibited from direct or indirect solicitation of, or sales to customers or purchasers of bulk bottle gas and/or servicing in connection with purchase of bulk bottle gas in Clinton County, Indiana, and/or from becoming employed by or associated with a business which sells or services bulk bottle gas in competition with plaintiff, Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc., in Clinton County, Indiana, excepting only such association as would limit the defendant's services to such a competing business to and within areas outside of Clinton County, Indiana, but in any event no longer than February 15, 1966...."
Appellant's motion for a new trial averring the insufficiency of the evidence and that the decision is contrary to law was overruled. The appellant appealed to this court, assignment as error the ruling on the motion for new trial.
It is the contention of the appellant that the foregoing contract is so ambiguous that it is not enforceable by injunction; that the restriction is such as to make the contract hard and oppressive and therefore unreasonable and unenforceable in a court of equity; that there is no legitimate interest of the appellee to protect, and the restraint sought is unreasonable and against public policy. As we interpret the questioned contract, the appellant, in consideration of training and access *460 to the customer routes of the appellee, Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc., covenants that he will not, for a period of five years, compete with the appellee within the boundaries of Clinton County upon the termination of employment with said Frankfort Bottle Gas, Inc.
It is fundamental that one who executes a contract of a certain character is bound by its terms even though he meant something different and thought the words conveyed his meaning. A court must give effect to the meaning and intent of the parties as expressed in the language of their contract. This we are of the opinion the trial court correctly did by his language in the injunction. In absence of anything to show legal impediment to prevent their entering into any contract they see fit or expressing it in the language of their own choice, the rights of the parties must be determined according to the contract. The sole duty of a trial court in a proceeding, such as before us, is to determine what is meant by the language of the instrument. In other words, the object to be attained in interpreting a contract is to ascertain the meaning and intent of the parties as expressed in the language used. See Jenkins v. King (1946), 224 Ind. 164, 65 N.E.2d 121; 12 Am. Jur., Contracts, § 20, p. 517 and §§ 226 and 227, p. 745 et seq.; Western & Southern Life Ins. Co. v. Vale (1938), 213 Ind. 601, 611, 12 N.E.2d 350; Walb Construction Co. v. Chipman (1931), 202 Ind. 434, 441, 175 N.E. 132; Evans v. Consumers' Gas Trust Co. (1891) (Ind.) 29 N.E. 398; 31 L.R.A. 673; The Continental Insurance Company v. Vanlue (1890), 126 Ind. 410, 416, 26 N.E. 119; 10 L.R.A. 843.
Further, we cannot agree with the appellant's contention that the restriction is such as to make the contract hard and oppressive, unreasonable and unenforceable in a court of equity.
*461 It affirmatively appears that the geographical area encompassed by the covenants is Clinton County. A review of the authorities reveals that an entire county has been held to be a reasonable area of restriction. Beatty v. Coble (1895), 142 Ind. 329, 41 N.E. 590; Buanno v. Weinraub (1948), 226 Ind. 557, 81 N.E.2d 600; Bennett v. Carmichael Produce Co. (1917), 64 Ind. App. 341, 115 N.E. 793.
The third aspect of the appellant's contention of the contract here in question deals with the proposition that there is no legitimate interest of the appellee to protect and the restraint sought is unreasonable and against public policy.
The general rule of law in Indiana is that restrictive covenants in restraint of employment between an employer and an employee are enforceable by injunction where they are: (a) reasonably necessary for the protection of the employer's business; (b) not unreasonably restrictive upon the employee's rights; and (c) not against public policy. Grand Union Tea Company v. Walker (1935), 208 Ind. 245, 195 N.E. 277; Welcome Wagon, Inc. v. Haschert (1955), 125 Ind. App. 503, 127 N.E.2d 103; Ebbeskotte v. Tyler (1957), 127 Ind. App. 433, 142 N.E.2d 905.
In reviewing the evidence most favorable to the appellee it appears without dispute that the appellant's job required a knowledge of the transportation of a highly volatile and dangerous substance, but, most importantly, he had a personal relationship with the customers with whom he dealt. It was testified that there is no essential difference between the appellee's product and that of its competitors, and that, as a result, the appellee depended essentially on service for its customers.
The customers dealt with the appellant directly. In *462 fact, he was normally the only one in appellee's firm with whom they had a personal, face-to-face relationship. There was testimony to the effect that several customers had stopped dealing with the appellee following the appellant's employment by the competitor firm, Dolbow Gas, and that the appellant had called them. The personal relationship between the appellant and the customers was evidently of sufficient strength to bring about the loss of several customers, although, according to testimony, customers apparently change from one bulk gas to another only rarely.
To us, the conclusion is inescapable that the covenant as enforced by the foregoing injunction was reasonably necessary for the protection of the appellee's business in the county of Clinton. We cannot say, as a matter of law, that said injunction is unreasonably restrictive upon the employee's rights under the facts and circumstances of this particular case, nor is it against public policy.
The general rule to which Indiana adheres relating to contracts between employer-employee was well and thoroughly stated by our Supreme Court in the case of Grand Union Tea Company v. Walker, supra. See also, Welcome Wagon, Inc. v. Haschert, supra, and Ebbeskotte v. Tyler, supra.
Judgment affirmed.
Faulconer, C.J., Carson, and Ryan, JJ., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 202 N.E.2d 395.

=== CASE 2221837 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.50806+00 ===

348 Mass. 212 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 785
OLD COLONY TRUST COMPANY & another, trustees,
vs.
MANOEL ANTONIO SHAW & others.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
October 6, 1964.
December 8, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, KIRK, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
John M. Woolsey, Jr., stated the case.
Warren F. Farr (W. Lincoln Boyden, III, with him) for Louis A. Shaw, 2d, & another; Arnold W. Hunnewell, Jr., for Quincy A. Shaw, Jr., Abraham Margolis for Alexander A. Shaw, & Donald O. Smith for Manoel A. Shaw & another, also with him.
Brooks Potter (James C. Heigham with him) for Pauline S.C. Greene; John H. Linsley for Nancy S. Cutler & another, & Ira S. Siegler, of the District of Columbia, for Joanne S. Freedman, also with him.
SPALDING, J.
Quincy A. Shaw (the testator) died on June 12, 1908, and his will was admitted to probate on July 2, 1908. By the third article of his will he gave the residue of his estate to his trustees in trust "To hold the same during the lives of my said wife and of my children and of the survivor or longest liver of them, and upon the death of the *214 survivor or longest liver of them, I give, ... the said Trust Property as it shall then exist to my lawful issue then living, they taking by representation according to the stocks."
Article Fourth reads: "Whereas at the time of my decease I may have advanced to my children certain sums of money or securities, which I shall have charged against them upon my books of account, I authorize and direct my said Trustees at the time of the final distribution of the estate, to deduct from the share of each child and his issue such amounts as may be respectively charged against them, but without interest; and any such charge shall not be enforced as a debt in any manner except as herein directed."
The testator was survived by his widow, Pauline, who died on February 10, 1917, and by four children, Pauline Shaw Fenno, who died on August 6, 1952, Marion Shaw Haughton, who died on April 19, 1958, Robert Gould Shaw, Second, who died on March 29, 1930, and Quincy A. Shaw, Jr., who died on May 8, 1960. The testator also had a son, Louis A. Shaw, who died on July 2, 1891, thus predeceasing his father. When the trust terminated on May 8, 1960, there were living issue of each of the testator's children.
During 1960 and 1961, the testator's trustees distributed the major portion of the trust property. Subsequent to these distributions, an employee of the Massachusetts Inheritance Tax Division in connection with the determination of the inheritance taxes payable with respect to the final distribution of the trust contended that advances under the fourth article had in fact been made by the testator and that these were to be included in the amounts subject to inheritance tax. In support of this contention she produced a paper which appeared to be a copy of a memorandum appended to the inventory filed by the executors of the testator. Upon learning of this, the trustees examined the inventory (filed in the Registry of Probate on October 1, 1908)[1] and discovered on one of its pages under the caption *215 "Memorandum" a notation which reads: "The following amounts are in accordance with the terms of the fourth article of the will of the testator to be deducted from the share of each child and his issue at the time of the final distribution of the trust estate: Mrs. Marion S. McKean $184,855.74; Quincy A. Shaw 347,120.00; Mrs. Pauline S. Fenno 226,153.72; Robert G. Shaw 2nd 387,808.97."
The memorandum, as well as the inventory, was in the handwriting of Albert M. Lyon who was authorized under the tenth article to keep the accounts of the estate;[1a] it was written on an otherwise blank sheet of inventory schedule paper. The page containing the memorandum directly follows the schedule of personal property and directly precedes the schedule of real estate.
The three appraisers of the estate, one of whom was Lyon, signed the following statement which appeared on the first page of the inventory: "Pursuant to the foregoing order to us directed, we have appraised said estate as follows, to wit: Amount of Personal Estate, as per schedule exhibited, $7,150,483.88. Amount of Real Estate, as per schedule exhibited, $390,650.00." Directly below this was a jurat of the executors that "the foregoing is a true and perfect inventory of all the estate of said deceased, that has come to their possession or knowledge as herein explained"[2] (emphasis supplied).
The trustees brought this petition in the Probate Court seeking instructions as to whether the memorandum was evidence of such advances sufficient to require them to deduct the amounts therein set forth from the shares to be distributed on termination of the trust in accordance with the fourth article of the will. Additional instructions relating to questions of adjustments and interest were asked, in case of an affirmative answer to the principal question.
*216 At the hearing on the petition there was virtually no dispute as to the facts. The question for decision arises from the admission in evidence, subject to exception, of the memorandum of advances and the effect which was given to it in the final decree. The judge ruled that the memorandum was admissible and was "sufficient to charge these advances." A decree was entered instructing the trustees that the "entry in the inventory ... is, considered with other evidence ..., sufficient to require the ... [trustees] to deduct the amounts of advances as set forth in said entry from the shares to be distributed on termination of the trust in accordance with ... Article Fourth."[1b] Certain of the respondents who would be adversely affected by the decree appealed.
We are of the opinion that the memorandum was admissible as a declaration of a deceased person under G.L.c. 233, § 65, which provides in pertinent part, "In any action or other civil judicial proceeding, a declaration of a deceased person shall not be inadmissible in evidence as hearsay ... if the court finds that it was made in good faith and upon the personal knowledge of the declarant."
It is a condition precedent to the admissibility of a declaration under § 65 that the presiding judge shall make a preliminary finding of the facts essential to admission. Carroll v. Boston Elev. Ry. 210 Mass. 500. Slotofski v. Boston Elev. Ry. 215 Mass. 318. The admission of the declaration imports such a preliminary inquiry and finding if nothing to the contrary appears. Rothwell v. First Natl. Bank, 286 Mass. 417. But the decision of the judge admitting the declaration is not conclusive where all the evidence material to the issue is contained, as here, in the record. In such a case, the action of the judge may be reviewed by this court. Ames v. New York, N.H. & H.R.R. 221 Mass. 304. Hasey v. Boston, 228 Mass. 516.
Not only can the court consider evidence which is extrinsic to the declaration, but it can also look to the statements, *217 whose admissibility is being determined, as the basis for making preliminary findings. In New York Cent. R.R. v. Central Vt. Ry. 243 Mass. 56, reports, which were signed by the deceased president of a corporation, were introduced as secondary evidence of a contract, the contents of which had been lost or destroyed. The court made use of the reports in determining whether they were made on the personal knowledge of the president. "An examination of the reports ... shows that the president was reciting facts and making recommendations about matters which apparently he was personally negotiating." New York Cent. R.R. v. Central Vt. Ry., supra, at 68. See Tenney v. Foss, 268 Mass. 69. Compare Hasey v. Boston, 228 Mass. 516, where the declaration itself established that it was not made upon the personal knowledge of the deceased declarant.
The following facts and inferences could be found and drawn from the record, including the probate inventory and memorandum. Lyon, who died in 1953, was the writer of the memorandum. He was the bookkeeper charged under article tenth of the will with keeping the books of account. After the testator's death, Lyon was in charge of keeping the books of the estate. He also made up the annual accounts of the trustees to be filed in the Probate Court and carried out their directions with respect to the purchase and sale of securities. He was the testator's "man of business" who had looked after his interests prior to the testator's death in 1908. It could be reasonably inferred that Lyon, in appraising the estate, examined the books. And an inference was likewise permissible that in stating the total advancements to each child, he complied with article fourth, of which he was aware. From these facts and inferences, the judge could have found that Lyon's memorandum was written by him in good faith and upon his personal knowledge that charges were made in the books of account.
The appellants argue that the memorandum is inadmissible because it is an opinion rather than a statement of fact. Section 65 does not remove any ground of objection except the rule against hearsay. If on any other ground *218 the evidence offered is objectionable, the statute does not render it admissible. Pappathanos v. Coakley, 263 Mass. 401, 407. Thus, "[m]ere opinion based upon facts not known to the declarant through his own senses is inadmissible." Kulchinsky v. Segal, 307 Mass. 571, 572. Tafralian v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. 316 Mass. 429. But the statute is remedial and is to be construed liberally. Statements of fact are not rendered inadmissible merely because they are summed up in a general expression or conclusion. Tafralian v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., supra, at page 431. "While declarations, in order to be admitted under ... [§ 65], must be statements of fact and not of opinion, yet it is obvious that declarations of a deceased person are scarcely likely to have been made in the form that would be required of a living witness on the stand. In order that the statute may serve its purpose, it is held that general conclusions of fact by the declarant are competent." Samuel Cohen Shoe Co. v. Cohen, 329 Mass. 281, 284. Where, as here, the declarant is dead, "the evidence should not be lost merely because he stated the conclusion rather than the details that might be required of a witness." Kulchinsky v. Segal, 307 Mass. 571, 573. See Eldridge v. Barton, 232 Mass. 183; Shamgochian v. Drigotas, 343 Mass. 139.
A case bearing considerable resemblance to the case at bar is Berwin v. Levenson, 311 Mass. 239. There the plaintiff's declaration, as amplified by a bill of particulars, alleged that an account arose out of the purchase of surplus war materials during the years 1926 through 1929. Under § 65, a writing of the plaintiff's intestate was admitted which read in part, "the purpose of my talk ... was to ascertain the amount due me on that date, as payments had been made to me previously on account of the original settlement. It was mutually understood and agreed that $12,750 was the amount due me." The $12,750 figure was the balance of an account after a number of transactions had occurred and payments had been made. The court said, "There was no error in admitting this exhibit under the statute. The objection urged to its admissibility as distinguished *219 from its bearing and effect is that it contains conclusions and is not limited to statements of fact. But essentially the statements could be found to be statements of fact." Page 242. As in the Berwin case, the memorandum here states general conclusions of fact which summarize the charges made in the books of account.
It is also contended that the Lyon memorandum does not satisfy the requirements of the best evidence rule. Under this rule, in order to permit proof by secondary evidence of the contents of the allegedly lost document, the trial judge must make preliminary findings that the original had become unavailable, otherwise than through the serious fault of the proponent of the testimony, and that reasonable search had been made for it. Fauci v. Mulready, 337 Mass. 532, 540, and cases cited. The judge could have inferred that the books of account had existed; that the books were unavailable through no fault of those respondents who would benefit if advancements were made; and that proper search had been made for them. The requirements of the best evidence rule having been met, the Lyon memorandum was properly admitted as secondary evidence that charges were made upon the books of account.
The appellants argue that the admission of the memorandum would permit advancements to be established in a manner other than that provided by the testator. In support of this contention they cite Loring v. Blake, 106 Mass. 592. There a testatrix gave property to her children in equal shares. She directed that no child should be charged with any money advanced on his or her account unless the same be charged in a memorandum filed with her will. The testatrix gave a sum to one of her daughters who signed a receipt stating that the sum was to be deducted from the amount she would receive from the estate. The court held that the receipt was not such a memorandum as was contemplated by the will and that the sum was not to be deducted from the daughter's share. That case is one in which the terms of the will were being construed. The issue presented was whether a receipt was a memorandum as *220 contemplated by the will. Here, the issue is not whether the Lyon memorandum can be considered entries in a book of account, but rather, since the books of account were lost, whether the memorandum can serve as evidence of what those entries were.
For the reasons stated above we hold that the Lyon memorandum was admissible, and there being no evidence which tended to establish that charges for advancements were not made, the decree below must be affirmed. Costs and expenses of appeal are to be in the discretion of the Probate Court.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The will was executed on October 8, 1907, approximately a year before the filing of the inventory.
[1a]  The pertinent provisions of this article read: "I direct my Trustees to retain the present location of the business office of the estate at 12 Ashburton Place, Boston, and that the accounts thereof shall be kept by Albert M. Lyon ... as they now are until circumstances shall make a change imperative."
[2]  The italicized words were added in handwriting to the printed wording of the jurat.
[1b]  The decree also instructed the trustees with respect to other matters but these need not concern us, for the parties are in agreement as to them, and they have not been argued.

=== CASE 2221947 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:24.363396+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 732 (2000)
William CROSS, Relator,
v.
COUNTY OF BELTRAMI, Respondent.
No. C8-99-1457.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
March 7, 2000.
*733 Mark W. Gehan, Matthew A. Slaven, Collins, Buckley, Sauntry & Haugh, P.L.L.P., St. Paul, for relator.
Pamela R. Galanter, Frank Madden & Associates, Plymouth, for respondent.
Considered and decided by TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge, CRIPPEN, Judge, and FOLEY, Judge.[*]
OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
In Minnesota, public employees have a right of independent review of grievances that arise out of the terms and conditions of their employment. As an independent review agency found that the respondent Beltrami County had no cause to discharge relator, relator now contends that the county acted without authority when it treated the decision as a recommendation and found cause for relator's discharge. Because independent review under the statute is final, we reverse the county's further review of the employee's grievance.
*734 FACTS
On December 30, 1997, the county sheriff fired relator, a chief deputy, for violating a sexual harassment policy and violating the policy against conduct unbecoming an officer. Respondent claimed that relator was an at-will employee who had no right of review. The parties submitted their dispute to the Bureau of Mediation Services, which determined that the matter should be decided by an independent arbitrator.
The arbitrator determined that respondent was estopped from contending that relator's position was at-will and that respondent did not have just cause to terminate relator. The arbitrator concluded that respondent was permitted to take some disciplinary action against relator but that the appropriate action was a demotion to a non-supervisory position, not a discharge. Notwithstanding the arbitrator's findings of fact and conclusions of law, the respondent sustained its discharge of relator.
ISSUE
Is a public employer entitled to review and overturn the independent review decision for which provision is made in Minn.Stat. § 179A.25?
ANALYSIS
Respondent disputes the finality of the arbitrator's decision, claiming that its Board could review both relator's grievance decision and the right of the Bureau of Mediation Services to independently review the question. Absent this right of review, respondent's challenge to the grievance decision can only be brought to this court in an appropriate motion for a writ of certiorari.
In considering questions of law, "reviewing courts are not bound by the decision of the agency and need not defer to agency expertise." St. Otto's Home v. Minnesota Dep't of Human Servs., 437 N.W.2d 35, 39-40 (Minn.1989) (citations omitted). Statutory construction is a question of law, which this court reviews de novo. Sorenson v. St. Paul Ramsey Med. Ctr., 457 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Minn. 1990).
Minn.Stat. § 179A.25 (1998), part of the Public Employment Labor Relations Act (PELRA), provides that public employees have "the right of independent review, by a disinterested person or agency, of any grievance arising out of the interpretation of or adherence to terms and conditions of employment." Minn.Stat. § 179A.25 (1998). "If no other procedure exists for the independent review of such grievances," the statute declares, "the employee may present the grievance to the commissioner [of the Bureau of Mediation Services] under procedures established by the commissioner." Id.
The entitlement to an independent review depends on "the nature of [the employee's] contract of employment." Boe v. Polk County Library Bd., 299 Minn. 226, 227, 217 N.W.2d 208, 209 (1974) (finding no right of review because employee had no contract or comparable tenure right). The governing statute, empowering the Bureau of Mediation Services to independently determine a grievance, is silent as to whether or not the public employer may decide the entitlement of a public employee to independent review.
In Boe, the public employer refused the right of independent review, putting upon the employee the burden to seek review, on which the employee evidently acted on a writ of certiorari. Respondent suggests that the parties in this case should have similar powers and burdens. But the circumstances here are much different from those in Boe, which had continued effect when the employer refuses to submit a matter for independent review. Although respondent expressly declared to the employee that it was "reserving" the issue of jurisdiction for determination, it chose nevertheless to join with the employee in submitting the grievance question for independent review. Under these circumstances, *735 in spite of its assertion of reserved powers, the county elected the process for determining the dispute. See Helmerichs v. Bank of Minneapolis & Trust Co., 349 N.W.2d 326, 327 (Minn. App.1984) (holding that voluntary participant in arbitration process is estopped from objecting to this resolution of dispute, citing Twomey v. Durkee, 291 N.W.2d 696 (Minn.1980)), review denied (Minn. Dec. 20, 1984).
Respondent also contends that the independent review performed by the arbitrator is not final because the statute does not declare it to be so, pointing to the contrast between Minn.Stat. § 179A.25 and Minn. Stat. § 179A.20 (which specifically calls for "compulsory binding arbitration"). But the statute speaks for itself. It does not call for an investigation or a recommendation but for an "independent review." Without finality, the concept of independence of the review is meaningless. The legislature's declaration of a "right of independent review" precludes the notion of a mere investigation or recommendation.
Equally important, the finality of the Bureau of Mediation Services' action is suggested by the rules that govern its conduct. The power in this regard was first given to the Public Employment Relations Board, which was abolished in 1992; the Bureau of Mediation Services subsequently took over its responsibilities. 1992 Minn. Laws ch. 582, Sec. 25 (amending Minn.Stat. § 179.25). The PER Board rule stated that the board had final authority on the resolution of grievances, even if it appointed an administrative law judge to make recommended findings of fact and conclusions of law. Minn. R. 7315.1000 (1997).
Because the act providing for the transfer of powers from the PER Board to the Bureau did not direct otherwise, when the responsibilities of the PER Board were transferred, all of the rules governing the responsibilities "remain effective and shall be enforced until amended or repealed" by the Bureau. Minn.Stat. § 15.039, subds. 1, 3 (1998).
The Bureau of Mediation Services, under its own rules, provides that if it selects an arbitrator, "[t]he arbitrator shall have full authority delegated by the commissioner to hear the grievance." See Minnesota Bureau of Mediation Servs., Bureau Policy VII Independent Review, VI(b) (1996). Thus, though the Bureau has final authority over the resolution of the grievance, its own policies allow the bureau to delegate that authority to an arbitrator.
Here, there is no evidence in the record that the Bureau in any way limited the authority of the arbitrator or that the Bureau sought only a "recommendation" or anything less than a decision from the arbitrator. In fact, in its post-hearing brief to the arbitrator, respondent conceded that "[i]n accordance with the policies of the Bureau of Mediation Services, the Commissioner delegated full authority to Stephen F. Befort, an independent arbitrator selected by the parties, to hear and decide the petition."
The Bureau, in its letter responding to the parties' request to resolve the matter, asserted that it did not have the authority to decide whether or not the arbitrator's decision was final and binding. But the Bureau was incorrect in this assertion. As the PER Board formerly had the authority to make final and binding decisions in independent reviews, so now does the Bureau. Here, as the Bureau did not make any limitations on the power of the arbitrator's authority to decide the issue, the arbitrator's decision on behalf of the Bureau is equivalent to the PER Board decision, which is final and binding.
DECISION
Respondent having no right to review the independent review decision, except in its own quest for appellant review, the case is remanded to respondent to act in compliance with the decision of the arbitrator.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 10.

=== CASE 9740013 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:42.25104+00 ===

OPINION
KLAPHAKE, Judge
Appellant Rolf Edward Rogers challenges an order (1) denying the elimination of his child support obligation based on a claimed reduction in his net income and a change in the amount of time the parties’ children spend with each parent; (2) increasing his child-support obligation to respondent Lisa Anne Rogers on the court’s own initiative; and (3) denying him the income tax child dependency exemptions. Because the district court did not err in applying the Hortis/Valento formula for calculating child support, we affirm the denial of a modification on a claimed “time” change. But because the district court failed to address appellant’s claim of a change in circumstance based on reduced income, increased child support sua sponte, and improperly awarded the dependency exemptions, we reverse and remand with directions on those issues.
FACTS
The parties’ marriage was dissolved on December 22, 1994. The district court awarded respondent physical custody of the three minor children. On June 10, 1998, the district court changed the physical custody of the three children to appellant, but awarded respondent extensive visitation rights. Pursuant to the established visitation, the children were to spend approximately 55' percent of their time with appellant and 45 percent with respondent. Appellant, claiming a decrease in income and that respondent was not exercising her visitation rights, thus reducing the actual time she had physical custody, moved the court for elimination of his child support obligation. The district court denied his motion and sua sponte increased appellant’s child support obligation. In the same hearing, the parties stipulated to the termination of spousal maintenance because of a clerical error in the original decree. Under the terms of the original decree, the parties were to annually alternate tax dependency exemptions upon termination of maintenance and the district court invoked this arrangement. Appellant seeks review of the district court’s denial of his motion for modifi*727cation, the order increasing support, and the award of the dependency exemptions.
ISSUES
1. Did appellant establish a substantial change of circumstances for purposes of child support modification?
2. Did the district court abuse its discretion by modifying appellant’s child support sua sponte?
3. Did the district court abuse its discretion by awarding respondent income tax dependency exemptions?
4. Is respondent entitled to attorney fees on appeal?
ANALYSIS
I. Change in Circumstances
Appellant claims that the district court abused its discretion by refusing to eliminate his child support payments based on a decrease in his income and based on respondent spending less time with the children than was anticipated when the court set child support. Child support may be modified if the moving party shows a substantial change in circumstances that renders the existing support award unreasonable and unfair. Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 2(a) (Supp.1999). Modification of child support is within the district court’s broad discretion and will not be reversed absent an abuse of discretion. Hennessy v. Stelton, 302 Minn. 550, 551, 224 N.W.2d 926, 927 (1974); Kuronen v. Kuronen, 499 N.W.2d 51, 53 (Minn.App.1993), review denied (Minn. June 22,1993).
A. Tweeton
Appellant’s first claim for a substantial change in circumstances is based on his allegation that respondent does not exercise her visitation time. In this case, the district court applied Tweeton. In Tweeton, this court affirmed a district court’s application of the Hortis/Valento formula to calculate child support where one party has sole physical custody and the other has extensive visitation. See Tweeton v. Tweeton, 560 N.W.2d 746, 748-49 (Minn.App.1997), review denied (Minn. May 28, 1997). Tweeton emphasizes that application of the Hortis/Valento formula “ ‘should be used’ in all joint physical cases” and notes that the Hortis/Valento formula in those cases “was not premised upon the legal designation of parents as ‘joint custodian,’ but upon the pragmatic observation that the arrangements reviewed in those cases called for a provision of a significant amount of physical care by each parent.” Id. at 748 (citation omitted). Thus, if a noncustodial parent provides a significant amount of physical care for his or her children, the district court must, under Tweeton, apply the Hortis/Valento formula. Also, because the Hortis/Valento formula, and hence Tweeton, are an application of the guidelines, if a noncustodial parent does provide a significant amount of physical care, the district court can deviate from the Hortis/Valento/Tweeton formula (i.e. deviate from the guidelines) only if it makes appropriate findings. See Minn.Stat. § 518.551, subd. 5(c) & (i) (Supp.1999) (setting forth factors permitting deviation from the guidelines and requiring findings to deviate from guideline support obligation).
Here, appellant’s child support obligation was calculated based on respondent having the children approximately 45 percent of the time. Appellant insists that respondent had the children only 27 percent of the time, even though he acknowledged that respondent typically exercises visitation from Friday at 5:30 p.m. through Monday at 8:30 a.m. and two additional overnights every two weeks from 5:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. This amounts to a total of five out of fourteen nights in a two-week period. Respondent thus has the children for 130 overnights, based on a yearly projection of this weekend/midweek schedule. Adding 18 more days over the four-week summer schedule brings the total to 148, resulting in custody 41 percent of the time. The district court found that the overall *728total, including holidays, is 45 percent, regardless of whether respondent exercises her additional overnight per month with each child. Because the record supports the district court’s calculations regarding time allocations, the district court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that the amount of physical care provided by the respective parties did not change. Consequently, continued application of the Twee-ton formula was required, and the district court did not abuse its discretion in denying the portion of appellant’s motion to modify support based on the alleged change in the amount of time the children spent with respondent.
B. Decreased Income
Appellant’s second argument for a substantial change in circumstances is based on his decreased income. In his affidavit, appellant provided evidence that his net monthly income decreased from $6,246 to $5,361, and that his expenses exceed his income by $1,000 even before he pays child support. The district court failed to address this issue, mistakenly stating in its order that “[appellant] does not claim that there has been a substantial increase or decrease in his income.” If this court is unable to determine from the district court’s findings whether the statutory requirements were properly met, this court will remand for further findings. Stich v. Stich, 435 N.W.2d 52, 53 (Minn.1989). Particularized findings are necessary in child support cases. Id,. Findings also are necessary if a court wishes to refuse modification of child support. Olson v. Olson, 399 N.W.2d 660, 664 (Minn.App.1987). Because the findings fail to show that the district court considered the appropriate statutory factors, we reverse and remand for further findings on this issue.
II. Sua Sponte Modification of Child Support
Appellant claims the district court abused its discretion by increasing his child-support obligation on its own initiative. Appellant initially moved to clarify the district court’s decision to terminate spousal maintenance. The district court agreed with appellant that there was a clerical mistake, and terminated his spousal maintenance obligation one year earlier than provided in its previous order. Without a motion from respondent, the district court then increase appellant’s child support obligation, determining that respondent’s receipt of spousal maintenance had been used in calculating her income for purposes of child support.
The district court does not have authority to modify child support on its own initiative. See Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 1 (1998) (allowing modification of child support on motion of either party). In addition, the district court must inquire into the parties’ incomes and allow the parties to present all the facts, which it did not do. See MinmStat. § 518.551, subd. 5(i) (Supp. 1999) (support order requires findings on obligor’s income and other significant factors). We therefore reverse the district court’s increase of appellant’s child support obligation.
III. Tax Exemptions
Appellant contends that the district court abused its discretion by refusing to award him the tax dependency exemptions for the children. The district court has discretion in awarding tax exemptions. Crosby v. Crosby, 587 N.W.2d 292, 298 (Minn.App.1998), review denied (Minn. Feb. 18, 1999). As a general rule, the custodial parent is entitled to the tax exemption. Gerardy v. Geraray, 406 N.W.2d 10, 14 (Minn.App.1987). The court may order the custodial parent to execute a waiver of the exemption in favor of the noncustodial parent. Theroux v. Boehmler, 410 N.W.2d 354, 358 (Minn.App.1987). If the court does not order a waiver, it must strictly follow federal law and award the exemption to the custodial parent. Id.
Under the original divorce decree, appellant was granted the dependency exemptions for all three children so long as *729he was obligated to pay spousal maintenance. On termination of spousal maintenance, appellant and respondent were to alternate the children’s exemption deductions annually. After terminating the spousal maintenance retroactively, the district court applied the original decree’s use of tax exemptions. The original decree, however, was based on respondent having physical custody of the children, whereas now appellant has physical custody of all three children.
The district court found that respondent needed increased “cash flow” after maintenance terminated and awarded respondent a tax exemption to give her additional income. Dependency exemptions are awarded to either the custodial parent or, upon waiver of the custodial parent, to the parent paying child support. See Biscoe v. Biscoe, 443 N.W.2d 221, 224 (Minn.App.1989) (“[d]ependency exemptions are aligned with child support and may be modified upon a showing of a substantial change of circumstances”). There is no basis for using dependency exemptions as income support in lieu of spousal maintenance. Simply following the original decree as to tax exemptions after termination of maintenance, without considering that physical custody of the children has changed, is an abuse of discretion. Cf. Hecker v. Hecker, 568 N.W.2d 705, 709-10, n. 3 (Minn.1997) (in .maintenance context, failure to obtain status assumed by judgment can be substantial change in circumstances justifying modification). We thus reverse the district court’s order and remand with directions to award appellant the dependency exemptions.
IV. Attorney Fees on Appeal
Respondent requests attorney fees on appeal, citing Minn.Stat. § 518.14, subd. 1 (1998). Under this statute, a party is entitled to fees only if necessary to “carry on or contest the proceeding” or if a party “unreasonably contributes to the length or expense of the proceeding.” Id. Respondent has shown neither need nor conduct entitling her to attorney fees. Therefore, we deny respondent’s motion for attorney fees on appeal.
DECISION
Because the district court did not err in applying the Tweeton formula, we affirm on that issue. Because the district court erred in increasing appellant’s child support obligation sua spónte, we reverse as to that issue. The district' court erred in failing to address modification of appellant’s support obligation based on a decrease in income and in awarding the tax dependency exemptions to respondent, despite a change in circumstances from the original decree. We reverse and remand as to these issues and direct the district court to consider the appropriate statutory factors as to modification of support and to award appellant the dependency exemptions. No attorney fees are awarded on appeal.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded; motion denied.

=== CASE 9740014 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:42.255874+00 ===

SCHUMACHER, Judge
(concurring in part, dissenting in part)
I respectfully dissent from three aspects of the majority’s opinion.
1. The portion of the district court’s order stating that appellant did not claim a decrease in his income is consistent with what appellant’s attorney told the district court. Counsel stated appellant’s motion to modify support was based on a claim that respondent did not have the children as often as indicated by the visitation schedule and twice stated that appellant’s motion was not “economically driven.” Because appellant functionally withdrew any income-based claim, the district court did not need to address that claim.
2. Clerical errors may be corrected on a court’s own initiative. Minn. R. Civ. P. 60.01. Here, a clerical error caused an improper extension of respondent’s maintenance award. That award was used to *730calculate respondent’s child-support obligation under Tweeton v. Tweeton, 560 N.W.2d 746 (Minn.App.1997), review denied (Minn. May 28, 1997). Therefore, to not correct the support obligation when the maintenance error was corrected would have left a support obligation in place that was not based on the parties’ current incomes. See Thomas v. Thomas, 407 N.W.2d 124, 127 (Minn.App.1987) (requiring support obligations to be based on “current net income”); see also State Inc. v. Sumpter & Williams, 558 N.W.2d 719, 723 (Minn.App.1996) (district court did not abuse its discretion in correcting judgment based on clerical error), review denied (Minn. Nov. 20,1996).
3. The district court’s award of the tax dependency exemptions to respondent is supported by the findings that the “continued award of all three income tax exemptions to [appellant] would not be in the children’s best interests” and that respondent needed increased “cash flow to allow her to have sufficient accommodations for overnight visitation with the children.” This award explicitly considers the custodial situation and is consistent with case law. E.g., Crosby v. Crosby, 587 N.W.2d 292, 298 (Minn.App.1998) (award of tax-dependency exemption to noncustodial father upheld where physical care of children equally divided, mother had greater financial resources, and exemption was of no benefit to mother), review denied (Minn. Feb. 18, 1999); Joneja v. Joneja, 422 N.W.2d 306, 310 (Minn.App.1988) (award of tax-dependency exemptions is discretionary with district court).
Because the district court did not abuse its discretion on these issues, I would affirm.

=== CASE 2221845 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.647548+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 64 (2000)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Brian Luke BROULIK, petitioner, Appellant,
No. C6-98-989.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
February 24, 2000.
*66 John M. Stuart, State Public Defender, Susan K. Maki, Asst. State Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Mike Hatch, Minn. Atty. Gen., John B. Galus, Asst. Atty. Gen., St. Paul, G. Paul Beaumaster, Rice County Atty., Faribault, for respondent.
Heard, considered, and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
LANCASTER, Justice.
A Rice County jury found appellant, Brian Luke Broulik, guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.343, subd. 1(a) (1998).[1] Appellant argues that the trial court erred by refusing to give a modified version of the cautionary jury instructions on the admission of evidence of a prior bad act. We affirm.
At approximately 4 p.m. on Sunday, May 4, 1997, a man approached eight-year-old M.M. in Northfield, Minnesota, and asked M.M. if he would like to see the snake the man had found. The man led M.M. into a nearby apartment building's laundry room and once there touched M.M.'s penis. The man asked M.M. to reciprocate, but when M.M. refused, the man let him leave. M.M. immediately told his sister of the assault and the children observed the man leave the area in a small black car. The children then told their mother what occurred, and she called the police at approximately 4:30 p.m.
The police arrived and M.M. gave a description of the man and his car. M.M. then went to the police station and gave a recorded statement to the officers. M.M. returned home and at approximately 7 p.m. went for a bike ride with his mother. M.M. saw a black car drive past, and he identified it as the car of his attacker. M.M.'s mother directed a neighbor who knew of the incident to follow the black car. The neighbor drove in pursuit and soon saw a black car fitting the description and recorded the license plate number. That license plate number belonged to appellant's 1992 black Pontiac Grand Prix.
The next day M.M. chose appellant's picture from a photo line-up. M.M.'s sister could not identify appellant from the line-up, which consisted of six photographs, but chose his picture as one of two possibilities. On May 7 appellant telephoned police from his college in South Dakota. Appellant denied being in Northfield on May 4. Appellant said he spent the day with his father on the family farm in Blooming Prairie.
Appellant was subsequently charged with one count of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree.
Before trial, appellant notified the state that he intended to present an alibi defense. In response, the state sought to introduce evidence, pursuant to Minn. R. Evid. 404(b), of a prior bad act. The 404(b) evidence concerned an incident in which appellant improperly touched the penis of an 8-year-old boy in February 1996, for which he pled guilty to second-degree criminal sexual conduct. In fact, Sunday, May 4, 1997, was the day before appellant was to be sentenced for the 1996 *67 incident, and he had an 8 p.m. appointment with his attorney Sunday evening in Owatonna, Minnesota. Appellant objected to the admission of evidence of the 1996 molestation, but agreed during trial to stipulate to the essential facts of the episode.
After the state rested its case, the court read the following cautionary instruction to the jury:
The evidence that was going to be offered through testimony this morning was evidence, the State offered, was going to introduce, concerning an occurrence on February 7th, of 1996, in Owatonna, Minnesota. That evidence is offered only for whatever value, if any, you find it has in assisting you in determining whether the Defendant committed the acts in Northfield on May 4, 1997, which the defendant is charged with in the complaint we are trying at this trial.
The Defendant is not being tried for, and may not be convicted, for any offense other than the offense charged in the complaint. You're specifically instructed that you're not to convict the Defendant on the basis of any occurrence on February 7, 1996, in Owatonna, to do so might result in unjust double punishment.
This instruction was an adaptation of CRIMJIG 2.01 to the facts of this case. See 10 Minn. Dist. Judges Ass'n, Minnesota PracticeJury Instruction Guides, Criminal, CRIMJIG 2.01 (3d ed.1990).
The trial court then read the following stipulation to the jury:
On February 7, 1996, Brian Luke Broulik, then 23 years of age, having been born on August 11, 1972 had sexual contact with BW, then an 8-year-old boy, at the Bridge Street Apartments in Owatonna. This occurred when Mr. Broulik offered to help BW remove his snow pants. In the course of helping him remove his snow pants, Mr. Broulik, for sexual purposes, touched BW's genital area. BW immediately reported this incident to his mother who immediately called the Owatonna Police.
An hour after this incident was reported, Mr. Broulik's automobile, a 1992 Pontiac Grand Prix, with Minnesota license number 028-FAS, was seen at the Bridge Street Apartments. At the time of this incident Mr. Broulik was living on his parents' farm in rural Blooming Prairie, in Steele County.
After an uncontested proceeding in which Mr. Broulik acknowledged his conduct, Mr. Broulik was convicted of and sentenced for Criminal Sexual Conduct in the Second Degree by the Steele County District Court.
Appellant testified that he spent May 4 helping his father on the farm. Appellant's father testified that appellant was with him, and never out of his sight, until 5 p.m. that day. M.M.'s mother reported the sexual assault to police at approximately 4:30 p.m. Appellant's mother testified that she saw appellant return from the field and later leave the family home at approximately 6:45 p.m. Several friends of appellant testified they saw appellant at 7:30 that evening at a Pizza Hut in Owatonna. This was in the same timeframe when M.M. and his mother reported seeing the black car in their neighborhood in Northfield.
A stipulation was read to the jury that appellant arrived on time for his 8 p.m. appointment, but to avoid prejudice the jury was not informed that the appointment was a meeting with appellant's attorney to discuss sentencing on the 1996 molestation incident.
At the close of trial and prior to the jury's deliberations, the court read this additional cautionary instruction to the jury:
The parties have stipulated to an occurrence on February 7th, of 1996, in Owatonna, Minnesota. As I told you at the time this evidence was offered, it was admitted only for whatever value, if any, you find it has in assisting you in determining *68 whether the Defendant committed the acts in Northfield on May 4, 1997, with which the defendant is charged with in the complaint we are trying at this trial. Defendant is not being tried for, and may not be convicted of, any crime other than the crime charged in this Complaint. You are instructed specifically that you are not to convict the Defendant solely on the basis of any occurrence on February 7, 1996, in Owatonna. To do so might result in unjust, double punishment.
This instruction was an adaptation of CRIMJIG 3.16 to the facts of this case. See 10 Minn. Dist. Judges Ass'n, Minnesota PracticeJury Instruction Guides, Criminal, CRIMJIG 3.16 (3d ed.1990).
On appeal to this court, appellant does not challenge the admission of the evidence of his prior offense ("Spreigl evidence"[2]), but argues that the trial court erred when it refused to modify the CRIMJIG 2.01 and 3.16 cautionary instructions as they related to the prior offense. Appellant contends that State v. Billstrom, 276 Minn. 174, 177-78, 149 N.W.2d 281, 284 (1967), requires a more specific cautionary instruction than is currently contained in CRIMJIGs 2.01 and 3.16.
We stated in Billstrom that when Spreigl evidence is admitted to rebut an alibi:
[b]oth at the time the evidence is received and in the final charge, the court should admonish the jury that the testimony is received for the limited purpose of establishing identity. It is the court's duty to advise the jury in unequivocal language that defendant is not being tried and may not be convicted for any offense except that charged, warning them that to convict for other offenses may result in unjust double punishment.
276 Minn. at 179, 149 N.W.2d at 285 (citations omitted). CRIMJIGs 2.01 and 3.16 follow the Billstrom language, except that they do not contain an admonition "that the testimony is received for the limited purpose of establishing identity."
Appellant asserts on appeal that the CRIMJIG 2.01 and 3.16 instructions given in his trial failed to satisfy Billstrom in two respects. First, he argues that the jury should have been instructed on the limited purpose for which it could permissibly use the evidence. Second, appellant argues that the jury should have been expressly instructed for what purpose it could not be used. We note at the outset that the instructions given did state that the evidence could be used only for the limited purpose of determining whether appellant committed the crime charged and could not be used to convict him for the prior conduct. Appellant contends that the instruction should be more specific in describing the permissible limited purpose, here establishing identity, and more specific as well in describing the impermissible use, inferring guilt from bad character.
"The refusal to give a requested jury instruction lies within the discretion of the trial court and no error results if no abuse of discretion is shown." State v. Blasus, 445 N.W.2d 535, 542 (Minn.1989). "The jury instructions must be viewed in their entirety to determine whether they fairly and adequately explained the law of the case." State v. Flores, 418 N.W.2d 150, 155 (Minn.1988). We afford significant discretion to the trial court to craft jury instructions. See State v. Peou, 579 N.W.2d 471, 476 (Minn.1998). We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion here by following the CRIMJIG 2.01 and 3.16 instructions.
First, we reject the contention that the appellant was deprived of his right to a fair trial because the jury instructions did not tell the jury that the other-crime evidence was admitted for the limited purpose of establishing identity. Significantly, it does not appear that appellant requested *69 such an instruction at trial. The record does not contain the precise instruction language that appellant requested because the request was made in an off-the-record discussion in chambers.[3] The nature of the instruction requested is nevertheless revealed in a later statement by defense counsel made on the record:
There was one other matter. It was actually initially made during the course of this trial. I requested that the court, as part of the cautionary instruction regarding the, regarding the use of other wrongful acts or crimes, incorporate in that language from Minnesota Rules of Evidence 404, stating that such evidence is not to be used to prove character, or that the actor in this case, the Defendant, acted in conformity with that character. I requested that as an initial cautionary instruction. I also, I guess, request it as part of the final. And for the record the court declined to give that instruction, as I recall.
(Emphasis added.) This statement demonstrates that the requested instruction was directed only at the purpose for which the jury could not use the evidence. We see in the record no indication that appellant asked that the jury be instructed that the Spreigl evidence could only be used to prove identity.
The United States Supreme Court has recognized that Federal Rule of Evidence 105, which is identical to the parallel Minnesota Rule 105, provides protection against unfair prejudice from other crimes evidence admitted under Rule 404(b). See Huddleston v. United States, 485 U.S. 681, 108 S.Ct. 1496, 99 L.Ed.2d 771 (1988).[4] Both the federal and state Rule 105 provide that "[w]hen evidence which is admissible * * * for one purpose but not admissible * * * for another purpose is admitted, the court, upon request, shall restrict the evidence to its proper scope and instruct the jury accordingly." Fed. R.Evid. 105; Minn. R. Evid. 105 (emphasis added). Thus, Rule 105 contemplates a specific instruction regarding the permissible use of Rule 404(b) evidence only upon request. Appellant apparently neither cited Rule 105 nor made such a request at trial. He therefore waived any argument that the instruction should have informed the jury that the evidence could be used only for the specific purpose of establishing identity. See generally State v. Morales, 324 N.W.2d 374, 376 (Minn. 1982).
We do not read Billstrom as mandating a specific limited purpose instruction for Rule 404(b) evidence even in the absence of a request. We have allowed the standard CRIMJIG 2.01 and 3.16 instructions to be used for 20 years. Rule 105, which addresses the subject of limited purpose evidence and was adopted ten years after Billstrom, expressly requires such an instruction only "upon request." In these circumstances we cannot conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in failing to instruct the jury that the Spreigl evidence *70 was admitted for the limited purpose of establishing identity.
Appellant urges us to join the Second and Eighth Circuit Courts of Appeal and adopt pattern instructions that inform the jury of the specific limited purpose for which Rule 404(b) evidence has been received. We have reviewed the pattern instructions of the Second and Eighth as well as other circuits to see how other courts handle the task of instructing juries on the proper use of Rule 404(b) evidence. The Second Circuit has endorsed an instruction regarding use of Rule 404(b) evidence that explains the limited purpose for which the evidence may be used. See United States v. Danzey, 594 F.2d 905, 915 (2d Cir.) (jury instructed "not to consider the evidence as going to the character of the accused but only as going to identity"), cert. denied, 441 U.S. 951, 99 S.Ct. 2179, 60 L.Ed.2d 1056 (1979). But consistent with Rule 105, the limited purpose instruction is only required if requested by the defendant. See United States v. Thomas, 54 F.3d 73, 81 (2d Cir.1995) ("If such evidence is admitted, and if requested to do so, the trial court must give an appropriate instruction to the jury explaining the limited purpose for which the evidence may be considered") (emphasis added).
Like the Second Circuit, the Eighth Circuit has adopted a model instruction for Rule 404(b) evidence that includes both what the evidence may and may not be used for. Eighth Circuit Instruction 2.09 (defendant's prior similar acts where introduced to prove identity) provides:
You [are about to hear] [have heard] evidence that the defendant previously committed [an act] [acts] similar to [the one] [those] charged in this case. You may use this evidence to help you decide [manner in which the evidence will be used to prove identitye.g., whether the similarity between the acts previously committed and the one(s) charged in this case suggests that the same person committed all of them].
Remember, however, that the mere fact that the defendant may have committed [a similar act] [similar acts] in the past is not evidence that [he][she] committed such [an act] [acts] in this case. The defendant is on trial for the crime[s] charged and for [that] [those] crime[s] alone. You may not convict a person simply because you believe [he][she] may have committed some act[s], even bad act[s], in the past.
See Eighth Circuit Manual Model Jury Instructions Criminal 2.09 (West 1996). We recognize that other federal circuit courts have endorsed similar pattern instructions to be given when requested. For example, First Circuit Pattern Jury Instructions Criminal 2.05 (West 1998) provides:
You have heard [will hear] evidence that [defendant] previously committed acts similar to those charged in this case. You may not use this evidence to infer that, because of his/her character, [defendant] carried out the acts charged in this case. You may consider this evidence only for the limited purpose of deciding: * * *.
See also Fifth Circuit Pattern Jury Instruction Criminal 1.30 (West 1997); Sixth Circuit Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions 7.13 (West 1991); Seventh Circuit Federal Jury Instructions Criminal 3.04 (West 1999); Ninth Circuit Manual Model Criminal Jury Instructions 2.10 (West 1997); Eleventh Circuit Pattern Jury Instructions Criminal Special Instructions 4 (West 1997).
The comments to CRIMJIGs 2.01 and 3.16 express the opinion of the Minnesota District Judges Association Committee on Criminal Jury Instruction Guides that "the instructions should not discuss possible inferences which may be drawn from particular evidence * * *. This should be left to the argument of the attorneys. Accordingly this instruction is deliberately phrased in general language." 10 Minn. Dist. Judges Ass'n, Minnesota Practice Jury Instruction Guides, Criminal, Comment *71 to CRIMJIG 2.01 (4th ed.1999). See id. Comment to CRIMJIG 3.16. We have not been made aware of an appellate decision that has echoed that concern. The federal appellate courts have taken a different approach by including the specific limited purpose for which Rule 404(b) evidence may be used in their pattern instructions. A trial court's failure to give an instruction on the specific purpose for which Rule 404(b) evidence may be considered is not error where no request to so instruct is made.
The second aspect of appellant's challenge to the instructions on the Spreigl evidence, and the one that he did raise at trial, is the need for a more specific instruction that the evidence could not be used to establish bad character. Rule 404(b), of course, contains more than a list of proper purposes for admission of Spreigl evidence. It provides that "evidence of another crime, wrong, or act is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity" with that character. We warned in Spreigl that a judge or jury should not give excessive weight to a defendant's history of prior misconduct because those acts may bear too strongly on a new allegation of misconduct. 272 Minn. at 496, 139 N.W.2d at 172. We examine the instructions given in this case to determine whether they adequately protected appellant from the unfair prejudice against which we warned in Spreigl.
We recently held that using the standard cautionary jury instructions with prior acts evidence "helps ensure that the jury uses the evidence only for the permissible purposes espoused in Rule 404(b) or our case law, and not to convict the defendant on the basis of the prior bad acts." State v. Williams, 593 N.W.2d 227, 237 (Minn.1999). See also State v. Lynch, 590 N.W.2d 75, 81 (Minn.1999) (using the standard cautionary instructions "assured that the jury did not give improper weight to the evidence"); State v. Kennedy, 585 N.W.2d 385, 392 (Minn.1998) (explaining that CRIMJIGs 2.01 and 3.16 lessen "the probability of undue weight being given by the jury to the evidence"). The standard cautionary instructions have been used for over 20 years, and we have not required more specific cautionary instructions when Spreigl evidence is admitted.
The trial court, in rejecting the proposed modification to the standard instructions, stated: "when I start emphasizing what [the prior conviction] cannot be used for, in order to give the jury any information, then I start saying what it could be used for * * * the JIG instruction fairly indicates that it can't be used for the, that he can't be convicted of that [prior] offense." This is the essence of what we will call the character instruction; the jury may not infer that because appellant committed a similar act in the past, he has a bad character and is therefore more likely to have committed the act charged in the complaint. That concept needs to be explained to the jury, but whether it is explained in terms of the word "character" is not pivotal. Cf. United States v. Larson, 112 F.3d 600, 603 (2d Cir.1997) (quoting the following jury instruction: "You may consider this evidence only for this purpose. You may not consider it as evidence of a general criminal propensity on the part of the defendant"). Instead, a trial court should be afforded the leeway to explain this prohibited use of Spreigl evidence in terms the court determines a jury will understand.
When the substance of a particular instruction is already contained in the trial court's instructions to the jury, the court is not required to give an additional requested instruction. See State v. Auchampach, 540 N.W.2d 808, 816 (Minn.1995). Here the jurors received an accurate instruction admonishing them not to convict appellant based on his prior crime. The standard CRIMJIG instructions adequately cautioned the jury about how the Spreigl evidence could not be used. A more specific caution focused on impermissible character *72 inferences from Spreigl evidence would not be prohibited, but it was not an abuse of discretion to use CRIMJIGs 2.01 and 3.16.
We recently held that when a court correctly states the law in language that a jury can understand, there is no reversible error. See Peou, 579 N.W.2d at 476. Here, the instructions warned the jury not to convict appellant based upon the prior incident of child molestation. We do not believe the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to give a modified cautionary instruction.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Minnesota Statutes § 609.343, subd. 1, provides:
A person who engages in sexual contact with another person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree if any of the following circumstances exists: (a) the complainant is under 13 years of age and the actor is more than 36 months older than the complainant. Neither mistake as to the complainant's age nor consent to this act by the complainant is a defense. In a prosecution under this clause, the state is not required to prove that the sexual contact was coerced.
[2]  See State v. Spreigl, 272 Minn. 488, 139 N.W.2d 167 (1965).
[3]  To permit adequate appellate review of a challenge to jury instructions, counsel should make sure that any request for specific instruction language appears on the record. Minn. R.Crim. P. 26.03, subd. 18(1), permits proposed instructions to be submitted in writing and requires the trial court to inform counsel on the record of its proposed action upon such requests prior to the arguments to the jury.
[4]  Federal courts treat Rule 404(b) as a rule of inclusion, permitting evidence of other crimes to be admitted unless it tends only to prove the defendant's criminal propensity. See United States v. Molina, 172 F.3d 1048, 1054 (8th Cir.1999); United States v. Bok, 156 F.3d 157, 165 (2d Cir.1998); United States v. Cassiere, 4 F.3d 1006, 1021 (1st Cir.1993); United States v. Cohen, 888 F.2d 770, 776 (11th Cir. 1989). See generally United States v. VanMetre, 150 F.3d 339, 351 (4th Cir.1998); United States v. Bakke, 942 F.2d 977, 981 (6th Cir. 1991); Government of Virgin Islands v. Edwards, 903 F.2d 267, 269-70 (3d Cir.1990); United States v. Cuch, 842 F.2d 1173, 1175-76 (10th Cir.1988); McCluney v. Jos. Schlitz Brewing Co., 728 F.2d 924, 929 (7th Cir. 1984); United States v. Ackal, 706 F.2d 523, 531 (5th Cir.1983).

=== CASE 2221852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.840359+00 ===

53 Ill. App.2d 223 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 653
Muddy Grade School District No. 40, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Raleigh Grade School District No. 34, County Board of School Trustees of Saline County, Illinois, C.R. Gardner, Ex-Official Secretary of the Board of School Trustees, Ralph Reeder, et al., Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 64-35.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
November 5, 1964.
James W. Snaders, of Marion, for appellants.
Arlie O. Boswell, of Harrisburg, for appellee.
DOVE, P.J.
Ralph Reeder, Ruby Reeder, Clyde Gibbs and Otto Gibbs, on May 10, 1963, presented to the County Board *224 of School Trustees of Saline County, their petition praying that the real estate described in the petition be detached from Muddy Grade School District No. 40 and annexed to Raleigh Grade School District No. 34.
The required notices were given and on June 4, 1963, the Board met and considered this petition and heard the testimony of the several witnesses. On June 19, 1963, the Board entered an order reciting that the Board "granted the prayer of said petition, and assigned said real estate described in the petition to the Raleigh Grade School District No. 40." Thereafter Muddy Grade School District filed in the Circuit Court of Saline County its complaint to review this order. A hearing was had and on February 18, 1964, the Circuit Court entered an order reversing the order of the County Board of School Trustees, the only finding therein being that the order "detaching the area in accordance with the petition herein, was not entered in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the statute in such cases made and provided, and that said decision should be reversed and vacated." To reverse that order, Raleigh Grade School District No. 34 and the County Board of School Trustees, appeal.
Appellee herein, Muddy Grade School District No. 40, has made no appearance in this court, and we are not aided by any brief filed in its behalf.
The petition which initiated this proceeding was entitled: "Petition for Detachment and Annexation of Territory." It was addressed: "To the County Board of School Trustees of the County of Saline and State of Illinois," and commences:
"We, the undersigned, respectfully represent:
1. That we and each of us are legal voters residing in the following described territory:
The west one-half (W 1/2) of the southwest one-fourth (SW 1/4) of Section 35; and northeast one-fourth *225 (NE 1/4) of southeast one-fourth (SE 1/4) in section 34; and the south twenty-five acres of the southeast one-fourth (SE 1/4) of the northeast one-fourth (NE 1/4), all located in Township 8 South, Range 6 East of the Third Principal Meridian."
The record discloses that the hearing was conducted by the County Board of School Trustees in the Circuit Court Room on the evening of June 4, 1963, and at the beginning of the hearing, counsel representing appellee, addressing the Board, said: "In the petition you show 120 acres, and in your statement you state the area involved within the petition is 145 acres. I would like an indentification of the 25 acres before we proceed any further." Thereupon, C.R. Gardner, County Superintendent of Schools and Ex-Officio Secretary of the Board of School Trustees, replied: "As far as the petition is concerned and map accompanying it, on the inconformity our legal description checks out and can stand on its own. I guess we will have to fire some help." Counsel then said: "In other words, may I ask the Superintendent, is the description in the petition the property that is being proposed to be detached from Muddy?" And Mr. Gardner replied: "That is correct."
It does not appear in what section the southeast one-fourth (SE 1/4) of the northeast one-fourth (NE 1/4) is located. The south twenty-five acres thereof is therefore impossible of identification. Furthermore, no reference is made following this description of the premises, or anywhere in the petition, to the County or State in which the described premises are located. Our conclusion is, therefore, that the order of the County Board of School Trustees is void because the boundaries of the territory which it sought to detach from Muddy Grade School District No. 40, and annex to Raleigh Grade School District No. 34, are not located *226 and defined in the initiating petition, the required statutory notice of hearing, or order of the County Board of School Trustees.
In Streator Township High School Dist. No. 40 v. County Board of School Trustees of LaSalle County, 5 Ill. App.2d 38, 124 NE2d 579, the County Board of School Trustees granted the prayer of the petition and detached from Streator Township High School District No. 40 approximately 1515 acres of land, and annexed the same to Ottawa Township High School District No. 140. A portion of the premises was described in the petition as the north half of the southwest quarter, except 5 acres of section 33, town 32, north range 4 east of the third principal meridian in LaSalle County, Illinois. Upon appeal, under the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, the Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the County Board of School Trustees. In reversing the judgment of the Circuit Court, the Appellate Court, in the course of its opinion, said: (pp 43, 44) "Exactly what seventy-five acres of this eighty-acre tract is described in the petition filed in the instant proceeding cannot be determined from the description contained in the petition, the legal notice, or in the order of the Trustees. The defendants recognized that the boundaries of the territory in question could not be located from the description contained in the petition, but counsel for appellees contend that this defect may be corrected by evidence presented to the Trustees at the hearing. We do not think so. The primary function of the petition is to establish definitely the territory which the petitioners seek to have transferred from one school district to another." ... "Our conclusion," continued the court (pp 44, 45), "Is that the order of the County Board of Trustees is void because of the fact that the boundaries of the detached territory are not located and defined in the petition, notice, or order which we are reviewing."
*227 In Oakdale Community Consol. School Dist. v. County Board of School Trustees, 12 Ill. App.2d 260, 139 NE2d 795, there was an error in the description of the territory sought to be detached. The petition described it as the "southeast quarter of section 31, township 3, south, range 4 west, in Washington County, Illinois." The map required to be kept by the County Superintendent of Schools of Perry County, showed that the territory should have been described as the east half of that quarter section. The court held, however, that the misdescription, under all the facts disclosed by the record, could not have been misleading. The court distinguished the facts in this case from those in the Streator Township High School District case, supra, and said: (omitting citations) (p 264) "A mere error in description would not invalidate the proceedings where there could be no doubt as to the meaning and intent thereof. The so-called description in the instant case, if erroneous, could not be misleading.  The eighty acres in question are definitely described and regardless of whether the added eighty acres are located in the Oakdale or the Swanwick District, the territory described in the petition to annex is adequately described in the petition, and the proceeding would not be invalidated by reason of this type of description which might include territory already in the Coulterville District."
The School Code of 1961 provides that the boundaries of existing school districts lying entirely within any county may be changed by detachment or annexation by the County Board of School Trustees of such county when petitioned by two-thirds of the legal voters residing in any territory proposed to be detached from one district. Upon the filing of such a petition with the Secretary of the County Board of School Trustees, the Secretary shall cause a notice of such presentation to be given in writing to each board *228 of any district involved and publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the area of the territory described in the petition for the proposed change of boundaries. This notice shall state when the petition was filed, the description of the territory, the prayer of the petition and the return day on which the hearing on the petition will be held. (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 122, Art 7, secs 1, 6.)
Under the School Code, the territory sought to be detached from Muddy Grade School District No. 40, and annexed to Raleigh Grade School District No. 34, was required to have been properly and adequately described in the petition in order to give the County Board of School Trustees jurisdiction to enter an appropriate detachment and annexation order. This was not done. The words used in the petition and publication notice were insufficient to locate and define the boundaries of the territory sought to be detached from one district and annexed to another.
In Bourland v. Snyder, 224 Ill. 478, 79 NE 568, it is said (p 480): "A petition in compliance with the statute is prerequisite to the jurisdiction of the Board of Trustees to act, and likewise to the jurisdiction of any tribunal hearing the case on appeal from the Board."
The only appropriate order this court can enter is to affirm the judgment of the Circuit Court of Saline County.
Judgment affirmed.
WRIGHT and REYNOLDS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2221853 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.878086+00 ===

348 Mass. 144 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 922
JOSEPH LETO & others
vs.
BOARD OF ASSESSORS OF WILMINGTON & others (and a companion case[1]).
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
November 5, 1964.
December 2, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, & SPIEGEL, JJ.
Alexander E. Finger & Joseph F. Courtney for the plaintiffs.
Philip B. Buzzell & Charles M. Ewing for the defendants.
CUTTER, J.
Leto and others seek declaratory relief concerning the methods used in assessing property in Wilmington for 1964 taxes. In the companion case, the plaintiffs seek to restrain further action with respect to the 1964 tax assessment. A demurrer to each bill, addressed to the bill as a whole, was sustained. Each case has been reported by the trial judge for the decision of this court. See G.L.c. 214, § 30.
The bill in the Leto case alleges the following facts. In 1955 and 1956, the town established a "consistent scheme ... for ascertaining the fair cash value of all taxable real estate on a uniform, consistent, and equitable basis." In 1962, the assessors doubled the valuations theretofore determined on each such parcel." to approximate 100% of fair cash value for each such parcel." The assessors voted for "a general revaluation to be conducted in 1965." For the taxes of the year 1964, however, the chairman of the assessors "submitted revaluations made solely by him on only that land ... zoned for commercial and industrial use.[2] These revaluations increased assessments "from 300% to 1,900%" on "20% of all taxable land in the town," including land of the plaintiffs and were accepted by a majority *146 of the assessors.[3] No similar revaluations were made of other land with minor exceptions. The most significant allegations are "that the chairman of the [b]oard [of assessors] admitted that most residential land was assessed at a ratio of 79% to 82% of fair cash value and ... was not generally revalued" in 1964 while "commercial and industrial land was purportedly assessed at full cash value." and actually at "substantially in excess of fair cash value."
Upon the basis of earlier allegations the bill states as conclusions (a) that the valuations "cast a disproportionate tax burden" on the plaintiffs; and (b) that the assessors "deliberately and intentionally" have established and are pursuing a policy of assessing real estate "on a non-proportional basis ... discriminatory against many taxpayers, including the" plaintiffs. The bill also states that the chairman of the assessors conducted this revaluation of land in industrial and commercial zones by himself without participation by other assessors who acted thereon without understanding the chairman's methods, and in a manner different from that employed in prior years.
The bill in the Evans case (fn. 1) contains essentially the same allegations in substantially the same somewhat general and vague language. The allegations in both cases are diffuse and confusing and not made with the precision found in the careful statement of agreed facts described in Bettigole v. Assessors of Springfield, 343 Mass. 223.
In the Bettigole case, and in Opinion of the Justices, 344 Mass. 766, 768, we have recently discussed or referred to the statutory and constitutional requirements that property taxation be "proportional" and that property subject to *147 local taxation be taxed at full and fair cash value. See e.g. Constitution of the Commonwealth, Part II, c. 1, § 1, art. 4, and art. 10 of the Declaration of Rights; G.L.c. 59, §§ 38, 52. The duty of assessors was stated in the Bettigole case, 343 Mass. 223, 230-232. These opinions state what continues to be the law of the Commonwealth.
The difficulties of allegation, proof, timeliness, or appropriate remedy, frequently encountered by those who bring proceedings to test the constitutional and statutory validity of all one year's assessments and the whole tax levy for that year in a particular town, are illustrated by decisions discussed and cited in the Bettigole case. See e.g. Dowling v. Assessors of Boston, 268 Mass. 480; Amory v. Assessors of Boston, 306 Mass. 354; Amory v. Assessors of Boston, 310 Mass. 199; Carr v. Assessors of Springfield, 339 Mass. 89; Stone v. Springfield, 341 Mass. 246. See also notes, 75 Harv. L. Rev. 1374; 42 B.U.L. Rev. 246. Such a general attack upon a tax levy presents important public issues and formidable problems of proof. To grant wholesale relief, rather than to remit the complaining taxpayers to less drastic remedies, may seriously affect a town's ability to conduct its public services and cause great fiscal confusion.
Other remedies, even if not wholly satisfactory,[4] afford some measure of relief from disproportionate assessments. See e.g. G.L.c. 59, § (as amended through St. 1963, c. 125), § 64 (as amended through St. 1956, c. 544), § 65 (as amended through St. 1945, c. 621, § 6); G.L.c. 60, § 98. The existence of such remedies sometimes has been taken into account in determining whether a court should grant *148 relief in equity or by extraordinary writ. Even in the Bettigole case, 343 Mass. 223, 236-238, where the facts of a grossly nonproportional assessment scheme were plainly established, full consideration was given to whether practical difficulties and the public interest required that relief be denied. We said (at p. 236) that "the courts properly are always slow to grant injunctive relief in tax matters of this type except upon a very clear showing of violation of fundamental constitutional or statutory rights." In the Stone case, 341 Mass. 246, 249, we pointed out the necessity, in cases of this general type, of making "specific allegations of such asserted facts as would, if proved, establish invalid official action, as, for example, the precise nature of the lack of uniformity in assessments which ... [the plaintiffs expect] to prove and the circumstances indicating that it was intentionally discriminatory, rather than caused by inadvertence, mistake, or incompetence." We went on to discuss (at p. 250) the "necessity of specific allegations if judicial inquiry is not to cover an unduly wide range in a case of this character" in which a plaintiff "essentially asks the court to make `a revaluation of nearly all of the taxable real estate of a large ...'" community. We noted that, in this type of litigation, "courts should be slow to deal with issues of fact or law relating to properties other than those of the litigants before it, unless clearly required to do so."
The Bettigole case establishes that a court of equity may prevent the enforcement of the whole of an illegal city or town tax assessment for a given year. The authorities just cited, however, make it plain that such somewhat extraordinary relief will not be granted (1) unless basic facts exist showing essentially a deliberate and substantial violation[5] of the constitutional and statutory requirements that property tax valuations shall be proportional; (2) unless the plaintiffs show themselves to be directly, significantly *149 and adversely affected; (3) unless relief by ordinary abatement procedures or by an action at law will be seriously inadequate; and (4) unless equitable relief is shown to be practicable[6] and appropriate in the sense that the assessors' constitutional and statutory violations are so great as to warrant seasonable equitable interference with normal tax assessment and collection processes. There must be clear and precise allegation of facts which if proved will satisfy each of the foregoing prerequisites, if a bill in equity seeking such drastic relief is to be good against demurrer. No intendment will be made in favor of the allegations of such a bill in the face of a demurrer. See Mairs v. Madden, 307 Mass. 378, 380. There is particular practical reason in such cases that there be strict adherence to the requirement that averments of crucial facts be clear, direct, and unequivocal (see North Station Wine Co. Inc. v. United Liquors, Ltd. 323 Mass. 48, 51) so that the trial of very complicated issues of fact may be kept within reasonable limits.
Viewed in the light of these requisites, the diffuse and confusing allegations of these bills, although they may suggest that the assessors' procedures were improper or likely to result in some degree of nonproportional assessment, do not state a case for equitable relief. The allegation that land of the plaintiffs was revalued in 1964, perhaps, may be sufficient (taken with other allegations) to state discrimination against them as owners of commercial or industrial land, but even this allegation is largely by implication. We think, however, that the allegations concerning what the assessors have done are fatally indefinite and incomplete when they should have been full and incisive. Even if the allegations concerning the adoption of the 1955-1956 valuation scheme imply that thereafter the assessments were for a time proportional, it does not necessarily follow that they remained so as late as the 1962 doubling of the assessments. Indeed, it is alleged that the board in 1964 decided that a *150 new revaluation in 1965 was necessary and that the board chairman started in 1964 such a revaluation "on only that land ... in the areas zoned for commercial and industrial use." It does not appear that these revaluations were not necessary to bring the assessments of the revalued land to the level of fair cash value, or that the proposed 1964 assessments are not more nearly proportional than those in effect in 1963. The allegation that some land assessments were increased as much as 300% to 1900% suggests that the preexisting valuations had become very much out of line. It is not clearly alleged whether any structures (as distinguished from land, see fn. 3) were revalued in 1964 and it is not explicitly alleged that the aggregate assessments of land and structures will not be proportional, although, perhaps, that may be stated by implication.
The allegations most nearly setting out a violation of the principles stated in the Bettigole case are the general conclusions quoted above that "most residential land was assessed at ... 79% to 82% of fair cash value" and that "commercial and industrial land was purportedly assessed at full cash value," or more. Obviously no deliberate policy of assessing residential land and structures at 80% of fair cash value and commercial and industrial land and structures at 100% (or more) of fair cash value will comply with constitutional and statutory requirements. If alleged clearly and proved seasonably, equitable relief against such an assessment scheme should be granted on the principles declared in the Bettigole case. The basic specific facts alleged (see James Constr. Co. Inc. v. Commissioner of Pub. Health, 336 Mass. 143, 146; Weinstein v. Chief of Police of Fall River, 344 Mass. 314, 317) do little to support these general conclusions. If it was intended to allege a general scheme of intentional, serious, and nonproportional assessment, the basic facts supporting that assertion have not been set out with clarity and precision.[7] Indeed, the basic *151 facts are consistent with the view that the 1964 revaluations are the first (and perhaps the most immediately needed) steps in conducting in an orderly manner the general revaluation voted for 1965.[8] No allegations of fact, if proved, would justify the conclusion that the process of revaluation has been, or will be, unduly extended in time, or that the prompt revaluation by the assessors of land in residential zones is not contemplated, or that the assessors plan any continuing disparity of assessment ratios and levels among different classes of property. The bills do not aver any history of disparity comparable to the circumstances described in the Carr, Stone, and Bettigole cases.
In the light of these considerations we think that the demurrers were properly sustained. The allegations of basic facts in these bills do not show sufficiently that there is present occasion for substituting declaratory or injunctive equitable relief for the usual statutory remedies.[9]
Interlocutory decree sustaining demurrer affirmed in each case.
NOTES
[1]  John R. Evans & others vs. Board of Assessors of Wilmington & others, a ten taxpayers' bill under G.L.c. 40, § 53.
[2]  The bill says, "The revaluations distinguished ... [such] land from ... all other taxable classes of real estate by not subjecting such other land to similar revaluations and ... did not include revaluations of land used commercially and industrially ... located in other zoned areas...."
[3]  It is also alleged that one or more of the assessors have admitted that a revaluation only of land zoned for industrial and commercial use was adopted, that changes in other valuations were mainly based upon a limited number of sales and upon specific improvements of particular parcels, and that no similar revaluation was made of nonindustrial and noncommercial land. By implication at least the plaintiffs seem to have alleged that there has been "failure or refusal ... to revalue [at all] commercial and industrial structures and improvements," presumably as distinguished from commercial and industrial land. After reciting these and other allegations, mentioned in the body of this opinion, the plaintiffs "allege [all of them] as facts."
[4]  The Carr case, at pp. 92-93, the Stone case, at pp. 250-251, and the Bettigole case, at p. 237, suggest respects in which the usual statutory remedies may prove to be inadequate. As we said in the Stone case (at p. 251), "an assessment may be excessive in a constitutional sense, not because land is assessed at a figure in excess of its fair cash value, but because it is assessed at [fair cash value or] less than fair cash value while the land of other taxpayers is intentionally assessed at ... lower percentages of the full, fair cash value of such land." At p. 250, we pointed out that applications for abatement of real estate taxes have often been "dealt with in relation to whether the taxpayer's land is assessed for more than its fair cash value and without regard to whether other property is assessed at its full, fair cash value."
[5]  In essence it must be shown that the assessors are taking action intended to circumvent the constitutional and statutory requirements, or that such circumvention is the natural and probable consequence of this action.
[6]  This does not mean that questions of discretion whether to grant relief are open upon demurrer. See Massachusetts Chiropractic Laymen's Assn. Inc. v. Attorney Gen. 333 Mass. 179, 180. The bill, however, must allege at least the minimum facts essential to establish that any equitable relief is feasible.
[7]  Indefiniteness and lack of clarity also characterize the allegations concerning the conduct of the chairman of the assessors in his relation to his colleagues. These do little more than to suggest, in very general terms, that the full time chairman's revaluation activities (see St. 1950, c. 592, § 13) were approved by the chairman and one other assessor, without as much understanding by that assessor of the chairman's methods or as much exercise of intelligent independent judgment by him, as would have been desirable.
[8]  We assume that a general revaluation of a whole town normally will require a period of time and that most communities endeavor to maintain some stability in assessments, from year to year, subject to a continuing process of readjustment to reflect not only changes in properties but also clearly discernible long term trends in market conditions as distinguished from sporadic or short term fluctuations of a few prices.
[9]  Although the trial judge in sustaining the demurrers denied leave to amend the bills, this is a case where it would be appropriate for the Superior Court to exercise discretion to allow further prompt amendments of the bills, if the obscurity of the bills here discussed can be promptly and adequately corrected.

=== CASE 9740015 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:46.061087+00 ===

Achor, J.
The action is before this court on petition to transfer from the Appellate Court under Supreme Court Rule 2-23. [See: State Farm Life Insurance Company v. Spidel (1964), 194 N. E. 2d 96, for Appellate Court opinion.]
This was an action by plaintiffs-appellees against defendant-appellant to recover the proceeds of a life insurance policy issued by the appellant on the life of appellees’ son, Kenneth D. Spidel. The issues upon which the case was tried were formed by appellees’ second paragraph of answer which alleged that on May 26, 1958, appellant issued a life insurance policy to said Kenneth D. Spidel in the sum of $10,000, and that one of the conditions of said policy was that suicide within two years of the date of issuance of said policy was a risk not assumed under the policy, and that on August 4, 1959, said Kenneth D. Spidel committed suicide.
The grounds asserted as cause for new trial and assigned as error on appeal are as follows:
1. That the verdict is not sustained by sufficient evidence.
2. That the decision, is contrary to law.
3. That the court erred in overruling defendant-appellant’s motion for a directed verdict.
Before discussing the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom which support the verdict of the jury, we give consideration to the applicable law as related to the above assigned errors.
*460*4591. The contention that the verdict is not sustained by sufficient evidence presents no question to this court *460for review on appeal. Appellant alleged the affirmative defense of suicide in paragraph 2 of its answer and had the burden of proving the same. The jury found against appellant upon this issue and, as the court said in Metrailer et al. v. Bishop et al. (1959), 130 Ind. App. 77, 79, 162 N. E. 2d 94:
“ . . . *As the finding was negative to appellants who had the burden of proof, they cannot challenge the insufficiency of the evidence to sustain the finding [citing cases]
This general rule is supported by Pokraka v. Lummus Co. (1952), 230 Ind. 523, 528, 104 N. E. 2d 669, and Von Cline v. Cline, Administratrix, etc. (1960), 130 Ind. App. 473, 475, 165 N. E. 2d 608.
2. As to the contention that the verdict is contrary to law, the rule as announced by this court in Hinds, Executor Etc. v. McNair, et al. (1956), 235 Ind. 34, 41, 129 N. E. 2d 553, is:
“If the undisputed evidence entitles the one who has the burden of proof to a verdict which has been denied him, such verdict is contrary to law. To determine this question we may consider only the evidence most favorable to the appellees, together with all reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom.
‘It is only where the evidence is without conflict and can lead to but one conclusion, and the trial court has reached an opposite conelusion, that the decision of the trial court will be set aside on the ground that it is contrary to law,” See: Metrailer et al v. Bishop et al., supra.
3. In Whitaker, Admr. v. Borntrager (1954), 233 Ind. 678, 680-681, 122 N. E. 2d 734, the court gave this answer as to when a trial court may properly give a jury a peremptory instruction to find for the defendant:
*461“ ‘When there is a total absence of evidence or legitimate inference in favor of the plaintiff upon as essential issue; or where the evidence is without conflict and is susceptible of but one inference and that inference is in favor of the defendant. [Citing cases.]
‘... [T]he court will not weigh the conflicting evidence or inferences but will consider only the evidence and inferences that are most favorable to the party against whom the motion for a peremptory verdict is directed. [Citing cases.]
‘In determining whether a peremptory instruction should be given the court must accept as true all facts which the evidence tends to prove and draw, against the party requesting such instruction, all inferences which the jury might reasonably draw.’” [Citing cases.] See also: Garr v. Blissmer et al. (1962), 132 Ind. App. 635.177 N. E. 2d 913; Huttinger v. G. C. Murphy Company (1961), 131 Ind. App. 642, 172 N. E. 2d 74.
Thus, in determining whether the verdict is contrary to law and whether a verdict should have been directed for appellant, the tests and rules to be applied in deciding both questions are similar. Appellees are entitled to all reasonable inferences from the evidence in the record most favorable to them and, unless such evidence and inferences reasonably lead exclusively to the conclusion contended for by appellant and no other, the trial court should be affirmed in upholding the jury verdict.
With these rules in mind, we proceed to a recital of the evidence and consider this evidence and the inferences which support the verdict of the jury.
Kenneth D. Spidel was born in 1939 and was the son of appellees Kenneth W. and Reba Spidel. He graduated from high school in 1957, at which time he was in the top twenty of his class, and received a scholarship. He was an ambitious boy who worked on the outside while going to school; had always received high honors in school; was president of a high school fraternity; the leading student in his chemistry class, and president of *462the youth group of the church that he and his parents attended.
He enlisted in the Army and later was sent to Hanau, Germany, where he was assigned as a military policeman to Company C .of the 709th M. P. Battalion, eventually being promoted to P.F.C. At this time he was '20 years old, five feet, eleven inches tall and weighed about 180 pounds.
On August 3, 1959, at approximately 2:00 p.m., Kenneth Spidel and a roommate, Ulysses Hedrick, left the barracks and went to the town of Hanau to see about a temporary duty assignment for the next day in Frankfort, Germany. Thereafter they went to the American Star Bar in Hanau, started drinking beer, which drinking was continued in various taverns until about 8:30 p. m., when P.F.C. James L. King, a military policeman in Spidel’s outfit on routine patrol, told them to return to the barracks.
Spidel returned, but later went back to Hanau and resumed drinking, and about 11:15 p. m. P.F.C. King, with his patrol partner Kunz, again saw Spidel, who was then heavily under the influence of alcohol. They took him back to his company in a patrol jeep.
Hedrick, Spidel’s roommate, observed him in their room between 12 and 12:30 a. m., and Hedrick described him as “blind drunk or completely drunk,” and stated that he fell out of bed several times between 12:30 and 1:00 o’clock and had to be helped back into bed. At about 4:30 a. m. Hedrick awakened Spidel and asked him if he wanted to go to “chow.” Spidel declined but asked to borrow a sheet of paper and a pen, “to get his story straight,” and then asked his roommate to go down to the charge of quarters room to find out what had been put in the register. Hedrick did not return with the requested information. Soon after Hedrick left, Spidel went down to the charge of quarters room *463dressed in his underwear, looking tired, haggard and worried, and wanted to read the entry in the CQ log. He was very nervous and said he would get a 208 (dishonorable) discharge.
About a half hour later Spidel was seen fully dressed in proper uniform for going on duty in Frankfort, Germany. He was freshly shaven, his hair was neat and he appeared calm and asked for a cigarette.
Shortly thereafter Spidel went to the arms room and got a M-l rifle and a .45 caliber pistol, which was regular equipment for military policemen. At that time he appeared “fairly happy . . . had a smile on his face, and he answered in a polite fashion, which was the way he was all the time.”
At about 6:30 a. m. (about 15 minutes later), Ralph Register, another soldier, heard a shot. He went out in the hall and observed a bullet hole in the door to Spidel’s room, a crack in the plaster across from the door, and an expended bullet, which he picked up. He went into Spidel’s room and there found him on his bunk with a wound in his head. He then went to the charge quarters, reported the incident, and returned. Spidel was still alive, moving his arms and speaking incoherently. He observed a .45 caliber pistol lying on Spidel’s throat and an Air Mail-type envelope with red and blue border lying on his chest. Spidel died from the bullet wound, -the bullet entering his right temple and leaving the left temple. A witness who specialized in pathology testified that the gun was fired fairly close to the head. The contents of the envelope could only be described as a suicide note.
Obviously this evidence would have sustained a verdict for the appellant-defendant. The trial judge, sitting as a “thirteenth juror” at the motion for new trial, had not only the right but the obligation to weigh the evidence and determine whether *464in the minds of reasonable men a contrary verdict should have been reached. Novak, Admx., etc. v. Chi. & C. Dist. Tr. Co., et al. (1956), 235 Ind. 489, 497, 135 N. E. 2d 1, 5; Harmon v. Arthur (1963), 135 Ind. App. 134, 192 N. E. 2d 498; Bailey v. Kain (1963), 135 Ind. App. 657, 192 N. E. 2d 486; Topper v. Dunn (1961), 132 Ind. App. 306, 177 N. E. 2d 382. However, the trial court having determined that issue adversely to the party having the burden of proof, the appellate tribunals of the state are not free to readjudicate the credibility of witnesses or to weigh the evidence. Rather, since the verdict was for the plaintiff-appellees, and since the appellant-defendant had the burden of proving death by suicide, this court on appeal may look to the evidence solely for the purpose of determining whether the evidence is without conflict and could lead solely to a conclusion contrary to that reached by the jury. As this court stated in the case of Hinds, Executor Etc. v. McNair, et al., supra, 235 Ind. 34, 41, 129 N. E. 2d 553:
“If the undisputed evidence entitles the one who has the burden of proof to a verdict which has been denied him, such verdict is contrary to law. To determine this question we may consider only the evidence most favorable to the appellees, together with all reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom.”
Evidence in support of the verdict and of the overruling of the motion for new trial, on the ground that the verdict was contrary to law, consists primarily in the testimony of a Mr. Henderlong, who was an arms ballistic expert who testified extensively regarding the technical characteristics of the Colt .45 pistol, including such matters as the muzzle velocity and the foot pound pressure per inch produced by such weapons, and of the “most tremendous recoil actions” of such small arms. He also testified regarding the heat generated upon the slug projectile of such a weapon caused by *465the burning gasses forcing it through the barrel and the subsequent additional friction caused by the projectile passing through air or other matter through which it passes. He testified that it was his opinion that “if the gun were held in such a position as to enable the man to pull the trigger himself, the recoil would have been so great because of the lack of strength in that position that the arm would have thrown the gun upon the recoil.” And, further, that “the muzzle blast from the muzzle of the gun would have, without a question, blown the envelope off the chest.”
From the above evidence the jury could have reasonably inferred that Kenneth Spidel did not himself fire the weapon, because of the great likelihood that he would have lost control of the weapon on its recoil, and that it would not reasonably have fallen or been laid by him across his neck. Further, the jury could have inferred that by reason of the muzzle blast from the weapon the “suicide note” was not placed on his chest by Spidel himself, but by someone else, after the firing of the fatal shot. These inferences may be coupled with the failure of appellant’s evidence to exclude the possibility of a second person having been in the room with Kenneth Spidel up to 35 or 40 seconds after the fatal shot. [According to the witness Henderlong, it would have required this period of time for the projectile to cool enough to be picked up in a naked hand.]
Other weak points in the evidence are, the lack of evidence that Spidel’s fingerprints were on the gun; that the gun which fired the fatal shot was that which was released to Spidel. Under these circumstances some doubt can be said to exist as to whether the decedent met his death by his own hand. Certainly we cannot say that the evidence is without conflict and is susceptible of but one inference and that inference is in favor of the defendant-appellant.
*466Admittedly, the alternatives to suicide are accident or homicide and neither of these are supported by sufficient evidence to require an inference that the deceased met his death by either of said alternative methods. However, the appellees did not have the burden of affirmatively establishing such proof. In this case appellees had no burden of proof as to the cause of death, and, unless appellant’s evidence is such that only one inference — that of suicide — was possible, the verdict in appellees’ favor must be upheld.
Judgment affirmed.
Arterburn, C. J. & Landis, J., concur.
Jackson, J., concurs in result.
Myers, J., dissents, with opinion.

=== CASE 9740016 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:46.065526+00 ===

Dissent
Myers, J.
I cannot agree with the majority opinion’s conclusion that there was sufficient evidence from which the jury could have reasonably inferred that Kenneth D. Spidel did not himself fire the pistol and thus uphold the jury’s verdict that he died by some other method than suicide.
There was evidence that the gun was held close to Spidel’s temple and that the shot was fired accordingly. Spidel had previously gotten “blind” drunk the night before, had gotten up at 5:30 a.m. on August 4th and obtained from witness Hedrick a sheet of paper, a pen and a large business-type air mail-envelope. The envelope which was found on his chest containing the suicide note was the same type. Spidel had said he was in serious trouble and might go AWOL and was afraid of an undesirable discharge by the Army. Apparently, by around 6:00 o’clock, he had shaved and dressed and was almost serene in his manner as though he had found a solution to his problem. At 6:20 a.m. he *467was dead from the shot. Previously, he had obtained a .45-caliber pistol without signing for it.
Witness Register testified that he was in the process of shaving, across the hall from Spidel’s room. At 6:15 he heard a shot, and, upon going out into the hall, found the expended bullet which had gone through the door, falling on the floor in the hall. He kicked open the door to Spidel’s room and found him lying in bed, still alive, with the pistol on his throat and the note on his chest. It was witness Hedrick who came up immediately thereafter and took the pistol off Spidel’s throat and put it on a footlocker, together with the spent bullet.
This action in itself would have obliterated any finger prints on the pistol, including those of Spidel or some one else. This was factual evidence which was not disputed. The actions on the part of Spidel, plus the contents of the note, all of which are undisputed, are circumstantial evidence indicating suicide. There was absolutely no evidence that there was any one in the vicinity who entered Spidel’s room and shot him. “If one side is supported by evidence, and the other is not, that side which is unsupported must fail.” Sovereign Camp, etc. v. Haller (1900), 24 Ind. App. 108, 114, 56 N. E. 255, 257. From what appeared in the record, it was only pure speculation and guess-work, not based upon the factual evidence, which could have led the jury to believe that Spidel had not committed suicide.
The evidence upon which appellees rely was opinion evidence. It was based upon hypothetical questions placed to an expert in the field of firearms. He was not at the scene at the time of the shooting. He stated on voir dire examination that he had never seen a person after he had been shot in the head by a .45-caliber pistol, nor had he seen what reactions such a person would have had if he had been shot by a .45, where the bullet goes in the right temple and comes out the left temple. *468He did not testify that the shot was not suicide. He merely stated that in his opinion, if the gun were held in such a position for the man to pull the trigger himself, the recoil would have been great and would probably have broken the man’s wrist, and he said: “I say probably.” He also said that the blast from the muzzle Would have blown the envelope off the man’s chest if there were one lying there.
This opinion evidence does not upset the factual evidence which can lead to the only logical inference that suicide was committed. Under Judge Achor’s definition of what is contrary to law, the facts of this case fall right in with the definitions he has set forth in his opinion.
I think the Appellate Court’s decision was the right one and that transfer should be denied.
Note — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 886.

=== CASE 9740017 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:46.313172+00 ===

ANDERSON, J.
¶ 1. Theodore Oswald appeals from a nineteen-count judgment of conviction and an order denying his motion for postconviction relief. A new trial is warranted, he argues, because of juror bias, juror misconduct and ineffective assistance of trial counsel. First, he contends that the circuit court erroneously denied his motions to remove three jurors for cause, forcing him to use his peremptory strikes to remove them. Because he used his peremptory strikes to correct a court error, he requests a new trial where he would receive his full statutory entitlement of peremptory strikes.
¶ 2. Additionally, Oswald insists that during voir dire prospective jurors discussed their opinions about his guilt and the case while in the waiting room. Claiming that the court erroneously exercised its discretion by failing to properly investigate the misconduct allegations, he requests a new trial.
¶ 3. Lastly, Oswald contends that he was denied effective assistance of counsel because his trial counsel: (1) erroneously conducted voir dire, (2) failed to request a change of venue, and (3) failed to properly investigate and pursue a mental disease or defect defense. We reject these arguments and affirm.
¶ 4. A detailed discussion of Oswald's criminal activities is not necessary for this appeal. Suffice it to say, Oswald's conviction flows from the armed robbery of three financial institutions, a kidnapping and a run*67ning gun battle with law enforcement after the third robbery.1 During the chase and gun battle, a police captain was killed, and a hostage and three police officers were wounded. Oswald participated in the crimes with his father, James Oswald. The Oswald crime spree generated extensive coverage from the print and electronic media. Understandably, the pretrial publicity permeated the jury selection process, requiring the circuit court to call a large panel, to use written questionnaires for screening the panel of prospective jurors and to conduct individual voir dire.
¶ 5. After a three-week jury trial, Oswald was found guilty on all counts and sentenced.2 He then *68moved the court for a new trial. He argued that a new trial was warranted because of juror bias and misconduct and the ineffectiveness of his trial counsel. His postconviction motion was denied. Oswald reasserts these arguments on appeal.
JUROR BIAS
Background
¶ 6. A few weeks before trial, the court heard arguments regarding jury selection. The court determined that three alternate jurors would be impaneled, resulting in a fifteen-member jury panel selected from a twenty-nine person jury pool. Because alternate jurors would be seated, each party was granted an additional peremptory strike or seven total strikes. Oswald's motions to use juror questionnaires and to conduct individual voir dire of the jurors were both granted.
¶ 7. Voir dire took place over four days. During the course of voir dire, Oswald moved the court to strike twenty-seven jurors for cause. The court granted all but six of Oswald's requests to strike. On appeal, Oswald argues that the trial court erred by not striking three of these jurors for cause, and, because of this, he should be given a new trial. He contends that each of these jurors had exhibited bias by his or her strong and *69firmly held opinion that he was guilty of the charged crimes. In addition, he argues that because the court failed to dismiss these jurors for cause, he was forced to use his peremptory challenges to remove them and, as a result, was deprived of the full number of peremptory challenges.
¶ 8. We begin by noting that this case was not typical, as was highlighted by the court's willingness to adopt special jury selection procedures. This case was unique not only because of the enormous media coverage of the charged criminal activities, but also because of defense counsel's plan to turn the media coverage into a positive factor for his client. Because the media had consistently portrayed Oswald as an impressionable teenager who was victimized by his abusive and manipulating father, defense counsel desired jurors who had heard or read such media reports. Defense counsel reasoned that a juror with such knowledge would likely support the planned defense strategy — coercion. Oswald's strategy was not to contest his physical participation in the crimes but, instead, to focus on the theory that he participated in the crimes because he was coerced to do so by his father. Counsel believed that the media reports contained information that might not be admissible at trial. As an important circumstance of this case, we will bear in mind Oswald's theory of defense while reviewing the record for jury selection.
The Jurors
¶ 9. Oswald objects that the first juror questioned during voir dire, Jan G., should have been dismissed for cause. During preliminary questioning by the circuit court, Jan G. stated that based on pretrial publicity and his own personal morals, he had *70reached the opinion that Oswald was guilty. During continued questioning, Jan G. said that "it would probably be very difficult" to put aside what he had learned about the . case and reach a verdict on the evidence presented in the courtroom.
¶ 10. When quizzed by the prosecutor about whether he could put aside what he had heard and read, Jan G. responded, "I would hope that I'd have an open mind enough to be able to do that.... I'd try." He later agreed that he would try to decide the case solely on the evidence he heard during the trial. However, in response to questions from defense counsel, Jan G. admitted it would be very difficult for him to keep an open mind. He admitted during further questioning that he believed he should not be a juror because he felt so strongly about Oswald's guilt.3 The circuit court failed to ask any follow-up questions. Oswald's counsel moved to strike him for cause. After hearing arguments from both counsel regarding the motion to strike, the court denied the motion. It concluded that although Jan G.'s answers gave mixed messages, he clearly responded that he would be able to follow the court's instructions.
¶ 11. Next, Oswald objects that Edward T. should have been dismissed for cause. Edward T. revealed in his juror questionnaire that he had seen the video tape of Oswald's gun battle and capture on television at least ten times. The court questioned Edward T. about what he specifically remembered from the video tape. He replied, "It's obvious that [Oswald] was in the van and was taking part in the — in both the shooting, *71robbery, kidnapping and whatnot, so I would say that my opinion would be that he would be guilty." Nevertheless, when informed by the prosecutor that the video tape would be shown during the trial, Edward T. agreed that viewing the video tape as evidence would make it easier for him to follow the judge's instructions to consider only the evidence admitted at trial. However, when asked by defense counsel if his opinion about Oswald's guilt was based on both the video tape and the printed media reports, Edward T. replied "yes" and that he would not be able to put those opinions aside. In a follow-up question by the prosecutor, Edward T. again stated that if the evidence included the video tape he would be able to set aside his opinions.4 The circuit court did not pursue any follow-up questioning of Edward T. In denying Oswald's challenge for cause, the court stated that Edward T. was nervous and there were "inconsistent answers to questions." The court reasoned that "he was trying to answer the questions presented to him as forthrightly and as completely as possible."
¶ 12. The final juror that Oswald argues should have been stricken for cause was Marcia W. Marcia W. told the court that Oswald's taking a housewife hostage traumatized her, and, as a result, she "might not be able to be really fair." She admitted that she did consider Oswald guilty based upon a video tape of the incident that she had seen on television. Although she agreed that she would try to put what she knew out of her mind, she remarked that she was not sure if she could totally block it out. Defense counsel asked a series of questions relative to Marcia W.'s openness to *72the presentation of a coercion defense. In her responses, she revealed that the previous night she had received a phone call from her church's prayer chain and was told that she should not only pray for Oswald, but "for those people who would sit in judgment." She stated that she "felt a lot of pressure."
¶ 13. When further questioned about her opinion of the coercion defense, Marcia W. replied that after the phone call she was up all night and that she believed, "[Y]ou have a choice and that there — I'm sure that every time anybody takes an action many things build into that and cause you to do different things and I'm not saying that isn't valid. I still feel that's not an excuse for a — I think we all know right from wrong." When asked directly if she could follow the court's instructions on a coercion defense, Marcia W. replied that she would try but was not sure if she could. After being instructed on the coercion defense by the court, Marcia W. stated, "I guess I probably have a problem with that part of the law, umm, my conservative mind but I would try."5
¶ 14. Defense counsel moved to strike Marcia W. on the grounds that she was traumatized from the incident because she identified with the hostage and she was not sure she could follow instructions on the coercion defense. The circuit court denied the motion, holding that Marcia W.'s trauma from hearing about the incident was not unusual and there was no evidence that "she was in any way reactive ... to Theodore Oswald." The court failed to address the portion of counsel's motion challenging Marcia W.'s ability to follow the coercion instructions.
*73¶ 15. Because the court did not grant Oswald's motions to remove these three jurors for cause, Oswald used three of his seven peremptory strikes to remove them from the jury pool. He insists that the court erroneously exercised its discretion by failing to remove the jurors. This failure is grounds for reversal, he contends, because it forced him to use peremptory strikes to remove jurors who should have been stricken for cause, thus depriving him of his full statutory entitlement of peremptory challenges.
Discussion
¶ 16. The United States and Wisconsin Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant the right to a trial by an impartial jury. See U.S. Const, amend. VI; Wis. Const, art. I, § 7. A juror who "has expressed or formed any opinion, or is aware of any bias or prejudice in the case" should be removed from the panel. See § 805.08(1), Stats. Additionally, "[i]f a juror is not indifferent in the case, the juror shall be excused." Id.
¶ 17. Courts should strive to avoid even the appearance of bias. See State v. Louis, 156 Wis. 2d 470, 478, 457 N.W.2d 484, 488 (1990). In State v. Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d 700, 716, 596 N.W.2d 770, 777 (1999), our supreme court clarified the terminology to be used when examining juror bias. We will determine a prospective juror is biased and therefore should be removed for cause if the prospective juror is (1) statutorily biased, (2) subjectively biased or (3) objectively biased. See id.
*74
A. Statutory Bias
¶ 18. A prospective juror is statutorily biased if the prospective juror falls into one of the groups the legislature has deemed are biased as a matter of law in § 805.08(1), Stats. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 717, 596 N.W.2d at 778. Prospective jurors are statutorily biased if they are related by "blood or marriage to any party or to any attorney appearing in the case" or if they "[have] any financial interest in the case." See § 805.08(1). "Statutory bias is a conclusion of law premised on the belief that certain relationships are so inherently prone to partiality that an individual case-by-case inquiry is not worth the time or effort." State v. Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d 736, 744, 596 N.W.2d 760, 764 (1999). Neither party suggests that any juror should have been removed for statutory bias because he or she fell into one of the § 805.08(1) categories of excluded persons. Accordingly, we will only discuss the subjective and objective prongs for juror bias.
B. Subjective Bias
¶ 19. A prospective juror is subjectively biased if the record reflects that the juror is not a reasonable person who is sincerely willing to set aside any opinion or prior knowledge that the prospective juror might have. See Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d at 745, 596 N.W.2d at 764. "[S]ubjective bias refers to the bias that is revealed by the prospective juror on voir dire: it refers to the prospective juror's state of mind." Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 717, 596 N.W.2d at 778. Most frequently, a prospective juror will not explicitly admit to a prejudice or inability to set aside this prejudice. Through the juror's verbal responses to voir dire questions and his or her *75demeanor, the court can assess if the juror is subjectively biased. See Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d at 745, 596 N.W.2d at 764. The court's determination of whether a juror is subjectively biased is a factual finding and will be upheld unless clearly erroneous. See id. We will now review the court's determination that none of the prospective jurors in question were subjectively biased.
¶ 20. Jan G. repeatedly expressed doubts about his ability to ignore his opinions formed from pretrial publicity and his personal morals, but he also repeatedly affirmed his willingness to attempt to put aside his opinions and judge the case based on the evidence presented. He candidly confessed that he felt he was not the best choice for a juror because of his beliefs. The court considered the prosecutor's argument that every juror in the jury pool would have some feelings toward Oswald based on the media coverage but that this alone should not disqualify a juror. Rather, the prosecutor pointed out that a juror should only be disqualified if he or she were unable to set this opinion aside.
¶ 21. The circuit court determined that Jan G. was not subjectively biased. It believed that "he, clearly, responded that he would try to follow whatever the court's instructions are and, essentially,-be fair and impartial...." The record supports the court's finding that Jan G. was a reasonable person and that he was sincere in his willingness to set aside his opinion. "[A] prospective juror need not respond to voir dire questions with unequivocal declarations of impartiality." State v. Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d 758, 776, 596 N.W.2d 749, 759 (1999), cert. denied, 120 S.Ct. 987 (2000). The court's conclusion that Jan G. was not subjectively biased is not clearly erroneous.
*76¶ 22. Edward T. gave conflicting answers when questioned about whether he would be able to put his opinions aside. He first stated "no," rationalizing that because he had seen multiple airings of the video tape depicting some of the alleged criminal activities, he was convinced of Oswald's guilt. However, after being informed that the video tape would most likely be shown to the jury and could be considered as evidence, he felt he could put his opinions aside. The court believed that Edward T. gave conflicting answers because he was trying very hard to be forthright and was nervous. Such a determination relies on the juror's demeanor while being questioned. Whether a juror is subjectively biased will frequently "only be revealed through his or her demeanor." See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 778. The court correctly relied on Edward T.'s demeanor to judge if he was subjectively biased. "[T]he circuit court sits in a superior position to assess the demeanor and disposition of prospective jurors." Id. Accordingly, we agree with the court's finding that Edward T. was not subjectively biased.
¶ 23. Marcia W. also expressed concerns about her ability to be fair, particularly regarding a coercion defense. She also confessed to personally having traumatic feelings from news reports that Oswald allegedly took a housewife hostage. However, she repeatedly stated that she would try to put her opinions aside and follow the court's instructions.
¶ 24. The court found no subjective bias. It reasoned that Marcia W.'s feelings of trauma were nothing unusual and were in fact feelings of putting herself in the same position as the hostage, which was exactly what a juror would be asked to do during the trial. *77Indeed, a court is expected to "use voir dire to explore a prospective juror's fears, biases, and predilections and fully expect a juror's honest answers at times to be less than unequivocal." Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d at 776, 596 N.W.2d at 759. The court accepted Marcia W.'s affirmations that she would try to set aside her opinions. We find that the court's determination was not clearly erroneous. None of the jurors in question should have been dismissed for cause on grounds of subjective bias.
C. Objective Bias
¶ 25. A prospective juror is objectively biased if "a reasonable person in the prospective juror's position . objectively could not judge the case in a fair and impartial manner." Id. at 775, 596 N.W.2d at 759. When determining if a juror is objectively biased, the circuit court should consider the facts involved in the case and the facts and circumstances surrounding the voir dire. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 779. For example, when there is evidence from voir dire that a prospective juror has formed an opinion or has prior knowledge, a court must ask if a reasonable person in the juror's position could set aside the opinion or prior knowledge. See id. at 719, 596 N.W.2d at 779. A court's conclusion on whether a prospective juror is objectively biased is a mixed question of law and fact. See id. at 720, 596 N.W.2d at 779. We will give weight to this conclusion during our review and will reverse it only if a reasonable judge could not have reached it as a matter of law. See id. at 721, 596 N.W.2d at 779-80.
¶ 26. Courts have found objective bias or that a reasonable person in the prospective juror's position would not be able to be impartial if, for example, a prospective juror is related to a state's witness by blood *78or marriage to the third degree or if the prospective juror has a recent and continuous contact with the criminal justice system. See State v. Gesch, 167 Wis. 2d 660, 671, 482 N.W.2d 99, 104 (1992); State v. Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d 838, 854, 596 N.W.2d 736, 744 (1999). On the other hand, if a veteran juror was impaneled on a similar type of case, he or she will not be considered impartial per se but must exhibit bias about the specific case or issues he or she is called to hear. See Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d at 749, 596 N.W.2d at 766. The prospective juror must demonstrate an ingrained attitude about the particular subject of the case. See Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d at 850 n.6, 596 N.W.2d at 742. There must be a connection between the prospective juror's bias and the issues or theory of the case. These attitudes or opinions must be strongly held, see Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 735, 596 N.W.2d at 786, but are not expected to be unequivocal, see Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d at 750 n.10, 596 N.W.2d at 767.
¶ 27. From an objective viewpoint, the criminal activities in this case were widely publicized. Yet, we do not expect that prospective jurors will not have formed opinions from such media exposure; our concern is if a reasonable person in the prospective juror's position would have the ability to put aside these opinions and consider the case based on the evidence presented at trial.6
*79¶ 28. In this case, the circuit court did not have the benefit of the recent supreme court cases and therefore did not address whether the prospective jurors were objectively biased. We will independently examine the record to determine whether it supports a determination that they were not objectively biased. We are mindful that we are admonished to consider the facts and circumstances of voir dire along with the facts involved in the case. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 779. As we consider this point, we initially must disagree with Oswald's chief argument, supporting his contention that the prospective jurors were objectively biased and should have been dismissed for cause.
¶ 29. In his brief, Oswald claims that all the prospective jurors expressed strong opinions that he was guilty. These opinions, he argues, go "straight to the heart of the issue: their ability to presume the defendant innocent unless proven guilty of the charges." However, the facts and circumstances of this case reveal that this statement is incorrect. For Oswald, the heart of the issue during voir dire was securing a jury amenable to his coercion defense strategy. As a part of this strategy, Oswald was opting not to contest his participation in the crimes. His tactical decision was not to protest his guilt. This strategy involved searching for a particular type of juror; this ideal juror would not presume that Oswald was innocent but would be influenced by the media coverage and also could be *80supportive of a coercion defense. The particular type of juror that Oswald sought is an important circumstance surrounding the voir dire.
¶ 30. Considering that the defense sought jurors amenable to its coercion defense, the State argues that a reasonable juror would have misconceptions about what such a defense means. It points out that the prospective jurors were asked about their receptivity to a coercion defense, but it was never fully explained to them. A reasonable juror, it contends, would have viewed this case primarily as a homicide and most of the questions on coercion seemed to imply that this was a complete defense to all the charges.
¶ 31. We agree that this is a reasonable inference to draw from the voir dire. For instance, Marcia W. initially remarked that she probably could not consider a coercion defense because people make their own choices and cannot later seek to be excused from them. However, after the judge briefly summarized how a coercion defense would be applied in the case, she stated that she might still have a problem with such a coercion defense but she could try to consider it. A reasonable person would respond with reservations to questions about a legal defense that he or she did not completely understand and possibly assumed might relieve the defendant of guilt. Under the circumstances, Marcia W. replied in the manner that any reasonable person would. She affirmed her willingness to try to follow the court's instructions but confessed her trepidation. A reasonable person in Marcia W.'s position could set aside his or her prior opinions and judge the case impartially. We conclude that Marcia W. was not objectively biased.
¶ 32. In addition to Marcia W., Oswald also argues that Jan G. and Edward T. were objectively *81biased because of their strong opinions that he was guilty. First, we question the strength of these jurors' opinions. Both jurors equivocated in the answers and messages they gave the court. Second, we again note that the defense strategy employed at voir dire was not to secure a jury panel consisting of only jurors who stated they could presume Oswald innocent until proven guilty; rather, the defense sought jurors with some awareness of the media coverage and an amenability to a coercion defense.
¶ 33. Recently, the Faucher court determined that a prospective juror was objectively biased because of the strength of his opinion about a case's crucial witness. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 733, 596 N.W.2d at 785. In reaching this conclusion, the court focused on the juror's "strongly held belief about the case's crucial witness. See id. In contrast, the present situation differs because unlike the Faucher juror, the strength of the prospective jurors' opinions changed during the voir dire and, importantly, their opinions did not concern the central issue in the case.
¶ 34. In the present case, both Jan G. and Edward T. equivocated in their responses regarding their abilities to put aside their opinions. When they changed their initial responses from not being able to set aside their guilty opinions to a sincere willingness to try to do so, they showed that these opinions were not ingrained attitudes. Furthermore, Oswald's primary concern during voir dire was to seat jurors who could potentially support his coercion defense strategy. Following this strategy, Oswald's defense sought jurors exposed to the media coverage about the crimes and his father's behavior and, yet, open to believing that Oswald was coerced to perform those acts. This defense theory was the crucial issue in this case and neither *82Jan G.’s. nor Edward T.!s opinion that Oswald was guilty would prevent them from judging the defense's theory in a fair and impartial manner.
¶ 35. Each prospective juror candidly confessed any preconceived opinions he or she held. The prospective jurors each waivered when questioned about the strength of these opinions — whether these prior opinions were so strong they could not be disregarded. Like any reasonable person who is unfamiliar with serving as a juror and what will be expected of him or her in that role, the prospective jurors informed the court that they had opinions that Oswald was guilty, but that they were willing and would try to follow the court's instructions to put these prior opinions aside and consider only the evidence presented at trial. Although each juror initially assured the court that his or her guilty opinions were firm, their responses to further questioning revealed that these prior opinions were not ingrained attitudes unchangeable by court instructions and the presentation of evidence.
¶ 36. Considering the special facts and circumstances surrounding this voir dire, we conclude that a reasonable person in Jan G.'s or Edward T.'s position could set aside his or her prior opinions. The record shows that neither Jan G. nor Edward T. was objectively biased.
¶ 37. In sum, we determine that the prospective jurors should not have been dismissed for cause. The court did not err when it denied Oswald's motions to strike these jurors because the prospective jurors were not statutorily, subjectively or objectively biased. Because Oswald has failed to demonstrate that the prospective jurors were in fact biased and the court *83erred by denying his motions to strike them, his argument that he was denied his full statutory entitlement to peremptory strikes because of his efforts to correct the court's error has no merit and fails.
JUROR MISCONDUCT
¶ 38. Oswald argues that on the fourth day of voir dire the court misused its discretion when it denied his request for an investigation into allegations of possible juror misconduct. The allegations of possible juror misconduct initially arose during the voir dire of prospective juror Roger K. When the court asked him about how much media exposure he had had, Roger K. replied, "I know I've learned more in the last 3 days here sitting down there in that [waiting] room about this case than I have since the day that it happened."
¶ 39. After Roger K.'s admission, Oswald requested that the court strike him for cause and conduct an investigation into the content of prospective jurors' conversations in the waiting room. The court denied both requests.7 However, the court permitted the defense to question the remaining prospective jurors about the waiting room conversations but did not call any previously questioned jurors back to be examined on this topic. The defense questioned the remaining prospective jurors and the bailiff who supervised the waiting room. Two of the jurors who were *84questioned admitted that conversations about Oswald's guilt took place in the waiting room.8 Oswald again requested that the court conduct an inquiry of the jurors who had previously been qualified to serve on the panel and determine if they had participated in or been affected by the discussions of Oswald's guilt. This request was also denied.
¶ 40. At the postconviction hearing, Oswald's only additional evidence of juror misconduct was the testimony of prospective juror Jacqueline M. who had been stricken from the jury panel. Jacqueline M. testified that while in the waiting room, she heard at least three prospective jurors express opinions that Oswald was guilty and that the trial was a joke and a waste of time. She stated that one of these jurors, William S., was seated on the jury panel that decided the case.
¶ 41. In its oral decision denying Oswald's post-conviction motion for a new trial, the court stated that it did not find Jacqueline M. to be credible. It noted that she had had many opportunities to report the alleged discussions to the court or bailiff but never mentioned them until she was contacted by the defense's investigators. The court inferred that because the defense presented no other witnesses to support its claim besides Jacqueline M. that no other witnesses supported her assertions. Most significantly, the court stressed that she had given false answers on her juror questionnaire. In response to questions about if she had any physical or emotional problems which might interfere with jury service, if she had ever been the victim of physical violence, and if she had been *85involved in a violent or assaultive relationship, Jacqueline M. said "no."
¶ 42. To the contrary on cross-examination during voir dire, she testified that twenty-three days before signing her questionnaire she was physically assaulted by her husband with a fireplace poker and during the assault feared that her life was in imminent danger. She also testified that the police had been called to her home to remove her son, that the police noted that she had been drinking alcohol, and that this was a period of significant turmoil in her life in which she was prescribed psychotropic medications. The court concluded that Jacqueline M.'s testimony was unreliable because these events occurred within two or three weeks of her filling out the juror questionnaire, and on the questionnaire she failed to include them. The court also held that Oswald failed to make a sufficient showing that misconduct occurred.
¶ 43. On appeal, Oswald apparently argues that the trial court erred by denying his request to further inquire into the juror misconduct allegations because it prevented him from learning whether William S. gave false answers during voir dire and was actually biased. He claims that William S. did not admit to such a strong conviction of Oswald's guilt during voir dire as Jacqueline M. alleges he expressed in the waiting room. Because a prospective juror incorrectly answered a material question during voir dire, he requests a new trial.
¶ 44. A trial court has broad discretion over how a voir dire examination is conducted, including the form and number of questions asked of prospective jurors. See Hammill v. State, 89 Wis. 2d 404, 408, 278 N.W.2d 821, 822 (1979). Accordingly, we will not dis*86turb the court's voir dire decisions without a showing that the court misused its discretion. See id. at 408, 278 N.W.2d at 822-23.
¶ 45. After a review of the voir dire and postcon-viction hearing records, we too conclude that Oswald failed to make a sufficient showing of juror misconduct to warrant a new trial. Oswald bases his claim of juror misconduct on his allegation that William S. gave false answers to voir dire questions. When a prospective juror gives erroneous answers during voir dire, a new trial will only be awarded if "the juror incorrectly or incompletely responded to a material question on voir dire-, and if so, . . . it is more probable than not that under the facts and circumstances surrounding the particular case, the juror was biased against the moving party." State v. Wyss, 124 Wis. 2d 681, 726, 370 N.W.2d 745, 766 (1985), overruled on other grounds by State v. Poellinger, 153 Wis. 2d 493, 451 N.W.2d 752 (1990). Therefore, Oswald must show that the court erred by denying his request to investigate the previously impaneled jurors because if the court had granted it, information would have arisen that William S. gave incorrect answers to a material question and was prejudiced against him. Oswald has failed to demonstrate either of these factors.
¶ 46. First, Oswald fails to produce evidence that William S. gave an incorrect voir dire answer. Assuming the veracity of Jacqueline M.'s testimony, her allegation is that the prospective jurors in the waiting room discussed opinions that Oswald was guilty. This is entirely consistent with the opinion William S. expressed in voir dire questioning. William S. admitted that he did have an opinion in his juror questionnaire and in voir dire questioning. He testified that from what he had seen, he would have a hard time believing *87that Oswald was not involved. But, he also expressed a willingness and ability to put his opinion aside and listen to the evidence. Accordingly, Oswald does not provide evidence showing that William S. lied during voir dire because William S.'s admissions during voir dire were consistent with the alleged waiting room conversations.
¶ 47. Second, Oswald does not demonstrate that William S. was prejudiced against him. Considering Jacqueline M.'s characterization of the prospective juror discussions in the context of William S.'s voir dire answers, it appears that the prospective jurors were referring to their opinions that based on the pretrial publicity and media coverage, Oswald participated in the charged crimes. As we have previously discussed, if a prospective juror held the opinion that Oswald participated in the crimes, the prospective juror was not biased against Oswald because such an opinion was consistent with his coercion defense strategy.9 Based on these reasons, we find that Oswald did not sufficiently prove that William S. gave incorrect voir dire answers or was prejudiced against him. The court's denial of Oswald's motion for a new trial was a proper exercise of discretion.
INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL
¶ 48. Oswald argues that he was denied effective assistance of trial counsel in three respects. First, he maintains that counsel conducted voir dire in a deficient manner. Second, he insists that because of the continuous and pervasive publicity that created a "circus-like atmosphere" for his trial, his counsel was *88deficient for failing to request a change of venue. Lastly, he objects to his counsel's failure to properly investigate and advance a mental disease or defect defense.
¶ 49. There are two components to a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel: a demonstration that counsel's performance was deficient and a demonstration that such deficient performance prejudiced the defendant. See State v. Smith, 207 Wis. 2d 258, 273, 558 N.W.2d 379, 386 (1997). Oswald has the burden to prove both components. See id. An attorney's performance is not deficient unless it is shown that "in light of all the circumstances, the identified acts or omissions were outside the wide range of professionally competent assistance." State v. Guck, 170 Wis. 2d 661, 669, 490 N.W.2d 34, 38 (Ct. App. 1992) (citation omitted). We thus assess whether such performance was reasonable under the circumstances of the particular case. See State v. Hubanks, 173 Wis. 2d 1, 25, 496 N.W.2d 96, 105 (Ct. App. 1992). Deficient performance is limited to situations where the law or duty is clear such that reasonable counsel should know enough to raise the issue. See State v. McMahon, 186 Wis. 2d 68, 85, 519 N.W.2d 621, 628 (Ct. App. 1994).
¶ 50. Even if deficient performance is found, we will not reverse unless the defendant- proves that the deficiency actually prejudiced his or her defense: that counsel's errors were so serious as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial — a trial whose result is reliable. See State v. Johnson, 153 Wis. 2d 121, 127, 449 N.W.2d 845, 848 (1990). In other words, errors of counsel must actually have an adverse effect on the defense, for not every error that conceivably could have influenced the outcome undermines the reliability of the result in the proceeding. "[T]here [must be] a reasonable probability *89that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome." Id. at 129, 449 N.W.2d at 848 (citation omitted).
¶ 51. Whether counsel's actions constitute ineffective assistance is a mixed question of law and fact. See State v. Pitsch, 124 Wis. 2d 628, 633-34, 369 N.W.2d 711, 714 (1985). We will not overturn a circuit court's findings of fact concerning the circumstances of the case and counsel's conduct and strategy unless the findings are clearly erroneous. See State v. Knight, 168 Wis. 2d 509, 514 n.2, 484 N.W.2d 540, 541 (1992). However, the final determinations of whether counsel's performance was deficient and prejudiced the defense are questions of law which this court decides without deference to the circuit court. See id.
A. Voir Dire
¶ 52. Oswald contends that his counsel's performance during voir dire was deficient during the questioning of three prospective jurors. Counsel's performance was ineffective, he argues, because these jurors admitted bias and counsel failed to ask follow-up questions of them or move the court to strike them for cause. To the contrary, after reviewing the record of voir dire and counsel's Machner10 testimony, we conclude that counsel's conduct of voir dire was not deficient.
¶ 53. Oswald argues that his counsel conducted voir dire in the same manner as was held deficient in State v. Traylor, 170 Wis. 2d 393, 489 N.W.2d 626 (Ct. App. 1992), and State v. Zurfluh, 134 Wis. 2d 436, 397 *90N.W.2d 154 (Ct. App. 1986). In Zurfluh, a prospective juror expressed to the court during voir dire that she felt she "might not be able to be fair." See Zurfluh, 134 Wis. 2d at 439, 397 N.W.2d at 155. The court proceeded to explain a juror's duties, and the prospective juror replied that she understood them. Next, the court asked her if she would have a problem making a fair and impartial determination of the evidence. The prospective juror replied: "I don't know. I might. I'm afraid I might. I wouldn't want to have; but I'm afraid I might. I'm just being honest." Id.
¶ 54. The circuit court refused to remove the juror for cause. See id. It believed that the prospective juror, despite expressing difficulties, could still impartially decide the case. We disagreed. See id. We held that because the prospective juror expressed significant doubts in her ability to decide the case fairly and impartially, the court should have further questioned her about these doubts. See id. Without any additional clarification of the prospective juror's doubts, we determined that she was partial and should have been dismissed for cause. See id.
¶ 55. The Traylor court applied the Zurfluh holding and found a defense counsel's performance deficient for failing to ask follow-up questions of a prospective juror that would conclusively determine whether the prospective juror would follow the law as instructed by the court. See Traylor, 170 Wis. 2d at 399, 489 N.W.2d at 628. For example, counsel performed deficiently by not assessing through follow-up questions whether a prospective juror would follow the court's instructions when the prospective juror only stated that she "would try" to follow them. See id. at 398, 489 N.W.2d at 628. We held that counsel should have sought a more conclusive response from the pro*91spective juror about her ability to follow the law as instructed by the court, and if counsel failed to receive a satisfactory answer, counsel should have moved to strike the juror for cause. See id. at 399-400, 489 N.W.2d at 628.
¶ 56. With these legal standards in mind, we will now examine defense counsel's contested voir dire conduct. We begin with the questioning of prospective juror, James H. First, the circuit court quizzed James H. about his statement in his questionnaire that "any armed person fleeing from the police tends to appear guilty." James H. reaffirmed to the court that he believed that such acts made an individual appear guilty. However, while responding to questions from the prosecutor, James H. later stated that he believed that he could decide Oswald's guilt or innocence based only on the evidence presented at trial. Defense counsel then asked James H. six questions. Counsel first quizzed the juror about if he had formed any opinions about Oswald's guilt. James H. replied, "[TJruthfully ... at this point he would appear to be guilty." Counsel responded by asking him how strong this opinion was, if he favored one side or the other, and if he was impartial. James H. admitted that he might not be completely impartial, but that he was a fair man, did not favor one particular side and would listen to arguments and the evidence.
¶ 57. Oswald also contests his counsel's voir dire questioning of Dorothy L., who stated that she held an opinion that Oswald was guilty. In response to the prosecutor's questions, Dorothy L. stated that she would keep an open mind and listen to the evidence. When questioned about the hypothetical that if she were asked, would she be able to vote to convict Oswald at that very moment, Dorothy L. responded that she *92would be unable to do so without the State presenting evidence of the crimes. Defense counsel asked her numerous questions to which she stated that she would do her very best to consider all the evidence, that her mind was not set to the outcome, and that she was willing to hear arguments regarding a coercion defense.
¶ 58. The final contested voir dire questioning was that of Joy H. Like the other prospective jurors, Joy H. expressed her opinion in her juror questionnaire that Oswald was guilty. When asked by the court about this statement, she replied that she would need to listen to the testimony and evidence before reaching an ultimate decision on Oswald's guilt. The court proceeded to ask her if she could set aside her opinion and make her decision on the evidence presented at trial. Joy H. replied:
Well, in all honesty I think that would be pretty difficult to do. It's hard for me to understand anybody in this area . . . would be able to put that out completely, you know. I mean I wouldn't say that I couldn't try, but I'm saying ... it would be difficult not to have some prior information influence my decision.
¶ 59. During questioning from the prosecutor, Joy H. stated that just because she has a certain opinion now does not mean that the opinion would not change after the evidence was presented. She stated she would wait until she heard all the evidence to conclusively make up her mind. Again, the prosecutor asked her if she could set her opinion aside and only judge guilt based on the trial evidence. Joy H. responded: "I know I'm supposed to say yes. I don't know. I don't think so. I think it would be very tough. It *93would be very optimistic for me to say I could do that.... I don't think it's quite humanly possible to tell you the truth."
¶ 60. After the prosecutor repeated the question, Joy H. said, "I would hope that I could" set aside my prior opinion and judge the case only on the evidence presented. She then affirmatively answered the prosecutor's question regarding whether she was willing to follow the law per the court's instructions. She replied, "It's difficult but I would try" to be a fair and impartial juror.
¶ 61. Defense counsel then asked Joy H. numerous questions, including the following excerpted testimony.
Q ... I know I'm going to be following up on things that I know you have strong opinions. ... Is there anything else that you need to tell us about... your ability to be fair and impartial in this case?
A ... I don't come to the table impartial by any means at this point.
Q Do you find yourself having a bias towards one particular side or the other?
A Yes. ... I would be biased against your client.
Q You know, the other thing you said that I wanted to ask you about that you indicated talking about my client you said that young man that you had an opinion that he needs to take responsibility. Now I'd like to ask you have you formed this opinion now before the case is even started. Do you feel that your mind is set that he is responsible for the offenses he's charged with?
*94A Is it set like in stone? I have that opinion... and it is before [the trial] starts ... so I guess the answer is, yes, I do have it. If you're asking could it ever be changed I guess anything is possible.
Q I don't want to suggest that it would be required that you have to forget everything that you know because that's not going to be possible either, but I guess we all keep coming back to this point is whether or not... the opinions that you have are so strong that it's going to make it impossible for you to be impartial in this case? Can you answer that?
A I think . . . they probably are. They are strong enough. It would be difficult. It would be difficult.
Q I guess I'm just trying to understand whether or not... [your opinion is] set to the point or so strong . . . that you can't be open to hearing both sides and deciding the case just on the evidence and the legal instructions?
A ... I certainly would listen, I would certainly listen, but I do think that. . . my opinions and my bias [are] strong to begin with and I think it would influence or... it would play a part... in how I hear the rest of the evidence or what I do with the rest of the evidence.
Q You seem to have some concerns that even though you may be asked to set it aside and decide on the evidence that you couldn't do that?
A Yes, I do have concerns with that.
¶ 62. After reviewing the voir dire record, two things are apparent. First, each juror expressed an initial opinion that Oswald was guilty and equivocated to some degree in responses to questions about the *95strength of that opinion and his or her ability to put it aside. Second, the record reveals substantial questioning and dialogue between the jurors and the court, prosecution and defense. In each instance, defense counsel sought clarification of the juror's opinions by asking follow-up questions. Defense counsel conducted much more thorough questioning about the prospective juror's expressed doubts than was conducted in Traylor or Zurfluh, and his performance cannot be categorized as deficient in this respect.
¶ 63. However, Oswald raises one additional contention. He claims that his counsel was also deficient for not requesting that these jurors be stricken for cause. Whether defense counsel should move the court to strike a juror for cause is his or her tactical decision to make. See State v. Brunette, 220 Wis. 2d 431, 444-45, 583 N.W.2d 174, 180 (Ct. App.), review denied, 220 Wis. 2d 366, 585 N.W.2d 158 (1998). To show deficient performance, Oswald must show that his counsel's representation was objectively unreasonable. See id. at 445-46, 583 N.W.2d at 180.
¶ 64. At the Machner hearing, defense counsel testified that he expected that potential jurors would have preconceptions about whether Oswald participated in the crimes due to the extensive media coverage. His main focus in selecting jurors was to seek those who would be open to the coercion defense strategy. He was not overly concerned that a juror had a guilty opinion because such an opinion only addressed the juror's belief that Oswald had participated in the crimes, which would not be contested at trial.
¶ 65. Counsel testified that he did not request that Joy H. be stricken for cause because there was more to her than just the answers she told the court. "[W]e felt that underneath we had an open-minded *96person that would really listen to what we were trying to say despite her reservations." Counsel added that he based these conclusions on the following facts: she was married to a university professor, her political and personal beliefs and experiences, and the honesty of her answers. Likewise, counsel testified that he viewed Joy H. and Dorothy L., both mothers, as "inherently more sensitive to the issues." Counsel felt that Dorothy L. expressed some openness to the coercion theory. Counsel was not directly questioned about why he did not move to strike James H.
¶ 66. Based on counsel's testimony, counsel sought jurors with the ability to be open to considering the theory of defense, in spite of any preconceptions they may have had about Oswald's guilt. He decided that James H., Joy H. and Dorothy L. would all be good jurors because they would be open to the defense's strategy. We conclude that defense counsel's decisions not to move to strike these jurors were reasonable, tactical decisions and do not constitute deficient performance.
B. Change of Venue
¶ 67. Oswald asserts that he was denied his right to effective assistance of counsel by his counsel's failure to request a change of venue for his trial. Because the charged criminal activities received enormous media coverage, including live television coverage of his capture, he alleges that the potential jurors in the county were "inflamed and prejudiced." This assertion is proved, he contends, by the fact that in the juror questionnaires the potential jurors not only admitted media exposure, but also evidenced that they were "hopelessly infected with bias[ ]."
*97¶ 68. Normally, the proper venue for a criminal trial is the county where the crime was committed. See § 971.19(1), Stats. A defendant may request the court to change the trial's venue to another county if securing an impartial jury is not possible in the county where the crime occurred. See § 971.22(1), Stats. When a defendant is represented by counsel, he or she delegates tactical decisions to counsel. See Brunette, 220 Wis. 2d at 443, 583 N.W.2d at 179. Whether a case necessitates a change of venue request is such a tactical decision that a criminal defendant has delegated to counsel. See State v. Hereford, 224 Wis. 2d 605, 617, 592 N.W.2d 247, 252 (Ct. App.), review denied, 225 Wis. 2d 490, 594 N.W.2d 384 (1999).
¶ 69. At the Machner hearing following Oswald's conviction, his trial counsel defended his tactical decision for not requesting a change of venue. Counsel acknowledged that the case had received extensive media coverage and that some of the media reports were erroneous and prejudicial. However, he claimed that he balanced the extensive publicity against two other factors affecting the case. He first theorized that Oswald's requested severance of his trial from his code-fendant father was more likely to be granted without a change of venue motion because his father had already requested that the court change the venue for his trial. His second consideration was the planned defense strategy for trial.
¶ 70. In light of the State's strong evidence against Oswald — video tapes depicting Oswald's flight with a hostage and his capture while armed and wearing a bulletproof vest, eyewitnesses, ballistics evidence, his handwritten plans for the crimes and his confession to police officers — defense counsel theorized *98that the best defense for his client was that Oswald performed the criminal acts because he was coerced to do so by his father. Counsel testified that:
[W]e ultimately were convinced that it would be preferred... to seek the ... jury... from Waukesha County despite the fact that a lot of people had seen the video and were well aware ... of the facts of this case. And I think the reason for that was ... [a] feeling among the community that Ted Oswald's position was different from that of his father; that the relationship between father and son was so unusual that the coercive aspects of our presentation were ... put forth [by] the media.... [T]he image of our client was fairly intact of a young high school student . . . look[ing] very young, very vulnerable, very impressionable. . . . [W]e felt that that was entirely consistent with the defense that we chose to present in this case ... and we concluded that there would be benefit from having a jury impaneled in Waukesha County.
¶ 71. Counsel presented well-reasoned testimony in support of his strategy, and it is not this court's prerogative to second-guess counsel's reasonable tactical decisions. See State v. Felton, 110 Wis. 2d 485, 502, 329 N.W.2d 161, 169 (1983). We reject Oswald's contention that his counsel was deficient for not requesting a venue change after reviewing the prospective jurors' answers to the juror questionnaires. The opinions expressed in the questionnaires only regarded opinions the prospective jurors held about Oswald's alleged participation in the crimes. The opinions revealed by the questionnaires did not reflect on Oswald's state of mind, which was the focus of his coercion defense. His counsel's actions in this regard *99cannot be construed as deficient but rather are consistent with the planned defense strategy.
¶ 72. Oswald's only remaining arguments are that: (1) in reaching the conclusion that a coercion defense was feasible, counsel failed to conduct a systematic polling of the Waukesha county community; and (2) Oswald's case was eventually severed from his father's two months prior to trial, allowing plenty of time for counsel to request a venue change. Neither of these contentions evidences deficient performance. Conducting a systematic opinion poll of the county is not an act that is considered necessary for professionally competent assistance. Additionally, the decision of whether to request a change of venue is a tactical decision under the control of defense counsel. Counsel testified that he weighed the alternatives of the case and in his professional judgment the best possible defense for his client was to argue coercion and that a coercion defense would be benefited by remaining in the county. We conclude that counsel was not deficient for failing to request a change of venue.
C. Mental Disease Defense
¶ 73. Oswald’s final argument that his counsel was ineffective is that his counsel did not sufficiently investigate or advance a defense that Oswald should be exonerated of responsibility because of a mental disease or defect. Although Oswald admits that he actively participated in the decision not to pursue a mental disease defense, he now claims that this decision was not a fully informed one. At the postconviction hearing, the defense's expert witness, Minnesota psychologist Dr. James Gilbertson, confessed that he was unfamiliar with Wisconsin's legal standard for a *100mental disease defense. He further testified that if he had been aware of Wisconsin's legal standard for a mental disease defense, he would have opined that Oswald satisfied this threshold. As a result, Oswald asserts that if his counsel had performed effectively, Gilbertson's support for a mental disease defense would have been revealed. This was prejudicial, he argues, and denied him a potentially viable defense.
¶ 74. At the postconviction hearing, trial counsel stated that he had considered a mental disease defense from the beginning of the case. Counsel retained a psychologist, Dr. Gary Kendziorsky, who he had previously used and trusted. After interviewing Oswald, Kendziorsky concluded that he was not mentally ill.
¶ 75. Counsel determined that mental disease was not a viable defense on the basis of Kendziorsky's evaluation and other factors. He testified that Oswald was adamant about not wanting to "play the 'crazy game'" and enter a mental disease defense. Counsel further stated that he discussed the strategic considerations about pursuing such a defense with his client. They discussed that Oswald would be evaluated by court and state examiners and that the State could receive evidence from, these examinations about Oswald's state of mind, potentially weakening the coercion defense. Counsel averred that he believed a mental disease defense was inconsistent with how Oswald presented himself, how others described him and the planned coercion defense. Counsel recommended to Oswald that they focus on the coercion defense and not pursue a mental disease defense. Oswald accepted his counsel's recommendation.
¶ 76. Oswald now complains that this was an ill-informed decision. He claims that his counsel should *101have learned that Gilbertson, a psychologist the defense hired to render an opinion supporting the coercion defense, would have also supported a mental disease defense. Gilbertson's initial mental disease determination was based on an erroneous assumption about Wisconsin's legal standard. He testified that Oswald suffered from a "complex posttraumatic stress disorder" that was not a generally accepted diagnosable disease but could satisfy Wisconsin's legal standard. Oswald maintains that if he had been effectively represented, his counsel would have continued serious consideration of a mental disease defense.
¶ 77. The State replies that the record indicates that counsel fully considered a mental disease defense, and Oswald consented to its rejection. Additionally, it argues, "[CJounsel was not required to continue shopping for a different expert opinion after he received a reliable opinion from a qualified expert...." We agree. In light of the circumstances, counsel made an adequate inquiry into a possible mental disease defense. "Competent representation does not demand that counsel seek repetitive examinations of the defendant until an expert is found who will offer a supportive opinion." California v. Williams, 751 P.2d 395, 437 (Cal. 1988). Oswald's ability to produce a conflicting psychological evaluation at the postconviction hearing does not in itself establish that the factual inquiry was inadequate. The record reveals that his counsel made a reasoned and considered choice to abandon the mental disease defense based on the facts of the case and his judgment of the most appropriate trial strategy. Because counsel's strategic decision was rationally founded on the facts and the law, we conclude that his representation was not deficient.
*102CONCLUSION
¶ 78. In summary, we determine that even though the prospective jurors expressed opinions that Oswald was guilty, they were not biased against him. The prospective jurors were not subjectively biased because each prospective juror confirmed that he or she was willing to put the guilty opinion aside, nor were they objectively biased because they did not have ingrained attitudes opposed to the coercion defense. A new trial because of juror misconduct is not warranted because Oswald did not present sufficient proof that the impaneled jurors lied during voir dire and were prejudiced against him.
¶ 79. Similarly, Oswald's request for a new trial because of the ineffective assistance of his trial counsel fails. His counsel conducted adequate voir dire questioning of prospective jurors and made reasonable, tactical decisions on which jurors to request that the court strike for cause. Finally, regarding counsel's decisions not to request a change of venue or pursue a mental disease defense, counsel did not perform defi-ciently but made well-reasoned, considered and strategic decisions seeking the best interests of his client.
By the Court. — Judgment and order affirmed.
For a more thorough factual discussion, see State v. James Oswald, 2000 WI App 3, ¶ 2, 232 Wis. 2d 103, 606 N.W.2d 238.
Oswald was convicted of three counts of party to the crime of aiding and abetting an armed robbery while concealing identity, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 943.32(2) and 939.641, STATS.; one count of party to a conspiracy to commit first-degree intentional homicide by using a bulletproof vest and a dangerous weapon plus one count of an attempt of the same crime, see §§ 939.05(2)(c), 940.01(1), 939.63(l)(a), 939.64(2) and 939.32(l)(a), Stats.; one count of party to the crime of aiding and abetting the armed taking of a vehicle without consent, using a bulletproof vest, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 943.23(lg) and 939.64(2), Stats.; one count of party to the crime of aiding and abetting armed burglary using a bulletproof vest, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 943.10(2)(a) and 939.64(2), Stats.; one count of party to the crime of aiding and abetting the armed taking of hostages by force or threat using a bulletproof vest, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 940.305, 939.63(l)(a)2 and 939.64(2), Stats.; one count of party to the crime of aiding and abetting the armed operation of a motor vehicle without consent, using a bulletproof vest, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 943.23(3), 939.63(l)(a) and 939.64(2), STATS.; eight counts of party to the crime of aiding and abetting attempted first-degree intentional homicide using a bulletproof *68vest and a dangerous weapon, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 939.32(l)(a), 940.01(1), 939.63(l)(a)2 and 939.64(2); and one count of party to the crime of aiding and abetting first-degree recklessly endangering safety using a bulletproof vest and a dangerous weapon, see §§ 939.05(2)(b), 941.30(1), 939.63(l)(a)2 and 939.64(2), Stats. He was sentenced to serve 565 years in prison consecutive to two life sentences (in addition to ten years to be served concurrently).
Jan G. had completed a written juror questionnaire prior to voir dire. Responding to a question about his opinion of Oswald's guilt, he commented, "Yes, guilty. No doubt in my mind that he was involved with his father."
In his questionnaire, Edward T. wrote that he believed Oswald to be guilty "because of collection of guns and premeditation of robberies and escape at all cost."
In her questionnaire, Marcia W. wrote that her reaction to the video tape of the gun battle and subsequent apprehension of Oswald was "[gluilt, disgust and fear."
In State v. Herrington, 41 Wis. 2d 757, 765, 165 N.W.2d 120, 123-24 (1969) (quoting Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 722-23 (1961)), the supreme court stated:
It is not required, however, that the jurors be totally ignorant of the facts and issues involved. In these days of swift, widespread and diverse methods of communication, an important case can be expected to arouse the interest of the public in the vicinity, and scarcely any of those best qualified to serve as jurors will not have formed some impression or opinion as to the merits of the case. This *79is particularly true in criminal cases. To hold that the mere existence of any preconceived notion as to the guilt or innocence of an accused, without more, is sufficient to rebut the presumption of a prospective juror's impartiality would be to establish an impossible standard. It is sufficient if the juror can lay aside his impression or opinion and render a verdict based on the evidence presented in court.
Circuit courts are cautioned to err on the side of granting motions to remove jurors for cause because such a practice avoids the appearance of bias and in the long rim may save the judiciary's time and resources. See State v. Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d 838, 864, 596 N.W.2d 736, 749 (1999). In this case, the court granted twenty-one of Oswald's twenty-seven motions to strike jurors for cause. Oswald does not appeal the court's denial of his motion to strike Roger K.
For example, one juror testified that none of the other prospective jurors was trying to convince him of a certain opinion but would express opinions that Oswald was guilty.
See supra text pp. 69, 79-80.
State v. Machner, 101 Wis. 2d 79, 303 N.W.2d 633 (1981).