=== CASE 2211837 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.393982+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 999 (1980)
Morris APLIN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
PORTER SCHOOL TOWNSHIP OF PORTER COUNTY; ADVISORY BOARD OF PORTER SCHOOL TOWNSHIP; AND ROGER BAIRD, School Township Trustee of Porter School Township, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 3-979A266.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
December 29, 1980.
*1000 David C. Campbell, Wayne O. Adams, Bingham, Summers, Welsh & Spilman, Indianapolis, Patrick E. Donoghue, Sweeney, Winski, Dabagia & Donoghue, Michigan City, for plaintiff-appellant.
James L. Jorgensen, Hoeppner, Wagner & Evans, Valparaiso, for defendants-appellees.
GARRARD, Presiding Judge.
This case comes to us on appeal from the entry of summary judgment in favor of appellees, Porter School Township of Porter County, the Advisory Board of Porter School Township (Advisory Board) and Roger Baird, School Township Trustee of Porter School Township, in an action filed by appellant, Morris Aplin, alleging that defendants wrongfully terminated his contract of employment as a public school teacher.
Aplin was employed by Porter School Township as a nonpermanent, or non-tenure, teacher.[1] On April 28, 1977, Trustee Baird signed and delivered, or caused to be delivered, to Aplin an "Official Form of Notice of Termination of Contract of Non-Tenure Teachers."[2] Thereafter, Aplin brought this action contending, as he does on appeal, that his termination was unlawful. Aplin bases his contention upon IC 20-6.1-4-14, the statute pertaining to contract rights of nonpermanent teachers, which he interprets as requiring that only the "governing body" of a school corporation may make the decision not to renew a teacher's contract. Pursuant to IC 20-6.1-1-3 the "governing body" of a school corporation consists of the township trustee and the advisory board. Since the decision to not continue his contract was made by Trustee Baird alone, Aplin argues he was unlawfully discharged. The trial court held for defendants, concluding that, as a matter of law, the trustee alone could make the decision to not renew. We affirm.
The granting of summary judgment should be sustained only where the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with *1001 any affidavits and testimony, reveal that no genuine issue as to any material fact exists, and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Indiana Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 56(c). In the instant case the facts are not in dispute. The case turns upon a purely legal issue: Who is authorized to make the determination to not renew the contract of a nonpermanent teacher?
The resolution of this case rests upon the proper construction to be given certain provisions of our statutes regarding teachers and school corporations. Specifically, we must determine upon whom the legislature has conferred the authority to terminate nonpermanent teachers. This is a matter of first impression, and there is little case law available to aid in its resolution.
At the time of Aplin's termination, IC 20-6.1-4-14 (1976), read as follows:[3]
"20-6.1-4-14. Contract rights of nonpermanent teachers.-(a) Each contract *1002 entered into by a nonpermanent teacher and a school corporation continues in force on the same terms and for the same wages, unless increased by IC 20-6.1-5-1, the teachers' minimum salary law, for the next school term following the date of termination set in the contract. However, the contract does not continue if:
(1) On or before May 1, the school corporation notifies the teacher that the contract will not continue for the next school term; this notification must be:
(A) Written; and
(B) Delivered in person, or mailed by registered or certified mail to the teacher at his last and recognized address;
(2) The teacher delivers or mails by registered or certified mail to the school corporation his written resignation; or
(3) The contract is replaced by another contract between the parties.
(b) A teacher who is refused continuation of the contract under subsection (a) of this section may request a written statement showing reason for the dismissal from the governing body."
In an effort to aid our determination, both parties offer interpretations of this statute. Specifically, the parties have focused upon who constitutes the "school corporation" thereunder.[4] Aplin contends that "school corporation" under paragraph (a) above refers to the governing body of the school corporation, namely the advisory board and the trustee. Appellees urge that the legislature's use of the words "school corporation," rather than governing body, indicate that they did not intend for the latter to be the decision maker.
However, we need not inquire into what the legislature intended by its use of the words "school corporation" as we find nothing in paragraph (a) which addresses the question of who is empowered to make the non-continuation decision. Rather it provides a procedural mechanism for the notification of such a decision. We construe the term "school corporation" as merely indicating that school officials must notify the teacher that his contract will not be renewed, and the manner in which the notification must be made. Therefore, paragraph (a) speaks only to the notice requirements of the non-renewal of nonpermanent teachers. We note with regard to the adequacy of the notice afforded Aplin, that the trustee alone, in signing the notice of non-renewal, may represent the school corporation. In State ex rel. Sights v. Edwards (1949), 228 Ind. 13, 89 N.E.2d 443, the Supreme Court held, on petition for rehearing, that a notice of dismissal of a teacher was not insufficient where it was signed only by the trustee. In so holding, the Court stated, "[u]nder this statute, the trustee is to all intents and purposes, the school corporation, for whom he acts. It can act only through him in the matters here involved." 228 Ind. at 30, 89 N.E.2d 443.
We next turn to paragraph (b) of IC 20-6.1-4-14 wherein the legislature provided that a teacher could obtain a statement of the reasons for his dismissal from the governing body of the school corporation. Aplin argues that this reference to the governing body indicates that it is they, and not the trustee acting alone, who make the termination decision. However, it does not follow a fortiori that because the governing body may be called upon to provide a list of reasons for a nonpermanent teacher's termination, they are also the body which must make the original decision. We decline to accept such a construction of the statute. While the end result of the process available to a teacher under paragraph (b) is to involve the governing body in reviewing a decision to terminate, the statute does not support the inference that a discharge is unlawful because someone other than the governing body made the initial decision not to renew a teacher's contract.
*1003 Since IC 20-6.1-4-14 provides little assistance in resolving this issue, we must consider the broader policies behind the trustee's role in the school system, and the relationship of that role to the process of terminating nonpermanent teachers. In describing the duties of school trustees, IC 20-2-9-1 provides in relevant part:
"The school trustees shall take charge of the educational affairs of their respective townships, towns and cities. They shall employ teachers, establish and locate conveniently a sufficient number of schools for the education of children therein, and build, or otherwise provide, suitable houses, furniture, apparatus and other articles and educational appliances necessary for the thorough organization and efficient management of said schools." (emphasis added)
It thus seems clear that school trustees are generally empowered to take such action as is necessary to maintain the efficient operation of the schools in their township. Included in their duties is the power to employ teachers. Absent legislative directive on this matter, we must decide if the power to hire necessarily includes the power to decide not to rehire.
We emphasize that the instant case involves a nonpermanent teacher. Nonpermanent teachers are not accorded the same status, for purposes of right to employment and contract renewal, as are permanent teachers. The courts have recognized that the rights bestowed upon permanent teachers are contractual in nature, and may only be taken away within the limits provided by statute. State of Indiana ex rel. Brand v. Anderson (1938), 303 U.S. 95, 58 S.Ct. 443, 82 L.Ed. 685; State ex rel. Tittle v. Covington Community Consolidated Schools of Fountain and Warren Counties, et al. (1951), 229 Ind. 208, 96 N.E.2d 334. Specifically, IC 20-6.1-4-10 lists the sole grounds for the cancellation of a permanent teacher's contract, and IC 20-6.1-4-11 details the extensive notification and hearing procedures to which a permanent teacher is entitled upon cancellation of his contract.
On the other hand, nonpermanent teachers have no contractual right to continued employment. The legislature has left the decision not to rehire a nonpermanent teacher to the relatively unfettered discretion of school officials. Absent a right to have one's contract continued, the nonpermanent teacher's contract rights exist only with regard to the contract entered into for the present school year. The decision to continue a nonpermanent teacher's contract is merely the decision to re-employ that teacher for another year. Conversely, where no right to employment exists for succeeding years, the decision to not continue a nonpermanent teacher's contract is merely a determination to not re-employ the teacher. Since a trustee is vested with the power to "employ teachers" under IC 20-2-9-1, the power to decide not to "re-employ" a teacher is clearly consistent with a trustee's statutory duties and is implicitly necessary to effect the trustee's duty to "employ" the teacher for the ensuing school year.
We conclude, therefore, that the trustee of a school township may make the initial decision to not renew the contract of a nonpermanent teacher. Accordingly, Aplin's dismissal was not rendered unlawful by Trustee Baird having alone determined to not continue his contract.
Affirmed.
HOFFMAN and STATON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  A distinction is drawn in the law between nonpermanent and permanent teachers. The latter have served at least five successive years in a particular school corporation. IC 20-6.1-4-9.
[2]  Pursuant to IC 20-6.1-4-14, set out infra, the contract of a non-tenure or nonpermanent teacher continues in force for the next school year unless the teacher is notified by the school corporation prior to May 1st of the existing school year.
[3]  In 1978, IC 20-6.1-4-14 was amended by a change in the language of paragraph (b) and the addition of paragraphs (c) and (d). The present version reads as follows:
"20-6.1-4-14. Contract rights of nonpermanent teachers.-(a) Each contract entered into by a nonpermanent teacher and a school corporation continues in force on the same terms and for the same wages, unless increased by IC 20-6.1-5-1, the teachers' minimum salary law, for the next school term following the date of termination set in the contract. However, the contract does not continue if:
(1) On or before May 1, the school corporation notifies the teacher that the contract will not continue for the next school term; this notification must be:
(A) Written; and
(B) Delivered in person, or mailed by registered or certified mail to the teacher at his last and recognized address;
(2) The teacher delivers or mails by registered or certified mail to the school corporation his written resignation; or
(3) The contract is replaced by another contract between the parties.
(b) A teacher who is refused continuation of the contract under subsection (a) of this section has the following rights:
(1) Upon the request of the teacher, and within fifteen [15] days of the receipt of the notice of contract non-renewal the governing body or the superintendent of the school corporation shall provide the teacher with a written statement which may be developed in an executive session and which is not a public document, giving the reasons for the non-continuation of the teacher's contract.
(2) The principal of the school at which the teacher teaches, shall provide the teacher with an annual written evaluation of the teacher's performance before January 1, of each year. Upon the request of a nonpermanent teacher, delivered in writing, to the principal within thirty [30] days after the teacher receives the evaluation required by this section, the principal shall provide the teacher with an additional written evaluation.
"(c) A conference shall be held with the governing body, or at its direction with the superintendent or his designee, not more than ten [10] days following the day the governing body receives the request. If the first conference is not with the governing body, a second conference shall be held with the governing body not more than twenty [20] days following the day the governing body receives the request for a second conference, or before the end of the school year, whichever is earlier. The governing body may, in addition to a conference, require that the superintendent or his designee and the teacher summarize in writing the position of each with respect to the continuation of the contract. At any conference, the governing body, the superintendent or his designee may provide any information supporting noncontinuance, and the teacher may provide any information demonstrating that noncontinuance of the contract is improper. The conference with the governing body shall be in executive session unless the teacher requests a public conference. The teacher may have a representative at any conference. The time periods set out in this subsection shall be extended for a reasonable period when a teacher or school official is ill or absent from the school corporation or for other reasonable cause. The governing body shall affirm or reverse its position on continuation of the teacher's contract not more than ten [10] days after the conference.
(d) The governing body of a school corporation may decide not to continue a teacher's contract under this section: (1) for any reason considered relevant to the school corporation's interest; or (2) because of a teacher's inability to perform his teaching duties."
The present version of the statute clearly vests the ultimate decision as to the non-renewal of a nonpermanent teacher's contract in the school corporation's governing body should a teacher wish to pursue the available conference procedures. While we must decide this case under the language of the 1976 statute, we note that the legislature's further clarification of the appeals process does not resolve the question as to who may make the initial decision with respect to continuation of a contract.
[4]  IC 20-6.1-1-5 provides:
"School corporation defined.-As used in this article [20-6.1-1-1 - 20-6.1-6-17], the term `school corporation' means any public school corporation established by and under the laws of the state. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, any school city, school town, school township, consolidated school corporation, metropolitan school district, township school corporation, county school corporation, united school corporation or any community school corporation."

=== CASE 3784369 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.481551+00 ===

Plaintiff in error brought an action against defendant in error in the court of *Page 569
common pleas, division of domestic relations, Hamilton county, for divorce, on the ground that defendant in error was confined in the Ohio Reformatory at Mansfield, Ohio, under sentence thereto upon a plea of guilty to an indictment charging highway robbery. Defendant did not appear either in person or by counsel, but upon the testimony adduced by plaintiff, it was shown that the defendant was an inmate of the Ohio State Reformatory, and the court, being of opinion that that institution was not a penitentiary, held that the petition did not state a cause of action, and dismissed the petition. Error was prosecuted to the Court of Appeals, where the judgment of the trial court was affirmed. The cause has been admitted to this court upon motion to certify.
Section 11979, General Code, as one of the grounds of divorce, provides:
"9. The imprisonment of either party in a penitentiary under sentence thereto. The petition for divorce under this clause must be filed during the imprisonment of the adverse party."
The sole question is whether the Ohio State Reformatory is a "penitentiary" within the meaning of that section.
The defendant was between the age of 21 and 30 years. Section 2131, General Code, provides that a male criminal between 21 and 30 years may be sentenced to the reformatory, if the court passing sentence deems the prisoner amenable to reformatory methods. Under Section 2139, General Code, he might have been sentenced to the penitentiary and later transferred to the reformatory. Or under Section 2140, if more than thirty years of *Page 570
age at the time of his conviction or if previously convicted of crime, he might have been sentenced to the reformatory and afterward transferred to the penitentiary. Under Section 1835, both institutions are placed under the management of the Ohio board of administration. By the provisions of Sections 2136 and 2169 both institutions are required to be operated under rules and regulations making provision for reformatory discipline. In the legislation establishing the Mansfield institution (81 Ohio Laws, p. 206), it was called an "intermediate penitentiary." Later the character of the institution was somewhat changed, and the name also changed, by the Act of April 24, 1891, (88 Ohio Laws, 382), whereby it was given the name "Ohio State Reformatory." It will be seen, therefore, that there can be no well-defined distinction whereby the Mansfield institution could be regarded otherwise than a penitentiary. The matter is more confused by the fact that women cannot in any event be sent to the penitentiary at Columbus, but must be sent to the reformatory at Marysville, and yet Section 11979 provides that the imprisonment of either party in a penitentiary becomes ground for divorce upon the petition of the other party.
A penitentiary has never been defined by the courts of this state, and only two cases have been brought to our attention wherein a definition of a penitentiary is found: State v.Burnett, 184 N.C. 783, 115 S.E. 57, and Millar v. Kansas,2 Kan. 174. In both those cases the term "penitentiary" was used in the broad sense of any state prison for the confinement of felons. The statutes of *Page 571
Ohio do not define the term "penitentiary," but felony is defined by Section 12372, General Code:
"Offenses which may be punished by death, or by imprisonment in the penitentiary, are felonies; all other offenses are misdemeanors."
Dictionaries define the term "penitentiary" as a prison, or place of punishment. In Ohio it could not be a local prison or other than a state prison where felons are confined, by reason of the provisions of Section 12372.
Section 11979 was enacted long before the legislation providing for the intermediate penitentiary at Mansfield, and, although the Legislature has never taken the trouble to amend Section 11979, we are of the opinion that the Legislature never intended to draw any distinction between the two institutions so far as grounds for divorce are concerned. This view is strengthened somewhat by the fact that Section 11979 uses the article "a" instead of the article "the," thereby indicating that it did not have in mind a single state's prison.
The judgments of the lower courts will therefore be reversed, and the cause remanded to the court of common pleas, division of domestic relations, for further proceedings.
Judgment reversed, and cause remanded.
JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY, ALLEN, KINKADE and ROBINSON, JJ., concur. *Page 572

=== CASE 2211848 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.578804+00 ===

83 Ill.2d 20 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 1282
In re ALYCE TALLMANN NEFF, Attorney, Respondent.
No. 53216.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed December 1, 1980.
*21 Philip Schickedanz, of Springfield, for the Administrator of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission.
No appearance for respondent.
Respondent suspended.
MR. JUSTICE UNDERWOOD delivered the opinion of the court:
On February 2, 1979, the Administrator of the Illinois Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission filed a petition pursuant to Rule 763 (73 Ill.2d R. 763) alleging that on January 2 the respondent, Alyce Tallman Neff, also known as Alyce Neff Browne, had been suspended indefinitely from the practice of law in the State of Wisconsin. The order of the Supreme Court of Wisconsin indicates, in addition to the indefinite suspension, that respondent would not be permitted to petition for reinstatement for at least six months and would not be reinstated unless and until she paid $500 costs to the Board of Attorneys Professional Responsibility and had made whole the former client upon whose complaint the action was based. The Administrator's petition sought an order of this court subjecting respondent, who was licensed in 1961 to practice law by this court, to the same disciplinary sanction in this State to run concurrently with the Wisconsin discipline.
*22 Respondent requested a hearing upon the Administrator's petition, and the cause was referred by us to the Hearing Board pursuant to Rule 763. A panel of that board held a hearing and recommended "that the Respondent be suspended from the practice of law in the State of Illinois on the same terms and conditions as previously imposed upon Respondent by the State of Wisconsin, to run concurrently with the discipline imposed by the State of Wisconsin." Respondent excepted to the recommendation of the Hearing Board. Although she filed no brief, respondent did appear before the Review Board, which noted in its order that she was "the mother and sole support of five (5) children," and that her practice was limited and her income sparse. There is no transcript in this record of the proceedings before the Review Board, and we have nothing before us indicating the basis for those findings. We do note, however, that respondent had testified before the hearing panel that she was receiving support from two former husbands. The Review Board concluded, with two members dissenting, that substantially less discipline was warranted in Illinois and dismissed the complaint. The cause is before us pursuant to leave granted the Administrator to file exceptions to the Review Board's action.
Rule 763, on reciprocal disciplinary action, provides:
"If an attorney licensed to practice law in this State and another State is disciplined in the foreign State, he may be subjected to the same discipline in this State, to run concurrently with the discipline in the foreign State, upon proof of the order of the foreign State imposing the discipline.
The Administrator shall initiate proceedings under this Rule by filing a petition with the court, to which a certified copy of the order of the foreign State is attached, together with proof of service upon the attorney. Within 21 days after service of a copy of the petition upon him the attorney may request in writing a hearing on the petition. *23 The hearing shall be held before the Hearing Board no less than 14 days after notice thereof is given to the attorney respondent and the Administrator. At the hearing the attorney may be heard only on the issues as to (1) whether or not the order of the foreign State was entered; (2) whether it applies to the attorney; (3) whether it remains in full force and effect; (4) whether the procedure in the foreign State resulting in the order was so lacking in notice or opportunity to be heard as to constitute a deprivation of due process of law; and (5) whether the conduct of the attorney warrants substantially less discipline in this State.
If an attorney is suspended or disbarred in this State pursuant to this Rule, the reinstatement in this State shall be governed by the provisions of Rule 767.
Nothing in this Rule shall prohibit the institution of independent disciplinary proceedings in this State against any attorney based upon his conduct in another State, and, in the event the Administrator elects to proceed independently, any discipline imposed in this State shall not be limited to the discipline ordered by a foreign State." 73 Ill.2d R. 763.
The only issue here is whether the conduct of the respondent warrants substantially less discipline in this State.
The Wisconsin proceedings were the result of a complaint by a client of the respondent with that State's Board of Attorneys Professional Responsibility. The complaint by that board to the Supreme Court of Wisconsin alleged that in 1974 respondent accepted $75 from the client for representation in a bankruptcy action; that she informed the client that bankruptcy papers were filed; that the statement so made was not true; that the client thereafter obtained other counsel to represent him and demanded of the respondent the return of the money paid as a retainer; and that she failed and refused to return such funds. A "Second Claim for Discipline" in that complaint consisted of allegations that respondent failed on at least three occasions to answer correspondence concerning the client's complaint from representatives of the State bar and the *24 district grievance committee. These failures by the respondent constituted a violation of Wisconsin's standards of professional conduct.
Respondent appeared at a prehearing conference in Wisconsin and requested and was granted an opportunity to answer the complaint, but did not do so. She failed to appear at the subsequent default hearing on the complaint, following which a referee made findings in accordance with the complaint and the supreme court entered its order of suspension based upon those findings.
At the subsequent hearing on the complaint now before us respondent stated that she received notice December 9, 1978, from the Supreme Court of Wisconsin that she had been suspended from membership in the State bar of Wisconsin for failure to comply with that State's 1977 continuing-legal-education requirements. Respondent further testified that she did not pursue the subsequent Wisconsin disciplinary matter because she did not intend to practice in Wisconsin and would limit her practice to Illinois. Respondent indicated that she did not refund the retainer fee because she believed she was entitled to it as a result of more than three hours spent with the client. She also introduced into evidence a copy of her petition for reinstatement and "Immediate Inactive Status" addressed to the Supreme Court of Wisconsin. Her unexecuted supporting affidavit states that she met the conditions for reinstatement and "has forwarded" the $500 costs to the Wisconsin board and repaid her client. An affidavit by that client also indicated repayment of $75. Upon questioning by the panel members, respondent indicated she had not actually forwarded the documents but intended to execute and forward the originals of the documents and the $500 costs to the Wisconsin bar that afternoon, "within two hours." She did not do so.
The Administrator notes in his brief that when respondent appeared before the Review Board six months *25 later she still had taken no action to resolve her Wisconsin suspension. The respondent has not filed a brief in this court, and we have no indication that her representation to the Hearing Board has been fulfilled.
The Review Board majority based its conclusion that substantially less discipline was warranted in Illinois on its finding that restitution was made to the client, only $75 was involved, respondent's income was sparse, and there did not appear to be any fraud, deceit or misrepresentation attributable to her.
It is settled that final responsibility for determining the discipline to be imposed rests in this court and that in determining the appropriate penalty we may properly consider all facts and circumstances in aggravation and mitigation, including respondent's actual conduct. (In re Cook (1977), 67 Ill.2d 26; In re Lytton (1971), 48 Ill.2d 390.) Determining the discipline to be imposed upon an erring attorney is never a simple matter, but there are few of our functions more important than our supervision of the disciplinary system. The purpose of that system is to safeguard the public and maintain the integrity of the legal profession. (In re Spencer (1977), 68 Ill.2d 496.) The principal objective of a disciplinary inquiry is to determine whether the attorney is a proper person to be permitted to practice his profession. In re March (1978), 71 Ill.2d 382; In re Andros (1976), 64 Ill.2d 419.
It is established here that respondent had accepted a fee to represent a client in a bankruptcy matter and told him she had filed the necessary papers. In fact she had not done so and did not do so. She refused to refund the fee, and she failed to answer repeated attempts by disciplinary personnel to contact her regarding the client's complaint. Respondent's explanation to our hearing panel that she believed she had earned the fee was, of course, an explanation which would have been appropriate in the Wisconsin proceedings. It was not appropriate here, since the contrary *26 Wisconsin findings are res judicata. (In re Cook (1977), 67 Ill.2d 26, 32; In re Andros (1976), 64 Ill.2d 419, 423.) After the Wisconsin disciplinary complaint was filed, respondent requested and was granted an extension of time within which to file an answer but did not do so, and was ultimately defaulted. The Wisconsin sanctions seem clearly justified, and respondent has not improved her position by her failure to implement her statement to the Illinois hearing panel that she was mailing the documents to the Wisconsin Supreme Court.
Under ordinary circumstances we would agree with the hearing panel that substantially less discipline in Illinois is inappropriate. These circumstances, however, are not ordinary. The six months' minimum period of suspension imposed in the Wisconsin proceedings has now expired. Respondent has refunded the retainer fee to the former client. Presumably she would be reinstated in Wisconsin if she paid the $500 costs incurred in that proceeding and met the continuing-education requirements. She indicates, however, that she does not intend to seek reinstatement, a choice which is hers to make.
While we acknowledge respondent's right to refrain from seeking reinstatement, we are under no obligation to permit her to practice law in Illinois while ignoring the order of the Wisconsin court requiring her to pay the accrued costs of that disciplinary action. Respondent's conduct there not only reflected unfavorably upon her but also upon the integrity of the legal profession. She has displayed a remarkable lack of concern and indifference to those proceedings and regarding her representations to the hearing panel in this case. Considering, however, that the proceedings before us arose solely because of the Wisconsin incident, and respondent apparently is now eligible for reinstatement there except for the continuing-education requirements, we believe it a sufficient sanction to suspend her pending payment by her of the $500 in accrued court costs.
*27 It is accordingly ordered that respondent be suspended from the practice of law in this State until such time as she files with the clerk of this court a receipt from the clerk of the Supreme Court of Wisconsin showing payment of the accrued court costs in the amount of $500.
Respondent suspended.

=== CASE 9737741 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:35.378614+00 ===

WEDEMEYER, P.J.
¶ 1. Antonio V. Blanco and Nora M. Al-Shammari appeal from judgments entered after both pled guilty to possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance, marijuana, greater than 2,500 grams, as a party to a crime, contrary to WlS. STAT. §§ 961.14(4)(t), 961.41(lm)(h)3, 939.63 and *398939.05 (1997-98).1 Blanco and Al-Shammari claim that the trial court erred when it denied their motions seeking to suppress evidence. Each argues that the arrest warrant held by police did not give them proper authority to enter Al-Shammari's apartment and that, once the police had entered, the protective sweep doctrine did not authorize a search of a crawl space in the bathroom ceiling, which was secured by four screws. Because the police actions did not violate the appellants' constitutional rights, we affirm.
I. BACKGROUND
¶ 2. On September 10, 1997, at approximately 7:15 p.m., Milwaukee Police Officer Diane Arenas, Wauwatosa Police Detective Keith Werner, and two other Milwaukee police officers arrived at an apartment building located at 2867 South Kinnickinnic Avenue in the City of Milwaukee. The officers believed that Blanco was staying in apartment #118 at that location. The officers had an arrest warrant for Blanco for the crime of attempted first-degree homicide, while armed. The officers did not directly proceed to the apartment where Blanco was believed to be, but conducted further investigation. An officer showed Blanco's picture to the apartment manager, who stated that Blanco might be staying in apartment #118. An occupant of the apartment building told an officer that Blanco had just been outside the apartment building smoking a cigarette before the police arrived. Another *399occupant told the police that he had seen Blanco enter apartment #118 just before the police arrived.
¶ 3. At approximately 8:00 p.m., the officers knocked on the apartment door, announced that they were police officers, and that they were there to arrest Blanco, pursuant to a felony arrest warrant. A female, later identified as Al-Shammari, refused to allow the officers to enter. During this time period, another officer observed Blanco attempt to leave the apartment through a window. Blanco aborted the attempt, however, when he saw the police. The police called for assistance from the Tactical Enforcement Unit.
¶ 4. The immediate area was secured, surrounding apartments were evacuated, and the police were granted entry to an apartment immediately above and identical to the Al-Shammari apartment. As a result of this access and a review of the layout of the apartment, police were aware that there was a crawl space above the bathtub where someone could hide. Communications were repeatedly attempted with Al-Shammari to have Blanco turn himself over to the police. During this time, the police heard noises and activity coming from Al-Shammari's bathroom, including an inordinate amount of toilet flushing, and voices and sounds near the crawl space above the bathtub. The police also heard repeated use of the garbage disposal in Al-Sham-mari's kitchen. As a result, the water was turned off to the Al-Shammari apartment.
¶ 5. At approximately 10:30 p.m., after their unsuccessful efforts to have Al-Shammari consent to entry, or Blanco voluntarily submit to arrest, the six-man Tactical Enforcement Unit entered the apartment by use of a key obtained from the building manager. Officer Gilbert Carrasco was the first to enter. He held his shield in front of him in anticipation of some type of *400resistant force. Upon entry, three individuals were located: Al-Shammari, Blanco, and Rogelio Fuentez. The three were handcuffed and taken into custody. Carrasco proceeded to the bathroom to perform a protective sweep of that room. He testified that he was concerned that someone may have been hiding in the crawl space located above the bathtub. The board covering the crawl space was secured to the ceiling with four screws. Carrasco asked another officer for a screwdriver and he then removed the panel. Upon doing so, a bag containing marijuana fell on his head. He checked the crawl space for suspects, but it was empty.
¶ 6. As a result of the discovery of the contraband, the police obtained a search warrant for the premises and discovered additional marijuana, a total of 20.4 pounds, scales, $1,745 in cash, three pagers, a cellular telephone, and a .380 caliber pistol. After being properly charged for the drug offenses, Blanco and Al-Shammari both filed motions seeking to suppress the evidence. The trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing and concluded that the entry into the apartment and the protective sweep were not inappropriate or unreasonable. Both Blanco and Al-Shammari pled guilty. Judgment was entered. Both now appeal.
II. DISCUSSION
¶ 7. This case presents us with two questions: (1) whether the entry into Al-Shammari's apartment with only an arrest warrant for Blanco was lawful; and (2) whether the search of the crawl space above the bathtub was within the scope of a lawful protective sweep. The trial court answered both questions affirmatively, and denied Blanco's and Al-Shammari's motions seeking to suppress evidence discovered after the entry and the search.
*401¶ 8. Both issues implicate the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, which provides:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Article I, section 11, of the Wisconsin Constitution provides:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated; and no warrant shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.
"In reviewing an order suppressing evidence, this court will uphold a trial court's findings of fact unless they are [clearly erroneous]." State v. Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d 128, 137, 456 N.W.2d 830 (1990). "However, whether a seizure or search has occurred, and, if so, whether it passes statutory and constitutional muster are questions of law subject to de novo review." Id. at 137-38 (footnote omitted).
A. Entry With Only Arrest Warrant.
¶ 9. When the police officers entered the Al-Shammari apartment, they did not have a search warrant. They did, however, have an arrest warrant for Blanco. The warrant was for a charge of attempted *402first-degree homicide, while armed. The address on the warrant, however, was not the Al-Shammari apartment, but rather was an address in Wauwatosa, which was believed to be Blanco's residence. Before coming to the Al-Shammari apartment, the police had also visited several other abodes where it was suspected that Blanco might be staying. They did not find him at any of the other addresses. Upon arrival at the Al-Sham-mari apartment building, the police engaged in further investigation to determine whether Blanco was now residing in the Al-Shammari apartment. The police were advised by the apartment manager that Blanco might be staying in the Al-Shammari apartment, although the apartment was leased only to Al-Sham-mari. The police discovered that Blanco had been seen in front of the apartment building smoking a cigarette shortly before the police arrived, and that Blanco was seen returning to the Al-Shammari apartment after-wards. The police also observed a friend of Blanco approach the apartment building, but then retreat after seeing the officers. Further, Blanco was positively identified within the apartment by one officer who saw him through the door jam, and another who saw him attempt to escape through a window.
¶ 10. An arrest warrant authorizes the police to "enter the suspect's residence to execute the warrant if there is reason to believe he will be found there; the officer does not need a search warrant." United States v. Pallais, 921 F.2d 684, 690 (7th Cir. 1990) (citing Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 603 (1980)). The question raised in the instant case, however, is whether the police had reason to believe that Blanco was residing in the Al-Shammari apartment. If so, this case is governed by Payton; if not, resolution rests on another line of cases, including Steagald v. United *403States, 451 U.S. 204 (1981) and State v. Kiper, 193 Wis. 2d 69, 532 N.W.2d 698 (1995).
¶ 11. Payton authorizes police entry to a home if they have probable cause to believe that the person named in the arrest warrant lives there and is present within. See id., 445 U.S. at 576. Payton held:
If there is sufficient evidence of a citizen's participation in a felony to persuade a judicial officer that his arrest is justified, it is constitutionally reasonable to require him to open his doors to the officers of the law. Thus, for Fourth Amendment purposes, an arrest warrant founded on probable cause implicitly carries with it the limited authority to enter a dwelling in which the suspect lives when there is reason to believe the suspect is within.
Id. at 602-03.
¶ 12. Payton has been construed to mean that police may enter the home of a person named in an arrest warrant, if the person resides there, even though third persons also reside there. See United States v. Harper, 928 F.2d 894, 896 (9th Cir. 1991). In the instant case, the State argues that Payton governs, that the police had probable cause to believe that Blanco both resided in, and was present in, the Al-Shammari apartment at the time entry was effected to execute the arrest warrant.
¶ 13. The other line of cases suggests that an arrest warrant is insufficient to enter a third party's home, even if the police believe that the subject of the arrest warrant is present there. In Steagald, the Supreme Court held that, absent consent or exigent circumstances, the police may not enter a third party's home to search for the subject of an arrest warrant. See id., 451 U.S. at 205-06. Our Wisconsin Supreme Court *404decided a similar case in Kiper, concluding that the police did not have probable cause to believe that the subject of the arrest warrant in that case was a resident of the Riper home. See id., 193 Wis. 2d at 83-84. Accordingly, the court applied the Steagald rationale and held that, absent Kiper's consent, exigent circumstances, or a search warrant, the police were not authorized to enter Kiper's home to search for the subject of the arrest warrant. See Kiper, 193 Wis. 2d at 87-89. In the instant case, Blanco and Al-Shammari argue that Blanco was not residing in the apartment, but was simply a guest and, therefore, under the Stea-gald line of cases, the police were required to obtain a search warrant before entering the apartment.
¶ 14. In Valdez v. McPheters, 172 F.3d 1220 (10th Cir. 1999), the federal appeals court reconciled the conclusions reached in Payton and Steagald, stating:
Payton and Steagald cannot be understood to divide the world into residences belonging solely to the suspect on the one hand, and third parties on the other. The rule announced in Payton is applicable so long as the suspect "possesses common authority over, or some other significant relationship to," the residence entered by police. Thus, entry into a residence pursuant to an arrest warrant is permitted when "the facts and circumstances within the knowledge of the law enforcement agents, when viewed in the totality, must warrant a reasonable belief that the location to be searched is the suspect's dwelling, and that the suspect is within the residence at the time of entry."
Id. at 1225-26 (citations omitted).
¶ 15. The Valdez court also observed:
*405The majority of circuits which have addressed the issue have agreed that, under Payton, police officers entering a residence pursuant to an arrest warrant must demonstrate a reasonable belief that the arrestee lived in the residence, and a reasonable belief that the arrestee could be found within the residence at the time of the entry. See United States v. Route, 104 F.3d 59, 62 (5th Cir. [1997]) ("A valid arrest warrant carries with it the implicit but limited authority to enter the residence of the person named in the warrant in order to execute the warrant, where there is 'reason to believe' that the suspect is within"); United States v. Risse, 83 F.3d 212, 216 (8th Cir. 1996) ("officers executing an arrest warrant must have a 'reasonable belief that the suspect resides at the place to be entered... and [have] reason to believe that the suspect is present' at the time the warrant is executed"); United States v. Lauter, 57 F.3d 212, 215 (2nd Cir. 1995) ("the proper inquiry is whether there is a reasonable belief that the suspect resides at the place to be entered . . . and whether the officers have reason to believe that the suspect is present"); United States v. Edmonds, 52 F.3d 1236, 1248 (3d Cir. 1995) (although "the information available to the agents clearly did not exclude the possibility that [the suspect] was not in the apartment, the agents had reasonable grounds for concluding that he was there"), vacated in part on other grounds, 52 F.3d 1236, 1251 (3d Cir. 1995); United States v. Magluta, 44 F.3d 1530, 1535 (11th Cir. [1995]) ("the facts and circumstances within the knowledge of the law enforcement agents, when viewed in the totality, must warrant a reasonable belief that the location to be searched is the suspect's dwelling, and that the suspect is within the residence at the time of entry").
*406Id. at 1224 (subsequent history omitted). We agree with the reasoning espoused in Valdez. The dispositive issue then becomes whether the police have reasonable grounds to believe that the suspect of the search warrant was residing in the third party's home, or whether the information known to the police suggests merely that the suspect was visiting the third party's home. In Kiper, the reasonable facts suggested only that the subject of the arrest warrant was a visitor. There, the police entered the Kiper home knowing only that the suspect "had moved from the two addresses noted on the face of the arrest warrant, had no known present address, and . . . was present at Kiper's apartment six weeks earlier." Id., 193 Wis. 2d at 84. Similarly, in Steagald, the police entered the third party's home based upon information that the subject of the warrant could be reached by telephone at that residence "during the next 24 hours." Id., 451 U.S. at 206.
¶ 16. The facts that the police officers relied upon in the instant case led to the reasonable belief that Blanco was not merely a guest or visitor in Al-Sham-mari's home, but rather was residing there. Accordingly, this case is governed by Payton. Payton allows the police to enter a residence armed only with an arrest warrant if two factors are met: (1) the facts and circumstances present the police with a reasonable belief that the subject of the arrest warrant resides in the home; and (2) the facts and circumstances present the police with a reasonable belief that the subject of the arrest warrant is present in the home at the time entry is effected. See id., 445 U.S. at 602-03.
¶ 17. During their investigation to locate Blanco, the police obtained the following information: (1) a tip that Blanco was "staying" at the apartment building; (2) confirmation from the building manager that *407Blanco may be staying in the Al-Shammari apartment; (3) representation from an occupant of the building that Blanco had just been outside the apartment smoking a cigarette; (4) representation from an occupant of the building that Blanco returned to the Al-Shammari apartment after smoking his cigarette; and (5) evidence that Blanco was not at the Wauwatosa address or any other location investigated earlier that day by police. Further, the police observed individuals inside the Al-Shammari apartment moving furniture and other objects around the apartment, heard a great deal of noise coming from the bathroom, saw Blanco attempt to escape the apartment through the window, observed Blanco inside the apartment through the door jam, and observed a known friend of Blanco's approach the apartment.
¶ 18. Blanco contends that the significant distinction between "staying at" and "residing at" renders the officers' reliance on this information insufficient to enter the Al-Shammari apartment. We disagree. A similar argument was rejected in Clayton v. City of Kingston, 44 F. Supp. 2d 177 (N.D. N.Y. 1999), where the federal district court, relying on United States v. Lovelock, 170 F.3d 339, 344 (2d Cir. 1999), held that "the use of the word 'stays' is reasonably interpreted to mean that the suspect . . . resided or lived at" the residence, which was searched. Clayton, 44 F. Supp. 2d at 182 (emphasis added). We agree that in this context, "[t]he colloquial use" of staying is consistent with residing. Lovelock, 170 F.3d at 344; see also United States v. Risse, 83 F.3d 212, 216-17 (8th Cir. 1996) (stating that the phrases "staying with" and "living with" are suffi*408cient to support police officers' belief that the suspect resided at the location at issue).2
¶ 19. Thus, when the police officers were informed that Blanco was "staying" at the Al-Sham-mari apartment, it was reasonable for them to conclude that he was residing there. Given all of these factors, it was reasonable for the police to form a belief that Blanco was not merely visiting Al-Shammari. Rather, these facts support the reasonable conclusion that Blanco " ’possesse[d] common authority over, or some other significant relationship to,'" the apartment. Valdez, 172 F.3d at 1225-26 (citation omitted). Under the totality of the facts and circumstances, it was reasonable for the police to conclude that Blanco had made the Al-Shammari apartment his "dwelling" place and that he was residing there.3
¶ 20. Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court's finding that Blanco was residing in the apartment was not clearly erroneous. We further conclude that, based on the same information set forth above, it was reasonable for the police to conclude that Blanco was present within the apartment when they entered. Accordingly, the two factors required by Pay-ton were satisfied and, as a result, the arrest warrant provided the police with lawful authority to enter the *409Al-Shammari apartment to search for the subject of the arrest warrant, Blanco.
B. Protective Sweep.
¶ 21. Blanco and Al-Shammari next claim that the search of the crawl space above the bathtub, conducted as part of a protective sweep, was unlawful. Blanco and Al-Shammari contend that the police used the protective sweep doctrine as a mere ruse or pretext in order to open the screwed-down access panel because the police suspected contraband was hidden in the crawl space. The State responds that the police officer who opened the panel testified that he went to the bathroom to conduct a protective sweep, that he opened the panel based on a belief that someone may have been hiding in the crawl space, and that he was not searching for contraband.
¶ 22. The trial court considered the information available at the time, including: (1) that Blanco's outstanding warrant was for attempted homicide while armed; (2) that the officers had heard a great deal of noise and activity coming from the bathroom; (3) the police officer's knowledge that the crawl space was big enough for a person to hide in; and (4) it appeared from the condition of the paint around the panel's screws that the panel had recently been removed. The trial court found that, based on these factors, it was reasonable for the police to believe a person might have been hiding in the crawl space. The trial court concluded that the search of the crawl space as a part of a protective sweep "was not inappropriate and was not unreasonable under the law and circumstances."
¶ 23. In Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325 (1990), the United States Supreme Court held that officers may conduct a limited protective sweep of a home, fol*410lowing an in-home arrest, if they have "a reasonable belief based on specific and articulable facts that the area to be swept harbors an individual posing a danger to those on the arrest scene." Id. at 337. The " 'protective sweep' is a quick and limited search of [a] premises, incident to an arrest and conducted to protect the safety of police officers or others. It is narrowly confined to a cursory visual inspection of those places in which a person might be hiding." Id. at 327. The sweep must also be limited in duration, lasting "no longer than is necessary to dispel the reasonable suspicion of danger." Id. The Supreme Court held that, during an arrest, officers may "without probable cause or reasonable suspicion[ ] look in closets and other spaces immediately adjoining the place of arrest from which an attack could be immediately launched." Id. at 334. Beyond that limited cursory inspection, however, an officer must have articulable facts that support an inference that the area to be swept harbors an individual posing danger to those present. See id.
¶ 24. In applying the protective sweep doctrine, and what constitutes a "cursory visual inspection of those places in which a person might be hiding," courts look at the individual facts available to the police at the time the action is taken. See United States v. Burrows, 48 F.3d 1011, 1016-18 (7th Cir. 1995). In Burrows, the seventh circuit upheld a protective sweep where the police forced open four locked doors, in a two-story apartment. See id. at 1017. The court determined "that the officers had the right to ensure their safety." Id. As evidenced by this case, there may be situations in which a secured place may be subjected to a cursory search.
¶ 25. The question in the instant case then becomes whether the search of the crawl space above *411the bathtub was proper under the protective sweep doctrine. Blanco and Al-Shammari point out that the panel had four screws in it fastening it to the ceiling and that the police officer needed to use a screwdriver to remove the screws before he could open the panel. They argue that there is no testimony that he had his gun drawn, or had the assistance of other officers in the bathroom, as he should have, if he truly believed that someone was hiding in the crawl space. They contend that removal of the panel above the bathtub, under the pretext of "sweeping" the area for a person, was simply a ruse to discover suspected contraband.
¶ 26. The facts argued by Blanco and Al-Sham-mari do not fall on deaf ears. In hindsight, the actions of the officer may raise an eyebrow, particularly given the fact that the panel was screwed into the ceiling and, as it turned out, no other person was hiding in the crawl space. However, each situation must be examined by the facts and circumstances confronted by the police at the time the sweep was conducted.
¶ 27. The officers in this case were brought to a scene where an individual was wanted on a charge of attempted first-degree homicide, while armed. Certainly, the potential for an explosive and dangerous situation existed. The police officers were refused entry and Blanco refused to come out of the apartment for over three hours. The Tactical Enforcement Unit, called in to assist, entered the apartment with ballistic shields drawn. Although the suspects did not resist arrest once the officers had gained entry, that did not preclude the possibility that another person might be hiding in the apartment. Our task is to examine all the facts and circumstances and to determine whether the police officer's conduct was reasonable, given the milieu of danger in which he was discharging his pro*412fessional responsibility. Reasonably, a protective sweep is not a series of slides, any one of which can be isolated and then examined with the precision of an academic scalpel. Rather, it is a continuum of action, and sometimes reaction, requiring split-second decisions that ought be examined only under the microscope of reasonableness.
¶ 28. Here, under all the facts and circumstances, the officer's action in "sweeping" the crawl space was reasonable. In addition to the facts noted above, the police were also operating with the following relevant information: (1) during surveillance of the apartment, the police were able to view an apartment with an identical layout; (2) the police knew from this that there was a crawl space above the bathtub, which was two feet by five feet, a space sufficiently large enough to hide a person; (3) the police had heard an inordinate amount of noise and activity coming from the bathroom near the crawl space, leading them to suspect that someone might be in the crawl space attempting to break through the floor into the apartment above; (4) upon entry into the bathroom, Officer Carrasco observed that the paint around the screws holding the access panel of the crawl space to the ceiling had been tampered with, revealing that the panel had recently been removed.
¶ 29. In addition, we note that the police did not come into the apartment and start rummaging around looking for contraband. No other closet, drawer, cupboard or area was swept. The police swept only the area in which they had reason to believe that a person might be hiding. These facts dispel Blanco's and Al-Sham-mari's contention that the police were not checking the crawl space for persons, but were actually looking for *413illegal drugs. Moreover, even if a suspicion of contraband was created during the surveillance because of the inordinate amount of flushing and excessive use of the garbage disposal, such does not trump the police officers' actions in sweeping the area for persons. When a police officer is confronted with two reasonable competing inferences, one that would justify the search and another that would not, the officer is entitled to rely on the reasonable inference justifying the search. See State v. Tompkins, 144 Wis. 2d 116, 125, 423 N.W.2d 823 (1988). Under the totality of the facts and circumstances, we conclude that the protective sweep of the crawl space was reasonable. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's decision to deny the motions to suppress.4
By the Court. — Judgments affirmed.
Blanco's conviction also included the "while armed" enhancer. On its own motion, this court orders Blanco's case, No. 98-3153-CR, and Al-Shammari's case, No. 98-3535-CR, consolidated for appeal dispositional purposes.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes will be to the 1997-98 version unless otherwise noted.
This conclusion is consistent with practical experience, wherein the meaning of where one resides, lives, or stays has been blurred. See generally Charles B. Schudson, Foreword, 7 Notre Dame J. L. Ethics & Pub. Pol'y 365 (1993).
Although not dispositive of our decision in this case, we point out that Blanco's counsel admitted during the sentencing hearing that the Al-Shammari apartment was Blanco's "temporary residence."
We acknowledge that the theory suggested in the dissent certainly is plausible. However, based upon the testimony of the officer and the surrounding facts and circumstances, it is not the only plausible theory. In ruling that the protective sweep was constitutional, the trial court inherently judged the credibility of the police officer's testimony provided in support of the protective sweep. Because the facts and circumstances available to the police at the time the sweep was conducted support the police officer's actions, we cannot discredit the plausibility of the valid purpose supporting the protective sweep.

=== CASE 9737742 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:35.384281+00 ===

CURLEY, J.
¶ 30. (dissenting). I am in agreement with the majority's analysis and conclusion that, under the circumstances present here, the police, armed with an arrest warrant for Antonio Blanco, lawfully entered Al-Shammari's apartment and arrested Blanco. I do not, however, agree with the majority's decision that the police officer's actions in searching a secured crawl space were reasonable or lawful under the protective sweep doctrine.
*414¶ 31. First, I do not believe that the officer was actually conducting a protective sweep. A review of the officer's actions permits only one reasonable conclusion — that the officer was searching for illicit drugs in the crawl space, and not, as he claimed, conducting a search for an accomplice of the three persons found in the apartment. I reach this decision by noting that the officer went immediately to the bathroom, bypassing several other larger rooms on his way in which he conducted no protective sweeps. Further, as the majority opinion concedes, the record is devoid of any evidence that the police officer, when entering the bathroom, had his gun drawn, or requested the assistance of any other officers, actions one would ordinarily expect when a police officer suspects an accomplice is hidden in a room. These facts, coupled with the earlier police observations concerning the apartment lead me to believe no protective sweep was taking place.
¶ 32. After many hours of monitoring Al-Sham-mari's apartment, the police observed only three people in the apartment. All three were immediately accounted for when the police entered the apartment. Thus, when the police entered Al-Shammari's apartment and observed three people, they had no reasonable suspicion that another person was in the apartment. The police did, however, have a reasonable belief that drugs were being disposed of by means of the toilet and the garbage disposal. The police reported hearing excessive flushing of the toilet and constant running of the garbage disposal. So strong were their suspicions that drugs were being removed from the apartment in this manner that the police had the water turned off. Thus, while it was reasonable for the police to believe that the suspects were disposing of contraband, these same observations did not transform their *415suspicion of drug disposal into a reasonable belief that a person was hiding in the crawl space. Consequently, I believe no reasonable officer had any facts, much less facts which meet the "specific and articulable facts" test required under Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325 (1990), to believe that the bathroom or, for that matter, the apartment, contained a dangerous person who posed a danger to him.
¶ 33. The facts in United States v. Burrows, 48 F.3d 1011 (7th Cir. 1995), a case affirming a protective sweep, cited in the majority opinion, are much different. In Burrows, the Court held that the police could forcibly open the locked doors of several rooms. See id. at 1016-17. There, however, the police entering the apartment had absolutely no idea how many people were in the apartment. Here, the police knew, after hours of observation, that there were only three suspects. Thus, I must conclude that the claimed protective sweep for dangerous accomplices was actually a pretext for the unauthorized search of the apartment for contraband.
¶ 34. Second, even if one accepts the premise that the police were engaged in a protective sweep, the actions taken by the officer went far beyond those permitted under law. Assuming that the officer had a specific and articulable belief that someone might be hiding, his protective sweep was, nevertheless, limited in its scope. A protective sweep "is not a full search of the premises." Buie, 494 U.S. at 335. Rather, it is a "quick and limited search of premises, incident to an arrest and conducted to protect the safety of police officers or others. It is narrowly confined to a cursory visual inspection of those places in which a person might be hiding." Id. at 327. The protective sweep doctrine is "aimed at protecting the arresting officers," id. *416at 335, and the doctrine limits officers to "look in closets and other spaces immediately adjoining the place of arrest from which an attack could be immediately launched," id. at 334 (emphases added).
¶ 35. None of the underpinnings for a constitutionally protected protective sweep existed here for the search of the crawl space. First, the bathroom did not adjoin the place of arrest. In fact, as noted, the officer had to travel past several rooms before reaching the bathroom. In State v. Kruse, 175 Wis. 2d 89, 499 N.W.2d 185 (Ct. App. 1993), a case with facts more supportive of a protective sweep than those found here, this court upheld the trial court's suppression of marijuana found in Kruse's bedroom closet during a protective sweep after Kruse was arrested in the living room. In doing so, this court stated: "We conclude that the bedroom closet was not in the vicinity of the place of arrest and therefore not subject to a Buie protective search without reasonable suspicion." Id. at 95.
¶ 36. Second, given the limited purpose of the sweep — to protect officers — no reasonable officer could believe that a person, if indeed there was one, hidden behind a trapdoor securely fastened with four screws would pose a danger to the officers or possibly launch an immediate attack. In Burrows, the locked doors that were forcibly opened "were in an area adjoining the place of arrest [the bathroom] from which an attack could be immediately launched." Burrows, 48 F.3d at 1014. A locked door can be easily unlocked from the inside, but here, it would be most difficult and time consuming for a person to exit from a crawl space whose opening has been secured by four screws on the outside. Also, a "cursory visual inspection" hardly encompasses entering a secured space with the aid of tools.
*417¶ 37. Consequently, I believe the actions taken by the police fell outside those permitted under the protective sweep doctrine. Further, by legitimizing the search of a crawl space accessed only by means of removing the door's four screws with a screwdriver, the majority has enlarged the protective sweep exception far beyond that contemplated by the United States Supreme Court and, in doing so, has dealt a serious blow to the Fourth Amendment prohibition against unreasonable searches.

=== CASE 9737743 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:37.774573+00 ===

ROGGENSACK, J.
¶ 1. Farm Credit Services of North Central Wisconsin, ACA (FCS) brought this *525action against David Wysocki, a former employee. FCS seeks to enforce a covenant not to compete which is a provision of a 1983 employment contract that Wysocki entered into with Production Credit Association of Wausau (PCA of Wausau). FCS claims it is the same corporation as PCA of Wausau, operating under a new legal name which was selected subsequent to several mergers which occurred during 1986 and 1991. Wysocki contends that the covenant is unenforceable by FCS because it is not the same corporation as PCA of Wausau and even if it were, the restrictive covenant is void under the provisions of WlS. STAT. § 103.465 (1983-84).1 We agree that even if we were to assume, arguendo, that FCS is the same corporation as PCA of Wausau, because the restrictive covenant's "specified territory," as that term is used in § 103.465, has been unilaterally enlarged by FCS, we conclude that the restrictive covenant is void. Therefore, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court dismissing this action against Wysocki.
BACKGROUND
¶ 2. Wausau Production Credit Association was formed in 1934 as an agricultural credit association pursuant to the terms of the Farm Credit Act. See 12 U.S.C. 2001-2279cc (1994 & Supp. 1999).2 Wysocki *526was hired in 1980 and began work without a written contract of any type. The majority of his time was spent on credit-related transactions for farmers who were members of that association. By 1983, Wausau PCA had changed its name to Production Credit Association of Wausau. PCA of Wausau, which was chartered to serve a specified geographic area, then entered into a written contract with Wysocki as a "Related Services Coordinator/Loan Officer" to perform "all other duties customarily performed by one holding such position" and to provide "accounting, bookkeeping, or prepare tax returns for PCA membership." The contract also contained the following restrictive covenant:
Post-employment Competition. In consideration.of the special training and materials provided to Employee by PCA and the preparation of tax returns for persons engaged in agriculture and confidential information made available to Employee by PCA concerning the financial affairs of its members, including, in particular, information generated by the Agrifax program, it is agreed that the Employee's activities shall be restricted in accord with this paragraph. If the Employee ceases to be a PCA Employee, for any reason, the Employee shall not, for a period of one year immediately following the date of separation from PCA, directly or indirectly, engage in the business of tax preparation, tax consultation, bookkeeping, or accounting, or any other duties performed as a tax consultant for PCA with the persons(s) (sic) the Employee con-*527suited or serviced in performance of his/her consultant duties at any time during the one year immediately prior to the date of separation. Person(s) includes individuals, sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations.
¶ 3. In 1986, PCA of Wausau merged with Production Credit Association of Antigo and Production Credit Association of Neillsville, in accord with an agreement among the PC As that PCA of Wausau would be the surviving entity.3 Prior to that merger, P CA of Wausau had been authorized to serve five counties and part of a sixth: Lincoln, Marathon, Portage, Price, Wood and a portion of Taylor. After that merger and a subsequent name change in 1989, PCA of Wausau, then legally operating as PCA of North Central Wisconsin, was chartered to serve twelve counties: Clark, Forest, Langlade, Lincoln, Marathon, Oneida, Portage, Price, Taylor, Vilas, Waushara and Wood. 4 After its charter was amended to permit the geographic expansion of its service area, PCA of North Central Wisconsin did not enter into any additional written contracts with Wysocki, but Wysocki continued to provide services to it, as an employee.
*528¶ 4. In December of 1990, in anticipation of its merger with the Federal Land Bank Association of North Central Wisconsin, PCA of North Central Wisconsin changed its name to Farm Credit Services of North Central Wisconsin, ACA, under which name it continues to do business. The territory that FCS continues to serve is the same twelve counties served since 1989. However, FCS's business involves more facets than it did prior to the merger.5 Based on undisputed facts, FCS contends that because the mergers it participated in were statutory mergers where the merger documents chose it as the surviving entity, it is the same corporation as that which contracted with Wysocki; and therefore, it is entitled to enforce the restrictive covenant against him upon his resignation in 1998.
¶ 5. Wysocki, denying that the restrictive covenant is enforceable, moved for summary judgment of dismissal, which the circuit court granted. It concluded that FCS was not the same entity as PCA of Wausau and that even if it were, the restrictive covenant was not enforceable because the territory specified in 1983 had been enlarged unilaterally by the time of attempted enforcement in 1998.
*529DISCUSSION
Standard of Review.
¶ 6. This court applies the same summary judgment methodology as that employed by the circuit court. See WlS. Stat. § 802.08 (1997-98); Brownelli v. McCaughtry, 182 Wis. 2d 367, 372, 514 N.W.2d 48, 49 ( Ct. App. 1994). We first examine the complaint to determine whether it states a claim, and then we review the answer, to determine whether it joins a material issue of fact or of law. See Brownelli, 182 Wis. 2d at 372, 514 N.W.2d at 49. If we determine that the complaint and the answer join issue, we examine the moving party's affidavits, to determine whether they establish a prima facie case for summary judgment. See id. If they do, we look to the opposing party's affidavits to determine whether there are any material facts in dispute which entitle the opposing party to a trial. See id. at 372-73, 514 N.W.2d at 49-50.6
¶ 7. Whether a given covenant not to compete comports with the requirements of WlS. STAT. § 103.465 is a mixed question of law and fact. See NBZ, Inc. v. Pilarski, 185 Wis. 2d 827, 839-40, 520 N.W.2d 93, 97 ( Ct. App. 1994). Additionally, whether a restrictive covenant is reasonably necessary to protect the employer depends on the totality of the circumstances and is a question of law to be resolved on the basis of either factual findings made by the circuit court or a stipulation of all the relevant facts by the parties. See id.
*530Restrictive Covenant.
¶ 8. Wisconsin law favors the mobility of workers. See Gary Van Zeeland Talent, Inc. v. Sandas, 84 Wis. 2d 202, 214, 267 N.W.2d 242, 248 (1978); Milwaukee Linen Supply Co. v. Ring, 210 Wis. 467, 473, 246 N.W. 567, 569 (1933) (citation omitted). As a result, a contract which operates to restrict trade or competition is prima facie suspect and will be liberally construed in favor of the employee. See Wausau Med. Ctr., S.C. v. Asplund, 182 Wis. 2d 274, 281, 514 N.W.2d 34, 38 (Ct. App. 1994). The legislature codified that policy in Wis. Stat. § 103.465,7 which provided in relevant part:
A covenant by an assistant, servant or agent not to compete with his employer or principal during the term of the employment or agency, or thereafter, within a specified territory and during a specified time is lawful and enforceable only if the restrictions imposed are reasonably necessary for the protection of the employer or principal. Any such restrictive covenant imposing an unreasonable restraint is illegal, void and unenforceable even as to so much of the covenant or performance as would be a reasonable restraint.
¶ 9. Nonetheless, restrictive covenants may serve to prevent the dissemination of confidential business information necessary to the employer and may prevent unfair competition. See Wausau Med. Ctr., 182 *531Wis. 2d at 283, 514 N.W.2d at 38-39. However, an " 'employer is not entitled to be protected against legitimate and ordinary competition of the type a stranger could give.'" Id. at 283, 514 N.W.2d at 39 (citation omitted). The supreme court has also explained that competition based on the ordinary skills and experience an employee has acquired through working for an employer is not unfair competition. See Behnke v. Hertz Corp., 70 Wis. 2d 818, 822, 235 N.W.2d 690, 693 (1975). In order for a covenant not to compete to be enforceable, it "must (1) be necessary for the protection of the employer; (2) provide a reasonable time restriction; (3) provide a reasonable territorial limit; (4) not be harsh or oppressive as to the employee; and (5) not be contrary to public policy." Fields Found., Ltd. v. Christensen, 103 Wis. 2d 465, 470-71, 309 N.W.2d 125, 128-29 (Ct. App. 1981) (citation omitted).
¶ 10. The parties do not discuss whether this covenant not to compete has been proven to be reasonably necessary to protect a legitimate business interest of F CS.8 That determination is dependent upon consideration of factual matters which, unless there is a stipulation of all material facts, is inappropriate for resolution on summary judgment because the circuit court must consider at least the following: (1) the nature and character of the information sought to be protected; (2) the extent to which its secrecy is vital to the employer's ability to conduct its business; (3) the extent to which the information could be had elsewhere; (4) the extent to which the restraint inhibits the *532employee's ability to pursue a livelihood in the area of his personal skills; and (5) the extent to which a stranger could compete in the provision of the services the former employee would be restrained from providing. See Lakeside Oil Co. v. Slutsky, 8 Wis. 2d 157, 163, 98 N.W.2d 415, 419 (1959); Rollins Burdick Hunter of Wis., Inc. v. Hamilton, 101 Wis. 2d 460, 470, 304 N.W.2d 752, 757 (1981); Wausau Med. Ctr., 182 Wis. 2d at 287, 514 N.W.2d at 40. Additionally, what is reasonable changes from case to case, so that what may be unreasonable in one case is not in another. See Wausau Med. Ctr., 182 Wis. 2d at 285, 514 N.W.2d at 39 (citation omitted). Therefore, because we have not been presented with a stipulation of all material facts, if we were asked to determine whether the restrictive covenant FCS seeks to enforce is reasonably necessary to protect a legitimate business interest of FCS, we would not be able to do so on the record before us.
¶ 11. However, instead of addressing whether the covenant is reasonably necessary to protect the employer, FCS and Wysocki focus their arguments on whether the covenant that FCS seeks to enforce "specified" a territory, as is required by WlS. STAT. § 103.465. It is possible for a restrictive covenant to "specify" a territory through the use of a customer route, see Chuck Wagon Catering, Inc. v. Raduege, 88 Wis. 2d 740, 754, 277 N.W.2d 787, 793 (1979), or through a geographic restriction which does not restrain the employee's activities in a geographic territory into which his former work has not taken him. See Wisconsin Ice & Coal Co. v. Lueth, 213 Wis. 42, 45, 250 N.W. 819, 820-21 (1933).
¶ 12. Wysocki contends that between 1983, when the restrictive covenant was entered into, and 1998, *533when he resigned and began his own tax preparation business, the territory within which FCS seeks to restrain him was unilaterally doubled in size. Therefore, the covenant which FCS seeks to enforce is not consistent with the non-competition agreement Wysocki signed in 1983. FCS contends that fact is irrelevant because the covenant restrains him from doing business only with people for whom he has provided services in the twelve months preceding his termination. It cites the supreme court's opinions in Chuck Wagon and Hunter as holding that a customer-based restrictive covenant is a specified territory which is a reasonable restraint on competition, as a matter of law.
¶ 13. As discussed earlier, we cannot determine, as a matter of law, that this restraint is reasonable, as the record is insufficient in regard to the necessary findings of fact. However, we do conclude, as a matter of law, that the restrictive covenant that FCS seeks to enforce applies within the twelve-county area described in its charter. However, in 1983, due to the charter of PCA of Wausau, that covenant could not have been applied to six of those twelve counties. Therefore, because FCS unilaterally enlarged the specified territory of the restrictive covenant beyond that to which the parties agreed in 1983, it is unenforceable.
¶ 14. The requirements for an enforceable customer-based statement of territory were examined in detail in Chuck Wagon. There, the supreme court considered whether a customer-based restraint that formed part of a lease for a sales route, where products were sold at the customer's place of business rather than at the employer's place of business, was reasonably necessary to protect the employer's business. In reaching its ultimate conclusion, the supreme court reasoned that there is a foundational difference *534between a route salesperson and a non-route salesperson. It relied on Van Zeeland and its conclusion that route salespeople were different because they developed customers that "were dependent exclusively" upon the salesperson who provided goods or services to them. See Chuck Wagon, 88 Wis. 2d at 750, 277 N.W.2d at 791 (citing Van Zeeland, 84 Wis. 2d at 215, 267 N.W.2d at 249). We also note that in Van Zeeland, the court concluded that a post-employment prohibition on contacting Van Zeeland's customer list, without any additional geographic limitation, was held to be unenforceable:
That paragraph provides that the employee will never, without time limitation, disclose the list of customers to any person. Even were this customer list a trade secret, subject to protection within a reasonable geographic area and for a reasonable period of time, this provision, which sets no limits with respect to either, is unreasonable and void.
Van Zeeland, 84 Wis. 2d at 218, 267 N.W.2d at 250. Therefore, reconciling Van Zeeland with Chuck Wagon, we conclude that the restriction on solicitation of route customers in Chuck Wagon complied with the requirement of WlS. Stat. § 103.465 to "specify" the territory because the geographic territory which Raduege served on the route and the route's customer list were coextensive. Stated another way, the prohibited customer list in Chuck Wagon did define a geographic territory, as well as those customers within it, because it covered only those businesses on Raduege's route; it did not cover persons in areas different from the route that Raduege rented from Chuck Wagon when the lease was signed.
*535¶ 15. For the covenant at issue here, because of the geographic restriction of PCA of Wausau's charter, the 1983 non-competition agreement did have an unstated geographic restriction, just as Raduege's route provided an unstated geographic restriction in Chuck Wagon. The present covenant, when it was signed, applied to customers drawn from a geographic area comprised of only five counties and part of a sixth. The customers Wysocki served for PCA of Wausau could not have been drawn from a larger or from a different geographic area. In essence, those five and one-half counties were Wysoeki's "route."
¶ 16. However, in 1998, interpretation of the covenant consistent with the charter then applicable to F CS would preclude Wysocki from providing services to customers in twelve counties. Therefore, the customer list for which FCS seeks an injunction against Wysocki is no longer limited by what would have been the specified territory of the covenant in 1983. Rather, the geographic component of the covenant has been unilaterally doubled by FCS through the amendment of its charter.
¶ 17. One could argue that the amended charter provided only an attempted change in the scope of the covenant because Wysocki did not agree to it. However, once the charter was amended, the covenant could not reasonably be interpreted to apply to only those counties to which it applied in 1983; and, FCS does not contend that it does.9 Furthermore, restrictive covenants are "subject to common law contract principles *536as well as § 103.465, STATS., requirements." NBZ, 185 Wis. 2d at 836, 520 N.W.2d at 96. And the policies that underlie the statute prohibit "blue lining" a restrictive covenant by cutting back the restriction asserted by the employer to one which may be legally enforceable. See Streiff v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 118 Wis. 2d 602, 607-09, 348 N.W.2d 505, 508-09 (1984). Therefore, because PCA of Wausau's geographic territory of service was limited by its charter and applicable federal law in 1983 when the covenant was entered into and because of FCS's subsequent, unilateral enlargement of the geographic component of the "specified territory," we conclude the restrictive covenant is void and unenforceable against Wysocki.
¶ 18. Furthermore, we conclude that Hunter, a case on which FCS relies heavily, provides no support for the contention that this restrictive covenant has not changed the specified territory within which it is effective. There, the supreme court determined only one issue: whether a territorial limitation of a restrictive covenant was required to be expressed in geographic terms as an "absolute prerequisite to a valid and enforceable agreement." See Hunter, 101 Wis. 2d at 467, 304 N.W.2d at 755. It concluded that a statement of a geographic territorial limit is not always essential to a valid covenant not to compete; therefore, some customer-based restrictions may be reasonable.10 See id. at 464, 304 N.W.2d at 754. However, because the record was insufficient to determine whether the cove*537nant before it was reasonable, it remanded the matter for further proceedings.11 See id. The supreme court did not address the issue upon which our opinion turns: whether the restraint which the employer seeks to enforce has changed the "specified" territory over which the restrictive covenant was agreed to have an effect. Accordingly, we conclude that Hunter is not dis-positive of this case.
CONCLUSION
¶ 19. Even if we were to assume, arguendo, that FCS is the same corporation as PCA of Wausau, because the restrictive covenant's "specified territory," as that term is used in WlS. STAT. § 103.465, has been unilaterally changed by FCS, we conclude that the restrictive covenant is void. Therefore, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court dismissing this action against Wysocki.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1983-84 version unless otherwise noted.
The Farm Credit Act was established to assist farmers by increasing the availability of "sound, adequate, and constructive credit. To accomplish this objective, Congress created a farmer-owned cooperative credit system ...." Smith v. Russellville Prod. Credit Assn, 777 F.2d 1544, 1547 (11th Cir. 1985). The production credit associations and the federal land banks form parts of an integrated system of farmer-owned banks and *526associations which are individually chartered to serve designated geographic areas and particularized credit needs. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 2071, 2091. All institutions created under the Farm Credit Act are regulated by the Farm Credit Administration, an independent federal agency. See 12 U.S.C. § 2002(a).
PCAs are permitted to merge subsequent to an agreement of their memberships and the approval of the Farm Credit Administration. Often they are permitted to combine their geographic areas of service when they merge, but the Farm Credit Administration sometimes refuses to allow charter amendments which permit this. See Buckeye Prod. Credit Ass'n v. United States, 792 F. Supp. 827, 832 (D.D.C. 1990).
Initially after the 1986 merger, PCA of Wausau was authorized to serve fourteen counties and part of a fifteenth. However, in 1989, its service area was restricted to twelve counties, and has remained constant for those same twelve counties since 1989.
Initially, PCA of Wausau was limited by its charter and applicable federal law under which it was authorized to extend credit to farmers, which credit was secured by personal property. It had no authorization to make real estate loans. However, that authorization was given after the merger with the Federal Land Bank Association of North Central Wisconsin in 1991.
All of the facts stated above are taken from the parties' filings that were before the circuit court for its consideration of the summary judgment motion.
1995 Act 225, § 347, effective May 1, 1996, amended WlS. Stat. § 103.465 to make it gender neutral and 1997 Act 253, § 81, effective June 19,1998, made minimal word changes, none of which affect the substantive meaning of the statute, as we interpret it in this opinion.
The employer has the burden of proving the reasonable necessity of a restrictive covenant before’it can be enforced. See Geocaris v. Surgical Consultants, Ltd., 100 Wis. 2d 387, 388, 302 N.W.2d 76, 77 (Ct. App. 1981).
The dissent suggests that we should enforce the restrictive covenant for the five counties and part of a sixth county covered by PCA of Wausau's charter in 1983. However, FCS has not argued to us that it wishes to enforce the covenant in only *536those counties. See Streiff v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 118 Wis. 2d 602, 607-09, 348 N.W.2d 505, 508-09 (1984).
There is a great deal of dicta in Hunter. Therefore, it must be read with care to separate out that which is necessary to the court's ultimate conclusion and that which is simply an interesting quote from another case.
We reached the same result, a remand for a reasonableness determination, in General Medical Corp. v. Kobs, 179 Wis. 2d 422, 435, 507 N.W.2d 381, 386 (Ct. App. 1993).

=== CASE 9737744 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:37.782793+00 ===

DYKMAN, P.J.
¶ 20. (dissenting). This appeal arises on summary judgment. As a result, our first task is to review the pleadings to determine whether a claim or cause of action has been stated and whether the answer presents a material factual issue. See Preloznik v. City of Madison, 113 Wis. 2d 112, 116, 334 N.W.2d 580 (Ct. App. 1983). It is not clear whether the majority has concluded that the plaintiff fails at this stage of summary judgment methodology. That is one possible interpretation of the majority's opinion. Another possi*538ble interpretation is that the defendant is entitled to judgment on the affidavits and other material as a matter of law. See WlS. STAT. § 802.08 (1997-98). The analysis required is different depending upon the focus of the majority opinion. However, because this is a dissent, and because the first step in summary judgment methodology is to examine the pleadings, I will do so.
¶ 21. There is nothing in Farm Credit Services' complaint which suggests that its 1983 agreement with Wysocki covered three, six, twelve or forty-seven counties. There is nothing in Wysocki's answer which gives this information. Neither the complaint nor the answer tell us the number of counties in which Farm Credit Services was permitted to do business in 1998. The closest Wysocki comes to suggesting any of this are his assertions that: "The restrictive covenant includes geographical areas not contemplated or included in 1983 and is unreasonable in its scope" and "The plaintiffs business operations and customer base is totally changed from that of PCA in 1983." Following summary judgment methodology, one cannot avoid the conclusion that Farm Credit Services' complaint states a claim and Wysocki's answer raises issues of material fact.1 We next examine Wysocki's affidavits and other material to determine whether he has made a prima facie case for summary judgment. The majority concludes that he has, based upon its determination that Farm Credit Services unilaterally changed the terms of Wysocki's contract.
*539¶ 22. We therefore move from procedure to substantive law. The most significant factor here is that this is a contract case. It is affected by statutory factors, most notably WlS. Stat. § 103.465 (1983-84),2 which places significant limitations on the right of parties to contract as they see fit. But before we reach the question of how § 103.465 affects the contract between Farm Credit Services and Wysocki, we must first determine whether the parties contracted with each other, and what that contract requires. The majority notes that Farm Credit Services "entered into a written contract with Wysocki" but goes no further. In particular, the majority does not consider what was required of the parties by their contract. I believe that this is a necessary and dispositive inquiry, and therefore, this is another area where I part company with the majority.
¶ 23. There are some basic concepts of contract, law which have not, until now, been open to question. "[B]oth offer and acceptance are necessary for the creation of a contract." Eisenberg v. Continental Cas. Co., 48 Wis. 2d 637, 652, 180 N.W.2d 726 (1970). When we conclude that parties have entered into a contract, certain rights and obligations flow from that conclusion. One basic conclusion which has been accepted in Wisconsin until now is that a party to a contract is not free to unilaterally change the material terms of that contract without the assent of the other party. See Schaefer v. Dudarenke, 89 Wis. 2d 483, 492, 278 N.W.2d 844 (1979). I cannot enter a contract to purchase 100 widgets at $37.50 per widget and then successfully have a court enforce my unilateral decision to pay only $25.00 per widget.
*540¶ 24. Another concept of contract law unchallenged until now is that a contract is interpreted as of the date the parties entered the contract. This would seem to be a matter of common sense, but it is also the law: "In the construction of contractual provisions the prevailing idea is to glean the intent of the parties at the time such contract was executed." Huntoon v. Capozza, 57 Wis. 2d 447, 460, 204 N.W.2d 649 (1973). And we are to interpret contracts so as to uphold their validity rather than their invalidity.
Many cases can be seen in which, when the words of the contract can be interpreted either in a way which would cause the contract to be valid or in a way which would result in invalidity, courts have chosen the former interpretation. This preference is based upon the judicial belief that the parties intend their agreement to be valid rather than invalid, lawful rather than unlawful, and honest and effective rather than fraudulent and voidable.
Margaret N. Kniffin, Corbin on Contracts §24.22 (Joseph M. Perillo ed., revised ed., LEXIS 1998) (footnotes omitted). The Restatement (Second) OF Contra CTS adopts a similar concept, but in terms of "Standards of Preference in Interpretation:"
In the interpretation of a promise or agreement or a term thereof, the following standards of preference Eire generally applicable:
(a) an interpretation which gives a reasonable, lawful, and effective meaning to all the terms is preferred to an interpretation which leaves a part unreasonable, unlawful, or of no effect....
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 203 (1981); see also Variance, Inc. v. Losinske, 71 Wis. 2d 31, 36-37, 237 N.W.2d 22 (1976).
*541¶ 25. By examining WlS. STAT. § 103.465 first, before determining what the parties intended in their contract, the majority has put the cart before the horse. It has interpreted a contract before determining whether the parties have entered into a contract. I believe that the proper way to analyze the effect of what the parties did is to begin at the beginning. The dispositive question to me is what the parties intended when they signed the document titled "EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT" on July 26, 1983. The employment contract is specific in its prohibition of certain post-employment competition:
If the Employee ceases to be a PCA Employee, for any reason, the Employee shall not, for a period of one year immediately following the date of separation from PCA, directly or indirectly, engage in the business of tax preparation, tax consultation, bookkeeping, or accounting, or any other duties performed as a tax consultant for PCA with the person(s) the Employee consulted or serviced in performance of his/her consultant duties at any time during the one year immediately prior to the date of separation.
¶ 26. On July 26, 1983, the parties intended that Wysocki would not compete with PCA (later, Farm Credit Services) by preparing taxes for persons who lived in a geographic area consisting of six counties.
¶ 27. Interpreting their contract as of July 26, 1983, as we must, see Huntoon, 57 Wis. 2d at 460, it is impossible to conclude that the contract covered twelve counties. Wysocki was never prohibited from competing with PCA or Farm Credit Services in the six counties the majority adds to the agreement in order to reach the conclusion that the agreement is void. Wysocki and PCA could have amended their contract *542when PCA's territory was expanded to include twelve counties, but the undisputed fact is that they did not. The contract just remained in some file somewhere, awaiting this lawsuit.
¶ 28. How has the majority reached its conclusion? First, it has decided to interpret the employment contract so as to make it invalid rather than valid, thus violating the rule that we are to attempt an interpretation which leads to a valid contract. See Variance, 71 Wis. 2d at 36-37. Next, it has concluded that the parties' contract "has been unilaterally changed by FCS," thus adopting for the first time in Wisconsin the concept that a party can unilaterally and validly change the terms of a contract without the other party's assent.3 It would not suffice to conclude that PCA attempted to unilaterally amend the contract. It is necessary that the contract actually was amended, and indeed, validly amended. It is necessary to the majority opinion that the employment contract embrace twelve counties. It is therefore necessary that something changed the contract from a contract covering persons living in six counties to one covering persons living in twelve counties. Ergo: the majority's conclusion that P CA was able to do what heretofore no-one has been able to do — unilaterally and validly amend a contract without the assent of the other party.
¶ 29. Farm Credit Services has asked for an injunction and damages for Wysocki's breach of the employment agreement by soliciting Farm Credit Ser*543vices' customers in 1998. Whether Farm Credit Services is entitled to an injunction and the amount of its damages are matters which would have been determined at trial. It is commonplace to plead and argue damages in excess of those which one hopes to receive. I do not agree with the majority that by asking for damages in excess of those to which it might be entitled, Farm Credit Services has forfeited the right to receive damages in any amount. And on summary judgment, the question is not whether a party has made a prima facie case as to one claim, but whether a genuine issue exists as to any material fact, in which case a trial is necessary. See Preloznik, 113 Wis. 2d at 116.1 conclude that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Wysocki's 1983 employment agreement, encompassing the territory then in existence, was made void by Wis. Stat. § 103.465.
¶ 30. This leaves the issue of whether Farm Credit Services can enforce a contract between Wysocki and PCA. There is no question but that the pleadings raise this issue. Farm Credit Services' affidavits assert that Farm Credit Services is really PCA by another name. Wysocki claims that the mergers that occurred after 1983 resulted in Farm Credit Services having no continuing or chain of relationship with P CA. In part, the answer to this question depends upon the intent of the various parties whose actions resulted in the transfer from PCA to Farm Credit Services. The issue of intent is not one that is properly decided on a motion for summary judgment. See Lecus v. American Mut. Ins. Co. of Boston, 81 Wis. 2d 183, 190, 260 N.W.2d 241 (1977). This is an issue that should be tried. See Rollins Burdick Hunter, Inc. v. Hamilton, 101 Wis. 2d 460, 470-72, 304 N.W.2d 752 (1981) (discussing the problems with deciding reasonableness on *544summary judgment in the context of a restrictive covenant).
¶ 31. I conclude that the majority: has interpreted the parties' contract so as to lead to its invalidity; has concluded that one party to a contract can unilaterally change a term in the contract without the assent of the other party; and has interpreted a contract as of a date far in the future from the date on which the parties agreed to the contract terms. I cannot agree to any of this, and therefore respectfully dissent.
There could be significant debate as to whether Wysocki's answer pleads facts which create a dispute as to material fact. The portions of his answer which I have quoted are probably not material or are conclusions of law. But there are bigger problems with this case, and I will not discuss this issue further.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1983-84 version unless otherwise noted.
By "validly" I mean that what PCA did by changing its territory to include twelve counties amended the contract to include a prohibition against competition in twelve counties. I do not mean that had the parties agreed to change the territory to twelve counties, this contract amendment would have been valid. That is a question I do not reach.

=== CASE 2211859 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.709146+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 252 (2000)
Kris Renee JOHNSON, Relator,
v.
DOLPHIN STAFFING, Commissioner of Economic Security, Respondents.
No. C2-99-2037.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 18, 2000.
Review Denied September 13, 2000.
*253 Kris Renee Johnson, Minneapolis, pro se relator.
Dolphin Staffing, Dolphin Clerical Group TCG Incorporated, Minneapolis, Kent E. Todd, St. Paul, for respondent Commissioner of Economic Security.
Considered and decided by KLAPHAKE, Presiding Judge, KALITOWSKI, Judge, and STONEBURNER, Judge.
OPINION
KALITOWSKI, Judge.
Relator Kris Renee Johnson challenges the determination of the commissioner's representative that she was disqualified from reemployment insurance benefits for failure to accept suitable employment, pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 8(a)(2) (1998).[1] We reverse.
FACTS
Relator submitted an employment application to respondent Dolphin Staffing on March 15, 1999. She indicated that she had secretarial, data entry, and telephone experience and was available for permanent or long-term, full-time work. Relator completed her first work assignment through Dolphin from March 18 through March 25, 1999.
She accepted a subsequent assignment to begin on March 29, 1999, at a business in downtown Minneapolis. She traveled to the business early that morning, only to discover that the company was not located at the address she had been given. She immediately contacted Dolphin and spoke with a staffing consultant, who informed her that the assignment had been canceled but offered relator an alternative assignment at Northstar Title beginning that day and lasting until at least June 4. Relator considered the offer for a short time and then called back and accepted it.
Relator arrived at Northstar at nine o'clock that morning and began a training session, where a supervisor told her that the job could become permanent. Relator responded that she was not interested in permanent employment. She then called the Dolphin staffing consultant and informed him that Northstar was seeking a permanent employee and that she only wanted temporary work. Relator asked whether she should continue in the position and was told that she should. She called Dolphin again later that day and said that she did not wish to continue working at Northstar. She did not return to Northstar after the first day. Dolphin later received a report from Northstar that relator was unfriendly and had complained that Dolphin forced her to take the position.
*254 Dolphin subsequently offered relator another work assignment from April 20-23, 1999, which she successfully completed. On April 28, 1999, she accepted what was to be her last assignment through Dolphin, a position as a law firm receptionist. On May 10, 1999, Dolphin informed relator that this assignment had been canceled because the law firm was not happy with her performance. Relator has had no further job assignments with Dolphin.
Relator established her reemployment insurance account on June 27, 1999. On her application, she indicated a discharge date of May 10, 1999, the date of her discharge from the law firm. The department determined that relator was eligible for benefits, and Dolphin appealed. The reemployment insurance judge affirmed, finding that claimant was not disqualified from benefits because her discharge from the law firm was for reasons other than misconduct.
Dolphin appealed to the commissioner's representative, who agreed that relator had not been discharged from the law firm for misconduct. But the commissioner's representative concluded that relator was disqualified for failure to accept suitable employment, by turning down the potentially permanent assignment with Northstar Title that was to have run from March 29 until at least June 4.
ISSUE
Did the commissioner's representative err by determining that relator was disqualified from receiving reemployment insurance benefits because she failed to accept suitable employment?
ANALYSIS
Appellate review of the commissioner's factual findings is limited to whether the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the decision, supports that decision. Lolling v. Midwest Patrol, 545 N.W.2d 372, 377 (Minn.1996). The ultimate determination of whether an employee is properly disqualified from receiving benefits is a question of law, subject to de novo review. Id.
The reemployment insurance fund is available only to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own. Minn.Stat. § 268.03, subd. 1 (1998). A claimant is disqualified from benefits if, without good cause, he or she fails to seek or accept suitable employment when offered. Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 8(a)(2) (1998). Suitable employment is "employment in the claimant's labor market area that is reasonably related to the claimant's qualifications." Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 9(a) (1998).
Relator challenges the commissioner's factual finding that the employment with Northstar was "suitable employment." We need not reach this issue, however, because we conclude that the commissioner erred as a matter of law by determining that relator was disqualified for rejecting a job offer she received before her claim for benefits arose.
Relator argues that her refusal to accept suitable work on March 29, 1999, is irrelevant to her claim for reemployment insurance benefits. We agree. Relator accepted subsequent assignments from Dolphin after March 29 and only sought benefits following her discharge from the law firm on May 10, 1999. Thus, even assuming that the position with Northstar was "suitable employment," the offer came more than a month before the discharge that resulted in her claim for benefits.
The commissioner's representative relied on Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subds. 8 and 9, in support of the determination that relator was disqualified. Subdivision 8 provides that a claimant is disqualified from benefits for failing to accept an offer of suitable employment and subdivision 9 defines "suitable employment" as employment in the claimant's labor market area that is reasonably related to his or her qualifications. But neither of these subdivisions nor any other provision under the reemployment insurance statutes supports *255 disqualification for rejecting a job offer that predates a claim for benefits.
We note that relator was not required to disclose the job offer from Northstar in order to meet the express statutory obligations imposed on an individual seeking reemployment insurance benefits. Under Minn.Stat. § 268.101, subd. 1(a) (1998), a claimant must disclose "the names of all employers and the reasons for no longer working for all employers during the claimant's last 30 days of employment." The statute plainly identifies the reason for this requirement:
The purpose for requiring the claimant to report the name of all employers and the reason for no longer working for all employers during the claimant's "last 30 days of employment" is for the commissioner to obtain information from a claimant on all issues that have the potential for disqualifying the claimant from benefits under section 268.095.
Minn.Stat. § 268.101, subd. 1(d). This same subdivision details a claimant's obligation to disclose offers of employment, which is limited to offers made subsequent to a claim for benefits:
Each claimant shall report any employment, loss of employment, and offers of employment received, during those weeks the claimant made continued claim for benefits. * * * The claimant shall report any offers of employment during the period between the making of continued claims.
Minn.Stat. § 268.101, subd. 1(c) (emphasis added). In other words, a claimant must disclose all employers in the 30 days prior to making a claim, but is only required to report offers of employment that occur after the claim. Here, relator was not obligated to disclose the position under either requirement.
The commissioner's representative cited no legal authority for the proposition that disqualification occurs when a claimant rejects a job offer that predates a claim for benefits. Dolphin points to no such authority on appeal, and our independent research similarly reveals no cases in which a claimant was deemed "disqualified" for refusing a job offer made before the right to claim reemployment insurance benefits even existed. A number of cases address the ramifications of a claimant's refusal to accept an offer of employment made after making a claim for reemployment benefits, but all involve job offers made after the right to claim benefits arose, not before.[2] By disqualifying relator for failing to accept employment with Northstar, the commissioner's representative in effect imposed a stricter disclosure requirement than the legislature contemplated, contrary to the general rule that the disqualification provisions are to be narrowly construed. See, e.g., Hansen v. C.W. Mears, Inc., 486 N.W.2d 776, 779 (Minn.App.1992), review denied (Minn. July 16, 1992).
Finally, we note that Dolphin does not appear to have raised or argued the suitability of the offer of employment from Northstar until its appeal to the commissioner's representative of the reemployment insurance judge's decision. We are troubled by the apparent failure to afford relator any prior notice that her refusal to accept employment with Northstar might be at issue. But because we decide this case on its merits, we need not address relator's argument that she was denied procedural due process.
*256 DECISION
The commissioner's representative erred as a matter of law in determining that relator was disqualified from reemployment insurance benefits for failure to accept an offer of suitable employment that predated her claim for benefits.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The legislature recently amended the reemployment compensation statutes. Because all of the events relevant to a determination of relator's initial eligibility occurred prior to the effective date of the amendments, we apply the substance and terminology of the reemployment insurance statutes in effect at that time. We note, however, that nothing in the amendments would affect our holding here.
[2]  See, e.g., Valenty v. Medical Concepts Dev., Inc., 503 N.W.2d 131, 134 (Minn.1993) (holding that a claimant who accepted unsuitable employment was not disqualified from receiving benefits for subsequently terminating that employment); Whitehead v. Moonlight Nursing Care, Inc., 529 N.W.2d 350, 352 (Minn.App.1995) (concluding claimant was not disqualified for refusing to accept a new assignment from temporary employer where employer only left a message and never contacted claimant personally); Henry v. Dolphin Temporary Help Servs., 386 N.W.2d 277, 280 (Minn.App.1986) (finding claimant was not disqualified from receiving continued benefits from base-period employer because she sought and/or rejected temporary assignments from temporary employer).

=== CASE 9737745 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:41.010434+00 ===

*415KAUS, J.
A jury found defendant guilty on a count charging him with possession of heroin for sale. (Health & Saf. Code, § 11500.5.) Outside of the presence of the jury defendant had admitted a conviction of murder suffered in 1950. A motion for new trial was denied, but the court reduced the offense to simple possession of heroin. (Health & Saf. Code, § 11500.) Defendant appeals.
We take the statement of facts leading to defendant’s arrest and the seizure of the heroin from his own brief: “Various officers of the State Narcotic Agency and members of the Los Angeles Police Department, accompanied by defendant’s parole officer, Lloyd Starkweather, went during the night time to the 100 block of South Hill Street and at that time saw the defendant approaching the area where they were standing. The defendant, when about 100 feet away from the officers, stopped and turned away and started walking in the opposite direction; at this time Mr. Starkweather called defendant’s name and defendant stopped, turned around and waited. Upon approaching the defendant, the defendant was ordered to accompany the officers to the State Building. While accompanying the officers, defendant pulled a brown paper bag from his hip pocket and threw it into some bushes; at this time there was a short struggle, after which the officers recovered the bag and therein found the bag to contain 4 condoms filled with a white powdery substance which was identified as being heroin. At the time the defendant was questioned relative to the throwing of the bag he told the officers he had just found the bag in the parking lot and 1 thought it was pills. ’ ”
Officer Cota, one of the officers involved, who testified to an extensive background in narcotics investigation also testified as an expert that in his opinion the purpose for which the defendant possessed the heroin was “for sale.” Before he came to that conclusion he had personally examined defendant and determined that he was not a user of narcotics. The amount of narcotics found was sufficient to produce five hundred No. 5 capsules. A No. 5 capsule is the size of capsule which a user administers to himself; depending on his tolerance he uses anywhere from one to five capsules per injection.
When asked what factors led the officer to his opinion he said, among other things: “The manner in which it was packaged. One condom was doubled and you had two other condoms that were one package in itself.  Each are significant of a quarter ounce of heroin which is generally the amount that a major narcotic peddler would sell, either *416quarter ounces, half ounces or ounces of heroin. ’ ’ Pressed for more reasons he gave the following answer: “If the individual is not an addict, by reason of an examination it doesn’t show he was an addict and he was in possession of that amount of heroin I would form the opinion that he is a major violator and is in possession of this amount of narcotics for sale.’’ At that point counsel for defendant moved for a mistrial. The motion was denied after lengthy argument, but the court admonished the jury to disregard “in its entirety the last question of the People . . . and the answer given by the witness . . . both the question and the answer. ... It is not an issue to be determined under the Information in this ease. ’ ’
On appeal defendant maintains, as he did below, that the seizure of the heroin was the fruit of an illegal arrest. Actually there was no formal arrest before defendant threw the paper bag into the bushes. To be sure the officers ordered him about and there is no question that had he tried to get away, force would have been used. (cf. People v. Furnish, 63 Cal.2d 511, 515-517 [47 Cal.Rptr. 387, 407 P.2d 299].) It would therefore be more accurate if defendant claimed that the heroin was obtained as the result of an illegal assertion of authority. (Badillo v. Superior Court, 46 Cal.2d 269, 273 [294 P.2d 23].) The contention, however, cannot stand in the light of People v. Hernandez, 229 Cal.App.2d 143 [40 Cal.Rptr. 100] holding that the “requirement of reasonable or probable cause does not apply to search of a paroled prisoner when conducted by his parole supervisors.’’ It is clear that defendant disposed of the package in fear of such a legal search.
Defendant argues that in view of People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], Hernandez is no longer good law. He points to the fact that at the time Dorado was questioned he was an inmate of San Quentin Prison, but that his constitutional right not to be questioned without the proper warnings was nevertheless recognized. The court in Hernandez was extremely careful not to say that a parolee has no constitutional rights.  The true question is whether the search of a parolee without probable cause is “unreasonable’’ within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. Hernandez holds that it is not. We see nothing in Dorado which would in any way affect Hernandez.
Officer Cota’s expert testimony to the effect that the heroin was possessed “for sale’’ was attacked as “invading the province of the jury, going to the precise [ultimate] issue of the case and as not being a proper subject matter of expert testimony. ’ ’ These are also the contentions on appeál.
*417The problem of the proper scope of expert testimony in cases involving possession “for sale” cannot be disposed of by reference to the fact that on motion for new trial the court modified the verdict to one of simple possession. From the expert testimony the jury learned that the heroin supposedly found by defendant in a parking lot was worth between $1,000 and $25,000 at retail. Although the inference that heroin worth a lot of money is less likely to be found lying around in parking lots1 than small quantities is not the only rational one, certainly the jury was entitled to infer that the high value of the narcotics made defendant’s explanation that much more unlikely.2
The objection that a question calls for an answer which “usurps the function of the jury” has been called “a mere bit of empty rhetoric.” 7 Wigmore, Evidence (1940) § 1920.) We agree. (See also McCormick on Evidence, § 12.) The jury is not bound to follow the expert’s opinion and was presumably so advised. (Pen. Code, § 1127b.)
The objection that the opinion of an expert coincides with the “ultimate issue” in the ease is equally untenable as such. (7 Wigmore, Evidence (1940) §1921: McCormick on Evidence, § 12.)
In People v. Wilson, 25 Cal.2d 341, 349 [153 P.2d 720] the Supreme Court said: ‘ ‘ There is no hard and fast rule that the expert cannot be asked a question that coincides with the ultimate issue in the case. ‘We think the true rule is that admissibility depends on the nature of the issue and the circumstances of the case, there being a large element of judicial discretion involved. . . . Oftentimes an opinion may be received on a simple ultimate issue, even when it is the sole one, as for example where the issue is the value of an article, or the sanity of a person; because it cannot be further simplified and cannot be fully tried without hearing opinions from those in better position to form them than the jury can be placed in. ’ *418(Hamilton v. United States, 73 F.2d 357, 358, 359; Rackoff v. United States, 78 F.2d 671, 673; see, also, Nolan v. Nolan, 155 Cal. 476, 480 [101 P. 520, 132 Am.St.Rep. 99, 17 Ann.Cas. 1056]; Giraudi v. Electric Improv. Co., 107 Cal. 120, 127 [40 P. 108, 48 Am.St.Rep. 114, 29 L.R.A. 596]; Sim v. Weeks, 7 Cal.App.2d 28, 39 [45 P.2d 350]; Hurwit v. Prudential Ins. Co., 45 Cal.App.2d 74, 82 [113 P.2d 691] ; 78 A.L.R. 755; 4 Wigmore Evidence (3d ed.) §1921; 7 N.C.L.Rev. 320.)  In the present case there was no other practicable way of framing the questions if they were to serve the purpose of obtaining the benefit of the witness’s expert knowledge as to matters on which enlightenment of the jury by the expert was proper. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1870, subd. 9; Moore v. Norwood, 41 Cal.App.2d 359, 366 [106 P.2d 939]; Engelking v. Carlson, 13 Cal.2d 216, 221 [88 P.2d 695] ; Patterson v. Marcus, 203 Cal. 550, 553 [265 P. 222]; Perkins v. Trueblood, 180 Cal. 437, 443 [181 P. 644].) ” (Ibid., pp. 349-350.)3
Whether or not an opinion coincides with an ultimate issue is a neutral factor as far as its admissibility is concerned. If the question cannot be further simplified, the opinion is admissible in spite of the fact that it “calls for the ultimate issue.” Opinions as to value in eminent domain eases are a good example. If the question can be simplified, it should be. Thus the rule that an expert can testify whether a structure is built in accordance with standard and accepted construction methods and architectural practice, but not whether it is safe (Blinkinsop v. Weber, 85 Cal.App.2d 276, 283 [193 P.2d 96]) exemplifies the many situations where opinion evidence is inadmissible, not because it goes to the ultimate issue, but because it goes beyond the point where the expert can assist the court as an expert. When he testifies to conclusions which even a lay jury can draw, the expert is no longer testifying “on a question of science, art or trade” in which he is more skilled than the jury.4 (Code Civ. Proc., § 1870, subd. 9.) As Profes*419sor McCormick says: ‘ ‘ There is no necessity for such evidence, and to receive it would tend to suggest that the judge and jury may shift responsibility for decision to the witnesses.” (op. cit. p. 25.)* ***5
The third ground of objection made below was that Officer Cota’s testimony was not the proper subject matter of expert testimony. To discuss the validity of that objection it is necessary to set forth the proceedings in some detail. When Officer Cota was called as an expert in the narcotics field and had testified to an extensive background as a narcotic agent for the State of California and as a police officer, the prosecutor first attempted to question him on the basis of his experience and personal observation. In this he was repeatedly blocked by successful objections. These objections were clearly good.6 Frustrated in this approach, the prosecutor then switched to hypothetical questions. Again he got nowhere. Cota’s testimony was then interrupted by the testimony of the police chemist who identified the substance as being 31 grams of heroin, including the weight of the 4 condoms, which weighed about 2 grams apiece. The percentage of pure heroin in the powder was 20 percent. Cota was then recalled and the following hypothetical question was put to him: "Officer, assume these facts to be true: That police officers, narcotics officers, stopped an individual and requested that he accompany them to their office; that on the way to the office he suddenly reaches in his pocket and pulls out a brown paper bag and throws this bag into some bushes; that the officers observe him do this; that they go to the bag and pick it up and take it to their office along with the defendant and examine the contents of the bag and find it to be condoms containing a white powdery substance packaged in the manner that the white powdery substance was contained in the condoms which is part of People’s Exhibit 1; that the white powder is heroin, that it weighs 31 grams and an allowance is made of two grams for each condom and the percentage of heroin within the total mass of the powder is approximately 20 percent heroin; that the officers then examine the defendant’s arms and eyes and *420arrive at the conclusion that the defendant or this person that they observed throw the bag is not addicted to heroin and let us assume in this hypothetical question that the person that threw this object containing the heroin knew or had knowledge of the contents as to the substance itself and the fact that it was heroin. Based on your experience as a narcotics officer in that hypothetical situation could you form or do you form an opinion as to the purpose for which this person would be in possession of the heroin?” Over objection he then testified that the purpose of the possession of the heroin was “for sale.”
The accepted criterion for the admissibility of opinion evidence is articulated in People v. Cole, 47 Cal.2d 99, 103 [301 P.2d 854, 56 A.L.R.2d 1435]: “Although courts have not always used the same language, the decisive consideration in determining the admissibility of expert opinion evidence is whether the subject of inquiry is one of such common knowledge that men of ordinary education could reach a conclusion as intelligently as the witness or whether, on the other hand, the matter is sufficiently beyond common experience that the opinion of an expert would assist the trier of fact. ’ ’
Whether or not the opinion asked of Cota meets this test cannot be answered by a simple “yes” or “no.” Undoubtedly, the lay jury which was being asked to answer the question whether defendant possessed the heroin for sale had no way of knowing whether or not the quantity described by the chemist, at the level of purity to which he testified, was more than the supply which a person who is addicted might carry about for his own use or which one who is not addicted might have on his person to furnish to an addict as a friend. The jury needed help from an expert so that it could determine whether or not the quantity of narcotics was such that it could be described as defendant's stock in trade. It was entitled to be informed—as it was—of the number of capsules which the heroin would yield, of the habits of users with respect to the amounts in their possession, of the retail price of the heroin involved and of the methods of packaging heroin for use as distinguished from packaging for sale.7
On the other hand it is obvious that the hypothetical ques*421tion contained certain elements from which the jury could have concluded just as easily as Cota that the heroin was possessed for the purpose of sale. Thus it seems to us—at least without the benefit of reasons not disclosed by this record— that any layman is as competent as an expert to form the opinion that a nonuser who possesses a quantity of narcotics is more likely to possess it for sale than for use and that this is so regardless of the quantity involved. Similarly it seems to us that the element of knowledge of the narcotic character of the substance should not have been included in the hypothetical questions8 as an element on which the officer based his conclusion. Any layman can draw the inference that if a person goes around with 25 grams—about one ounce—of a white powdery substance, it is more likely that he possesses it for sale if he knows that it is heroin, than if he thinks it is granulated sugar.
Thus, as this particular hypothetical question was put to the witness, it asked him to base his conclusion in part on inferences which the jury could have drawn. To that extent the question exceeded the scope of the proper use of expert opinion testimony.
Speaking generally, it appears to us that in most cases of this nature it would be unnecessary to ask the expert the “ultimate” question, namely whether in his opinion the particular narcotics were held for sale. Once he has given the jury the benefit of his experience with respect to the habits of users, the quantities involved, the value of the narcotics found in defendant’s possession, the customary methods of packaging them for wholesale, for retail and for use and matters of this nature, the jury should he as able as the witness to form an opinion whether or not the narcotics involved in the prosecution were held for sale. It has received all the help which it needs.
This does not mean that in all cases it is prejudicial error to exceed the proper scope of expert testimony. Without even considering the question of discretion of the trial court (People v. Cole, 47 Cal.2d 99, 105 [301 P.2d 854, 56 A.L.R.2d 1435]; People v. Haeussler, 41 Cal. 252, 260 [260 P.2d 8]; Zelayela v. Pacific Greyhound Lines, 104 Cal.App.2d 716, 727 [232 P.2d 572]), it is obvious that defendant suffered no prejudice here. WTien the testimony was admitted he was still *422charged with possession for sale and the only element of the expert testimony which could conceivably have harmed him as far as the end result is concerned—except for the last point discussed in this opinion—was the reference to the value of the narcotics. This was, however, eminently proper under the principles just discussed.
Finally we turn to the incidents during the examination of Cota previously quoted, where at one point he said: 1 ‘ That a quarter ounce of heroin ... is generally the amount that a major narcotic peddler would sell, either quarter ounces, half ounces or ounces of heroin” and at another, that in his opinion a nonaddieted individual, in possession of the amount of heroin which defendant had, was a “major vilator. ’ ’
Defendant approaches the problem from the point of view of prejudicial misconduct of the prosecutor. In this he is obviously mistaken. The questions to which Cota responded in the manner shown were quite innocuous. The most that can be said is that the witness might have been more guarded. There is nothing in the record to show that when he said that major narcotic peddlers usually sell heroin in the quantities mentioned he was not telling the truth or that the apparent underlying assumption, namely that defendant intended to sell the heroin as it was packaged at the time and not in smaller quantities, was incorrect. If the evidence indicates that defendant was not only a peddler but a “major” peddler and the evidence is admissible to strengthen the inference that the heroin was possessed for sale, he should only be able to complain if the prejudicial effect of such evidence outweighs its probative value. Although the record does not show affirmatively that the trial court weighed one against the other (People v. Ford, 60 Cal.2d 772, 801 [36 Cal.Rptr. 620, 388 P.2d 892]) no objection of any kind was made to the officer’s first answer. The second answer was stricken upon objection. Even if it is difficult to “unring a bell,” we cannot say that a different result was either probable or possible without the claimed misconduct of the witness. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243]; Fahy v. Connecticut, 375 U.S. 85, 86-87 [84 S.Ct. 229,11 L.Ed.2d 171].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Ford; J., concurred.
Defendant testified in Ms own behalf and continued to maintain—■ as he did at the scene—that he found the paper bag in a parMng lot just before he was arrested.
Coneeivably the prosecution would have been able to introduce evidence concerning the value of the heroin on rebuttal, had defendant offered the same explanation as a defense to a simple charge of possession, but rather than reconstruct a hypothetical trial, we feel that the problem should be discussed, particularly since this type of expert testimony is quite common in cases of this nature (People v. Aguilar, 232 Cal.App.2d 173, 178 [42 Cal.Rptr. 666]; People v. Woods, 239 Cal.App. 2d 697, 701 [49 Cal.Rptr. 266]) and we have been unable to find any case specifically commenting on its propriety.
See also People v. Cole, 47 Cal.2d 99, 105 [301 P.2d 854, 56 A.L.R.2d 1435]; People v. Brown, 49 Cal.2d 577, 587 [320 P.2d 5]; People v. Polk, 61 Cal.2d 217, 233 [37 Cal.Rptr. 753, 390 P.2d 64l]; People v. Wolff, 61 Cal.2d 795, 811 [40 Cal.Rptr. 271, 394 P.2d 959]; People v. Patterson, 169 Cal.App.2d 179, 185 [337 P.2d 163]; People v. Peoples, 212 Cal.App.2d 581, 583 [28 Cal.Rptr. 120],
Wigmore puts it this way: "The true theory, then, of the Opinion rule, in the sense we are here to use, is simply that of the exclusion of supererogatory evidence. It is not that there is any fault to find with the witness himself or the sufficiency of his sources of knowledge or the positiveness of his impression; but simply that Ms testimony, otherwise unobjectionable, is not needed, is superfluous.” (7 Wigmore, Evidence (3d ed. 1940), § 1918.)
The objection that opinion evidence "goes to the ultimate issue” has been given a decent burial by our Legislature in the Evidence Code, section 805 which reads as follows: "Testimony in the form of an opinion that is otherwise admissible is not objectionable because it embraces the ultimate issue to be decided by the trier of fact. ’ ’ The comment to section 805 states that it is declarative of existing law.
One question was: ‘1 Officer, did you form any opinion concerning this defendant as a result of your investigation?”
We certainly do not intend this to be an inclusive list of the matters ■which, in. this field, are ‘1 sufficiently beyond common experience that the opinion of an expert would assist” the jury. In People v. Woods, 239 Cal.App.2d 697 [49 Cal.Rptr. 266], the expert formed significant conclusions, which might have escaped the jury, not only from the amount of heroin, but also from the presence of packaging paraphernalia and milk sugar.
Just why the prosecutor chose to proceed by way of a hypothetical question is not clear. The only factual element not based on Cota’s personal knowledge or experience was the chemical analysis.

=== CASE 2211947 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.805197+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 30 (1935)
G. M. BROWN et al., Respondents,
v.
WILLIAM JONES, Appellant.
Civ. No. 10762.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division Two.
December 24, 1935.
H. E. Gleason and Fred W. Heatherly for Appellant.
No appearance for Respondents.
Wood, J.
Plaintiffs commenced this action to quite title to certain real property, basing their claim of title on a tax deed issued by the tax collector of Los Angeles County. Defendant and appellant William Jones by cross-complaint sought to have his own title quieted. The trial court found in favor of Jones, and also found that plaintiffs had expended the sum of $302.08 in paying the taxes, assessments, penalties and other costs. Under the heading "Conclusions of Law" there appears this language: "That the defendant William Jones is entitled to a judgment quieting the title in and to said real property as against the plaintiffs and each of them, upon his paying to the plaintiffs the sum expended by the plaintiffs in pursuit of the state's title to said property." *31 In the judgment, which was filed on February 23, 1933, after adjudging that the title of Jones be quieted, the trial court inserted the following: "It is further ordered and decreed, however, that the foregoing provisions of this decree shall not become effective unless and until the said defendant William Jones shall have paid to the plaintiffs herein the sum of $302.08, said sum being the full amount of taxes," etc.
In April of 1933 plaintiffs filed a notice of motion to amend the judgment to provide that unless the sum of $302.08 be paid within thirty days from the date a judgment be entered in plaintiffs' favor. The record before us is very fragmentary. It appears from the bill of exceptions that this motion was ordered off calendar; and in another place therein it appears that a minute order was made as follows: "Motion to set aside conclusions of law and enter others and different judgment comes on for hearing; ... Said motion is granted Judgment to provide that amount be paid within thirty days from date." This order was made on May 1, 1933, and is the order from which this appeal is taken.
Appellant claims that the motion was filed too late, but the record is not sufficiently complete for us to pass upon this point, and counsel for respondents has filed no brief. The point may be regarded as of no consequence, since we have concluded that the judgment must be reversed for another reason.
[1] Plaintiffs have attempted to obtain an order based upon section 663 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provides that a judgment or decree may be set aside and vacated and another and different judgment entered for the following cause: "Incorrect or erroneous conclusions of law not consistent with or not supported by the findings of fact." The record discloses that the judgment and conclusions of law herein are consistent with and are supported by the findings of fact, and are not incorrect or erroneous. If the order appealed from has any effect whatever it would bring about a modification of the judgment, which result may not be brought about under circumstances disclosed by the record.
The order appealed from is reversed.
Crail, P. J., and McComb, J., pro tem., concurred.

=== CASE 9737771 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:18.426881+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice.
Peter Spotted Horse, Jr. (Spotted Horse) appeals 1 a judgment rendered on a jury verdict convicting him of driving while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage (DUI) and failure to display current registration. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
FACTS
On April 1, 1988, Spotted Horse, an enrolled member of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe who resided on the reservation, was driving off the reservation in the town of Mobridge, South Dakota. His car was not displaying valid 1988 license plate stickers, in violation of SDCL 32-5-98 (a Class 2 misdemeanor). Seeing this violation, Mo-bridge City Police Officer Roger Krone (Krone) attempted to stop the vehicle by turning on the red revolving light on top of his patrol car. This attempted stop occurred within the boundaries of the municipality of Mobridge.
Spotted Horse did not stop. Instead, he drove across the Missouri River bridge and onto the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation (reservation). Krone continued the pursuit with his siren running and red light flashing. The chase reached speeds ranging from 90 mph to 109 mph.2 Spotted Horse *465proceeded north on Highway 1806, driving seven or eight miles onto the reservation. Spotted Horse then turned off of Highway 1806 and drove within the city limits of the town of Wakpala, then into a housing area, and onto a private driveway or yard. Krone continued following Spotted Horse the entire time, never losing sight of him.
Once Krone exited his police car, Spotted Horse began to drive away again. Krone ran to the vehicle, reached inside and shut off the ignition. There were two adults and two children in the car. Krone informed Spotted Horse that he did not have “current [license] plates” on his car and told him numerous times to get out of the car. Spotted Horse refused. Krone started pulling on Spotted Horse’s arm to extract him from the car. The ensuing struggle went on for anywhere from five to fifteen minutes during which time Krone struck Spotted Horse three or four times with his nightstick, several of the blows hitting Spotted Horse in the head and cheek. Finally, Krone pulled Spotted Horse from the car by his hair or his left shoulder and upper arm, threw him to the ground on his stomach, put his knee on his back and handcuffed him. Following the handcuffing, Krone lifted Spotted Horse by the arms and placed him in the police car.
Spotted Horse was then taken back to Mobridge. On the ride back, Krone noticed the smell of alcohol on Spotted Horse’s breath. After arriving back at the station in Mobridge, Krone administered the field sobriety test to Spotted Horse, which he failed. Following the test, Krone arrested Spotted Horse for DUI and read him the implied consent warnings. Spotted Horse agreed to take a blood test and was taken to the Mobridge Hospital for the extraction of blood. The BAC was 0.244.
Spotted Horse was charged with five counts: (1) eluding police in violation of SDCL 32-33-18 (Class 1 misdemeanor); (2) driving while under the influence in violation of SDCL 32-23-1 (Class 1 misdemean- or); (3) resisting arrest in violation of SDCL 22-11-4 (Class 1 misdemeanor); (4) driving without a license in violation of SDCL 32-12-22 (Class 2 misdemeanor); and (5) failure to display current registration in violation of SDCL 32-5-98 (Class 2 misdemeanor). After a jury trial, Spotted Horse was convicted of Counts 2 and 5, driving under the influence and failure to display current registration. He was acquitted of Counts 1 and 3, eluding police and resisting arrest.3
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in ruling that the State had jurisdiction to try an Indian who committed a misdemean- or off the reservation, but who fled to the reservation and was arrested by a municipal police officer on the reservation?
2. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in not suppressing evidence of unrelated crimes where the defendant alleged use of excessive force in making the arrest?
3. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in failing to suppress the blood test given to defendant because the blood was extracted by an LPN with expanded training?
ANALYSIS
We begin by discussing the appropriate standard of review. The jurisdictional challenge raised by this appeal involves the application and effect of SDCL 1-1-18 and 1-1-21, and procedural compliance with Public Law 280. Because issues regarding the removal of constitutional disclaimers of state jurisdiction are questions of state law, they are reviewed de novo by this court. See Brown v. Egan Consol. School Dist. # 50-2, 449 N.W.2d 259 (S.D.1989); Beville v. University of S.D. Bd. of Regents, 420 N.W.2d 9 (S.D.1988). However, the question of substantive compliance with PL 280, i.e., the validity of retrocession of PL 280 jurisdiction, is a question of federal law. Tyndall v. Gunter, 840 F.2d 617, 618 (8th Cir.1988). With these *466standards in mind, we begin with Spotted Horse’s argument that State lacked jurisdiction to make arrests on the reservation.
. 1. Jurisdiction
To understand our ultimate conclusion, it is necessary to briefly retrace the intermittent nature of state jurisdiction over reservations. In 1953, Congress passed Public Law 280,4 which gave disclaimer5 states, such as South Dakota, statutory power to assume and exercise civil and criminal jurisdiction over reservations if they passed legislation to accept jurisdiction. State v. Onihan, 427 N.W.2d 365, 367 (S.D.1988). Though South Dakota made efforts to pass legislation in 1957 and 1959 to fulfill this mandate, the legislation was ultimately ineffective. See In re High Pine, 78 S.D. 121, 99 N.W.2d 38 (1959); 1951 S.D. Sess. L. ch. 187; 1957 S.D. Sess. L. ch. 319; 1959 S.D. Sess. L. ch. 144, §§ 1, 2.
Then, in 1961, South Dakota passed SDCL 1-1-186 and SDCL 1-1-21,7 wherein the legislature conditioned acceptance of civil and criminal jurisdiction on federal reimbursement. An exception was provided, however, whereby the State assumed jurisdiction over criminal offenses and civil causes of action on the highways without the requirement of federal reimbursement. The validity of this legislation is the lynchpin of this decision. Following the 1961 legislation, we held that these statutes were ineffective because the State could not assume partial jurisdiction over Indian country. See In re Hankins, 80 S.D. 435, 125 N.W.2d 839 (1964). We then changed course for partial jurisdiction on the highways in Onihan, supra, after the United States Supreme Court held that the state of Washington had validly assumed partial jurisdiction over reservations in the case of Washington v. Confederated Bands & Tribes of the Yakima Indian Nation, 439 U.S. 463, 99 S.Ct. 740, 58 L.Ed.2d 740 (1979).
Now, we must reconsider our position again in light of the decision of the United States Court of Appeals in Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. South Dakota, 900 F.2d 1164 (8th Cir.1990). Rosebud reversed the district court’s decision which had sustained the state’s exercise of jurisdiction over highways running through reservations in the state, on two principal grounds. First, the 1961 legislation did not validly retrocede jurisdiction to the State within the terms of PL 280. The Rosebud court found that our decision in Onihan had misinterpreted Yakima, thereby improperly overruling the Hankins decision that the State lacked PL 280 jurisdiction. Speaking of the differences between the assumption of jurisdiction in Yakima versus our legislature’s actions, the Eighth Circuit stated:
The major concerns reflected in the passage of PL 280 were (1) to reduce the economic burden of federal jurisdiction *467over reservations, (2) to respond to a perceived hiatus in law enforcement on reservations, and (3) to assimilate Indians into the general population. Yakima, 439 U.S. at 498 [99 S.Ct. at 760], We believe South Dakota’s limited excursion into the area of Indian jurisdiction is not responsive to the concerns underlying the passage of PL 280. Jurisdiction over highways does not go very far in reducing lawlessness on reservations, but simply introduces a third party to the already complex jurisdiction pattern on reservations. It also does little to reduce federal presence on reservations since the federal government retains the financial burden of the majority of jurisdictional concerns. The Washington statute, which left open the possibility of complete jurisdiction upon tribal consent, reflected an acceptance of the burden of jurisdiction, as well as an attempt to accommodate tribal self-governance. The state’s partial jurisdiction assumption here represents the contrary result. We believe that the failure to assume jurisdiction in a manner consistent with the purposes of PL 280 is not sufficient “action within the terms of the offer made by Congress to the States in 1953.”
900 F.2d at 1170-71 (footnotes omitted).
Second, the Eighth Circuit found that Congress, by amending PL 280 in 19688 and requiring tribal consent to any new assumption of jurisdiction, vested the interests of the tribes in self-government and precluded South Dakota from enforcing its 1961 legislation because it was improper to apply Yakima retroactively. The court explained:
The Tribes, particularly in South Dakota, have relied on the protection offered by the tribal consent amendment since 1968. The Tribes have co-existed with state authorities with the knowledge that the state could not assume jurisdiction over them without their consent. The state allowed federal and tribal authorities to exercise jurisdiction prior to and after 1968 without asserting its claim to jurisdiction. Retroactive application of the Yakima interpretation of PL 280 to revive South Dakota’s 1961 legislation would disregard the manner in which the Tribes and the state have structured their jurisdictional relationship.
[[Image here]]
[T]he congressional intent in passing the 1968 amendment did not contemplate that a subsequent, retroactive application of a change in statutory interpretation could alter South Dakota’s lack of jurisdiction existing at the time of the repeal of section 7.
900 F.2d at 1173, 1174. Accordingly, South Dakota does not have jurisdiction over Indian country, nor may the State exercise partial jurisdiction over highways running through the reservations.
Since South Dakota had no jurisdiction on the reservation, our fresh pursuit statute could not reach onto the reservation and we are left with the question: What effect did Krone’s incursion onto the reservation have on the trial of Spotted Horse?
We first consider Spotted Horse’s argument that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to try him on the charges. He acknowledges our holding in State v. Winckler, 260 N.W.2d 356 (S.D.1977), where we said:
When a person accused of a crime is found within the territorial jurisdiction wherein he is so charged and is held under process legally issued from a court of that jurisdiction, neither the jurisdiction of the court nor the right to put him on trial for the offense charged is impaired by the manner in which he was brought from another jurisdiction, whether by kidnapping, illegal arrest, abduction, or irregular extradition proceedings.
Id. at 363 (citing 4 Wharton’s Criminal Procedures § 1484, at 39-40 (1957)). This rule, the Ker-Frisbie rule, is an adaptation of *468the rules of Ker v. Illinois, 119 U.S. 436, 7 S.Ct. 225, 30 L.Ed. 421 (1886) and Frisbie v. Collins, 342 U.S. 519, 72 S.Ct. 509, 96 L.Ed. 541 (1952), originally adopted by this court in an earlier decision, State v. Thundershield, 90 S.D. 391, 399, 242 N.W.2d 159, 163-64 (1976). Spotted Horse urges us to reexamine our holding in Winckler in light of the authority found in United States v. Toscanino, 500 F.2d 267 (2d Cir.1974).
In Winckler the offense charged, assault with a dangerous weapon without intent to kill, was committed by the Indian defendants firing guns from trust land at officers who were outside the trust land. The defendants surrendered to an officer of the B.I.A. police, who then simply turned them over to State authorities for prosecution. In comparison, the defendant in Toscanino alleged that he was kidnapped in Uruguay by American agents, tortured, and abducted to the United States for the purpose of prosecution here. The Winckler decision referred to our Thundershield decision and eschewed Toscanino. Thundershield involved an extradition technicality, a purely statutory violation, not claimed to be of constitutional dimension.
More recently we applied the same rule in Quiver v. State, 339 N.W.2d 303, 305 (S.D.1983), referring to it as the Ker rule. In Quiver, no Indian jurisdiction was involved; rather it was a question of procedurally incorrect extradition from Nebraska.
In the context of Indian jurisdiction cases, the rule found in Ker and Frisbie was criticized by the New Mexico Supreme Court in Benally v. Marcum, 89 N.M. 463, 553 P.2d 1270 (1976). Citing Toscanino, the decision first noted the expansion of the concept of due process to protect the accused against pretrial illegality. The decision went on to point out how the Navajo tribe “has provided specific procedures for extraditing persons accused of crime from the reservation” and the Navajo tribal government's exercise of the sovereign power vested in them. 89 N.M. at 467, 553 P.2d at 1274.
Although we find Spotted Horse’s case can be factually distinguished from Thundershield, Winckler and Quiver, and it is a very close case based on the actions of the police officer, we are not persuaded to abandon our rule at this time. Even though Krone chased defendant at breakneck speeds which were unwarranted considering the nature of the violation (expired license plate stickers), and engaged in a battle using his night stick, his actions cannot be equated with torture. No doubt, in pursuing Spotted Horse, Krone was relying, to some degree, on our decision in Onihan. Further, because the record reflects that the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe has not enacted into their tribal code any provisions for extradition, we are left with the firm conviction that, at least for the present, we should retain our established rule. Thus, we hold that the trial court had jurisdiction over Spotted Horse for the purpose of trial.
In arriving at this decision, we are also aware of the discussion in Toscanino, supra, wherein the court discussed the development of the concept of due process “which now protects the accused against pretrial illegality by denying to the government the fruits of its exploitation of any deliberate and unnecessary lawlessness on its part.” 500 F.2d at 275. The court went on to point out:
Although the issue in most of the cases forming part of this evolutionary process was whether evidence should have been excluded (e.g., Mapp, Miranda, Wong Sun, Silverman), it was unnecessary in those cases to invoke any other sanction to insure that an ultimate conviction would not rest on governmental illegality.
Id.
We then examine the correlative issue, whether the evidence, particularly the field sobriety test and the blood test results, resulting from Spotted Horse’s arrest were admissible at trial. Although Spotted Horse raises no issue on the admissibility of the field sobriety tests, and only challenges the admission of the blood tests on statutory grounds regarding the drawing of the blood sample, we review this very important issue under the doctrine of *469plain error. SDCL 23A-44-15. Under the doctrine of Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441 (1963), the exclusionary rule generally makes inadmissible against the defendant evidence that is the product of an unconstitutional arrest. As the court explained in Wong Sun, the purpose of the rule is to make effective the fundamental constitutional guarantees of sanctity of the home and inviolability of the person. The exclusionary prohibition extends to indirect as well as direct evidence; physical tangible materials obtained either during or as a direct result of an unlawful invasion, come at by exploitation of the illegal search; and testimony of matters observed during an unlawful invasion to enforce the basic constitutional policies. The seizure of Spotted Horse by Krone was clearly a violation of Spotted Horse’s Fourth Amendment rights, thus suppression would seem to be automatic. However, there are some jurisdictions which have made some distinctions whereby the admission of such evidence has been permitted.
In People v. Wolf, 635 P.2d 213 (Colo.1981), the Denver police made a stakeout and arrest in an adjoining county, beyond their jurisdiction, collected evidence, and turned the case over to the local authorities for prosecution. The Colorado Supreme Court determined that the police had the power to make a citizen’s arrest where probable cause existed. The court went on, however, to caution that in cases where the police act in willful disobedience of the law, the courts have not hesitated to use their supervisory powers to exclude evidence. Id. at 217.
Here, Krone was not in the process of making a citizen’s arrest, assuming such an arrest is possible under tribal ordinances. The violation for which he was initially and principally making the arrest, failure to display current vehicle registration, was not even an offense triable on the reservation. With respect to the DUI offense, Krone did not follow proper procedures. He transported Spotted Horse back to Walworth County for trial rather than turn him over to tribal authorities. Likewise, in City of Kettering v. Hollen, 64 Ohio St.2d 232, 416 N.E.2d 598 (1980), the Ohio Supreme Court, in a rather shallow opinion, determined that the exclusionary rule was not applicable to a DUI defendant arrested by a Kettering police officer in adjoining Dayton. The officer was engaged in hot pursuit. Nevertheless, the court assumed from an insufficient record that the arrest was unauthorized. The court held that the exclusionary rule, applicable for violations of a constitutional nature only, would not be applied to evidence which is the product of police conduct violative of state law, but not violative of constitutional rights. Id. 416 N.E.2d at 600. Because we view Krone’s actions in pursuing Spotted Horse down the reservation highway, into the housing area and onto his front lawn to be a constitutional violation, far above simple statutory violations, we hold that the evidence attained by the unconstitutional arrest is not admissible against Spotted Horse. We therefore reverse the conviction for driving under the influence.
However, since the failure to display current registration offense was committed off the reservation, and independent evidence was obtained through Krone’s observation before the illegal arrest, we affirm the verdict on this offense. Winckler, supra (manner of arrest, even including illegal arrest on reservation, does not bar prosecution).
That issue decided, we feel compelled to comment on the need for a solution to this gap in criminal jurisdiction. When a crime is committed off the reservation and criminals can flee unimpeded onto the reservation, both Indians and non-Indians alike are harmed. We would hope that in this year which the Governor has proclaimed “The Year of Reconciliation,” that both tribal leaders and governmental officials will sit down and work out treaties that will remedy this situation.
2. Suppression of Evidence
Next, because Spotted Horse’s conviction on expired license plates is preserved, we consider his argument that Krone’s use of excessive force in making the arrest was a *470violation of SDCL 23A-3-59 and required suppression of evidence on all charges or, in the alternative, a jury instruction providing that an illegal arrest provided a defense to all the charges.
Before we may reverse the trial court on a motion to suppress, Spotted Horse must demonstrate that the trial court abused its discretion in not suppressing the evidence. State v. Bartlett, 411 N.W.2d 411, 414 (S.D.1987). Spotted Horse fails to meet this burden.
We begin by noting that there is a paucity of evidence that supports Spotted Horse’s contention that he was brutally beaten. Also, Spotted Horse conveniently does not mention his resistance in leaving his car. Faced with this dearth of evidence, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to give the instruction or suppressing the evidence. Bartlett, supra. Furthermore, we can find no precedent for an exclusionary rule that would extend suppression of evidence to unrelated offenses and the cases cited by Spotted Horse certainly do not warrant this conclusion.
Contrary to Spotted Horse’s contention, State v. Gage, 302 N.W.2d 793 (S.D.1981), merely stands for the proposition that insufficient information in an affidavit for a warrant deprived the police of probable cause and thereby makes an arrest illegal. As we noted earlier, even though the arrest on the reservation was illegal, that does not prevent prosecution on the failure to display current registration sticker offense. Winckler, supra.
Nor does Brown v. Wyman, 224 Mich. 360, 195 N.W. 52 (1923), stand for the proposition that excessive force invalidates an arrest. Brown is a civil case that awarded civil damages to a plaintiff who was struck in the face with a black jack by a sheriff making an arrest. Instead of supporting Spotted Horse’s argument, Brown points to Spotted Horse’s proper remedy — a civil suit for damages, not application of the exclusionary rule.
Nor is State v. Rich, 417 N.W.2d 868 (S.D.1988), support for creation of a new exclusionary rule. Rich involved an assault by a private citizen and the availability to the defendant of the privilege of self-defense or defense of another. Nothing within the decision supports this novel expansion of the exclusionary rule that Spotted Horse now urges.
Finally, contrary to Spotted Horse’s argument, United States ex rel. Means v. Solem, 646 F.2d 322 (8th Cir.1980), stands only for the proposition that a defendant may be entitled to a self-defense instruction or defense of others in a riot situation if excessive force is used. It does not stand for, nor can we find, any precedent that states that a defendant is entitled to an acquittal on unrelated charges if excessive force is used during an arrest. Sufficient deterrence to police misconduct is provided if the excessive force invalidates a resisting arrest charge. Further, Spotted Horse would be entitled to pursue civil remedies against the officer. These two factors together provide a more than sufficient remedy for this type of conduct.
Because we have suppressed the blood test as the fruits of an illegal arrest, Spotted Horse’s third issue is moot.
DECISION
Therefore, we reverse the trial court on the conviction for DUI and affirm on the conviction for failure to display current registration and instruct the trial court to enter an order in conformity with this opinion.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and SABERS, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
. The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe filed an ami-cus curiae brief in support of Spotted Horse.
. Justice Dunn, concurring specially in State v. Seidschlaw, 304 N.W.2d 102, 107-08 (S.D.1981), expressed well our opinion about these high-speed chases over minor traffic offenses.
"I realize that in the presence of a violation of the law it is the duty of an officer to take steps to suppress the offense and apprehend the violator; however, this must be done within the limits of rationality. Here the acts of these officers has brought them to the very *465edge of this precipice of rationality and may even have plunged them over that edge."
. The fourth charge, driving without a license, was dismissed during trial.
. Act of August 15, 1953, ch. 505, 67 Stat. 588 (codified as amended at 18 U.S.C. § 1162, 28 U.S.C. § 1360 (1976)).
. The term “disclaimer state” designates those states which had constitutions or statutes containing organic law disclaimers of jurisdiction over Indian country. State v. Onihan, 427 N.W.2d 365, 367 (S.D.1988).
. 1961 S.D. Sess. L. ch. 464, § 1. SDCL 1-1-18 provides:
The state of South Dakota, in accordance with the provisions of 67 Statutes at Large, page 589 (Public Law 280), hereby assumes and accepts jurisdiction of all criminal offenses and civil causes of action arising in the Indian country located within this state, as Indian country is defined by Title 18 United States Code, section 1151, and obligates and binds this state to the assumption thereof, the provisions of chapter 106 of the Session Laws of the state of South Dakota for 1901, as amended, or any other law of this state to the contrary, notwithstanding.
.1961 S.D. Sess. L. ch. 464, § 4. SDCL 1-1-21 provides:
Except as to criminal offenses and civil causes of action arising on any highways, as the term is defined in chapter 31-1, the jurisdiction provided for in § 1-1-18 shall not be deemed assumed or accepted by this state, and §§ 1-1-18 and 1-1-20 shall not be considered in effect, unless and until the Governor of the state of South Dakota, if satisfied that the United States of America has made proper provision for the reimbursement to this state and its counties for the added costs in connection with the assumption of said jurisdiction, has issued his proper proclamation duly filed with the secretary of state declaring the said jurisdiction to be assumed and accepted.
. Act of April 11, 1968, Pub.L. 90-284, Title IV, § 403, 82 Stat. 79 (codified at 25 U.S.C. § 1323 (1983)).
. SDCL 23A-3-5 provides, in pertinent part: "No person shall subject an arrested person to more physical restraint than is reasonably necessary to effect the arrest[.]”

=== CASE 9737772 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:18.433135+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
As one reads through the thread of the majority opinion, it becomes obvious that this Court, and thus this State, is enlightening itself by (a) having its decisions re*471versed and (b) finally recognizing that there is a tribal sovereignty concept which spreads across the reservations, not only in South Dakota, but across this nation.
To have condoned this officer’s jurisdiction, on a private driveway, where the defendant was arrested, would be granting authority unto law enforcement officers in this state defying the recognition of tribal sovereignty and independence. Such recognition would simply cause the mandates of Public Law 280 to be a nullity. Therefore, I concur in the majority’s holding reversing the DUI conviction.
As I concur in this opinion, I call attention to my special concurrence in State v. Onihan, 427 N.W.2d 365 (S.D.1988):
As one continues to struggle in reading the law, it is perceived that gradations of jurisdiction exist, not to mention variances, as the type of Indian jurisdiction cases surface in the appellate bodies. Specifically, in this type of case, basic questions should be asked: Does this case involve tort law? Family law? Criminal law? If the latter, does the case pertain to one of the major crimes? See 18 U.S.C. § 1153. Or are we just considering a minor crime? An analysis must further encompass the specific situs of the facts giving rise to the litigation. One must consider: Are the parties Indian or non-Indian? Does the Indian Child Welfare Act apply? Two authors, Davis H. Getches and Charles F. Wilkinson, in their treatise, Federal Indian Law (2d ed. 1986), write that the jurisdictional maze in criminal cases can be “walked with some confidence” when an analytical approach is followed. Supra, at 412. Briefly, their analysis contains these steps:
1.Was the locus of the crime in Indian Country?
2. Does Public Law 280 or a specific jurisdictional statute apply? Here, Public Law 280 is governing.
3. Was the crime committed by or against an Indian?
4. Which Defendant-Victim category applies? This question includes “victimless” and “consensual” crimes.
See Federal Indian Law, supra, at 412-15.
This point I try to make: Jurisdiction depends upon many factors. History of the particular reservation involved,1 as well as legislative enactments of the particular state, likewise play a vital role. Each ease must be scrutinized to determine where jurisdiction lies. Indian jurisdiction is a complex subject and is not ordinarily amenable to black and white solutions. There are many areas of gray in this kind of litigation. Overlaying all of the above is the shifting sand of federal policy which spawns further complicated and knotty difficulties and entanglements. One law review article has characterized Indian policy as having “vacillated between assimilation, annihilation, and self-determination.” Note, Recognition of Tribal Decisions in State Courts, 37 Stan.L.Rev. 1397, 1399 (1985).
I wish to further call attention to my concurring in result in Wells v. Wells, 451 N.W.2d 402 (S.D.1990).
As I pen my legal thoughts, a wave of legal concern comes upon my spirit. For over one decade, I have attempted to recognize the Indian community’s struggle for social and governmental autonomy, as well as justice for our Red Brothers in this State’s courts. State v. Chief Eagle, 377 N.W.2d 141 (S.D.1985), Henderson, J., dissenting. Comity and mutual respect to the decisions of tribal courts has been a long time message of mine. Mexican. I have in the past, and now, recognize that in South Dakota we *472have tribal and state court systems. As found in the 1990 Legislative Senate Journal (pg. 60, 2nd legislative day), our present Governor has declared this year to be a Year of Reconciliation, requesting Indians and non-Indians to come closer together. Our Governor has asked us to set goals, to make strides toward better understanding in 1990. He is quoted in an article on page 2 of the Rapid City Journal, January 12, 1990 as follows: “The end result should not only be fun, but mutual respect and trust.” Chairperson, Judy Petersen, who acts as the “Chairman” of the Flandreau Sioux Tribe, observed that the gathering should go beyond pure enjoyment. Governor Mickelson thus appeared before the State Indian Affairs Commission on January 11, 1990 in an attempt to bring together the Indian and white community in a spirit of friendship. Id. pg. 1.
On February 1, 1990, Governor Mickel-son and representatives of eight of the state’s nine Sioux Tribes began what has now been called the “Year of Reconciliation.” The Governor sat cross-legged on the floor of our State Capitol rotunda and shared a peace pipe with these Sioux representatives. Filled with legislators, state and tribal officials, the rotunda rang out with traditional Indian songs honoring the Indian people and expressing a hope for peace. See, Rapid City Journal, pg. 1, February 2, 1990.
This is the beginning of the second century of South Dakota statehood. It is good that Indians and whites now seek a year of racial understanding and a new beginning of peace with one another.
Alas, but hopefully only for a moment, as the tide of understanding ebbs and flows, South Dakotans read, via a February 3, 1990, Rapid City Journal article that our Governor has said: “We’re not going to solve jurisdictional issues.” He also expressed that jurisdictional disputes could not be settled by the State and tribes and should not be part of the 1990 Reconciliation effort. Disappointment was expressed by the Chairman of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe who observed that the gatherings should go beyond pure enjoyment thereof indicating that: “If he’s (the Governor) not interested in jurisdictional things and the issues that are really tearing us apart, there is no sense trying to pull this thing together. It’s rhetoric.” However, other tribal leaders took a more positive approach after the reconciliation ceremony. Increased understanding by the non-Indians and Indians could bring about help and economic development, health care and education for Indian people, they asserted.
A deep wound exists in the State of South Dakota by virtue of jurisdictional disputes between tribal courts and state courts.2 The Indians tell us that their inherent sovereignty pre-dates the Constitution of the United States. They want to decide cases, within tribal courts, which involve their people and their children. State court actions which undermine the authority of tribal courts are an impermissible infringement upon the right of tribal self-government. Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 223, 79 S.Ct. 269, 272 [3 L.Ed.2d 251]. Let us, in the Year of Reconciliation, pursue all avenues of peace to include open-minded solutions to jurisdictional conflict between the Indians and non-Indians of this state.
I wrote specially in Wells because I was concerned with the sovereignty of tribal courts. In Wells, I called attention to a shining example of how this Court recognized the rights of Native Americans to care for and watch over and protect their own children in their own courts. In re Guardianship of D.L.L. & C.L.L., 291 N.W.2d 278 (S.D.1980). In that special writing, I quoted Federal Judge Bogue as expressing in Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe v. Kleppe, 424 F.Supp. 448 (D.S.D.1977):
... All too often courts seem to pay little more than lip service to the right and power of Indian people to govern themselves.
*473Again, in Wells, I admonished that Native American people should have jurisdiction over disputes between their own people on their reservations. I quote from my writing:
If state court jurisdiction on Indians or activities on Indian land would interfere with tribal sovereignty and self-government, the state courts are generally divested of jurisdiction as a matter of federal law. The United States Supreme Court in Iowa Mutual Ins. Co. v. LaPlante et al., 480 U.S. 9, 107 S.Ct. 971, 94 L.Ed.2d 10 (1987) declared, inter alia, ‘We have repeatedly recognized the Federal Government’s long standing policy of encouraging tribal self-government ... Tribal courts play a vital role in tribal self-government (citation omitted), and the Federal Government has consistently encouraged their development. Further, in Wells, I stated:
Land within the limits of any Indian Reservation under jurisdiction of the United States Government is in Indian country. 18 U.S.C. § 1151.
I now note, come the dawn, that the majority opinion now expresses: “Accordingly, South Dakota does not have jurisdiction over Indian country nor may the state exercise partial jurisdiction over highways running through the reservations.”
In Wells, I stated:
South Dakota has long danced with Public Law 280. It has unsuccessfully attempted to conditionally or partially assume civil and criminal jurisdiction over Indians and Indian territory. See, In re High Pine, [78 S.D. 121] 99 N.W.2d 38 (S.D.1959). Said decision overruled Chapter 391 of the Session Laws of 1957 which gave South Dakota criminal and civil jurisdiction over Indian land. Another key decision in this Court is In re Hankin’s Petition, [80 S.D. 435] 125 N.W.2d 839 (S.D.1964). In Hankin, chapter 464 of the Session Laws of 1961 was ruled inconsistent with the congressional purposes of Public Law 280. There has been a historic struggle by the State Legislature with the Congress of the United States to acquire, in one fashion or the other, state jurisdiction to supplant inherent tribal sovereignty. In the end, the Crow Creek Tribe has a right to make and enforce its own laws subject only to the will of Congress. The members of this Court cannot manifest a power, by broad language, to carte blanche assume jurisdiction over controversies between the Indians exclusively arising within the borders of their own reservation. Hearken unto the words of a unanimous United States Supreme Court decision, United States v. Mazurie, 419 U.S. 544, 556, 95 S.Ct. 710, 717, 42 L.Ed.2d 706 (1975), reversing a 1973 Tenth Circuit Court decision as found at 487 F.2d 14. Speaking through Justice Rehnquist the highest court of this land stated:
This Court has recognized limits on the authority of Congress to delegate its legislative power ... Those limitations are, less stringent in cases where the entity exercising the delegated authority itself possesses independent authority over the subject matter ... Thus, it is an important aspect of this case that Indian tribes are unique aggregations possessing attributes of sovereignty over both their members and their territory, they are a ‘separate people,’ possessing ‘the power of regulating their internal and social relations ... ’
Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 79 S.Ct. 269, 3 L.Ed.2d 251 (1959).
I wish to point out that this arrest was a reckless arrest and did not justify a 109 mile per hour pursuit, all mind you, arising from an invalid license plate sticker, a class two misdemeanor. This Native American defendant was arrested some 7 to 8 miles within the reservation, on a private driveway (his own). This area was expressly outside the scope of the jurisdictional mandate of SDCL 1-1-21 and SDCL 31-1-1. No action has ever been taken to acquire jurisdiction over a privately owned driveway and yard some 8 miles within the territorial boundary of an Indian Reservation in South Dakota. There are no federal statutes currently authorizing fresh pursuit by state officers onto an Indian Reser*474vation. True, the primary concern of Congress in enacting Public Law 280 was to deal with the problem of lawlessness and the absence of adequate law enforcement on certain reservations. See, Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. South Dakota, 709 F.Supp. at 1511. This does not, however, absolve the State of South Dakota from meeting the requirements imposed by federal law to attain such goals.
In Benally v. Marcum, 89 N.M. 463, 466, 553 P.2d 1270, 1273 (1976), the New Mexico Supreme Court held that state courts could not try Native Americans who are arrested on a reservation for an off-reservation crime. Perhaps that is good authority for reversing the invalid license plate sticker conviction. However, this Court’s analysis is based upon Winckler, a contrary viewpoint. So we are standing upon 1977 precedent. Is that precedent sound? Is it sound when one considers the more recent decisions in the federal courts? I full well understand that the majority opinion believes the offense was committed off the reservation and the officer could see the plates. Hence, though an illegal arrest, we can, so the majority says, affirm the verdict on this offense. An arrest such as this should also be the subject of future efforts between Native Americans and the white legal community. It could well be that this arrest is another “gap in criminal jurisdiction.” Certainly, this type of scenario is no novelty in South Dakota.
Accordingly, I now welcome the other four members of this Court to my views on reconciliation, including jurisdiction, so that Native Americans and the white community can gather in the spirit of giving and understanding which would trigger the elimination of prosecutorial clouds. In the immortal words of Isaiah “Come, let us reason together.”
. South Dakota has nine Indian Reservations, and each has an active tribal court. Seven have tribal courts which originate in a tribal sovereignty predating the United States Constitution. Two tribal courts are derived from the federally created Courts of Indian Offenses. These tribal courts are all subject to Congressional authority. See generally F. Pommersheim, South Dakota Tribal Court Handbook (March 1988). The Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux Reservation, formerly the Lake Traverse Indian Reservation, was technically terminated as a "reservation” in 1891, but retains some attributes of reservation status. See DeCoteau v. District County Court, 420 U.S. 425, 95 S.Ct. 1082, 43 L.Ed.2d 300 (1975).
. This Spotted Horse decision is a tender leaf of hope; let us pray that it blossoms.

=== CASE 2212143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:16.235602+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 974 (1980)
Mary Cecile DONAHUE, in Her Individual Capacity, Mary Cecile Donahue, in Her Capacity As Trustee of the Trust Created under the Last Will and Testament of Ellen D. Watson, Deceased, Mary Cecile Donahue, in Her Capacity of Beneficiary of the Trust Created under the Last Will and Testament of Ellen D. Watson, Deceased, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Edward J. WATSON, Mary Ann Elliott, Francis D. Watson, Nancy Elizabeth Plaster, Sister Ellen Watson, Martha Connell, William C. Watson, Appellees-Plaintiffs.
No. 2-580A163.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 29, 1980.
Rehearing Denied March 3, 1981.
*975 Thomas W. Munger, Lafayette, for appellant-defendant.
Lesley A. Meade, Hanna, Gerde and Meade, Lafayette, for appellees-plaintiffs.
CHIPMAN, Judge.
Mary C. Donahue, former trustee of a testamentary trust created by Ellen D. Watson, appeals from an order of the Tippecanoe Circuit Court which directed Donahue to pay the attorney fees of the trust beneficiaries. The following issues are raised for our consideration:
1) whether the trial court had jurisdiction to award attorney fees,
2) whether the trial court erred by holding the trustee individually liable for the attorney fees of the beneficiaries, and
3) whether there was sufficient evidence to support an award of $10,000.
Affirmed.
On October 24, 1978, the trial court granted a motion for summary judgment filed on behalf of the appellees, who are beneficiaries of the trust in question. The court found trustee Mary Donahue had committed a breach of trust by improperly distributing trust corpus as income, failing to maintain separate accounts for principal and income, improperly commingling trust funds, and by making improper charges of expenses against principal. The trial court ordered Donahue removed from her position as trustee and found her personally liable to the trust and to the beneficiaries for amounts improperly distributed and for resultant dissipation of trust principal. While the trial court stated in its findings that Donahue was liable to the beneficiaries for their attorney fees, an award of such fees was not included in the order and judgment. An appeal from this original judgment was taken by Donahue and the record of proceedings was filed with this court on June 7, 1979. We affirmed the trial court's summary disposition of the case. Donahue v. Watson et al., (1980) Ind. App., 411 N.E.2d 741.
On June 15, 1979, after the record had been filed with this court in the original appeal, the trial court entered a second judgment directing Donahue to pay $10,000 in attorney fees incurred by the beneficiaries during the prosecution of their action to establish a breach of trust. Donahue subsequently filed a second motion to correct errors and this appeal follows.
I. Jurisdiction
Appellant Donahue first argues the trial court lost jurisdiction over the entire subject matter of this controversy when the record of proceedings was initially filed with the clerk of our court on June 7, 1979. We hold the trial court had the authority to make the attorney fee award.
Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 3(A) states the general rule concerning the acquisition of appellate jurisdiction:
"Every appeal shall be deemed submitted and the appellate tribunal deemed to have acquired jurisdiction thereof on the date the record of proceedings is filed with the clerk of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeals."
Interpreting A.P. 3(A), our courts have consistently held that when appellate jurisdiction *976 is acquired, the trial court is deprived of any further jurisdiction in the action. Bright v. State, (1972) 259 Ind. 495, 289 N.E.2d 128; Nehring v. Raikos, (1979) Ind. App., 390 N.E.2d 1092; Logal v. Cruse, (1975) 167 Ind. App. 160, 338 N.E.2d 309. The rule does not promote form over substance; it facilitates the orderly presentation and disposition of appeals and prevents the confusing and awkward situation of having the trial and appellate courts simultaneously reviewing the correctness of the judgment.
However, the policies which underlie the rule appear to be absent in the present case. The first judgment entered by the trial court did not order the payment of attorney fees. Therefore, the issues presently before this court could not have been raised during the initial appeal. The trial court impliedly reserved this ancillary matter until an evidentiary hearing could be conducted and a determination made as to what a reasonable fee would be. Indeed, we believe this practice is contemplated by our rules of civil procedure. Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 54(B) allows the trial court to direct the entry of a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all the claims of the parties. We hardly think the trial court thereby loses jurisdiction to adjudicate those claims which remain unresolved. Therefore, we hold the trial court retained limited jurisdiction over the case to dispose of those claims left unresolved by the first judgment.
II. Liability of Trustee
Appellant Donahue next argues the trial court erred by holding her individually liable for the attorney fees of the beneficiaries. Donahue contends our Trust Code does not authorize the recovery of attorney fees in a case such as this, and that such an award is contrary to a provision of the Trust. We disagree.
First, our Trust Code specifically authorizes the recovery of attorney fees in a case where a beneficiary successfully maintains an action to compel the trustee to perform his duties, to enjoin the trustee from committing a breach of trust, to compel the trustee to redress a breach of trust, or to remove a trustee for cause. Ind. Code 30-4-3-22(a)(1), (2), (3) and (4). Ind. Code 30-4-3-11(b)(4) provides that if a trustee commits a breach of trust, he is liable to the beneficiary for:
"(4) reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the beneficiary in bringing an action on the breach."
As the trial court found Donahue committed a breach of trust by improperly distributing principal as income and by commingling funds, an attorney fee award was entirely appropriate.
Donahue also contends a provision in the trust instrument manifests an intention of the settlor that the trustee not be held personally liable for attorneys' fees. That provision states:
"In the exercise of the several powers herein granted, said trustees shall have full power and authority to bind the trust without making themselves individually liable... ."
While this provision unquestionably manifests the settlor's desire that the trustee be able to contractually bind the trust without incurring personal liability,[1] it simply cannot be interpreted as precluding the recovery of attorney fees when a breach of trust has been established. Therefore, we hold the trial court did not err by finding Donahue personally liable for the reasonable fees incurred by the beneficiaries in the prosecution of this action.
III. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Finally, appellant Donahue argues the evidence does not support an attorney fee award of $10,000. According to Donahue, the award is based upon an unusual duplication of work. We disagree.
The evidence does show that the work of attorney Les Meade, then an associate with *977 the firm of Hanna and Gerde, was reviewed by senior attorney George Hanna. While Meade had only practiced law for approximately a year and a half at the time, Hanna had nearly 25 years of experience. Both Meade's and Hanna's time were considered in arriving at the $10,000 figure. Meade's time was computed at $50 an hour, Hanna's at $60 an hour. In light of the complex nature of this litigation, which involved multiple defenses and counterclaims, we do not believe the trial court abused its discretion by considering the time expended by both attorneys.
Donahue also argues that some of the hours included in the beneficiaries' claim for attorney fees were expended in another case, not in the beneficiaries' action to establish a breach of trust. Contrary to this assertion, George Hanna testified on cross-examination, "I believe that all of this time was necessarily spent to resolve successfully in behalf of our clients Cause Number C-29-75." (R. 125)
In short, we find sufficient evidence as to the value of the legal services provided to the beneficiaries to support an attorney fee award of $10,000.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
YOUNG, P.J., concurs.
MILLER, J., concurs in result.
NOTES
[1]  This principle of law has been codified in our Trust Code, Ind. Code 30-4-3-10(a):
"Unless the terms of the contract or other non-negotiable obligation expressly provide otherwise, the trustee is not personally liable on a contract or other non-negotiable obligation with a third person made by him in the administration of the trust."

=== CASE 9737837 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:35:24.696964+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
Victor Kopp appeals from a judgment of the District Court for Morton County issued January 25, 1990, affirming the North Dakota Workers Compensation Bureau’s order of July 26, 1989, affirming its order *133of March 22, 1988, denying further benefits. We affirm.
In November of 1985 Kopp filed a claim for Workers Compensation benefits in connection with an injury which occurred in May of 1985. Kopp subsequently underwent surgery to repair a rotator cuff tear in his shoulder and the Bureau assumed liability for related medical and disability benefits. The Bureau continued to provide payments to Kopp until February of 1987, when it determined Kopp was no longer disabled. The Bureau issued its order denying further benefits on March 5, 1987. Thereafter, Kopp filed a timely request for rehearing dated April 3, 1987. The Bureau granted Kopp a formal hearing which was held on January 6, 1988. Prior to the hearing the Bureau deposed Doctors Ray Miller, Russell 0. Saxvik, and Albert F. Samuelson. After the formal hearing the Bureau issued its order on March 22, 1988, affirming the order denying benefits.
In October of 1988, the district court ordered the Bureau to reconsider this matter in light of evidence provided by Dr. Craig DeGree. Thereafter, the parties agreed to obtain an independent psychiatric examination of Kopp. After reviewing evidence provided by Doctors Craig DeGree and Scott McNairy, the Bureau issued its order of July 26, 1989, affirming its order of March 22, 1988, affirming order denying further benefits. The matter was then appealed to the district court for decision. The district court determined that Kopp was entitled to recover disability benefits from February 4, 1987, through March 10, 1988, because of the Bureau’s failure to provide pretermination due process, but it affirmed the decision of the Bureau to terminate the claimants benefits. This appeal followed.
Kopp asserts that the Bureau’s findings cannot be supported by a preponderance of the evidence for the following two reasons: (1) the Bureau has incorrectly placed upon Kopp the burden of showing that he remains disabled and is entitled to disability benefits; and (2) the Bureau failed to resolve inconsistencies in the medical evidence.
I.
Kopp’s first assertion is that the Bureau improperly placed upon Kopp the burden of showing that he remains disabled. Kopp contends that his “property interest” in the continued receipt of benefits creates a presumption of an entitlement which must be rebutted by the Bureau before termination of benefits. In support of this argument he urges us to rely upon this Court’s prior recognition of property interests in cases concerning procedural due process, and upon case law stemming from statutory provisions of other jurisdictions.
It should be noted that this argument does not concern the trial court’s determination that Kopp was entitled to recovery of benefits from February 3, 1987, through March 10, 1988, because the Bureau failed to provide notice and hearing prior to the termination of benefits. Instead, Kopp directs this argument toward the issue of whether or not he must carry the burden of proof during the termination hearing.
Kopp relies upon our prior decisions recognizing that the payment of Workers Compensation benefits give rise to a protectable property interest. Beckler v. North Dakota Workers Compensation Bureau, 418 N.W.2d 770 (N.D.1988). However, in Beckler, this Court was concerned with issues of procedural due process upon the termination of benefits. Id. at 772-74. We held in Beckler, that the Bureau’s failure to provide adequate notice and hearing to the claimant before the termination of benefits deprived the claimant due process under the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, § 12 of the North Dakota Constitution. Id. at 775. We do not find those principles to be in question here in the matter concerning who must carry the burden of proof during the termination hearing.1 There*134fore, we find that the principles established in Beckler have little application in determining whether or not the Bureau properly placed the burden of showing that he was currently disabled upon Kopp.
Kopp also seeks to support his property interest assertion by referring to a number of cases from other jurisdictions. See C.D. Burnes Co. v. Guilbault, 559 A.2d 637 (R.I.1989) (a discussion of R.I.Gen.Laws § 28-35-45 (1956)); Williams v. W.C.A.B. (Montgomery Ward), 127 Pa.Cmwlth. 587, 562 A.2d 437 (1989) (holding 77 Pa.Const.Stat.Ann. § 732 (1989) places the burden of proof on the party seeking modification); Kachinski v. W.C.A.B. (Vepco Const. Co.), 516 Pa. 240, 532 A.2d 374 (1987) (same); Norton v. SAIF Corp., 86 Or.App. 447, 739 P.2d 1058 (1987) (an interpretation of Oregon worker’s compensation law); Pavel v. Hughes Bros, Inc., 167 Neb. 727, 94 N.W.2d 492 (1959) (holding the burden of proof is on the party seeking modification); Oham v. Aaron Corp., 222 Neb. 28, 382 N.W.2d 12 (1986) (an interpretation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-141 (1989)); Smith v. Van’s Equiy. Co., 158 Ga.App. 460, 280 S.E.2d 870 (1981) (an application of Georgia law to the modification of worker’s compensation awards); Rourks v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 497 So.2d 35 (La.App.1986) (an interpretation of LA Rev.Stat.Ann. § 23.1331 (1989)); Smith v. Dexter Oil Co., 432 A.2d 438 (Me.1981) (an interpretation of Maine worker’s compensation law); Violette v. Midwest Printing-Webb Pub., 415 N.W.2d 318 (Minn.1987) (the 1983 addition to Minnesota law is a response to the burden which is placed upon the claimant when benefits were terminated by filing of a notice). These cases place the burden of showing that the claimant was no longer eligible for benefits upon the Bureau. This Court has long recognized that the rights of both employers and employees are purely statutory. Waith v. Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 409 N.W.2d 94, 97 (N.D.1987) (citing Breitwieser v. State, 62 N.W.2d 900 (N.D.1954)). In Waith, we said:
“But the foregoing rationale of the Montana Supreme Court is simply inapplicable to this case, because the North Dakota Constitution has no counterpart to the construed Montana provision. Furthermore, the Montana subrogation statute, Section 39-71-414, of the Montana Code Annotated, does not include language similar to Section 65-01-09, N.D.C.C., which provides that the Bureau’s subro-gation rights apply ‘to the extent of fifty percent of the damages recovered.’ That language constitutes a legislative decision in this State to limit the Bureau’s subrogation interest to a maximum of one-half of the amount actually recovered by a benefit recipient against a third-party tortfeasor. Montana law does not provide the same limitation.”
Waith, 409 N.W.2d at 98. Kopp is relying upon decisions from jurisdictions that have enacted statutes which specifically provide, or have been interpreted to provide, that the burden of proof is on the Bureau to show that an employee is no longer entitled to benefits after having been previously determined to be entitled to benefits.
Our law does not so provide nor have we interpreted it to so provide. Hayden v. Workers Compensation Bureau, 447 N.W.2d 489, 496 (N.D.1989) (holding that the claimant must show that he/she is still disabled upon Bureau’s termination of benefits). In Waith, we said the rights conferred on employers and employees under Worker’s Compensation statutes are purely statutory and that the rationale of other courts in construing provisions of their workers compensation statutes is inapplicable when our laws do not contain a counterpart provision. Id. at 97, 98. Because our legislature has not enacted a provision shifting the burden of proof to the Bureau, we decline to adopt a rationale used by courts whose statutes more specifically jus*135tify such a result, or are not similarly constructed to our laws. Compare section 65-05-04, N.D.C.C. with Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-141.
As we have previously indicated herein, where the Bureau decides to terminate benefits after initially granting compensation, the burden will be upon the claimant to establish that he or she has a continuing right to receive the benefits. Hayden v. Workers Compensation Bureau, 447 N.W.2d at 496; Gramling v. North Dakota Workmen’s Comp. Bureau, 303 N.W.2d 323 (N.D.1981). In Gramling, as in the case at hand, the claimant asserted that the burden was on the Bureau to prove that the claimant was malingering. Gramling, 303 N.W.2d at 325. We rejected that claim stating:
“Gramling next contends that the burden was upon the Bureau to prove that he was a malingerer. The Bureau does not have a burden of proving that the claimant is not entitled, to benefits. Rather, the burden is upon the claimant to prove that he is entitled to benefits.”
Id. at 329. Applying similar thinking to this case, we conclude the burden was upon Kopp to establish that he was still entitled to benefits upon the Bureau’s determination that the benefits should be terminated.
II.
Kopp’s second contention is that the Bureau engaged in the selective consideration of evidence by failing to resolve inconsistencies in the medical evidence provided in the record. Because of this failure, Kopp asserts the Bureau’s findings of fact are not supported by a preponderance of the evidence. Primarily, Kopp contends that the Bureau ignored evidence explaining the claimant’s lack of muscle atrophy and testimony which established the presence of a conversion disorder rather than malingering. When reviewing the Bureau’s treatment of inconsistent medical testimony, this Court has repeatedly stressed the importance of keeping in mind the following basic rule: “ ‘Normally, it is within the province of the administrative agency, not the courts, to weigh conflicting medical opinions and to resolve these conflicts. Hassler v. Weinberger, 502 F.2d 172 (7th Cir.1974).’” Hayden, 447 N.W.2d at 498 (citing Claim of Bromley, 304 N.W.2d 412, 417 (N.D.1981)).
Although the ultimate resolution of conflicting medical testimony falls with the agency, this Court has required the Bureau to clarify discrepancies among inconsistent medical reports. DeChandt v. N.D. Workers Comp. Bureau, 452 N.W.2d 82, 83 (N.D.1990); Howes v. Workers Compensation Bureau, 429 N.W.2d 730, 733 (N.D.1988); (quoting Hayes v. North Dakota Workers Comp. Bureau, 425 N.W.2d 356, 357 (N.D.1988)). Initially, we limited the requirement of adequate clarification of discrepancies in medical testimony to situations involving internal conflicts in the attending physician’s report. Bromley, 304 N.W.2d at 417. Later, we expanded the requirement to include situations involving two reports by the same physician which contained conflicting opinions. Roberts v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 326 N.W.2d 702, 706 (N.D.1982). Finally, in 1985, this Court remanded a decision to clarify discrepancies between two different physicians. Weber v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 377 N.W.2d 571, 574 (N.D.1985). Although we are continuing to shape the principles which govern the Bureau’s treatment of inconsistent medical evidence, we must continually bear in mind the basic rule first articulated by Justice Sand: “Normally, it is within the province of the administrative agency, not the courts, to weigh conflicting medical opinions and to resolve these conflicts.” Bromley, 304 N.W.2d at 417 (citing Hassler v. Weinberger, 502 F.2d 172 (7th Cir.1974)).
Section 28-32-19, N.D.C.C., controls our review of the administrative process. It is our obligation to affirm the Bureau’s decision unless we determine that the Bureau’s findings of fact are not supported by a preponderance of the evidence or its conclusions fail to be supported by its findings of fact. Howes, 429 N.W.2d at 734 (citing Hayes, 425 N.W.2d at 356-57.) However, it is not within the function of this Court to *136engage in independent fact finding or substitute our judgment for that of the agency. Howes, 429 N.W.2d at 734 (citing Power Fuels, Inc. v. Elkin, 283 N.W.2d 214 (N.D.1979)). Our function is to determine whether or not a reasoning mind could have reasonably determined that the factual conclusions were supported by the evidence. Howes, 429 N.W.2d at 734 (citing Power Fuels, 283 N.W.2d at 214).
On May 13, 1985, Kopp sustained an injury to his left shoulder. After initial consultations with his primary care physician, Kopp was referred to Dr. Ray Miller, an orthopedist, who subsequently ordered an arthrogram and diagnosed Kopp’s condition as a rotator cuff tear. Kopp underwent surgery to repair the rotator cuff tear on January 3, 1986. Kopp was advised to undergo physical therapy after the surgery and testified that he continued physical therapy until December of 1986.
On March 10, 1986, Kevin Axtman, RPT, reported that the claimant was showing signs of inflammation of the shoulder joint which limited claimant’s motion. At this time, the claimant began “home therapy” consisting of passive movement of his arm in an attempt to prevent muscle wasting. In April of 1986, Dr. Miller observed that the claimant’s condition appeared to be regressing; the claimant had full passive range of motion but exhibited zero active range of motion in flexion, extension, or abduction. Dr. Miller advised Kopp to seek biofeedback therapy with Dr. Hase. Dr. Miller indicated in May of 1986 that Kopp was still undergoing both physical and biofeedback therapy. At that time, Kopp was prescribed an anti-depressant. Dr. Miller ordered an EMG (Electromyelogram) which was determined to be normal. At this point, Dr. Miller opined that the claimant did not have any physical problems and recommended Kopp see Dr. A.F. Samuelson, a psychiatrist; Dr. Miller noted that Kopp was not responding to biofeedback therapy.
Dr. Samuelson met with Kopp on July 9, 1986. Dr. Samuelson noted that Kopp “displayed no evidences of depression nor concern about his left arm which was noted to be held tightly to his left side.” Dr. Samuelson also noted that the claimant had some ability to move his arm because Kopp had been observed placing his hand in his pocket as he walked. Dr. Samuelson concluded that the claimant was suffering from either a conversion disorder or malingering. Dr. Samuelson believed malingering was the more likely of the two, however, he could not draw any conclusion as to the exact cause of the claimant’s inability to move his arm. Dr. Samuelson declined to say Kopp was malingering because such a determination would involve value judgments, but did note that if Kopp suffered from a conversion disorder he should have responded to biofeedback and physical therapy.
In July of 1986, Kopp returned to Dr. Miller. At that time Dr. Miller noted that Kopp had full passive motion and had not suffered any muscle atrophy. However, Kopp still did not display any active range of motions of flexion, extension, or abduction. Dr. Miller then ordered an evaluation to be performed by a MedCenter One assessment team. The assessment team noted that the results of an arthrogram indicated that Kopp may be suffering from a possible minor leak in the rotator cuff repair, but that did not account for the discrepancy between the active and passive range of motion. The assessment team recommended that Kopp return to biofeedback and physical therapy, and if Kopp failed to improve within two months, a cervical myelogram should be performed. In concluding, the assessment team noted that Kopp’s condition was likely psychological, but certainly not a typical conversion reaction, and also noted that some of the investigators characterized the problem as malingering.
Kopp continued with the biofeedback and physical therapy. In October of 1986, Dr. Miller noted that Kopp had ten percent of flexion and extension as well as ten to fifteen percent of normal external and internal rotation. Kopp still did not show any signs of muscle atrophy. As a result of Kopp’s lack of improvement, Kopp underwent a cervical myelogram as recom*137mended by the assessment team. Dr. Roger F. Kennedy’s review of the cervical mye-logram indicated that a degenerative disc disease discovered in Kopp’s neck did not affect the range of motion which should be present in his arm.
In January of 1987, the Bureau received a report from Dr. Saxvik of the assessment team from MedCenter One. After reviewing the progress of Kopp’s biofeedback and physical therapy, Dr. Saxvik concluded that they were now dealing with a claimant who was malingering. He based this on the following factors: (1) the results of the extensive biofeedback excluded a conversion reaction; (2) good active movements were obtained through the application of a stimulator; and (3) malingering is evidenced by the lack of muscle wasting. On February 5, 1987, the Bureau informed Kopp of its intent to terminate his benefits. On March 5, 1987, the Bureau issued its order denying benefits.
On February 12, 1987, Dr. Miller suggested to the Bureau that Kopp be evaluated by a physician at the Mayo Clinic. The Bureau responded that it did not intend to pay for the examination. Kopp underwent an examination at the Mayo Clinic by Dr. Kokmen, who recommended Kopp continue rehabilitation and undergo a psychiatric evaluation.
Kopp returned to Dr. Miller in July of 1987 at the direction of his counsel. Dr. Miller noted that Kopp appeared to be improving. Dr. Miller could not explain the improvement in the claimant’s condition in light of the fact that both biofeedback and physical therapy had apparently failed. At that time Dr. Miller believed the best explanation for the improvement was that Kopp was finally making a voluntary effort. Subsequent medical reports indicate Kopp continued to improve. In light of this improvement, Dr. Miller suggested the Bureau assign a rehabilitation specialist to the claimant. The Bureau refused, stating that it had determined that Kopp did not suffer from a disability.
In August of 1988, Kopp underwent a psychological evaluation conducted by Dr. Craig DeGree. Both the Bureau and Kopp subsequently stipulated for remand and consideration of an independent psychiatric evaluation.
Dr. DeGree, a psychologist, administered an MMPI which suggested Kopp was suffering from a hysteroid personality orientation. He stated that persons with such disorders are prone to conversion reactions. He concluded that Kopp could be suffering from either a conversion disorder or malingering, with the conversion reaction being most likely. Dr. DeGree noted that in order for a conversion disorder to be present there must be a primary stressor, which he could not identify from his limited exposure to the claimant. Dr. DeGree also noted that malingering requires a factor of secondary gain. Although Dr. DeGree initially dismissed litigation as a basis for secondary gain, he later stated in his deposition testimony that reinstatement of the benefits could be a possible goal or purpose for malingering. Dr. DeGree based his conclusion that Kopp suffered from a conversion reaction rather than malingering on the basis of his analysis of the MMPI results only, although he conceded the results indicated by the MMPI could also give rise to a diagnosis of malingering.
During January of 1989, Kopp was examined by Dr. Scott McNairy, a psychiatrist. Dr. McNairy specializes in work injury rehabilitation. Dr. McNairy concluded that the claimant did not suffer from a conversion disorder for three reasons. First, Dr. McNairy noted that Kopp had suffered no muscle atrophy. He stated that the passive exercises being performed by Kopp could not have allowed the claimant to retain “good muscle body to the arm and the shoulder.” Dr. McNairy also noted that the muscle tone in the claimant's arm indicated that Kopp was probably using his arm. Dr. McNairy also noted that the size of the biceps, triceps, and deltoids present in the claimant’s arm would require active strengthening exercises to maintain the muscle bulk and tone. Dr. McNairy, as well as others, also noted when he attempted to passively lift Kopp’s arm, Kopp actively recruited his underarm muscles which would require voluntary effort on *138Kopp’s part. The third factor Dr. McNairy listed for his conclusion that the claimant was malingering was the presence of a motive. Dr. McNairy stated that reinstatement of the claimant’s disability benefits would provide ample secondary gain for the conclusion Kopp was malingering. Dr. McNairy also disputed the diagnosis of a conversion order upon the sole foundation of a hysteroid personality. On the contrary, Dr. McNairy believed the underlying personality profile is more frequently associated with the development of “conscious use of symptoms for secondary gain.”
Kopp contends the Bureau failed to adequately address the deposition testimony of Doctors Samuelson, Saxvik, and Miller concerning the lack of atrophy in the claimant’s shoulder and arm. Kopp refers this Court to several pages of deposition testimony which he believed show Doctors Miller and Samuelson accepting the proposition that the passive manipulation of Kopp’s arm may have prevented atrophy of his muscles. However, upon further review of this testimony, we note that the testimony of Dr. Samuelson which has been referred to is actually part of the transcript of Kopp’s own testimony. The testimony of Dr. Miller referred to by the claimant does not concern the atrophy of the muscle, but instead is an explanation of why the claimant has good passive range of motion. Although not in the testimony referred to by claimant, Dr. Saxvik does state that the passive manipulation of the arm could prevent atrophy. However, the Bureau provides a thorough discussion of Dr. Saxvik’s testimony in paragraphs XIII, XIV, XVIII, and XXIII of the Bureau’s findings of fact.2
Kopp also asserts that the Bureau failed to adequately address the possibility of a conversion order rather than malingering. Kopp claims that the Bureau relied solely upon Dr. McNairy and disregarded the evidence provided by the other physicians. However, a review of the Bureau’s findings of fact indicates that the Bureau evaluated Dr. DeGree’s testimony in paragraphs XIX, XX, XXII, and XXIII.3
*139This Court has articulated the requirement that the Bureau clarify discrepancies which may exist in the medical testimony. E.g. DeChandt, 452 N.W.2d 82. Adequate explanation of why the Bureau disregarded evidence favorable to the claimant may be provided through the Bureau’s discussion of why the contrary evidence was accepted. “We must also keep in mind that pursuant to section 28-32-19, N.D.C.C., we must affirm the Bureau’s decision unless its findings of fact are not supported by a preponderance of the evidence or its conclusions are not supported by its findings of fact.” Howes, 429 N.W.2d at 734 (citing Hayes, 425 N.W.2d at 357; Gramling, 303 N.W.2d at 325-26).
In determining whether or not the Bureau’s findings of fact are supported by a preponderance of the evidence we need only determine whether or not a reasonable mind could have reasonably determined that the factual conclusions were supported by a preponderance of the available evidence. Howes, 429 N.W.2d at 734. (Citing Power Fuels, Inc. v. Elkin, 283 N.W.2d at 220.) Additionally, in applying the preponderance of the evidence test this Court will not substitute its judgment for that of the agency or engage in independent fact finding. Power Fuels, 283 N.W.2d at 220. In light of the foregoing evidence, we believe a reasoning mind could have reasonably concluded that Kopp failed to prove that he continued to be disabled.
III.
The district court granted the claimant recovery of disability benefits from February 3, 1987, through March 10, 1988, because the Bureau failed to provide Kopp with prior notice and hearing of the termination of his benefits. The Bureau concedes that Forster v. North Dakota Workers Compensation Bureau, 447 N.W.2d 501 (N.D.1989), is dispositive of this issue.
For the reasons stated herein, the judgment of the district court is affirmed.
YANDE WALLE and GIERKE, JJ., concur.
. The district court found that Kopp was entitled to disability benefits from February 3, 1987, through March 10, 1988, because the claimant’s benefits were terminated without notice and an opportunity to be heard. The Bureau concedes that Forster v. North Dakota Workers Compensa*134tion Bureau, 447 N.W.2d 501 (N.D.1989), is dis-positive of this issue. However, the claimant now attempts to apply the principles of due process found in Forster and Beckler v. North Dakota Workers Compensation Bureau, 418 N.W.2d 770 (N.D.1988), to the issue of whether or not the burden of proof falls upon the claimant to show he is entitled to continue benefits. They are inapplicable in the determination of the latter issue.
. The text of the relevant findings of fact is as follows:
"XIII.
"The director of the MedCenter One Assessment Team, Dr. Saxvik, indicated in a letter to the Bureau that extensive biofeedback therapy should exclude a conversion reaction. Dr. Saxvik indicated that biofeedback therapy did indeed exclude conversion reaction as a possibility.
"XIV.
"At deposition, Dr. Saxvik testified that he believed the claimant had a failed surgery syndrome. However, Dr. Saxvik is a psychiatrist and is not an expert in orthopedics as is Dr. Miller. Dr. Saxvik expressly deferred to Dr. Miller concerning whether claimant had a failed surgery syndrome. However, Dr. Sax-vik believed that he could rule out the possibility of conversion reaction on the basis of biofeedback therapy that previously had been unsuccessful.
* * * * * *
"XVIII.
"The differential diagnosis for the claimant is between conversion reaction and malingering. Dr. Samuelson originally thought that malingering was more likely but could not so state with reasonable medical certainty. Dr. Saxvik originally diagnosed claimant as malingering, but at deposition testified that he believed claimant suffered from failed surgery syndrome. However, Dr. Saxvik was able to rule out conversion reaction as a diagnosis. Therefore, the bureau concluded from the testimony of Dr. Miller, Dr. Samuelson, and Dr. Saxvik that claimant was malingering.
"XXIII.
“The greater weight of the evidence taken as a whole indicates that the claimant is likely malingering. Dr. Miller ruled out any physical basis for claimant’s complaints. Dr. Sax-vik believed the complaints were physical in nature but deferred to Dr. Miller’s opinion. Dr. Saxvik also ruled out conversion disorder. Finally, although Dr. DeGree believed claimant had a conversion disorder he did not set forth any facts to support the opinion. Dr. McNairy concluded that the claimant was malingering. The bureau accepts this medical opinion based upon its consistency with the other medical opinion, and that several factors support a diagnosis of malingering rather than conversion disorder.”
. The text of the relevant findings of fact is as follows:
"XIX.
"Claimant consulted Dr. Craig DeGree, psychologist, who tested claimant on August 25, 1988. Dr. DeGree indicated that the claimant had an elevated scale 3 on the MMPI which indicated that claimant had a hysteroid personality. Dr. DeGree believed that based upon this finding it was more likely that claimant suffers from a conversion reaction *139than is malingering. Dr. DeGree was unable to provide any other rationale for his opinion. Dr. DeGree did concede that an individual with a hysteroid personality pattern could be either malingering or having a conversion disorder. A diagnosis of a hysteroid personality in no way precludes a diagnosis of malingering.
"XX.
"The bureau obtained an independent medical evaluation from Dr. Scott McNairy, who examined the claimant on January 27, 1989. Dr. McNairy repeated some of the testing that Dr. DeGree had done. Dr. McNairy indicated that the claimant had an invalid MMPI score because questions were omitted or answered both true and false. Dr. McNairy was able to review the results of the MMPI that Craig DeGree, Ph.D., had administered. Dr. McNairy testified that since the primary purpose of a conversion disorder is to keep unacceptable ideas or impulses out of awareness they are channeled or converted into somatic or sensory symptoms. The physician found no indication of such a primary stressor in Kopp’s history. In his deposition Dr. DeGree had confirmed that by definition diagnosis of conversion reaction requires a primary stres-sor. Although neither physician found a primary stressor, Dr. McNairy believes that the absence of a primary stressor helps to rule out a diagnosis of conversion disorder, while Dr. DeGree could not so conclude.
* * * * * *
"XXII.
"The bureau accepts Dr. McNairy’s opinion that the claimant is malingering rather than suffering from a conversion reaction due to the three factors that he has set forth which validate his opinion. These three factors are lack of atrophy and muscle bulk of the left shoulder, presence of active recruitment of the opposing muscles when attempting to elevate the arm, and presence of secondary gain. Dr. DeGree was unable to give any factor supporting a diagnosis of conversion disorder over that of malingering other than hysteroid personality which is not indicative of either disorder. Dr. McNairy also indicated that claimant’s sudden improvement which Dr. Miller testified to was more consistent with malingering than with conversion disorder.”
For the text of paragraph XXIII, see footnote 2, supra.

=== CASE 9737752 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:44.645162+00 ===

GARRARD, Presiding Judge,
concurring.
The decisions of our Supreme Court have held that the “perverseness of attitude” necessary to recover in a guest passenger case can be established by evidence of the voluntary commission of the act coupled with an awareness on the.part of the actor that injury to the passenger will probably result. See, e. g., Brown v. Saucerman (1957), 237 Ind. 598, 145 N.E.2d 898.
The court recently addressed this qualitative question in Andert v. Fuchs (1979), Ind., 394 N.E.2d 931, 934. It quoted with approval from Clouse v. Peden (1962), 243 Ind. 390, 186 N.E.2d 1, setting forth an objective standard of
“.. . a very real and present likelihood of injury under circumstances where the misconduct of the operator of the vehicle would be the proximate cause of the injury.”
See also Frybarger v. Coffelt (1979), Ind.App., 387 N.E.2d 104, 106.
*618It appears to me that what we hold today is that Holderbaum’s action in attempting a nearly right angle left hand turn while driving at a rate of speed near sixty-five miles per hour is so fraught with peril that the perverse attitude-likelihood of injury element may be reasonably inferred from the act alone. As such it may be distinguished from situations involving speeding (Frybarger) or intoxication (Andert) where the evidence was such that the inference sought was possible, but without more a verdict to that effect would need be based on speculation and could not stand. On the basis of that distinction, I concur.

=== CASE 9737753 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:49.51357+00 ===

MEIERHENRY, Circuit Judge.
This case combines two lower court actions involving a contract to purchase the Chamberlain Livestock Auction (auction). Donald Penner (Penner), the purchaser, brought an action for rescission of the contract claiming misrepresentation; in the alternative, if the court found no misrepresentation, he contended that Robert Jor-gensen’s (Jorgensen), the seller’s, damages were limited to those specified in the contract. Jorgensen claimed that Penner was in default, requested termination of the contract, demanded immediate possession and sought damages in excess of the contract provision. The trial court denied the claim for rescission, found no misrepresentation by Jorgensen and determined that Jorgensen was not limited to the damage provision in the contract.
The issues are (1) whether the trial court erroneously found that Jorgensen had not misrepresented certain information and (2) *481whether the trial court should have limited Jorgensen's damages to those specified in the liquidated damage provision of the contract. We affirm the trial court’s finding of no misrepresentation; we reverse its award of damages in excess of the contract provision.
FACTS
On July 13, 1987, Jorgensen and Penner entered into an agreement for the auction’s sale and purchase. The negotiations for the sale and purchase of the auction barn and business took place between Jorgen-sen, the principal shareholder and operating officer of the auction, and Penner, the principal shareholder and operating officer of Chamberlain Livestock Sales. The sale included real estate, inventory, equipment, fixtures, supplies and goodwill.
The terms of the agreement included a total purchase price of $320,000; $20,000 to be paid at the execution of the agreement; $60,000 on or before July 31, 1987; and the balance of $240,000 with interest at 9% per annum was to be paid in thirty equal semiannual installments of $14,736 commencing on February 1, 1988. Penner made the payments of $20,000 upon executing the agreement and $60,000 on or before July 31, 1987. Penner failed to make the $14,-736 semi-annual payment on February 1, 1988.
MISREPRESENTATION
Penner sought rescission of the purchase agreement and return of the $80,000 down payment. Penner maintained that Jorgen-sen misrepresented the livestock figures to him, thereby inducing him to enter into the contract.
South Dakota law provides for rescission of a written contract when the consent of a contracting party was “given by mistake or obtained through duress, fraud, or undue influence_” SDCL 53-11-2. Fraud can be either actual or constructive.
Actual fraud in relation to contracts consists of any of the following acts committed by a party to the contract, or with his connivance, with intent to deceive another party thereto or to induce him to enter into the contract:
(1) The suggestion as a fact of that which is not true by one who does not believe it to be true;
(2) The positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the information of the person making it, of that which is not true, though he believe it to be true;
(3) The suppression of that which is true by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;
(4) A promise made without any intention of performing it; or
(5) Any other act fitted to deceive.
Actual fraud is always a question of fact.
SDCL 53-4-5.
Constructive fraud consists of “any breach of duty which, without any actually fraudulent intent, gains an advantage to the person in fault ..., by misleading another to his prejudice_” SDCL 53-4-6. The existence of fraud is a question of fact for the fact finder. Holmes v. Couturier, 452 N.W.2d 135 (S.D.1990); Tri-State Refining v. Apaloosa Company, 431 N.W.2d 311, 314 (S.D.1988).
The facts show that the parties began discussions of the sale and purchase of the auction in 1984. Penner made a written offer to purchase the auction in June of 1986 for the sum of $320,000. Jorgensen did not accept the offer. Penner renewed his interest in the auction early in 1987 and after several months of negotiations an agreement was reached.' Prior to finalizing the agreement, Penner requested and Jorgensen supplied information concerning the number of livestock sold, 1986 tax returns and 1985 annual financial reports.
Jorgensen sent Penner the livestock numbers for the years of 1984, 1985, and 1986. The numbers showed a decline for 1985 and 1986. At the top of the paper upon which the numbers were written, Jor-gensen wrote in his own handwriting this note: “All numbers are being build (sic) up Fast. Cattle-Hog-Sheep Lots of Replacement (sic) are being Held.”
*482At the bottom of the page he added, “Call me when you get this.” He signed both notes, “Bob.” Penner also requested the numbers for April, May and June of 1987 which showed the numbers had continued to decline.
At trial, Jorgensen said that he had provided Penner with the numbers for April, May and June of 1987; Penner maintained that Jorgensen did not provide the numbers but told him that the numbers were steady. Penner maintained he was misled by Jor-gensen’s representation that the cattle were being held in the country and building up fast and also by the characterization of 1987 numbers as “steady.”
The trial court concluded that no misrepresentation occurred. It found (1) that Penner had presented himself to Jorgensen as a knowledgeable businessman in livestock business and auctions; (2) that Jor-gensen had furnished all requested relevant business and financial information; (3) that Penner relied upon independent counseling and advice from his own lawyer and certified public accountant in entering into the Purchase Agreement; (4) that the handwritten note about numbers building up fast was not a misrepresentation and, in fact, was true; and (5) that Jorgensen’s statement comparing 1985 and 1986 numbers as “steady” was a reference to the income of the auction, not livestock numbers. The court also found that Penner’s testimony was “worthy of little or no credibility.”
The trial court’s findings of fact are presumed correct unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous.
This court may not substitute its judgment of factual questions for that of the trial court unless the findings of fact are clearly erroneous. Northern Farm Supply, Inc. v. Sprecher, 307 N.W.2d 870 (S.D.1981). In applying the “clearly erroneous” standard, we do not ask whether we would have made the same findings as did the trial court. Rather, the test is whether, after reviewing all the evidence, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Temple v. Temple, 365 N.W.2d 561 (S.D.1985); Cunningham v. Yankton Clinic, P.A., 262 N.W.2d 508 (S.D.1978); In Re Estate of Hobelsberger, 85 S.D. 282, 181 N.W.2d 455 (1970). The findings of fact made by the trial court are presumptively correct. The burden to show error is on the appellant. Temple, supra; Hilde v. Flood, 81 S.D. 25, 130 N.W.2d 100 (1964).
Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Strain, 432 N.W.2d 259, 265 (S.D.1988).
After a review of the record, we find that Penner has not met his burden. We are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
Penner further argues that the representations were a “mistake” upon which the contract was based under SDCL 53-11-2(1) which justifies rescission. Since this issue was not raised at the trial court level, it will not be addressed at the appellate level. Gulbranson v. Flandreau Township, 458 N.W.2d 361 (S.D.1990); Weaver v. Boortz, 301 N.W.2d 673 (S.D.1981); Ward v. Viborg School Dist. No. 60-5, 319 N.W.2d 502, 505 (S.D.1982).
DAMAGES
Penner claims that in the event he is in default, the damages should be limited to those specified in the agreement. The contract specified that if Penner breached the contract he would forfeit all payments and improvements and all rights, title and interest would be re-invested in Jorgensen. The terms of the contract defined the seller’s rights in the event of default:
In the event Buyer shall fail to pay when due any of the payments herein provided, either principal or interest thereon, or to perform any of the covenants on its part to be performed, then all payments, together with interest, shall become immediately due and payable and this contract shall be forfeited and terminated at the option of the Seller, and in such event the Seller shall have the right to re-enter and re-take complete possession of all of said property, and the Buyer agrees to surrender, and turn over the same promptly and *483without delay. Such failure on the part of the Buyer to perform its obligations hereunder shall cancel all obligations of the Seller to be performed hereunder and fully re-invest Seller with all right, title and interest to be conveyed hereunder, and the Buyer shall forfeit all payments theretofore made, including all improvements, and such payments and improvements shall be retained by the Seller in full satisfaction and liquidation of all damages by it sustained.
The action which Jorgensen took upon Penner’s failure to make the February 1, 1988, payment specifically invoked the contract provision to foreclose Penner’s rights, title and interest to the business. Jorgen-sen served a notice of default on Penner on February 3, 1988. Jorgensen used the acceleration clause of the contract, declared the total amount of the contract due, demanded immediate possession of the business, and terminated the contract.
Jorgensen’s notice of default dated February 3, 1988, read as follows:
As you know a payment of $14,736.00 was due February 1st, 1988, to the Chamberlain Livestock Auction, Inc. according to the terms of the purchase agreement entered into the 13th day of July, 1987, between yourself and the Chamberlain Livestock Auction, Inc. Because you have failed to make that payment, please treat this as notice of default under that agreement.
Under the terms of the agreement I hereby demand that the total amount of the contract including all principal and interest be immediately paid or that you forfeit and terminate the contract and return possession of all the property to Chamberlain Livestock Auction, Inc.
The total amount due under the contract is $240,000.00 in principal plus $10,-800 in interest to February 1st, 1988 or a total of $250,800.00 plus $60.00 per day interest until paid in full.
You must make payment of all the principal and interest due on or before 60 days from this notice....
As was stated before, please treat this as a notice of default and demand for all principal and interest due under the contract, ....
On March 18, 1988, Jorgensen filed a summons, complaint, and order to show cause for immediate delivery of the property, buildings and facilities of the auction business. Jorgensen alleged that Penner was in default under the purchase agreement and was wrongfully detaining the property. He sought “immediate possession of the property and business” and money damages. His complaint alleged:
That after the February 1st, 1988, default, the Plaintiff demanded the business which was conveyed to Penner under the purchase agreement be returned to the Plaintiff as required under the contract. The contract states if the Buyer failed to make any of the payments when due the Seller would have the right to re-enter and retake complete possession of all of the said property and the Buyer agrees to surrender and turn over said property promptly and without delay.
Penner operated the auction until the middle of March when he voluntarily vacated the premises. Jorgensen immediately took possession, found another buyer, and completed resale of the business by March 28, 1988.
At the hearing on the order to show cause for wrongful detainer March 29, 1988, Jorgensen informed the court that he was seeking default and immediate possession pursuant to his complaint. He also advised the court that Penner had delivered possession of the business, that Penner was claiming rescission of the contract, and that damages would need to be determined at trial. Penner was not present at the show cause hearing.
At trial, Jorgensen asserted he had the right to elect remedies and sue for the total amount of the contract. He contended that the contract gave him the right to accelerate the total amount due under the contract and to foreclose, but did not limit him to the damages specified in the contract. In effect, he invoked the contract clause regarding default and acceleration of pay*484ments but wished to avoid the liquidated damage provision.
The trial court found the clause was not exclusive and entered a judgment for the contract price, less the resale price, less the $80,000 payments made by Penner plus taxes, interest and consequential damages for a total amount of $131,113.90.
Jorgensen argues that Middleton v. Klingler, 410 N.W.2d 184 (S.D.1987) gave him the right to elect a remedy other than the one specified in the contract.1 In Middleton, however, the seller did not invoke the default provision of the contract but sought, instead, specific performance.
In construing the entire default provision we conclude it gives the sellers the right to possession, and buyers the concomitant obligation to deliver possession, only if sellers elect to “deem this contract null and void. ” This was simply a reservation of sellers’ remedy of the right to possession should they elect to cancel the contract, which in this case they chose not to do. (emphasis added).
Id. at 186.
Although Jorgensen may have had a right to elect another remedy, he did not do so. His notice of default, his pleadings, his re-entry and resale relied upon the terms of the contract which reserved his right to foreclose Penner’s rights, title and interest.
In a strict foreclosure action, the seller cannot retake the property and at the same time recover the purchase price. Strict foreclosure has the effect of cancelling the contract and all the buyer’s rights, title and interest to the property.
It would seem clear that plaintiff cannot have both the land and the purchase price. He cannot have the contract terminated or canceled to enable him to get back the land, and at the same time have it kept alive to enable him to get the purchase price, or any part of it....
[[Image here]]
... If the vendor is placed in the same legal position as if the contract had not been made, then he has no right of action for anything arising out of the contract.
Terpin v. Daugherty, 53 S.D. 341, 345-346, 220 N.W. 852, 854 (S.D.1928)2.
When a seller seeks foreclosure under a default clause in a purchase agreement, a liquidated damage provision may allow the seller to retain payments under the contract if the provision is a valid, enforceable provision and not an unlawful penalty. Prentice v. Classen, 355 N.W.2d 352, 356 (S.D.1984). “Whether a forfeiture provision in a sales contract is an enforceable, liquidated damage provision or an unenforceable penalty is a question of law for the court.” Safari, Inc. v. Verdoorn, 446 N.W.2d 44, 46 (S.D.1989). In Safari a similar damage provision was found to be a penalty. In Heikkila v. Carver, 378 N.W.2d 214 (S.D.1985), the damage clause was upheld.
In Prentice, Safari, and Heikkila the buyer challenged the clause as an unenforceable penalty. The party against whom enforcement is sought has the burden of establishing that a liquidated damage provision is a penalty. Safari, supra. The court determines its enforceability by “consideration of the instrument as a whole, the situation of the parties, subject matter of the contract, circumstances sur*485rounding its execution, and other factors.” Prentice, 355 N.W.2d at 355.
Penner did not challenge the damage clause as a penalty; instead, he maintained that the contract clause applied if he were found in default. Jorgensen claimed that it did not apply because he had selected a different remedy with a different measure of damages. We find Jorgensen’s argument without merit.
This case is also distinguishable from Beitelspacher v. Winther, 447 N.W.2d 347 (S.D.1989) and Dow v. Noble, 380 N.W.2d 359 (S.D.1986) where equitable adjustments were allowed to the buyer on a foreclosure action for a contract for deed of real estate. Neither party in the present case, requests equitable adjustment or claims unjust enrichment. See, Heikkila, supra.
We agree with the trial court’s determination of the misrepresentation issue and reverse and hold as a matter of law that since Jorgensen elected to invoke the contractual remedy of the contract, the liquidated damage provision is valid and enforceable. Jorgensen is entitled to have all rights, title and interests in the business and retain all payments and improvements as damages.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
SABERS, J., concurs specially.
MEIERHENRY, Circuit Judge, for MORGAN, J., disqualified.
. In Middleton the contract contained a clause which stated that in the event of the buyer’s default the seller could declare the contract can-celled and take immediate possession of the premises and retain all payments as liquidated damages and reasonable rental for the use of the property in default. The contract also gave the sellers the option to "use such other remedy or remedies as may be authorized by law." The sellers sought specific performance and had not elected the foreclosure remedy described in the contract.
. In Wolken v. Bunn, 422 N.W.2d 417 (S.D.1988) the sellers were allowed strict foreclosure and a deficiency judgment. The holding was limited to the facts of the case and specifically did not overrule Terpin. In Wolken, the buyer had purchased a ranch for $ 1,350,000, made a down payment of $1,150,000, and agreed to pay the remaining $200,000 on a contract. The contract gave the seller the right to repossess but only mentioned an 80-acre homesite and was silent as to the 6,000 acres of ranch land. The buyer, an attorney, personally guaranteed the full amount and told the sellers they could seek a money judgment if he defaulted.

=== CASE 2211929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.599221+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 413 (1990)
Loren KOTHRADE, et al., Appellants,
v.
AMERICAN FAMILY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Respondent.
No. C4-90-1220.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
November 6, 1990.
*414 Sharon L. Van Dyck, Schwebel, Goetz & Sieben, Minneapolis, for appellants.
Thomas O. Albers, Gregory Johnson, Arthur, Chapman & McDonough, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Considered and decided by RANDALL, P.J., HUSPENI and KALITOWSKI, JJ.
OPINION
KALITOWSKI, Judge.
Appellants Loren and Jocelyn Kothrade, and minors Kendra, Kelly and Katherine Kothrade by their mother, Jocelyn Kothrade, challenge the trial court's grant of summary judgment for respondent American Family Mutual Insurance Company. Appellants contend that to determine the amount of underinsured motorist (UIM) benefits pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 4a (1986), the amount paid to each underinsurance claimant in a settlement agreement with the tort-feasor's insurance company should be offset against the per person UIM coverage limit with the aggregate of these differences capped by the UIM per accident limit.
FACTS
The material facts are not in dispute. On June 7, 1987, Loren Kothrade and his family were driving south in a pickup truck on County Road 19 in Corcoran, Minnesota. Loren and his wife Jocelyn were riding in the passenger section of the truck, while their three minor daughters rode unsecured in the bed of the truck. Bradley Northenscold drove his vehicle through a red light and struck the Kothrade vehicle. On impact, the topper of the truck flew off, and all three children were thrown from the truck. All members of the Kothrade family were seriously injured.
At the time of the accident, the Northenscold vehicle was insured by American Family Insurance in the amount of $30,000 per person and $60,000 per accident. The Kothrade family was also insured by American Family, with UIM coverage also in the amount of $30,000 per person and $60,000 per accident.
In March 1989, the Kothrades entered a settlement agreement with American Family in its capacity as liability insurer for the tort-feasor, Northenscold. The Kothrades accepted $60,000 in return for the release of the insured from further liability. This amount represented the maximum amount that could be recovered per accident under the terms of the Northenscold policy. The amount allocated to each member of the Kothrade family was as follows: Loren, $10,000; Jocelyn, $8,000; Kelly, $13,500; Katherine, $16,000; and Kendra, $12,500. None of the appellants was fully compensated for injuries sustained.
The Kothrade family submitted a claim to American Family to recover UIM benefits under the terms of their own insurance policy. American Family denied the claim, taking the position that no UIM benefits were recoverable because the $60,000 amount paid to the Kothrades as a result of the Northenscold liability policy was equal to their own per accident UIM coverage limit.
In March 1989, the Kothrade family commenced this action to recover UIM benefits from American Family. Following a preliminary arbitration decision, the trial court granted American Family's request for a trial de novo. On December 6, 1989, American Family moved the trial court for summary judgment. The trial court granted the motion for summary judgment on February 27, 1990.
ISSUE
Did the trial court err in determining that when more than one insured makes a claim to collect UIM benefits, the total amount paid to all underinsurance claimants should be directly offset against the UIM per accident limit?
ANALYSIS
On appeal from summary judgment, the reviewing court must determine whether there are material issues of fact and whether the trial court erred in its application of the law. Betlach v. Wayzata Condominium, 281 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Minn. *415 1979). The parties agree that there are no issues of material fact and disagree only regarding the application of Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 4a (1986), to the facts. Our standard of review regarding matters of law is de novo. A.J. Chromy Constr. Co. v. Commercial Mechanical Servs., Inc., 260 N.W.2d 579, 582 (Minn.1977).
The trial court granted summary judgment for respondents based on its finding that under Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 4a (1986), UIM benefits are not available when the total amount paid to UIM claimants from sources other than the underinsurance policy exhausts the policy's UIM per accident limit. Appellants dispute this interpretation of the statutory setoff provision. Appellants contend that to calculate UIM benefits when there is more than one UIM claimant, the amount paid to each individual claimant should be offset against the UIM per person limit and the aggregate of these differences should be capped by the UIM per accident limit.
Under appellants' interpretation, they would be entitled to UIM benefits. Specifically, the total of the differences between the per person UIM limit and the amount paid to each appellant in the settlement agreement with respondent as the tort-feasor's insurer is $90,000. Appellants argue that this amount of uncompensated damages should then be capped at the UIM per accident limit, resulting in recovery of $60,000 in UIM benefits. The UIM benefits would be in addition to the $60,000 appellants recovered in settlement from respondent as Northenscold's insurer.
A two-step analysis is used to address UIM coverage under the 1986 statutory scheme. First, the statutory definition of an underinsured motor vehicle is considered to determine whether the motor vehicle is underinsured. Broton v. Western Nat'l Mut. Ins. Co., 428 N.W.2d 85, 89 (Minn.1988). The definition provides that an underinsured motor vehicle is "a motor vehicle * * * to which a bodily injury liability policy applies at the time of the accident but its limit for bodily injury liability is less than the amount needed to compensate the insured for actual damages." Minn.Stat. § 65B.43, subd. 17 (1986). In this case, the Northenscold vehicle is underinsured because Northenscold's bodily injury liability policy applies, but the per accident limit of $60,000 is less than the amount needed to compensate appellants for the injuries sustained.
The second step in evaluating UIM coverage is to calculate the amount of UIM benefits by applying the statutory setoff provision. Broton, 428 N.W.2d at 89. It is the application of the setoff provision when more than one UIM claimant is involved that is in dispute in this case. Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 4a (1986), provides:
With respect to underinsured motor vehicles, the maximum liability of an insurer is the lesser of the difference between the limit of underinsured motorist coverage and the amount paid to the insured by or for any person or organization who may be held legally liable for the bodily injury; or the amount of damages sustained but not recovered.
The Broton court outlined a historical perspective of the changes in Minnesota's UIM benefits legislation to aid in understanding the effect of this statutory provision. Id. at 87-88. The overview is briefly summarized here for the same purpose. The legislature enacted what is referred to as the "limits less limits" method of calculating UIM benefits in 1971. According to this method, the amount of UIM coverage was equal to the UIM coverage limit minus the tort-feasor's liability limit. Thus, to recover UIM benefits, the insured's UIM coverage limit must have exceeded the tort-feasor's liability limit. Id. (citing Lick v. Dairyland Ins. Co., 258 N.W.2d 791 (Minn. 1977)). This provision was repealed in 1974 when the legislature enacted the Minnesota No-Fault Automobile Insurance Act. In the 1977 amendments to the Act, the legislature enacted what is referred to as the "add-on" method for determining UIM benefits. According to this method, UIM benefits were recoverable to the extent that damages were greater than the tort-feasor's liability limit. Id. at 88 (citing Holman v. All Nation Ins. Co., 288 N.W.2d 244 (Minn.1980)). Thus, UIM coverage provided *416 additional protection up to the UIM coverage limits whenever the liable party did not carry enough insurance to fully compensate damages.
As part of the 1985 Amendments to the No-Fault Act, the legislature enacted the "limits-less-paid" scheme at issue in this case.[1] Under this approach, the amount paid to UIM claimants from any legally liable person or organization must be offset against the amount of UIM coverage available. Id. at 89. In effect, UIM coverage became a floor of protection to make up for the deficiency in coverage of the underinsured vehicle. Unlike the add-on statutory scheme, benefits were not available for all uncompensated amounts up to the UIM coverage limits because the UIM coverage limits were offset by the amount paid to the UIM claimants from the tort-feasor or other legally liable sources.
Under the limits-less-paid statutory scheme, the application of the setoff provision has not been addressed in the context of multiple UIM claimants. However, the law is settled regarding the application of the setoff provision in the context of only one UIM claimant. UIM coverage compensates the UIM insured only in situations where the applicable personal liability coverage limits, or the amount actually paid to the injured party under such coverage, was less than the injured party's own UIM coverage. Thus, UIM benefits are not available when the UIM per person coverage limit is equal to the tort-feasor's per person bodily injury liability coverage limit, and the UIM claimant has received the full per person recovery under the liability policy. Broton, 428 N.W.2d 85, 90; Ballavance v. Safeco Ins. Co., 432 N.W.2d 185, 188 (Minn.App.1988), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 25, 1989); Thompson v. All-state Ins. Co., 412 N.W.2d 386, 388 (Minn. App.1987), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Nov. 13, 1987).
In this case, the per accident limit must be considered because more than one UIM claimant is involved. The appellants' $60,000 per accident and $30,000 per person UIM coverage limits are identical to the coverage limits of the tort-feasor's bodily injury liability policy. The appellants recovered the full per accident amount of $60,000 in a settlement with respondent as Northenscold's insurer. Since the method of calculating UIM benefits advocated by appellants would result in the additional recovery of $60,000 in UIM benefits, the method is inconsistent with the statute as it has been applied in the context of one UIM claimant.
The trial court's determination that UIM benefits are not available to appellants is also supported by the legislative history of the limits-less-paid statutory scheme. In Broton, the interpretation of this statutory scheme was based in part on the legislature's intent to counteract rising automobile insurance rates. Broton, 428 N.W.2d at 88. A major objective of the 1985 amendments was to eliminate the add-on basis of calculating UIM benefits. Id.
While appellants do not advocate a pure add-on method of calculating UIM benefits, their approach is more consistent with the add-on statutory scheme than with the limits-less-paid scheme that controls in this case. Appellants do not advocate complete recovery of all uncompensated damages up to the UIM per accident limit, which would have occurred under the add-on UIM statutory scheme. Appellants contend that the setoff provision should be first applied to offset the per person UIM limit by the amount of each claimant's individual recovery, with the total amount of UIM benefits limited to the UIM per accident limit. However, the result is still adding on UIM coverage for each individual's uncompensated damages up to the UIM per person limit, and in the aggregate up to the UIM per accident limit. This is inconsistent with the purpose of the limits-less-paid statutory scheme.
The trial court did not rule on an alternative argument for declaratory judgment put forward by respondent because the court found the setoff provision was dispositive. For the same reason, we do not *417 address the merits of the alternative argument.
DECISION
Pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 4a (1986), the total amount paid to UIM insureds from the liable party should be directly offset against the UIM per accident limit. The $60,000 appellants recovered from respondent in its capacity as the tort-feasor's insurer must therefore be offset against the appellants' UIM per accident limit of $60,000. The trial court correctly determined that no UIM benefits are available, and we affirm the grant of summary judgment.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The legislature again amended the statute in 1989. See 1989 Minn.Laws ch. 213, § 5.

=== CASE 2211887 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.075557+00 ===

82 Ill. 2d 571 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 394
THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD et al., Appellees,
v.
ROBERT H. ALLPHIN, Director of Revenue, et al., Appellants.  THE COUNTY OF KANE et al., Appellees,
v.
JAMES B. ZAGEL, Director of Revenue, Appellant.
No. 52836.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 18, 1980.
*572 *573 Tyrone C. Fahner and William J. Scott, Attorneys General, of Springfield (Fred F. Herzog, Special Assistant Attorney General, and Robert G. Epsteen, Assistant Attorney General, of counsel), for appellant.
Pfeifer & Kelty, P.C., of Springfield (Frank M. Pfeifer and Thomas W. Kelty, of counsel), for appellees.
Orders reversed.
MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This case involves a dispute over the recovery of interest allegedly due the plaintiffs in two cases consolidated in the appellate court arising as a result of this court's decision in City of Springfield v. Allphin (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 117. After consolidation in the appellate court, the consolidated case was transferred to this court pursuant to our Rule 302(b) (73 Ill.2d R. 302(b)). The issue now before us in whether under our holding in City of Springfield v. Allphin an award of interest is authorized. We hold it is not.
In City of Springfield v. Allphin, we held that the act reducing from 4% to 2% the State's fee for the collection of certain municipal taxes became effective on December 5, 1974, rather than July 1, 1975. The State, by collecting *574 a 4% fee during the period December 5, 1974, to July 1, 1975, had retained funds which should have been distributed to the plaintiff. Our decision remanding that cause directed the circuit court to fashion injunctive relief designed to halt the withholding of any collection fee until the amount overwithheld had been compensated for. On remand, the plaintiff city of Springfield filed an amended complaint that, on behalf of cities, sought to recover interest on the funds overwithheld in addition to the return of the principal amount. The complaint in County of Kane v. Zagel (filed January 31, 1979), the case consolidated with City of Springfield v. Allphin, sought similar relief on behalf of counties. The legislature appropriated funds for the payment of the amounts overwithheld and those payments are not at issue here. (1979 Ill. Laws 205, 211.) In both cases, the circuit court of Sangamon County awarded interest to the plaintiffs on the amounts overwithheld.
In discussing the relief to be granted on remand, we stated in City of Springfield v. Allphin that "[t]he net effect of such relief should be to reduce the amount of such taxes withheld by the State until the earlier overwithholding is compensated for." (City of Springfield v. Allphin (1979), 74 Ill. 2d 117, 131.) This language appears as the last sentence in the paragraph of the opinion stating the court's holding. If any ambiguity or suggestion that interest was recoverable existed earlier in the opinion, this sentence laid it to rest. Precise and unambiguous directions in a mandate must be obeyed. (House of Vision, Inc. v. Hiyane (1969), 42 Ill. 2d 45, 48; Thomas v. Durchslag (1951), 410 Ill. 363, 365.) Here, the circuit court, on remand, was authorized to compensate the plaintiff for the amount "overwithheld" and nothing more. In commenting on the reasons for this rule, the court stated in Stuart v. Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 22, that it would be *575 impossible to negate every conceivable issue in an opinion and that a decision which failed to exclude a particular result did not include it by implication. (Stuart v. Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 22, 27-28.) In our prior City of Springfield v. Allphin decision, the fact that we failed to exclude an award of interest did not mean, and cannot be construed to mean, that we intended to include it.
The plaintiffs argue that not only was interest not precluded by our previous opinion, but that the language of our opinion specifically authorized the award of interest. The language relied upon is: "[F]inally, because we hold that the remedy requested by plaintiffs was an appropriate one, we need not reach the merits of the alternative remedy suggested by the appellate court." (Emphasis added.) (74 Ill. 2d 117, 131.) Plaintiffs contend that the language italicized authorized the award of interest upon remand since they had, in the original declaratory judgment action, sought not only a refund of the amounts overwithheld, but also interest. Thus, plaintiffs argue, the award of interest was "the remedy requested by plaintiffs," which this court, in its opinion, stated was an appropriate one. The language clearly does not refer to the allowance of interest. Earlier in the opinion it was stated:
"In counts II through IV plaintiffs seek reimbursement from funds currently being collected by the State." (74 Ill. 2d 117, 122.)
The opinion noted that the pleadings had not precisely described the funds to be paid into the protest fund. The opinion then went on to discuss the holding of the appellate court which had remanded the cause to permit plaintiffs to amend their pleadings to pray for an alternative remedy. (74 Ill. 2d 117, 122-23.) The language now relied upon by plaintiffs was not referring to the allowance of interest as being an appropriate remedy. Instead, *576 it referred to the suggestion that reimbursement be made to plaintiffs from funds currently being collected. Therefore this court would not need to consider the alternatives suggested by the appellate court. The holding of this court was that, on remand, plaintiffs should amend the complaint to define the funds (tax revenue) from which they may obtain reimbursement, and that the net effect of such relief should be to reduce the amount of the taxes withheld from said funds by the State until the earlier overwithholding is compensated for. In fact, the last sentence of the paragraph containing the language relied upon by plaintiffs contains the clear direction to the trial court, on remand, heretofore discussed. Under the clear language of the opinion, the trial court, upon remand, was not authorized to order that the amount withheld by the State be reduced until the amount overwithheld, plus interest, is fully compensated for.
County of Kane v. Zagel was consolidated with City of Springfield v. Allphin in the appellate court after the latter case had been retried on remand. The County of Kane case was not part of the previous proceedings in this matter, and the mandate of this court in the previous case did not involve the County of Kane. We will therefore consider the other issues raised as to interest in such proceedings.
It is well settled that interest is not recoverable absent a statute or agreement providing for it. (Lakefront Realty Corp. v. Lorenz (1960), 19 Ill. 2d 415, 423; People ex rel. Barrett v. Farmers State Bank (1938), 371 Ill. 222, 224; Blakeslee's Storage Warehouses, Inc. v. City of Chicago (1938), 369 Ill. 480, 483.) Plaintiffs contend that sections 2 and 3 of the Interest Act give them the right to recover prejudgment and post-judgment interest in this case. Section 2 provides:
"Creditors shall be allowed to receive at the rate of five (5) per centum per annum for all moneys after they *577 become due on any bond, bill, promissory note, or other instrument of writing; on money lent or advanced for the use of another; on money due on the settlement of account from the day of liquidating accounts between the parties and ascertaining the balance; on money received to the use of another and retained without the owner's knowledge; and on money withheld by an unreasonable and vexatious delay of payment." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 74, par. 2.)
Section 3 states:
"Judgments recovered before any court shall draw interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of the same until satisfied or 6% per annum when the judgment debtor is a unit of local government, as defined in Section 1 of Article VII of the Constitution, or a school district or community college district. When judgment is entered upon any award, report or verdict, interest shall be computed at the rate aforesaid, from the time when made or rendered to the time of rendering judgment upon the same, and made a part of the judgment. However, the judgment debtor may by tender of payment of judgment, costs and interest accrued to date of tender, stop the further accrual of interest on such judgment notwithstanding the prosecution of appeal, or other steps to reverse, vacate or modify the judgment." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 74, par. 3.)
Assuming, arguendo, that the plaintiffs' claims come within these statutes, it must further be determined whether the legislature intended that the State be liable under them.
Interest statutes, like statutes imposing costs, are in derogation of the common law and must be strictly construed. Nothing is to be read into them by intendment or implication. (Summers v. Summers (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 338, 342.) It has been held that interest is a creature of statute and cannot be recovered except where a statute authorizes it. (Fowler v. Harts (1894), 149 Ill. 592, 597.) An exception has been recognized to this rule where a city has wrongfully exacted money and holds it without just right or claim. (City of Chicago v. Northernwestern Mutual *578 Life Insurance Co. (1905), 218 Ill. 40, 44.) In City of Chicago, however, it was recognized that the city was merely exercising its powers as a corporate municipality and not the power of sovereignty. That exception has no application here because general legislative enactments do not impair the rights of the sovereign unless an intent to make the State liable is expressed in the statute. (Department of Revenue v. Appellate Court (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 392, 396.) The general enactments quoted above do not suggest that they were aimed at imposing liability for interest on the State. In Department of Revenue v. Appellate Court this court considered whether costs could be assessed against the State under section 22 of "An Act to revise the law in relation to costs" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 33, par. 22). In discussing whether the statute was sufficient to subject the State to liability for costs, the court said:
"Statutes which in general terms authorize imposing costs in various actions or proceedings but do not specifically refer to the State are not sufficient authority to hold the State liable for costs. The State's consent to the imposition of costs against it must appear in affirmative statutory language." (Department of Revenue v. Appellate Court (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 392, 396.)
Our discussion and ruling in Department of Revenue v. Appellate Court concerning the imposition of costs against the State applies with equal force to the general interest statutes involved in the case at bar. This reasoning is buttressed by the fact that when the legislature intends to impose liability on the State for interest it affirmatively declares that the burden will fall on the sovereign. (E.g., Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 127, par. 132.403.) The failure of the legislature to specifically subject the State to liability under these general interest statutes prevents their use as authority for assessing interest against the *579 State in these cases.
We turn next to the consideration of whether a court exercising its equitable powers could award interest in this case. The rule has been long established that equity may award interest even though not within the precise terms of the statute. In chancery proceedings, the allowance of interest lies within the sound discretion of the judge and is allowed where warranted by equitable considerations and disallowed if such an award would not comport with justice and equity. (Finley v. Finley (1980), 81 Ill. 2d 317, 332; Galler v. Galler (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 464, 474; Duncan v. Dazey (1925), 318 Ill. 500, 527; Golden v. Cervenka (1917), 278 Ill. 409, 433; Keady v. White (1897), 168 Ill. 76, 83.) The fact that these proceedings were in equity does not authorize the circuit court to award interest against the State in the absence of statutory authority, when doing so has the net effect of entering a money judgment against the State. In seeking to recover interest from the State, plaintiffs are seeking to recover a sum of money from the sovereign over and above that which, under the statute, rightfully belonged to them and which the defendant, as an officer of the State, had wrongfully withheld.
In our original review of City of Springfield v. Allphin, we considered at length the question of sovereign immunity. We noted therein the statutory duties of the Director of Revenue and found that the relief requested against the Director for the wrongful withholding of funds did not make the case a suit against the State. The fact that the Director had deposited the disputed funds into the State's general revenue fund does not prohibit the court from fashioning an appropriate form of relief. In actions such as these where a public official is restrained from doing acts not authorized by statute, the suit is not necessarily against the State, but is against the individual in his official capacity. (See Bio-Medical Laboratories, Inc. *580 v. Trainor (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 540, 548; Owens v. Green (1948), 400 Ill. 380, 409; People ex rel. Freeman v. Department of Public Welfare (1938), 368 Ill. 505, 507.) In this case the defendant, Robert Allphin, the Director of Revenue, was required to collect the municipal retailers' occupation tax and the municipal service occupation tax on plaintiffs' behalf and pay those funds over to the State Treasurer. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, pars. 8-11-1, 8-11-5.) He was not authorized to invest or otherwise deal with the funds in any way other than that described. The collection of the appropriate amount of tax and the disbursement of those funds were the only duties of the office that had any effect on the plaintiffs, relative to this suit. Having determined that the defendant withheld an inappropriate amount of tax, in violation of the law, the court fashioned a remedy to correct that violation by allowing the defendant to be restrained from withholding future taxes until the amount overwithheld had been compensated for. The defendant would thus be compelled to discharge his duty according to law.
It is quite another question, however, for a court of equity to also withhold from future collections, not an amount rightfully belonging to plaintiffs which had been wrongfully paid into the State Treasury, but an amount over and above that sum to be paid to plaintiffs as interest. The claimed interest is a separate and distinct claim against the State of Illinois, and the order of the trial court ordering interest is, in effect, a judgment against the State of Illinois. The circuit court had no authority to enter a judgment or to fashion an equitable remedy for the collection of interest in this case. (See Campbell v. Department of Public Aid (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 1, 5.) By compelling the defendant to do acts in his official capacity which are not provided for by statute and to go beyond mere reparation for past "illegal" conduct, this court would be taking action against the State in contravention of sovereign *581 immunity. Hudgens v. Dean (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 353.
There being no method in law or equity by which interest can be awarded to the plaintiffs, the orders of the circuit court of Sangamon County awarding interest to the plaintiffs in these consolidated cases are hereby reversed.
Orders reversed.

=== CASE 9737755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:54.625203+00 ===

HERNDON, J.
Appellant was found guilty of first degree robbery and assault with a deadly weapon. He was sentenced to state prison on both counts, the sentences to run consecutively.  The sole issue presented on this appeal is whether or not these consecutive sentences constitute double punishment in violation of the provision of section 654 of the Penal Code that “An act or omission which is made punishable in different ways by different provisions of this code may be punished under either of such provisions, but in no ease can it be punished under more than one; . . . ”
We have concluded that the controlling precedents vindicate the judgment of the trial court and its implied finding that appellant’s course of criminal conduct was divisible.
On the morning of July 7, 1964, appellant entered a hardware store armed with a .410 gauge shotgun. He ordered two customers to lie face down on the floor. He then commanded the owner of the store to put the money from the cash register and from his wallet into a paper sack. The essential features of appellant’s course of criminal conduct are graphically portrayed by the following testimony of the store owner:
“Q. What did you do then? A. I didn’t do anything until he told me to get a paper sack and give him the money out of the cash register. Q. Did you do that? A. I did. Q. That was because of the gun? A. Yes. Q. Were you in fear of the gun? A. Yes. Q. Did you put all the money into the bag? A. I did. Q. Currency and coin? A. I did. Q. Was there anything said about the coin ? A. I first took the bills, and then he said give me the coins too. Q. How much money was in there? A. Approximately $75. Q. What happened after you got all the money in the bag ? A. Then he asked me to give him the money out of my wallet, which I took my money out and I put the money in the bag. Q. Then what happened ? A. Then he asked me where the floor safe was, and I told him I didn’t have any. *660Q. How far away from you was he during this episode about getting the money? A. Approximately four feet. Q. Pacing you? A. Yes. Q. Were you able to see his eyes through the sunglasses? A. I don’t remember. I was staring at him all the time I was giving him the money. Q. Then what happened after you told him you didn’t have a floor safe? A. I stepped back to the end of the cash register where there is a key machine. The next thing I knew the gun went off. Q. What happened to the bag of money ? A. I handed the bag of money to him on the counter first. Q. That was before you stepped back? A. That is right. Q. Did he take it? A. Yes. Q. Then you heard the gun go off after you stepped back? A. That is right. ’ ’
The owner was struck in the right arm by this gunshot and was hospitalized with a serious and crippling injury. The determinative question, as we have indicated, is whether the record provides adequate justification for the trial court’s finding that appellant’s course of criminal conduct was a divisible transaction in that the second of the two crimes which he committed involved a subsequent, separate and differently motivated act.
Our Supreme Court’s most recent statement of the law on this subject is to be found in People v. Ford, 65 Cal.2d 41 [52 Cal.Rptr. 228, 416 P.2d 132], In that ease the appellant had been convicted of murder and six other felonies including a robbery and a kidnaping in both of which the victim was one John Roope. The applicability of the law therein declared will appear from the following quotation from the decision (pp. 47-49) :
“Defendant asserts that the sentences constitute double punishment in violation of Penal Code section 654. He argues that he cannot be punished for both the kidnaping and robbery of Roope because they were part of a continuous and nondivisible transaction. . . .
“Whether defendant’s course of criminal conduct in robbing and kidnaping Roope is divisible and therefore gives rise to more than one act within the meaning of section 654 depends upon his intent and the determination whether he committed both offenses incident to one objective. (Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11, 19 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839]; People v. Jaramillo, 208 Cal.App.2d 620, 628 [25 Cal.Rptr. 403].)
“The ease of In re Chapman, 43 Cal.2d 385 [273 P.2d 817], presents a factual situation approximating the facts in the instant case with respect to the question of divisible acts. In *661Chapman the defendant committed a robbery while armed with a deadly weapon with which he menaced the victim and obtained from him a sum of money through thus placing him in fear; after the victim had produced the money, he attempted to escape. Defendant’s accomplice tackled him and the defendant then assaulted him with the weapon. It was held that the assault was not a means of perpetrating the robbery but a separate act that followed after the robbery was completed, and that therefore the defendant was guilty of two punishable acts.[1] Similarly, in the case now before us the kidnaping was not a means of perpetrating the robbery and was also preceded in time by the robbery. On this theory the trial court did not violate the proscription of section 654 against multiple punishment of a single act because the robbery and kidnaping convictions were predicated upon separate acts.
“The instant ease is conspicuously different in one crucial respect from the cases in which appellants have successfully raised the issue of double punishment based upon multiple convictions involving robbery and kidnaping. [Citations.] In those cases, unlike the present ease, the defendant was charged with both kidnaping for the purpose of robbery (Pen. Code, § 209) and robbery, and in each ease the kidnaping preceded and was the means of accomplishing the robbery. (See People v. Brown, 29 Cal.2d 555, 558 [176 P.2d 929].) The offense of robbery, of course, is necessarily included within the offense of kidnaping for the purpose of robbery where the kidnaper achieves his purpose. In the present case, as we have seen, the robbery which occurred at Roope’s house was completed before defendant commenced the acts relied upon as establishing the kidnaping; and neither robbery nor simple kidnaping (Pen. Code, § 207), the crimes with which defendant was charged and convicted, is an offense necessarily included within the other. ’ ’
The factual situation in People v. Houghton, 212 Cal.App.2d 864 [28 Cal.Rptr. 351] (hearing denied), is very similar to that presented in the case at bench. In Houghton, the defendant was found guilty of the crimes of robbery and assault with *662intent to commit murder. It appeared that after money had been taken from a service station attendant, he was ordered to face the wall of the restroom. The defendant Houghton then shot the attendant in the back.
In rejecting the claim of double punishment, the appellate court declared (p. 873) : “We are not convinced here, however, that the acts were indivisible. The robbery had been accomplished prior to the assault, the facts showing there was a threat of force (by use of a gun) sufficient to put the victim in fear; he was put in fear and the robbery was thereby accomplished. The circumstances were such that the shooting could have been an afterthought.” (Italics added.)
Likewise in the case at bench, appellant had accomplished the objective of his robbery when, after forcing the three men into the store at gun point, he had demanded and received all the money from the cash register and from the store owner’s wallet. Thereafter he asked about the location of the floor safe. After the store owner informed him that there was no floor safe, appellant blasted his victim at point-blank range with a .410 gauge shotgun. Certainly it is reasonable to infer that this subsequent act constituting the second needless crime was an impulsive afterthought motivated by a malicious or vengeful desire to injure, maim or kill.
As stated in Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11, at page 20 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839]: “In In re Chapman, 43 Cal.2d 385, 387 [273 P.2d 817], however, we held that when the assault is not a means of perpetrating the robbery but is an act that follows after the robbery is completed the defendant is guilty of two punishable acts.” In our opinion the decisions in Chapman, in People v. Houghton, supra, 212 Cal.App.2d 864, and in People v. Blanks, 229 Cal.App.2d 310 [40 Cal.Rptr. 223], are precedents which argue strongly in favor of affirmance herein.
By its discussion of In re Chapman, the decision in Neal reaffirms the previously established rule that if the question of the divisibility of the transaction and the question whether the several offenses were incident to more than one objective are essentially factual, then the findings of the trier of the facts will not be disturbed. It was pointed out that Neal, unlike Chapman, was a case in which the nature of the uneontradicted evidence was such that there could be no supportable finding of divisibility.
As was recently stated in People v. Ridley, 63 Cal.2d 671, 678 [47 Cal.Rptr. 796, 408 P.2d 124] : “ [T]he purpose of the protection against multiple punishment is to insure that the *663defendant’s punishment will be commensurate with his criminal liability. ...” And as we pointed out in People v. Reed, 241 Cal.App.2d 102, 107 [50 Cal.Rptr. 300] :
11 [R] ecent decisions follow a rationale embracing the time-honored doctrine that the law should seek ‘to make the punishment fit the crime. ’ Consistent with that rationale, they indicate that a defendant who commits two crimes in pursuit of two different objectives compounds his culpability and deserves more severe punishment. ’ ’
This approach to the problem is realistic, consistent with the dictates of both justice and common sense. An armed robber who needlessly and viciously maims and endangers the life of his victim, even after he has consummated the purpose of his original crime, certainly deserves more severe punishment than one who limits his criminal activity to the unlawful taking of the property of another.
In the circumstances of the present case, it would be quite inappropriate for this court to hold as a matter of law, and contrary to the implied findings of the trial court, that appellant’s course of criminal conduct was an indivisible transaction. Application of the prescribed test of motivation necessarily involves a process of fact finding which properly lies within the province of the trial court.
The judgment is affirmed.
Fleming, J., concurred.
Footnote 4 to the above quoted text reads as follows: "Compare People v. Logan, 41 Cal.2d 279 [260 P.2d 20], and People v. Allen, 220 Cal.App.2d 796 [34 Cal.Rptr. 106], in which, for the purpose of committing robberies, assaults were committed first, and it was held that under section 654 the defendants could not be punished for both the assault and the robbery. ’'

=== CASE 9737756 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:54.629611+00 ===

ROTH, P. J., Dissenting.
The majority in Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11, at p. 19 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839], holds: “Few if any crimes, however, are the result of a single physical act. ‘ Section 654 has been applied not only where there was but one ‘ ‘ act ’ ’ in the ordinary sense . . . but also where a course of conduct violated more than one statute and the problem was whether it comprised a divisible transaction which could be punished under more than one statute within the meaning of section 654.’ (People v. Brown, supra, 591.)”
The cases which follow Neal including People v. Ford, 65 Cal.2d 41 [52 Cal.Rptr. 228, 416 P.2d 132], cited by the majority, reiterate that “. . . the meaning of section 654 depends upon his [defendant’s] intent and the determination whether he committed both offenses incident to one objective.” (People v. Ford, supra, p. 48.)
It appears, therefore, that when a course of criminal *664conduct gives rise to multiple crimes, the only question of fact to be determined by the trial court is whether the “. . . intent and the determination ...” of a defendant who commits more than one offense in the perpetration of a crime, such as robbery, was embarked upon a course of criminal conduct “. . . incident to one objective. ...”
In every comparable case in which a trial court by its judgment imposes sentence for more than one crime, it has impliedly found that the criminal has consummated his “one objective” and committed an additional crime or crimes and that, therefore, section 654 of the Penal Code is not applicable.
All of the cases, including Neal, wherein a defendant was convicted and punished for more than one crime in the trial court, dealt with situations which necessarily involved an implied finding by the trial court that the crimes were divisible from the one objective. In Neal, however, the court nevertheless ignores such implied finding and holds that punishment must be confined to the crime which was the criminal’s “one objective.” It seems, therefore, that in spite of a trial court’s finding that the application of section 654 becomes a question of law, specifically, I presume, the question is whether the implied finding of divisibility is supported by the evidence.
The cases cited by the majority, with the possible exception of B.ought on, were clearly divisible on the facts. On the naked facts the distinction between Houghton and the case at bench is, I concede, sensitive, but when sound inferences are added to the evidence in Houghton, the distinction, I think is solid. In Houghton, the victim was told to turn his back to “move up a little higher ...” and reassured he would not be harmed. He was then shot. This additional evidence tends to prove a subjective calculated intent to commit a separate crime on the assumption that the robbery having been consummated, the criminal decided to do away with the only witness to his crime.
The facts at bench show one continuous sequence of action. They affirmatively show the robbery had not been completed. Appellant had made a demand for the whereabouts of the floor safe, showing that his “one objective” was to rob the hardware store by obtaining money from the cash register, the owner’s wallet, the floor safe and from any other source. His single objective was to obtain all the money available. Further, appellant had not extricated himself from the robbery. (Peo*665ple v. Kendrick, 56 Cal.2d 71, 90 [14 Cal.Rptr. 13, 363 P.2d 13]; People v. Beghtel, 164 Cal.App.2d 294, 297 [330 P.2d 444].1
Any robbery is an assault, and an armed robbery is always an assault with a deadly weapon irrespective of whether a weapon is discharged accidentally or because the victim attempted to interfere with the progress of the criminal act or with the “get away” of the robber. Since the victim in this case did pursue the robber even though shot in the arm, either of the latter two inferences are anything but illusory. In short, in the case at bench, there is no extra evidence other than the discharge of a gun to support a finding of divisibility.
I t.binlr, too, that there is no societal advantage in imposing an additional felony sentence for a separate felony which is predicated on an implied finding, illusory and vague, of a separate, calculated and objective criminal intent to commit an assault divisible from the robbery. If the victim in the ease at bench were a highly sensitive person, robbed at gunpoint, and the weapon had not been discharged or discharged in the air, it is not improbable that the mental, physical and emotional trauma suffered by the victim as a result of the experience, would cause actual physical, emotional and general psychiatric damage, infinitely more severe in its consequences than the gunshot wound inflicted upon the victim in the case at bench. In the assumed situation there could be no question but that there was a single crime committed, to wit: robbery, and there would be more reason for the application of the principle that the punishment should fit the crime, than in the case at bench.
I have difficulty in the absence of evidence other than the discharge of a gun in the perpetration of an armed robbery, in reconciling the mandate of section 654, as it has been specifically applied by our Supreme Court, with the vague and illusory distinctions between the implied finding that criminal intent is inherent in respect of the perpetration of any and every crime and the finding here separately made by the trial court, approved by the majority, of a subjective, calculated *666intent within appellant to commit an assault with a deadly weapon, as no part of his one objective, to commit a robbery.
I would vacate the judgment as to count one.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied November 2, 1966.
The court says in Beghtel, at p. 297: “As stated in People v. Raucho, 8 Cal.App.2d 655, 664 [47 P.2d 1108], ‘. . . the perpetration of a robbery is not completed the moment the stolen property is in the possession of the robbers. Bobbery, a combination of the crime of assault with that of larceny, includes, as does larceny, the element of asportation, and this taking away is a transaction which continues as the perpetrators depart from the place where the property was seized. ’ ’ ’

=== CASE 9737757 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:54.890001+00 ===

Shepherd, P.J.
Defendants appeal from a judgment of the circuit court entered in favor of plaintiff following a jury trial in the amount of $5,000 on a premises liability claim. The jury had awarded $10,000 in damages but reduced it after it found plaintiff fifty percent negligent. We affirm.
Plaintiff was injured when he fell from a seawall maintained by defendants. Plaintiff apparently tripped on a metal spike protruding from the seawall. Plaintiff had used the seawall for fishing over a period of time with the knowledge and approval of defendants.
The danger in this case, the exposed metal spike, was open and obvious. This was established by plaintiff’s admission that he was aware of the spike’s existence. He had, in fact, previously tried without success to remove it.
We believe that this case is controlled by Riddle v McLouth Steel Products Corp, 182 Mich App 259; 451 NW2d 590 (1990). In Riddle this Court reasoned that, if the encounter with a known or obvious danger has the effect of excusing the landowner’s duty, we would be back to the doctrine of *711contributory negligence as an absolute bar to recovery. We agree with Riddle.
Affirmed.
McDonald, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737758 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:54.894164+00 ===

Sawyer, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent.
Defendants claim that the trial court erred in not granting a directed verdict in favor of defendants on the basis that no duty was owed plaintiff or that any duty owed was complied with. I agree. There is no duty owed an invitee concerning open and obvious dangers, as the Supreme Court explained in Williams v Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc, 429 Mich 495, 500; 418 NW2d 381 (1988):
The duty a possessor of land owes his invitees is not absolute, however. It does not extend to conditions from which an unreasonable risk cannot be anticipated or to dangers so obvious and apparent that an invitee may be expected to discover them himself. [Emphasis added.]
The fact that the danger in this case, an exposed metal spike on a pier, was open and obvious was established by plaintiff’s admission that he was aware of the spike’s existence. He had, in fact, previously tried, without success, to remove the spike.
A similar result is reached if plaintiff was a licensee rather than an invitee. The duty owed to a licensee was stated in Preston v Sleziak, 383 Mich 442, 453; 175 NW2d 759 (1970):
The duty which occupiers of land owe their licensees is best expressed by 2 Restatement of Torts (2d), § 342, p 210:
"A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to licensees by a condition on the land if, but only if,
*712"(a) the possessor knows or has reason to know of the condition and should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such licensees, and should expect that they will not discover or realize the danger, and
"(b) he fails to exercise reasonable care to make the condition safe, or to warn the licensees of the condition and the risk involved, and
"(c) the licensees do not know or have reason to know of the condition and the risk involved.” [Emphasis added.]
Thus, again, defendants owed no duty to plaintiff since he was aware of the danger.
I recognize that this Court recently held that the doctrine of no duty to warn invitees of open and obvious dangers did not survive the adoption of comparative negligence. See Riddle v McLouth Steel Products Corp, 182 Mich App 259; 451 NW2d 590 (1990). However, unlike my colleagues in the majority, I conclude that Riddle was incorrectly decided.
First, and foremost, the Supreme Court reiterated the open and obvious dangers doctrine as recently as 1988 in Williams, supra, some nine years after adopting comparative negligence in Placek v Sterling Heights, 405 Mich 638; 275 NW2d 511 (1979).1 Second, it is for the Supreme Court, not this Court, to overrule Supreme Court precedent. See People v Mitchell, 428 Mich 364, 369-370; 408 NW2d 798 (1987). Third, considerations of stare decisis aside, comparative negligence does not itself directly involve issues of duty or breach of duty. Rather, it deals with the proper and just apportionment of fault, and responsibility, where both the plaintiff and the defendant are *713negligent. Comparative negligence does not, however, create negligence where none existed before that doctrine was adopted. That is, the adoption of comparative negligence did not create duties where none existed before.
Rather, the more fundamental question is what duty is owed by a possessor of land to his invitees and licensees. Our Supreme Court has long held that no further duty is owed by a possessor of land to an invitee or licensee once the invitee or licensee is aware of the alleged dangerous condition. The Supreme Court’s having defined the duty, it is for the Supreme Court, and not this Court, to redefine that duty, if a redefinition is even in order.2 For the same reasons, I disagree with a similar conclusion by this Court in Forche v Gieseler, 174 Mich App 588; 436 NW2d 437 (1989), which involved a licensee.
Accordingly, I would hold that the trial court erred in denying defendants’ motion for directed verdict and would remand the matter to the trial court with instructions to enter a judgment of no cause of action in favor of defendants._
Similarly, the Standard Jury Instructions continue to instruct juries that a possessor of land’s duty is discharged by warning his invitee or licensee of a dangerous condition. See SJI2d 19.03 and SJI2d 19.06.
Unlike my colleagues in Riddle, supra, and Forche v Gieseler, 174 Mich App 588; 436 NW2d 437 (1989), I am not inclined to redefine the land possessor’s duty even if it were our prerogative to do so. At some point an individual must assume responsibility for his own conduct. So long as an invitee or licensee is aware of a dangerous condition, be it by a warning from the possessor of land or by his own observation, he can act to avoid injury and should be charged with the sole responsibility of acting to avoid an injury due to the risk of which he is now aware.

=== CASE 2211894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.154542+00 ===

244 Cal. App. 2d 210 (1966)
CHARLES P. SHELLY, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
JAMES H. HANSEN, Defendant and Appellant; ELMER O. DOCKEN, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 29884.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 15, 1966.
Charles L. Lippitt for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Schell & Delamer and Fred B. Belanger for Defendant and Appellant.
Ives, Kirwan & Dibble and John A. Francis for Defendant and Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
In this legal malpractice action against two attorneys who had represented him successively, plaintiff was given a money judgment against defendant Hansen only. Plaintiff has appealed contending not only that the award was inadequate but that he was also entitled to a judgment against defendant Docken. Defendant Hansen has also appealed; although no challenge is made to the amount of the award, he renews the claim below that the action against him is barred by the statute of limitations (Code Civ. Proc.,  339, subd. 1). The appeals have been consolidated for disposition pursuant to stipulation.
We dispose first of the point that the action is barred as to both defendants by virtue of section 339, subdivision 1, supra, which was pleaded by way of affirmative defense in each answer. Plaintiff is a painting contractor. The original complaint, captioned "Malpractice," was filed on May 3, 1962; named therein as defendants were Docken and a Doe I. It alleges the employment of "defendants" on December 15, 1957, to prosecute an action in quantum meruit and breach of *212 contract against Southland Development Company and Sylmar Terrace for their failure to pay the balance due thereunder and other breaches of the contract, as well as defendants' employment to file and foreclose mechanics' liens to protect plaintiff's rights under pertinent lien laws; thereafter mechanics' liens were filed by the defendant attorneys "between February 18, 1958, and March 17, 1958." Subsequently, on May 19, 1958, said attorneys commenced suit to foreclose the subject liens but "negligently failed to file a lis pendens" on said May 18, 1958, as required by section 1198.1, Code of Civil Procedure as it then existed.  [fn. 1] Because of such failure, the defendant companies moved for, and were granted, summary judgment, and the action was dismissed "without prejudice of either party [sic] to file action for breach of contract." Thereafter, according to the complaint, defendants fraudulently concealed from plaintiff the fact of such dismissal (including his still remaining right to sue for breach of contract), and "plaintiff did not know and could not have known, of said dismissal at any time prior to May 5, 1961." There then follow allegations that if plaintiff's actions had been timely filed "and had not said lien foreclosure action been negligently conducted," recovery would have been had against the companies in sums there stated. By way of a second cause of action, it is then alleged that plaintiff employed "defendant Doe I" to prosecute the above claim for breach of contract and in quantum meruit; thereafter this defendant assertedly did not file such action at any time prior to April 1, 1962, "and negligently permitted plaintiff's cause of action to become barred by the statute of limitations of the State of California in such cases made and provided." If said action had been timely filed, the complaint finally alleges, there would have been a recovery against the companies in stated sums.
On October 25, 1963, an amended complaint was filed.  [fn. 2] Again captioned "Malpractice," it varies in no substantial aspect from its predecessor except that defendant Hansen is substituted in the title for the Doe I defendant, and the charging allegations of the second count make reference to said defendant by name instead of fictitiously. As mentioned *213 above, the bar of section 339, subdivision 1, Code of Civil Procedure was raised by each defendant to the amended pleading.
[1] The briefs of all parties discuss our decision in Alter v. Michael (Cal.App.) 48 Cal. Rptr. 14, which was filed subsequent to the trial of the present proceeding. There it was held that the one-year statute (Code Civ. Proc.,  340, subd. 3) applied not only to medical, but also to legal malpractice actions. Said decision was vacated by the Supreme Court which, on April 25, 1966, determined that the two-year statute (Code Civ. Proc.,  339, subd. 1) governs claims of the type here in suit (Alter v. Michael, 64 Cal. 2d 480 [50 Cal. Rptr. 553, 413 P.2d 153].) It is also there held, by an approving citation of Bustamante v. Haet, 222 Cal. App. 2d 413, 414-415 [35 Cal. Rptr. 176], that the two-year period runs from the date of the negligent act as distinguished from section 340, subdivision 3, which has been construed to run either from the date of discovery of the injury by the patient or from the time the use of reasonable diligence should have discovered it. (Stafford v. Shultz, 42 Cal. 2d 767, 776 [270 P.2d 1].)
In the light of the above rules, and insofar as it concerns the failure of defendant Docken to file the necessary lis pendens in the lien foreclosure action, plaintiff's action is clearly barred since it is expressly alleged in both complaints that the negligent act occurred on May 19, 1958, almost four years before the commencement of this proceeding (May 3, 1962). According to each complaint, however, Docken was also employed to file actions for breach of contract and in quantum meruit. Plaintiff argues that Docken had until December 26, 1959 (an interval of two years) to sue under the common count and two more years from that date to commence an action for breach of the written contract, or until December 26, 1961; neither of such actions, it is alleged, was commenced. Under section 339, subdivision 1, supra, any malpractice suit based on the failure to file the quantum meruit action was manifestly barred after December 26, 1961. With respect to Docken's failure to file a breach of contract suit, however, plaintiff had until December 26, 1963, to assert his claims therefor, and plaintiff points out that the present proceeding was instituted on May 3, 1962, well within the two-year limitation. But the trial court found that the attorney-client relationship with Docken terminated on May 1, 1962, at which time Docken turned the file over to defendant Hansen; and that on said date there still existed an enforceable right of action by plaintiff against the proposed *214 defendant companies. These findings are not challenged by plaintiff; indeed, as shown above, plaintiff concedes that the statute would not have run on the breach of contract action until December of 1961, some seven months after Hansen was brought into the case. [2] To warrant recovery for this type of negligence plaintiff must first plead and prove that at the critical times in question there existed the relationship of attorney and client with its accompanying responsibilities. (McGregor v. Wright, 117 Cal. App. 186, 193 [3 P.2d 624]; see also Modica v. Crist, 129 Cal. App. 2d 144, 145-146 [276 P.2d 614].) During the last seven months of the statutory period, the responsibility for filing the breach of contract action lay with Hansen and not Docken; furthermore, even if the latter had wished to do so, the proceeding could not have been instituted by him due to the termination of his employment as above stated. Stated otherwise, if Docken then had no duty to perform, how can it be properly urged that such duty was negligently carried out? [3] Under the above circumstances, it may not be contended (as is done by plaintiff) that Docken's asserted negligence while acting as his counsel, was a, not the, proximate cause of the damages said to have been sustained. The "but for" rule determines cause in fact (Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (1960) p. 1484); and in Lally v. Kuster, 177 Cal. 783, 787 [171 P. 961], it is declared that in a suit for negligence by a client against an attorney it must be shown that "but for" the asserted negligence an actionable claim could have been successfully maintained. Here the subsequent employment of Hansen intervened to make the above rule inoperative.
[4] Finally, the assertion by plaintiff that his action is also one for fraud and deceit, governed by a three-year statute (Code Civ. Proc.,  338, subd. 4), is a red herring. The pleadings, the pretrial order and the evidence received all point to the fact that the proceeding was one in negligence for the tortious acts of the two defendants. It may not be otherwise regarded solely because of the allegation that Docken "fraudulently concealed" certain facts from his client; too, the court, while finding that Docken did not keep plaintiff informed, did not declare in such finding that the dereliction in question was fraudulently motivated. For the above reasons, therefore, the action was barred as to defendant Docken, and the judgment in his favor was proper.
The situation is otherwise as to defendant Hansen. He had until December of 1961 to file the breach of contract action *215 and, as the court found, during the period of his employment the statute ran on the claim. Hansen contends, however, that the date of the alleged "misadvice" was June of 1961 and the amended complaint was not filed until October 25, 1963, more than two years later. The first of the above statements is simply not factually correct; as already noted, the negligence in question consisted of defendant's continuing omission to take timely action, in direct disobedience of the plaintiff's instructions, against defendants possessed of sufficient solvency to pay the sums sought. Nor does the date of the filing of the amended complaint have any bearing on the outcome. [5] A wholly different case not having been pleaded by the amendment, for purposes of the statute of limitations, the time of filing the original complaint is still the date of the commencement of the action. (Jones v. Wilton, 10 Cal. 2d 493 [75 P.2d 593]; D. A. Parrish & Sons v. County Sanitation Dist., 174 Cal. App. 2d 406 [344 P.2d 883].) The bar of the statute does not apply to defendant Hansen.
Having found that a reversal of the judgment is not warranted as to Hansen, we now consider his contention, in the alternative, that the judgment be affirmed on the issue of damages assessed against him. Thus, he concedes that some damages should have been awarded, and he also apparently concedes the establishment of the additional requirement in actions of this type that careful management on his part would have resulted in recovery of a favorable judgment. (Campbell v. Magana, 184 Cal. App. 2d 751, 754 [8 Cal. Rptr. 32].) [6] The parties are in agreement on the measure of damages that would there have been applied, and is applicable here. Where one party, willing to perform, is prevented from doing so by the other, the primary measure of damages is the amount of his loss, consisting of his reasonable outlay of expenditure toward performance, plus the anticipated profits which he would have derived from such performance. (Buxbom v. Smith, 23 Cal. 2d 535, 541 [145 P.2d 305].) The trial court determined that plaintiff's lost profits amounted to $1,800, and that his expenditures (consisting of equipment left on the job) were in the sum of $500. Plaintiff, however, contends that his unreimbursed expenditures totalled $9,000, and that he suffered lost profits reasonably worth $3,831.50. Because plaintiff's claims involve the resolution of disputed factual questions, it follows that they are not sustainable at this stage of the proceedings.
The entire contract price for painting the 79-unit tract in *216 question was $38,315. The president of Sylmar Terrace, Mr. Lively, testified that plaintiff had been paid the sum of $18,993.34 up to December 26, 1957, and that he then notified plaintiff by letter that "you have forced us to engage other help to complete your contract." (Testimony relating to the background of this letter might have tended to support a determination that it was plaintiff, not Sylmar, who prevented performance--in which event other principles of law would govern.) [7] On the issue of expenditures, plaintiff points to items, billed and unbilled, as of December 26, 1957. He admits, however, the existence of defense testimony that certain work had to be done over because of faulty workmanship which would, plaintiff concedes, constitute setoffs against his total claim for expenditures; and he also admits that "where the amount is entirely uncertain or extremely difficult of ascertainment the sum to be awarded is a question for the jury in the exercise of a sound discretion." (Monroe v. Owens, 76 Cal. App. 2d 23, 30 [172 P.2d 110].) There was clearly no abuse of such discretion at bar.
On the question of lost profits, plaintiff testified that his net profit, if he had been able to complete the job, would "average around 9 percent." According to plaintiff, the court erroneously limited the above 9 percent to the approximate balance of $20,000 still due under the contract, or $1,800; instead, it is contended, he should have been awarded 9 percent of the entire contract price (which eventually totalled in excess of $39,000), or $3,831.50 to be exact. But this, as noted above, was disputed by Mr. Lively who stated that as of December 26, 1957, "everything was paid current to that date." The court presumably accepted this testimony as including plaintiff's profit although, once again, there is evidence to the contrary. In a written memorandum, part of the record on appeal, the court noted that "The question of the extent of the damages suffered by the plaintiff is in such a state of confusion that it is utterly impossible to pinpoint, with any degree of accuracy, the actual result of Hansen's failure to protect [plaintiff's] interest." Under the circumstances, the court made a reasonable, and sustainable approximation of the lost profits, as follows: The balance of the contract, after payment of $18,993.34, was $19,331.66; 9 percent of this latter sum would be approximately $1,239.00, and 10 percent approximately $1,932. The amount allowed ($1,800), being between 9 percent and 10 percent, was a satisfactory basis for estimating the probable earnings that would have been had, even though they *217 were incapable of exact proof. (Natural Soda Products Co. v. City of Los Angeles, 23 Cal. 2d 193, 199 [143 P.2d 12].)
The judgment is affirmed; plaintiff-appellant's attempted appeal from the denial of his motion for a new trial is dismissed. The costs on appeal of defendant-respondent Docken will be borne by plaintiff-appellant only.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. In 1959, Code Civ. Proc.,  1198.1, was amended and  1198.2, relating to lis pendens, was added.
[fn. 2]  2. Such pleading was filed after Hansen, served as Doe I, successfully demurred to the original complaint on the ground of noncompliance with section 474, Code of Civil Procedure, which requires that plaintiff must allege his ignorance of the fictitious defendant's true name.

=== CASE 9737759 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:00.872731+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
We granted leave in these consolidated cases to decide the constitutionality of 1987 PA 28, §354(17X20), MCL 418.354(17X20); MSA 17.237(354)(17)-(20). This statute prohibits the coordination of workers’ compensation benefits for employees who were injured before the eifective date of 1981 PA 203. It also requires the repayment plus interest of all benefits withheld as a result of coordinating benefits between 1982 and 1987 from disabled employees whose injury dates were before 1982. We hold that the amendments of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act contained in 1987 PA 28, § 354(17)-(20) are constitutional exercises of legislative power retroactively modifying benefit levels for a legitimate purpose furthered by ra*521tional means. We also hold that the statute does not abrogate any vested rights of the employers. The statute may validly be applied to all compensation liabilities within its terms except those which have been reduced to final judgment before its enactment.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The plaintiffs were injured before 1981. In 1981, the Legislature enacted 1981 PA 203 which included the coordination of benefits provision of § 354, MCL 418.354; MSA 17.237(354). This section allowed coordination of workers’ compensation benefits with employer-funded pension plan payments. This statute was part of a legislative reform package involving a series of related amendments of the workers’ compensation statute. The coordination provisions were an essential component of a compromise plan that restructured benefits payable to disabled workers. The resources saved as a result of this coordination were reallocated by the statute to increase benefit levels generally, from two-thirds of the average weekly wage to eighty percent of after-tax wages, effective for injuries occurring after January 1, 1982.
The plaintiffs were subjected to these coordination provisions even though the statute was silent regarding its application to claims resulting from injuries occurring before its 1982 effective date. On September 28, 1983, General Motors Corporation informed plaintiff Romein that he had been overpaid $75.03 per week from January 1, 1982, because of the corporation’s failure to coordinate benefits under 1981 PA 203, § 354, as of its effective date. Thus, the corporation began to deduct the amount of this "overpayment” of $3,913.57 from compensation benefits as they became due *522and payable. The corporation also began coordinating future benefit payments by deducting pension and social security benefits from the workers’ compensation payments due, resulting in a thirty-five percent reduction of benefits actually paid. This resulted in a reduction of $132 a week. His total benefits were reduced from $19,377.80 to $12,513.80 per year. Plaintiff Gonzalez experienced an even more dramatic reduction in his workers’ compensation benefits. The Ford Motor Company informed Gonzalez that it would begin coordination of his benefits in accordance with § 354 resulting in the withholding of his entire $176 weekly payment beginning March 31, 1982.
Between January 1, 1982, and October 7, 1985, the legality of coordination of benefits for injuries which occurred before the effective date of 1981 PA 203, § 354, was in doubt. The Legislature expressed its view that the initial, lower court decisions1 permitting application of § 354 coordination rights only to claims arising from injuries occurring after the effective date of § 354 were correct.2
The defendants’ efforts to coordinate plaintiffs’ benefits under § 354 received judicial acceptance in 1985 when this Court reversed the lower court in Chambers v General Motors Corp, 422 Mich 636; 375 NW2d 715 (1985). The Court applied principles of statutory interpretation to hold that § 354 permitted coordination of benefits regardless of the date of injury since the Legislature did not state an intent to apply the provision only to benefits *523paid to employees whose injuries occurred after its effective date.
Thereafter, the Legislature enacted 1987 PA 28 which clearly indicated that the coordination of benefits provision of 1981 PA 203 was not intended to reduce benefits for injuries which occurred before the effective date of the 1981 statute. This statute retroactively amended § 354 and prevented any coordination of benefits for claims arising from injuries which occurred before March 31, 1982.
The first provision of 1987 PA 28 states that it is the Legislature’s intent to prohibit the coordination of benefits for pre-March 31, 1982, injuries.3 Another provision of the act requires that any setoffs which have been made by employers between March 31, 1982, and May 14, 1987, be refunded to employees, with interest. Thus, any benefits that were reduced under the coordination provisions of § 354, are deemed by statute to have been "underpayments” of workers’ compensation benefits and must be refunded within sixty days with interest.4 In addition, if the employee had *524repaid money to the employer for benefits received that the employer alleged should have been coordinated, 1987 PA 28 requires the employer to reimburse the employee, with interest, within sixty days.5
The issue before the Court is whether the Legislature has violated the defendants’ constitutional rights under the Due Process or Contract Clauses of the state and federal constitutions by retroactively altering the level of benefits due and payable prior to the amendment. We must also decide whether this retroactive alteration of benefits violates the Separation of Powers and One Court of Justice Clauses of the Michigan Constitution.
i
The defendants contend that 1987 PA 28, § 354(17)-(20) violates the Due Process Clauses of the United States and Michigan Constitutions by retroactively imposing liability for additional workers’ compensation benefits for past compensable periods. They contend that they relied on the coordination provisions of § 354 during the period between its effective date of March 31, 1982, and *525the amendment date of May 14, 1987, and that this reliance gives them a vested right to have their liability for those periods determined by the law then in effect.
The defendants argue that 1987 PA 28 is "purely retroactive” and unconstitutionally impairs rights under executed contracts of employment.
The defendants urge that this statute is "purely retroactive” because it not only applies to injuries arising before the effective date of the act, but also modifies the employer’s liability for a preenactment compensable period. Thus, this statute is different from the one upheld in Chambers.
We hold that the challenged statute satisfies the rational relationship test and does not abrogate any vested rights of the employers. The statute, therefore, does not violate the Due Process Clauses.
A
A rational basis standard of review governs this Court’s scrutiny of the legitimacy of social and economic legislation.
"It is by now well established that legislative Acts adjusting the burdens and benefits of economic life come to the Court with a presumption of constitutionality, and that the burden is on one complaining of a due process violation to establish that the legislature has acted in an arbitrary and irrational way. See, e.g., Ferguson v Skrupa, 372 US 726 [83 S Ct 1028; 10 L Ed 2d 93] (1963); Williamson v Lee Optical Co, 348 US 483, 487-488 [75 S Ct 461; 99 L Ed 563] (1955).” [Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp v R A Gray & Co, 467 US 717, 729; 104 S Ct 2709; 81 L Ed 2d 601 (1984).]
The rational basis test has been applied to the *526retroactive portions as well as to prospective portions of statutes modifying workers’ compensation benefit levels. Pension Beneñt Guaranty Corp, supra.
To apply a stricter standard of review to a workers’ compensation statute simply because it operates retroactively would put the judiciary in the business of "allocating] the interlocking economic rights and duties of employers and employees upon workmen’s compensation principles” although this is a task within the province of the Legislature. Usery v Turner Elkhorn Mining Co, 428 US 1, 15; 96 S Ct 2882; 49 L Ed 2d 752 (1976), citing New York Central R Co v White, 243 US 188; 37 S Ct 247; 61 L Ed 667 (1917).
B
A workers’ compensation statute will not be deemed unconstitutional simply because it imposes "a new duty or liability based on past acts,” Usery, supra at 16. The Usery decision upheld the constitutionality of title IV of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 19696 against a Due Process Clause challenge by applying only minimal judicial scrutiny to its retroactive provisions. The statute retroactively imposed liability on employers for injuries which occurred years before its enactment. The law was retroactive in two respects. First, it altered the legal status of completed transactions by requiring the compensation of employees who left the industry before the effective date of the act. Second, it imposed liability on coal mine owners for injuries suffered before the date of the new statute.
The Court in Usery, supra at 16-17, cautioned that: "It does not follow, however, that what Con*527gress can legislate prospectively it can legislate retrospectively. The retrospective aspects of legislation, as well as the prospective aspects, must meet the test of due process, and the justifications for the latter may not suffice for the former.” The justification for retrospective legislation must take into account the possibilities that the parties acted in reliance on current law and that they may have altered their conduct to reduce liability if they had anticipated the imposition of later liability.7 The coal mine operators could not have altered their conduct to avoid retroactive liabilities arising from injuries occurring before 1950 because at that time there was no understanding of the causal relation between the exposure to coal dust and black lung disease. Thus, the injuries arising before the enactment of the statute could not have been foreseen or avoided.8
It is similarly unlikely that the defendants in this case would have altered their course of conduct and paid full benefits merely to avoid the potential liability from a later change in the law. This is especially true since they would have been unlikely to recoup these amounts from the employees if the coordination provisions were later upheld for pre-1982 injuries.9 The employers acted in their own best economic interests at the time.
As in Usery, where the employer was required *528to pay benefits to former employers, the form of retroactive application at work here imposes liability for past, completed acts since the payments have already been made. These payments created an expectation in the employers that the payment periods were completed transactions. The employers in Usery also argued that the statute was purely retroactive in that it required payment to miners who left employment in the industry before the effective date of the act, i.e., past, completed transactions.
Admittedly, the employers in this case held an expectation that the payments were completed transactions. We do not accept, however, their contention that if parties have patterned their past conduct in reliance on past law, they have a vested right to have the legality of that conduct determined under law then in effect. The rational relationship test applies to economic legislation whether it is retroactive or not. The retroactive aspects of legislation must meet the test of due process, "[b]ut that burden is met simply by showing that the retroactive application of the legislation is itself justified by a rational legislative purpose.” Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, supra at 730. The Court in Usery held that the retroactive portion of the statute was justified "as a rational measure to spread the costs of the employees’ disabilities to those who have profited from the fruits of their labor—the operators and the coal consumers.” Usery, supra at 18.
The retroactive portions of the statute challenged here are justified by a rational legislative purpose to protect the benefit levels of workers who did not receive the increases in the legislative reform packages of 1980 and 1981. Since they did not receive the increase, remedial measures were *529needed. These amendments served a rational legislative purpose to alleviate this hardship.
The United States Supreme Court has upheld retroactive liability even where the employers acted in reliance on existing law. In Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, supra at 729, the Court upheld the retroactive application of the Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act of 1980.10 The statute modified the terms of a governmentally provided program of insurance designed to insure that the termination of a pension plan would not result in insufficient funds to pay employees their anticipated benefits. Employers paid premiums for the benefit of this government subsidized insurance program. The act imposed a new obligation on employers who terminated their plans to pay a proportionate share of the plan’s "unfunded vested benefits.” This new withdrawal liability was made retroactive for five months preceding the enactment of the amendments.* 11
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit found that the retroactive provisions of the act violated due process rights12 because the employers had legitimately relied on existing law upon withdrawing from pension plans, but the United States Supreme Court reversed. The Court concluded that Congress could impose the act retroactively because the retroactive portion was a rational means to further a legitimate end, namely, "to prevent employers from avoiding the *530adverse consequences of [the newly enacted] withdrawal liability . . . Id. at 723.
The defendants seek to distinguish Usery and Pension Beneñt Guaranty Corp by arguing that the retroactive provisions of 1987 PA 28 are materially different from the workers’ compensation and pension liabilities imposed by the statutes addressed in those two cases. The defendants argue that the statute in Usery only prospectively mandated the payment of new compensation obligations and so did not impose new liabilities for past compensable periods as does 1987 PA 28. But as to those miners in Usery who had left employment in the industry before the effective date of the act, the liability for past, completed transactions was altered. Additionally, the form of retroactivity does not alter the relevant test for assessing a due process violation. The payments at issue here are "purely retroactive” in that they apply to payments for past injury and they apply to payments that were already paid for past compensable periods. We cannot say, however, that the form chosen by the Legislature was arbitrary or unreasonable.
To determine if the retroactivity is arbitrary or unreasonable, the party’s reliance on the preexisting state of the law should be considered.13 Thus, we must address the extent of the defendants’ justifiable reliance on the coordination provisions of the prior statute repealed by 1987 PA 28.
We are not persuaded that the defendants’ reliance on the coordination provisions was reasonable.
The defendants cannot claim a reliance interest on rights created by the workers’ compensation *531statute that are more deserving of constitutional protection than the reliance interest of the employers who incurred retroactive liabilities under the pension law upheld in Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, supra at 727. In both instances, the employers were on notice of the legislative debate regarding the proposed changes in the law. Reliance on an area of law that is in a state of flux is not reasonable reliance.
There are no vested rights in the amount of liability established at the time of an injury. The Legislature possesses the authority to enact workers’ compensation laws that " 'increase the burden on the employer for disability or expenses occurring or continuing after the date of enactment of the amendatory statute, even though the accident which gave rise to the disability or expenses had occurred prior to that time.’ ” Lahti v Fosterling, 357 Mich 578, 592; 99 NW2d 490 (1959), citing Hogan v Lawlor & Cavanaugh Co, 286 AD 600; 146 NYS2d 119 (1955).14
This Court has held that a remedial statute which acts retroactively does not violate due process so long as it does not impair vested rights.15 The statute challenged here does not violate this principle for several reasons. First, from the context in which the statute was passed, it is clear that the Legislature was modifying the coordination of benefits provision to cure a perceived defect resulting from the interpretation of the prior law *532in Chambers, supra. Therefore, the amendment is remedial.
Second, the defendants have no vested rights in the finality of the coordinated benefits paid. The retroactive liability imposed by 1987 PA 28 does not abrogate a vested or contractual right of the employers since workers’ compensation benefits and liabilities are statutory in origin and may be revoked or modified at the will of the Legislature. See Lahti, supra at 589. The United States Supreme Court has held that an employer’s interest in the rate of compensation is not a right that is absolutely vested for purposes of the Due Process Clause:
[Certain] vested economic rights are held subject to the Government’s substantial power to regulate for the public good the conditions under which business is carried out and to redistribute the benefits and burdens of economic life.[16]
Finally, the 1987 amendment only modifies the source of funds from which an employer may satisfy a workers’ compensation award. The entitlement to benefits was established before the enactment of the original coordination of benefits statute. The amendment does not create a new entitlement conferring a disability status not provided under prior law. In White v General Motors Corp, 431 Mich 387, 395-396, n 7; 429 NW2d 576 (1988), this Court recognized that the retroactive increase of the amount of benefits owing to a disabled employee differs qualitatively from a statute altering the terms of a claimant’s eligibility for benefits. Thus, the defendant’s assertion that the amount of benefits specified by statute is a *533vested right and cannot be retroactively modified is unsupported by case law.
We hold, therefore, that 1987 PA 28 is constitutional even though it applies to benefits due and payable for a period before the effective date of the statute. We hold further that only judgments entered under former law are immune from this legislative modification. This limitation protects the vested rights that form in reliance on an award at the moment it is reduced to a final judgment.
n
Having found no violation of the Due Process Clauses, we must now decide if 1987 PA 28 violates the Contract Clause, US Const, art I, § 10. The defendants contend that the retroactive provisions violate the Contract Clause because they revive liabilities of employers that were fully discharged by completed transactions in reliance on state law. We hold that the contention lacks merit primarily because the expectation at issue here is not protected by the Contract Clause.
Further, even if the benefit levels were construed as a contractual right, the law serves a significant and legitimate public purpose and it employs reasonable means sufficient to survive a Contract Clause challenge.
A
The defendants cannot rely on the level of benefits existing at the time of an injury as a legitimate contractual expectation protected by the Contract Clause. Lahti, supra at 590-592.
Additionally, in Chambers, this Court reiterated the established principle that benefits and liabili*534ties in the workers’ compensation statute do not create rights protected by the Contract Clause. Chambers, supra at 654, citing Shavers v Attorney General, 402 Mich 554; 267 NW2d 72 (1978), and Lahti, supra at 591-592.
B
Even though we hold that the Contract Clause does not apply to the benefits at issue here, the retroactive provisions would survive a Contract Clause challenge. While the Contract Clause prohibits any state law from impairing the obligations of contract, this prohibition must be "accommodated to the inherent police power of the State 'to safeguard the vital interests of its people.’ ” Energy Reserves Group, Inc v Kansas Power & Light Co, 459 US 400, 410; 103 S Ct 697; 74 L Ed 2d 569 (1983). The prohibition, therefore, is not absolute. To test for the valid accommodation of the Contract Clause and the state’s police power, the United States Supreme Court has established a three-pronged test. The first prong is to determine "whether the state law has, in fact, operated as a substantial impairment of a contractual relationship.” Allied Structural Steel Co v Spannaus, 438 US 234, 244; 98 S Ct 2716; 57 L Ed 2d 727 (1978).
The impairment in this case cannot be deemed a substantial one. The workers’ compensation statute substitutes a remedial scheme of compensation for injuries otherwise subject to recovery in tort actions for the negligent acts of employers in the workplace. The employers benefit from this scheme by obtaining a definite limit on their liability for workplace injuries. Since the impairment complained of in this case does not alter this basic benefit to the employer, it cannot be said to be substantial.
One factor in determining the extent of the impairment is the degree of regulation in the *535industry the complaining party has entered.17 The party to a contract who has entered into a highly regulated industry may not remove their contract from state restrictions merely by making a contract purportedly immune from legal limitation. Energy Reserves Group Inc, supra at 411, citing Hudson Co Water Co v McCarter, 209 US 349, 357; 28 S Ct 529; 52 L Ed 828 (1908). The workers’ compensation statute regulates a field of commerce that has been subject to a wide-ranging and comprehensive scheme of government regulation. In this scheme the parties occupy a status that subjects them to certain retroactively imposed rights and liabilities. Lahti. The defendants knew that their rights were subject to alteration. In addition, the legislative resolution in early 1982 purporting to interpret §354 put the defendants on notice that the Legislature might seek to prevent the coordination of benefits for pre-1982 injuries if efforts to achieve this result failed in the courts. Since the employer was aware of the likely alteration of the coordination of benefits provision, the impairment cannot be deemed substantial.
To the extent, if any, that contractual interests are impaired, the second prong of the Contract Clause test requires that there be a legitimate public purpose for the regulation. This requirement guarantees that rather than merely providing a benefit to special interests, the state is validly exercising its police power. There is a significant state interest in protecting the right of disabled employees to receive the full compensation intended by the Legislature in return for the relinquishment of their tort claim._
*536It is significant that in the 1981 amendment, the resources saved as a result of coordination of benefits were reallocated to increase benefit levels generally. These increased levels, however, were only for injuries after January 1, 1982. The Legislature could have reasonably found that the coordination of benefits caused hardship among the employees whose injury dates were before 1982 since these employees were not entitled to the overall increase of benefits provided for those injured after 1982. There was a legitimate state interest, therefore, in correcting this perceived inequity.
The final prong of the Contract Clause test examines the means by which the contracting parties’ rights and responsibilities are adjusted. The means chosen here are reasonable in the light of deference given to legislative action. "As is customary in reviewing economic and social regulation . . . courts properly defer to legislative judgment as to the necessity and reasonableness of a particular measure.” United States Trust Co v New Jersey 431 US 1, 22-23; 97 S Ct 1505; 52 L Ed 2d 92 (1977). The means are also reasonable since the statute imposes no more retroactive liability than is necessary to remedy an unexpected circumstance relating to the interpretation of a prior statute. The judicial interpretation that allowed for the setoff was deemed to be incorrect and the setoff must be returned, not an unreasonable solution.
We find that 1987 PA 28 serves a legitimate state interest in protecting the benefits of disabled employees through reasonable means sufficient to survive a Contract Clause challenge.
hi
Turning to the Separation of Powers and One *537Court of Justice argument, we do not read the provisions of 1987 PA 28, § 354(17)-(20), as violating either art 3, § 2 or art 6, § 1 of the Michigan Constitution. The operative provisions of the statute do not encroach upon the sphere of the judiciary. Rather, they merely repeal the act that Chambers construed. That prior statute is superseded by 1987 PA 28 and the amendatory act expressly indicates that it is to be applied retroactively. This enactment is a valid exercise of the Legislature’s authority to retroactively amend legislation perceived to have been misconstrued by the judiciary. Such retroactive amendments based on prior judicial decisions are constitutional if the statute comports with the requirements of the Contract and Due Process Clauses of the federal and state constitutions, and so long as the retroactive provisions of the statute do not impair final judgments.
Numerous courts have recognized that the Legislature may cure, the judicial misinterpretation of a statute. For instance, the federal courts have upheld statutes that retroactively abrogate statutory rights, at least where the repealing statute does not impair final judgments.18 In Seese v Bethlehem Steel Co, 168 F2d 58, 62 (CA 4, 1948), the court reasoned that the Legislature’s enactment of a retroactive statute repealing the effects of a prior judicial decision is not an exercise of judicial power:
When the Fair Labor Standards Act was interpreted by the Supreme Court as requiring computation in the work week of time consumed in walking to work and other preliminary activities, *538this was just as though the original act contained express provision to that effect; and, when Congress passed the sections of the statute here under consideration, the effect was to repeal the original statute to the extent of that coverage and deny to the federal courts jurisdiction to entertain a suit based thereon. This does not in any manner affect adjudications already made, nor does it attempt to direct the courts in the exercise of judicial power. All that it does is to define rights, i.e., to amend or limit the effect of a prior statute so as to take away a cause of action given by it.[19]
Similarly, in Long v United States Internal Revenue Service, 742 F2d 1173 (CA 9, 1984), subsequent proceedings vacated on other grounds 487 US 1201; 108 S Ct 2839; 101 L Ed 2d 878 (1988), the court upheld a statute that abolished the plaintiff’s right to obtain disclosure of certain irs data, although such disclosure rights had been created by a previous federal appellate decision interpreting a statutory exemption to the Freedom of Information Act. In upholding the Congressional repeal of this exemption against due process challenge, the Court articulated a principle that is useful in resolving the separation of power claim presented here:
Courts have consistently upheld the retroactive application of "curative” legislation which corrects defects subsequently discovered in a statute and which restores what Congress had always believed the law to be. [Id. at 1183.]
Indeed, if the defendants’ separation of powers claim had merit as applied to the curative statute challenged here, the power of the Legislature to enact curative and remedial legislation would be *539severely curtailed, even where the statute does not violate constitutional due process limits.20 This would represent a judicial usurpation of what is properly a legislative function.21
Finally, we conclude that §354, as originally enacted in 1982, gave employers the right to coordinate benefits when an employee received a duplicate recovery through the receipt of other employer-funded benefits. Thus, employers may have properly exercised this right by withholding compensation benefits due and payable between the date of decision of Chambers in 1985 and the repeal of these provisions in 1987. An employer’s act of withholding benefits, however, does not have the status of a final judgment.22
CONCLUSION
The employers’ right to coordinate benefits as provided by statute in 1982 was repealed by 1987 PA 28 through a constitutional exercise of legisla*540tive authority to regulate social and economic life. We hold that 1987 PA 28 does not violate the Due Process Clauses of the state and federal constitutions, the Contract Clause of the federal constitution, or the Separation of Powers Clause of the Michigan Constitution, so long as it is not applied to impair coordination rights that were reduced to final judgment before its effective date.
Accordingly, we affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Levin, Boyle, and Archer, JJ., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
See Chambers v General Motors Corp, 1982 WCABO 751, and Franks v White Pine Copper Div, 122 Mich App 177; 332 NW2d 447 (1982).
The House and Senate both adopted legislative resolution in early 1982, purporting to interpret § 354 to prevent the coordination of benefits of persons injured before the effective date of § 354. These legislative resolutions, however, are not binding on this Court. Chambers v General Motors, 422 Mich 636, 659; 375 NW2d 715 (1985).
Subsection 17 provides:
The decision of the Michigan Supreme Court in Franks v White Pine Copper Division, 422 Mich 636 (1985) is declared to have been erroneously rendered insofar as it interprets this section, it having been and being the legislative intention not to coordinate payments under this section resulting from liability pursuant to section 351, 361, or 835 for personal injuries occurring before March 31, 1982. It is the purpose of this amendatory act to so affirm. This remedial and curative amendment shall be liberally construed to effectuate this purpose.
Subsection 19 provides:
Notwithstanding any other section of this act, any payments made to an employee resulting from liability pursuant to section 351, 361, or 835 for a personal injury occurring before March 31, 1982 that have been coordinated before the effective date of this subsection shall be considered to be an underpay*524ment of compensation benefits, and the amounts withheld pursuant to coordination shall be reimbursed with interest, within 60 days of the effective date of this subsection, to the employee by the employer or carrier.
Subsection 20 provides:
Notwithstanding any other section of this act, any employee who has paid an employer or carrier money alleged by the employer or carrier to be owed the employer or carrier because that employee’s benefits had not been coordinated under this section and whose date of personal injury was before March 31, 1982 shall be reimbursed with interest, within 60 days of the effective date of this subsection, that money by the employer or carrier.
See 30 USC 931-945.
The Court has examined an argument based on the likelihood of altering conduct to avoid future liability in Welch v Henry, 305 US 134; 59 S Ct 121; 83 L Ed 87 (1938). The Court upheld against due process attack a state statute enacted in 1935 which taxed 1933 dividend income previously exempted by the 1933 taxing statute. The Court held that the stockholder would have continued to receive corporate dividends even if he had known that the dividends would later be taxed.
Usery, supra at 40, n 4 (Powell, J., concurring).
As Justice Boyle stated in Chambers, supra at 662: "[OJverpayments by an employer while waiting for the board to approve a setoff may be difficult or impossible to recover.”
29 use 1381-1461.
The retroactive provisions of the act resulted in the appellee in Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, supra, having to pay a withdrawal liability of $201,359 that could neither have been foreseen nor avoided. Id. at 725. Prior to enactment, this employer would have been liable upon termination of the plan to pay only funded pension rights that had vested.
See Shelter Framing Corp v Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, 705 F2d 1502 (CA 9, 1983).
See Brennan v Kirby, 529 A2d 633, 640 (RI, 1987), citing Hochman, The Supreme Court and the constitutionality of retroactive legislation, 73 Harv L R 692, 727 (1960). »
We do not address in this opinion the constitutionality of a retroactive statutory reduction in workers’ compensation benefit levels.
In Karl v Bryant Air Conditioning Co, 416 Mich 558; 331 NW2d 456 (1982), the Court held that the newly enacted statute adopting comparative negligence could be applied to a products liability action even though the action was brought before the adoption of comparative negligence; the retroactivity did not violate due process because it did not take away any vested rights. See also Hansen-Snyder Co v General Motors Corp, 371 Mich 480; 124 NW2d 286 (1963).
United States v Locke, 471 US 84, 105; 105 S Ct 1785; 85 L Ed 2d 64 (1985), citing, inter alia, Usery, supra.
Energy Reserves Group, Inc, supra, citing Spannaus, supra at 242, n 13, citing Veix v Sixth Ward Bldg & Loan Ass’n of Newark, 310 US 32, 38; 60 S a 792; 84 L Ed 1061 (1940) ("When he purchased into an enterprise already regulated in the particular to which he now objects, he purchased subject to further legislation upon the same topic”).
See, e.g., Long Island Oil Products Co, Inc v Local 553 Pension Fund, 775 F2d 24, 30 (CA 2, 1985).
Accord Battaglia v General Motors Corp, 169 F2d 254, 261-262 (CA 2, 1948) ("[n]or is the Portal-to-Portal Act ... an encroachment upon the separate power of the judiciary”).
We are, however, troubled by the language of subsection 17 of 1987 PA 28. This provision contends that this Court’s holding in Franks, n 3 supra, was erroneous. Even though the Legislature has authority to remedy the effects of this Court’s decisions, and may do so by repealing statutes which those decisions interpret, the Legislature lacks the power to act as a supreme judicial body. But we need not address the defendants’ separation of powers claim with respect to this particular provision. Even if we held that subsection 17 violated the Separation of Powers Clause of the Michigan Constitution, this holding would not affect the validity of subsections (18K20). These separate amendatory provisions express a legislative intent to retroactively prohibit the coordination of benefits authorized by the prior statute. These provisions wholly replace the former law. The legal effect of such a repealing statute that wholly supplants a former statute was addressed by this Court in Lahti, supra at 588. Lahti held:
" 'Where a section of a statute is amended, the original ceases to exist, and the section as amended supersedes it and becomes a part of the statute for all intents and purposes as if the amendments had always been there.’ ” [id.]
See, generally, Hochman, n 13 supra at 704.
We do not address the question of how and to what extent the principles of finality are implicated.

=== CASE 9737760 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:00.879396+00 ===

Brickley, J.
(concurring).
i. introduction
Troubled though I am by the 1987 amendments at issue here, reaching back as they do to rewrite the past by altering the past consequences of past transactions, the lamentable failure of the United States Supreme Court to articulate any discernible limits on the constitutionality of retroactive civil, economic legislation forecloses the conclusion that the 1987 amendments violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. For this reason, I reluctantly concur with the majority.
The threat that retroactive legislation poses to our system of republican government should, in my judgment, be taken very seriously. The alarm has been sounded by Professor Julian N. Eule, in his recent article Temporal limits on the legislative mandate: Entrenchment and retroactivity, 1987 Am B Found Res J 379. I write separately primarily to amplify Professor Eule’s message.
*541II. THE ABSENCE OF MEANINGFUL CONSTITUTIONAL LIMITATIONS ON RETROACTIVE CIVIL LEGISLATION
A
Regarding the current state of the law, Professor Eule neatly sums up the sad state of affairs as follows:
Efforts to locate limits on retroactivity in the due process clauses of the fifth and fourteenth amendments, although once viewed as promising, seem to have fallen on hard times. The resurrection of the contract clause has not been paralleled under the due process provisions. The occasional noises emanating from the Court, designed to remind us that the route is not foreclosed, have a hollow ring to them. In Usery v Turner Elkhorn Mining Co [428 US 1; 96 S Ct 2882; 49 L Ed 2d 752 (1976)], for example, Justice Marshall, writing for the Court, concluded his recitation of the minimal scrutiny appropriate in reviewing economic legislation under the due process clause with the statement: "It does not follow, however, that what Congress can legislate prospectively it can legislate retrospectively.” In the context of the entire opinion, which nevertheless upheld the retrospective application of federal mine health legislation, this language cannot be fairly read as proposing or applying a more stringent level of scrutiny for retroactive legislation. Minimal scrutiny is still very much the order of the day. Only the focus is adjusted slightly. Hence it is not the legislative selection of the means but its decision to apply the means retrospectively that must bear a "rational relationship” to whatever legitimate ends the Court conjures up. The slim possibility that a successful attack could ever be launched, given the size of this judicially constructed target, is rendered implausible by the strong presumption of constitutionality that economic and remedial social enactments are afforded, even when retroactive. In the determination of whether retrospective *542economic legislation violates due process, the burden of proving irrationality thus rests squarely on the party asserting the violation. There’s not much for a legislator to worry about here. [Id., p 429. Citations omitted.]
B
In my opinion, Turner Elkhorn and Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp v R A Gray & Co, 467 US 717; 104 S Ct 2709; 81 L Ed 2d 601 (1984), make clear that the legislation here under attack need only survive minimal, rational-basis scrutiny.1 In addition, there are numerous cases from the federal courts of appeals supporting the majority’s result. See, e.g., Wiggins v Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 904 F2d 311 (CA 5, 1990) (upholding the retroactive application to tax year 1983 of 1984 federal tax legislation, despite the appellant’s reliance on the prior law); Canisius College v United States, 799 F2d 18 (CA 2, 1986), cert den 481 US 1014 (1987), Temple Univ v United States, 769 F2d 126 (CA 3, 1985), cert den 476 US 1182 (1986), and New England Baptist Hosp v United States, 807 F2d 280 (CA 1, 1986) (upholding, against a due process challenge, a retroactivity period of approximately four years); Long Island Oil Products Co, Inc v Local 553 Pension Fund, 775 F2d 24 (CA 2, 1985) (upholding a statute which reached back five years to undo a previously authorized six-month period of retroactivity); United States v Northeastern Pharmaceutical & Chemical Co, Inc, 810 F2d 726 (CA 8, 1986), cert den 484 US 848 (1987), United States v Monsanto Co, 858 F2d 160 (CA 4, 1988), cert den 490 US 1106 (1989), and O’Neil v *543Picillo, 883 F2d 176 (CA 1, 1989), cert den 493 US — (1990) (upholding retroactive application of a federal environmental statute creating liability for past, improper disposal of hazardous waste); Counsel v Dow, 849 F2d 731 (CA 2, 1988), cert den 488 US 955 (1988) (upholding legislation retroactively authorizing attorney fees); and cases upholding the constitutionality of the Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947, 29 USC 251 et seq., including Battaglia v General Motors Corp, 169 F2d 254 (CA 2, 1948), cert den 335 US 887 (1948), and Seese v Bethlehem Steel Co, 168 F2d 58 (CA 4, 1948) (upholding extensive retroactive nullification of a Supreme Court decision interpreting the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 USC 201 et seq.).
III. TEMPORAL LIMITS ON THE LEGISLATIVE MANDATE
While Professor Eule’s insights cannot be faithfully reproduced in a short space, the following excerpts may suffice to convey the gist of his thesis.
The Framers were not blind to the citizenry’s need for some security from the "fluctuating policy” of successive legislatures. It was to fulfill this need, said Madison, that the contract and ex post facto clauses were written into the Constitution. Conflicting lessons can be drawn from the inclusion of these restraints. They may alternatively be viewed as limited sanctuaries from the otherwise unfettered authority of legislatures to undo the policy judgments of their predecessors or as compelling evidence of the disfavored status of retrospective lawmaking. It is the choice between these competing visions—rather than the debate over natural law—that ultimately divided Justices Ire-dell and Chase in Calder v Bull [3 US (3 Dall) 386; 1 L Ed 648 (1798)]. Both agreed that the ex post facto clause could not, consistent with the histori*544cal meaning of that phrase, be applied to the civil legislation before the Court. For Justice Iredell this ended the constitutional inquiry since he believed that the legislature’s power necessarily included all that was not expressly denied to it. Furthermore, in Iredell’s eyes, the power to alter preexisting legal understandings was essential, not merely tolerable. He argued that if legislators were denied the ability to subordinate private rights to public exigencies, "the operations of Government would often be obstructed, and society itself would be endangered.” Iredell was not blind to the possibilities for abuse, but he contended that such risks had been undertaken willingly by the people when they delegated authority to their agents.
Justice Chase viewed the people’s grant as more restrained. Rejecting Iredell’s assumption that power not denied was conferred, Chase maintained instead that power not conferred was denied. A determination of what authority the people had entrusted to their agents (through the federal or state constitution) could not be made without an understanding of the principles of a republican form of government. Legislation inconsistent with those principles should be viewed as beyond the scope of the grant. The inapplicability of the ex post facto clause did not foreclose the possibility that the power exercised by the Connecticut legislature was one that the people of Connecticut had not conferred. It is common for scholars to characterize Justice Chase’s vision as limiting legislative power by reliance on immutable natural rights. This misses the point. Chase’s thesis was not that government could not be given the authority to act retrospectively, but that the conferral of power to act at odds with republican principles should not be "presumed.” For both Justices, therefore, the issue was one of agency: Does the scope of authority delegated by the people to their representatives comprehend the power to legislate retroactively where the exercise of such power is not expressly forbidden?
*545* * *
The voters do not delegate authority to rewrite history. Their earlier agents exercised legitimate authority when they enacted legislation. While such efforts may be repealed, this is not the same as retrospective eradication. A decision that bills defeated by prior legislatures can now be enacted and treated as if they had been enacted earlier arguably runs afoul of this same principle. The then-authorized representatives made a choice, and this decision demands recognition as the choice of the polity for that point in time. Each set of elected officials ought to be viewed as endowed by their sovereign with the mandate to make policy choices only within a bracketed temporal zone. Just as the delegation of authority does not encompass incursions into the domain of legislatures yet to come, it does not contemplate contravening the sanctity of time past.
While I contend that the prohibition against entrenchment and retroactivity are both products of the temporal boundaries the electorate affixes to its mandate, I do not pretend that these two borders are drawn to serve identical ends. I do believe they manifest a common interest in affording each generation of voters the opportunity to determine for itself, through its representatives, the rules that will govern its daily life. The two constraints, however, satisfy different—and at times conflicting—human needs. The postmandate restriction protects flexibility. It preserves the polity’s right to change its mind. The premandate limitation, on the other hand, offers stability. It enables the polity to alter its direction, without unduly undermining the security we all find so necessary. This means that the choices of our representatives can be relied on for the temporal realm in which these agents legitimately exercised authority. No more is guaranteed, but no less is tolerable. [Eule, supra, pp 441-446. Emphasis in original.]
The Legislature in this case did not merely *546change the future consequences of past acts, i.e., by changing the future benefit levels for persons injured prior to 1982—a practice which the appellants concede would be a constitutional way to amend our workers’ compensation scheme; rather, the Legislature turns back the clock to redefine rights and liabilities enjoyed and owing in the past, notwithstanding the fact that those rights and liabilities had already been determined by an earlier and different body of agents of an earlier majority, determinations which the Legislature in 1983, 1984, 1985 and 1986 declined to change. The legislation in this case violates the temporal limits of the 1987 Legislature. Because the United States Supreme Court has given no indication that it approves of Professor Eule’s approach, however, I must decline to dissent on these grounds from the majority’s finding that the 1987 amendments are constitutional.2
IV. ANALYSIS OF THE MAJORITY OPINION
For the most part, I concur with the analysis adopted in the majority opinion. I, too, am troubled by the Legislature’s apparent attempt to interpret a prior statute adopted by a prior Legislature. This is doubly distressing in light of our intervening decision in Franks v White Pine Copper, 422 Mich 636; 375 NW2d 715 (1985). Because the Legislature may not interpret its own statute, let alone that of a prior Legislature, I agree with the majority that the 1987 legislation must be viewed as a retroactive amendment rather than as a "legislative interpretation” of an earlier statute. This is the effect of the 1987 legislation, and *547courts, which must presume statutes to be constitutional, are required to look beyond form to the substance of the challenged legislation.3 As stated earlier, I find no principled basis for concluding that the 1987 amendments fail the rational basis tests articulated by the United States Supreme Court; since appellants have not offered a persuasive reason for giving a broader interpretation to the Due Process Clause of the state constitution, I agree that appellants’ due process claims fail.4
I also agree with the majority that the appellants cannot show any sort of reliance on the prior state of the law. I would not, however, go so far as to hold the possibility of reasonable reliance foreclosed by the mere fact that the Legislature debated changing the law before doing so.
I do not agree with the majority’s cursory discussion and conclusion, ante, pp 531-532, that the amendments in this case are "remedial.” That term, in my view, should be used with caution, lest every amendment be deemed remedial. The majority has not persuaded me that the amendments at issue in this case should be so categorized.
Finally, I would not analyze appellants’ Contract Clause argument as if that clause applied in this case. I therefore concur in the analysis and holding of § n(A), but not in those of § n(B).
In all other respects, I concur in the result and analysis of the majority opinion.
The Contract Clause, as the majority observes, does not help the appellants, and potentially promising arguments based on the Taking Clause of the federal constitution and Const 1963, art 4, § 27 are not before us.
While the appellants refer to Professor Eule’s article, they do not mount a "temporal mandate” attack on the 1987 amendments rooted in the state constitution or in the Guaranty Clause of the federal constitution.
Thus, if the provision declaring our decision in Franks erroneous is struck from the 1987 amendments, we must nevertheless determine whether the remainder may stand on its own terms. Since the remaining provisions clearly operate retroactively, the relevant inquiry is whether they offend due process.
In addition, no reasons are offered why the traditional rational basis inquiry should not apply to the due process claim.

=== CASE 9737761 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:00.887019+00 ===

Riley, C.J.
I respectfully dissent from the majority. In my opinion, the Legislature has invaded the *548constitutional authority granted to the judicial branch and usurped the judicial function of determining the proper construction of a statute. It is within the power of this Court, not the Legislature, to interpret the legislative intent of 1981 PA 203. Therefore, I would conclude that 1987 PA 28, § 354(17)-(20), violates art 3, § 2 and art 6, § 1 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963. Accordingly, I would hold that 1987 PA 28, § 354(17)-(20) is to be applied prospectively from its effective date, May 14, 1987.
I. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
In 1987 PA 28, § 354(17), the Legislature stated:
The decision of the Michigan Supreme Court in Franks v White Pine Copper Division, 422 Mich 636 [375 NW2d 715 (1985)] is declared to have been erroneously rendered insofar as it interprets this section, it having been and being the legislative intention not to coordinate payments under this section resulting from liability pursuant to section 351, 361, or 835 for personal injuries occurring before March 31, 1982. It is the purpose of this amendatory act to so affirm. This remedial and curative amendment shall be liberally construed to effectuate this purpose.
In Presque Isle Twp Bd of Ed v Presque Isle Co Bd of Ed, 364 Mich 605, 612; 111 NW2d 853 (1961), this Court held:
"It is too elementary to justify us in referring to authority on the question, that a legislative body is not permitted under any circumstances to declare what its intention was on a former occasion so as to affect past transactions. ... Its members have no more right to construe one of its enact*549ments retroactively than has any private individual.”™
A review of the historical background that encompassed the enactment of 1981 PA 203 and 1987 PA 28 serves to illustrate the reasoning behind this prohibition.
As outlined below, the interpretation of § 354 imputed to the 1981 Legislature by the 1987 Legislature was erroneous. The 1981 Legislature was fully cognizant of the consequences of coordinating workers’ compensation benefits, yet it enacted 1981 PA 203 in an attempt to stimulate a poor state economy by lowering the cost of doing business in Michigan.
A. 1981 PA 203
1981 PA 203 was part of a comprehensive reform of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act that was begun one year earlier.1
2 The purpose of the reform, and specifically 1981 PA 203, was to reduce the cost to the business community of workers’ compensation liability and to eliminate perceived abuses of the system. 1981 PA 203 was passed in December, 1981. During the period prior to the enactment of this legislation, Michigan had been struggling through a severe recession. A significant number of businesses either were closing their local operations or leaving the state. The unemployment rate in Michigan during December 1981, was 14.4 percent,3 and the 1981 inflation rate *550for the City of Detroit in 1981 was 9.3 percent.4 It was against this economic backdrop that the Legislature passed 1981 PA 203.5
As noted in Chambers v General Motors Corp, companion case of Franks, supra at 655, "Governor William Milliken discussed his proposals to solve what he deemed the 'biggest single liability to Michigan’s job climate today [November 18, 1981]’ ”:6
"To start with, we must keep in mind that the purpose of workers’ compensation, after all, is to restore wage-earning capacity lost in on-the-job accidents. Workers’ compensation was never intended to be more lucrative than gainful employment or to be a retirement bonus.
"I have proposed that we coordinate benefits from different employer-paid sources so that workers receive the maximum benefits to which they are entitled, but no more. It is only simple justice that an employer not be assessed costs for several different funds which result in reimbursing the injured worker for more than the lost wage-earning capacity.”[7] [Emphasis added.]
The Governor’s concerns were echoed in the Senate Analysis Section, SB 573: First Analysis, p 6 (January 7, 1982):
By coordinating workers’ compensation benefits with Social Security and other benefits, Senate Bill *551595 [1981 PA 203] would provide a major savings to employers in the cost of workers’ compensation while maintaining adequate beneñt levels for disabled workers. [Emphasis added.]
Since 1912, other public and private wage replacement insurance programs have appeared with the result that many employees now receive wage-loss benefits from two, three, or four different programs providing a total wage "replacement” greater than the wages the employee earned while on the job, while employers who must contribute to these programs fínd themselves paying more than once to replace the wages of a single employee. [Emphasis added.]
After SB 595 passed the House vote, five members of the House reserved the right to enter their protests against the passage of the bill. Rep. Cushingberry said:
This measure, while I’m sure will be reported as a major cost savings measure for business; it will prove to produce its benefit. The only thing this bill will do is to perhaps increase the burden on those less fortunate. . . . This outcome of our act tonight effectively cuts the benefits of even those who have a legitimate worker’s disability. [1981 House Journal 2855.]
Reps. Emerson and Vanek protested, "This provision that has been adopted will increase the likelihood that an injured employee could receive no worker’s compensation benefit, hardly an incentive for employers of this state to maintain a safe workplace.” Id. Rep. Kelsey stated:
Additionally, I supported the revisions of the system during the fall of 1980, which will take effect in January, 1982. To my dismay, however, the commitment to only do away with the abuses *552was not kept and it was decided by the proponents of revision to go all the way and not only to take care of the abuses but, again, to abuse and deprive the legitimate victims of on-the-job injuries. It was proposed not only to reduce the length of benefits but also the amount of benefits received by the workers. ... I could not, in good conscience, support the so-called revision which would only add to the current economic depression and harm the citizens of the State of Michigan. [Id. at 2856. Emphasis added.]
Finally, Rep. Elliott added:
This package tonight will relieve many employers of their responsibilities to pay any worker’s compensation benefits, not only to older workers but also to younger workers whose families may be entitled to social security benefits. [Id. Emphasis added.]
The 1981 Legislature knew exactly the consequences of SB 595. The purpose of the bill was to effectuate a cost saving reform for business, and to eliminate duplicate recovery of benefits. While some legislators strongly opposed 1981 PA 203, the majority felt the need for economic reform outweighed the "burden”8 that may be felt by an injured worker receiving benefits from more than one source. Four years later, this Court upheld the clear legislative intent behind 1981 PA 203 when we unanimously held "that this statute clearly and unambiguously requires coordination of workers’ compensation and other specified benefits for all compensable periods subsequent to its effective date, regardless of when the injury occurred.” *553Chambers, supra at 651. However, the 1987 Legislature not only disregarded our Chambers decision as having been "erroneously rendered,” it also ignored the legislative history that served as the basis for the Chambers decision.
b. 1987 pa 28
• 1987 PA 28 claims that the legislative intent of § 354 of 1981 PA 203 was "not to coordinate payments under this section . . . for personal injuries occurring before March 31, 1982.” However, a review of the voting members of the 1987 Legislature indicates that this claim is impossible to sustain.
The 1987 amendment of §354 was enacted in May 1987. At this time, Michigan was enjoying a much improved economic climáte.9 The level of unemployment was 8.2 percent10 (down from the 1981 level of 14.4 percent), and the 1987 inflation rate for the City of Detroit was 3.0 percent* 11 (down from the 1981 level of 9.3 percent). With Michigan industry in a much improved condition, and with a new Governor, the 1987 Legislature revisited the work of the 1981 Legislature.
The 1987 Legislature was displeased with the decision of this Court in Chambers, so it sought to correct our "erroneous” decision by providing its own "interpretation” of the intent of the 1981 Legislature. However, as pointed out by the appellants, only a fraction of the senators and represen*554tatives who voted in favor of 1981 PA 203 were still around to "interpret” the 1981 legislative intent with 1987 PA 28. Specifically, only eleven of the twenty-six senators12 who voted in favor of 1981 PA 203 were still around to vote in favor of 1987 PA 28.13 Similarly, only twenty of the sixty-two representatives14 who voted in favor of 1981 PA 203 were around to vote in favor of 1987 PA 28.15 Therefore, even though less than half of the senators and less than one-third of the representatives from the 1981 Legislature who voted in favor of 1981 PA 203 also voted in favor of 1987 PA 28, the 1987 Legislature claims that its amendment was the original intent of the 1981 Legislature. This is a claim with which I can not agree.
Furthermore, the claim of the 1987 Legislature that it provided the original intent of the 1981 Legislature flies in the face of the fact that those members of the 1981 Legislature who opposed 1981 PA 203 failed in their attempt to limit its application. As pointed out in Chambers, supra at 659, a legislative resolution16 was passed after the enactment of § 354 which attempted to prevent the coordination of benefits of persons injured prior to its effective date. This Court first noted that the resolution was an attempt by those who opposed 1981 PA 203 to subsequently limit its scope and then held:_
*555Had the Legislature wanted to change § 354 to impose that limitation, it could have properly done so only by amendment. Although § 354 has been amended, such amendments have not limited its application with respect to date of injury. Finally, the respectful consideration to which legislative resolutions are entitled ... is offset here by the fact that a bill introduced to achieve that result was defeated [SB 834, introduced on May 20, 1982]. im
In sum, the economic and political climate surrounding the enactment of 1987 PA 28 was vastly different from that in 1981. Only thirty-five percent of those members of the 1981 Legislature who voted in favor of 1981 PA 203 also voted in favor the 1987 amendment. Also, the legislative history of 1981 PA 203 clearly contradicts the claim of the 1987 Legislature that 1987 PA 28 provided the original intent of the 1981 Legislature.
Through this scenario, the wisdom of the Presque Me Twp School Dist, rule becomes evident—a legislative body is not permitted to declare what its intention was on a former occasion so as to affect past transactions. Therefore, I would conclude that the claim of the 1987 Legislature is nugatory.17
II. REMEDIAL LEGISLATION V SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE
The 1987 Legislature described 1987 PA 28 as a "remedial and curative amendment,” § 354(17). This is a description with which the Court of *556Appeals agreed.181 do not share the same opinion.
The function of curative legislation is to "repair the consequences of legal accident or mistake.” 2 Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction (4th ed), § 41.01, p 338. A legal accident or mistake "can be the result of the failure of the lawmakers to make provision for unforeseen circumstances which should have been provided for or the failure of parties to conform to nonessential legal requirements or limitations.” Id.
The case before us today is not one of "legal accident or mistake.” Quite the opposite is true. 1981 PA 203 was enacted at.the conclusion of a comprehensive reform of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act. The Legislature had made the determination that the system was subject to abuse by employees who were receiving benefits from multiple sources. In turn, this would result in the employee receiving total benefits that were in excess of his workplace compensation. In order to eliminate this possibility, and to reduce the cost of workers’ compensation to businesses, the coordination of benefits provision was enacted.
There was no "failure ... to make provisions for unforseen circumstances.” The Legislature enacted a statute that gave employers the right to coordinate benefits beginning on March 31, 1982. On October 7, 1985, this Court unanimously interpreted the statute to mean that employers have the right to coordinate benefit payments regardless of the date of injury. Consequently, after having the matter resolved by the highest court in the state, General Motors and Ford had the unquestionable right to coordinate the benefits of all employees receiving workers’ compensation bene*557fits who came under the provisions of 1981 PA 203.
Yet, nearly two years after the Chambers decision, and more than five years after the enactment of 1981 PA 203, the 1987 Legislature declared that General Motors and Ford did not have the right to coordinate benefits. Furthermore, § 354(19) of 1987 PA 28, required any amount so coordinated (pursuant to the statutory right as interpreted in Chambers), to be reimbursed with interest.
For a number of years, General Motors and Ford were coordinating benefit payments pursuant to their statutory right. At the very least, the companies were acting within the spirit of the law. Yet, this right was retroactively revoked by "remedial” legislation. Also, the "curative” legislation imposed upon the companies the added obligation of interest. Finally, 1987 PA 28 was enacted to invalidate this Court’s decision is Chambers, thus effecting a substantive change in the law. Hurd v Ford Motor Co, 423 Mich 531, 534; 377 NW2d 300 (1985).
"[T]he word of the 'curing’ legislature should not be conclusive in determining what the prior representatives meant. The question of original intent is ultimately one for the reviewing court.” Eule, Temporal limits on the legislative mandate: Entrenchment and retroactivity, 1987 Am B Found Res J 379, 448. This Court had interpreted the original intent of the 1981 Legislature. Yet, our interpretation was rejected by the 1987 Legislature. Therefore, I can not agree that the 1987 amendment was "remedial and curative.” Rather, I would hold that the 1987 amendment amounted to a substantive change in the law.19_
*558III. CONSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS
A
The majority holds, "[t]he operative provisions of the statute do not encroach upon the sphere of the judiciary. Rather, they merely repeal the act that Chambers construed.” Ante, p 537. However, this argument fails when reviewed against well-settled Michigan case law and the rules of statutory construction.
In Wade v Farrell, 270 Mich 562, 567; 259 NW 326 (1935), this Court unanimously20 held:
"When a statute continues a former statute law, that law common to both acts dates from its first adoption, and only such provisions of the old act as are left out of the new one are gone, and only new provisions are new laws. Where an act is amended . . . the part of the original act which remains unchanged is considered as having continued in force as the law from the time of its original enactment and the new portion as having become the law only at the time of the amendment.” 25 RCL p 907.[21] [Emphasis added.]
The rule quoted in Wade, mirrors the rule enunciated in 1A Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction (4th ed), § 22.33, pp 287-288:
Provisions of the original act or section which are repeated in the body of the amendment, either in the same or equivalent words, are considered a continuation of the original law. This rule of interpretation is applicable even though the original *559act or section is expressly declared to be repealed. . . . The provisions of the original act or section reenacted by the amendment are held to have been the law since they were ñrst enacted, and the provisions introduced by the amendment are considered to have been enacted at the time the amendment took effect. Thus, rights and liabilities accrued under the provisions of the original act which are reenacted are not affected by the amendment. [Emphasis added.]
Our decision in Chambers interpreted the coordination of benefits provisions as pertaining to all benefit payments due after March 31, 1982, regardless of the date of injury. The majority claims that the 1987 PA 28 "repealed] the act that Chambers construed.” However, 1987 PA 28 adopted verbatim the language of the first fifteen sections of the original act, MCL 418.354(1)-(15); MSA 17.237(354)(1)-(15), and it is within these first fifteen sections that the coordination of benefits provisions are found.
Applying both Michigan law and the rules of statutory construction to the instant matter leads to the conclusion that the coordination of benefits provisions that were interpreted by this Court in Chambers were not repealed. Rather, because they were reenacted by adopting the identical language from the original act, the coordination of benefits provisions are " 'considered as having continued in force as the law from the time of [their] original enactment [March 31, 1982].’ ” Wade, supra at 567.
B
Thus, I am persuaded that the declaration made by the 1987 Legislature in 1987 PA 28, § 354(17) that it was providing the legislative intent of the 1981 Legislature is clearly not supported by the *560economic, political, and legislative history behind the enactment of each amendment at issue here, 1987 PA 28 and 1981 PA 203. Moreover, it violates Michigan case law, Presque Isle Twp Bd of Ed, supra. The amendment enacted by the 1987 Legislature was not "remedial and curative.” Rather, it was a substantive change in the law. Finally, 1987 PA 28 did not repeal the legislative provisions that we interpreted in Chambers.
Therefore, the remaining question is, "What is the net effect of 1987 PA 28, and is the amendment constitutional?”
In my opinion, the net effect of 1987 PA 28 was nothing more than an attempt to "overrule” the decision of this Court in Chambers, to render the Chambers opinion null and void, as if it was never released.22 This Court cannot surrender to this invasion into the constitutionally granted authority of the judicial branch.
It should come as no surprise to the Legislature that 1987 PA 28 was constitutionally defective. After SB 67 (1987 PA 28) was passed, Sen. DeGrow23 commented:
Additionally, we’ve put in language that I think strengthens the argument that what we’ve done with the Chambers decision is constitutional. We put it in a preceding paragraph that tells what the *561intent of the Legislature was and will make stronger the argument that we haven’t passed an unconstitutional act. I’m not sure it will cure the defect, but I think we can feel a little better about ourselves in terms of voting for it; that it is not something that is unconstitutional. [1987 Senate Journal 1236. Emphasis added.]
In his article, Professor Julian N. Eule notes, supra at 445:
The voters do not delegate authority to rewrite history. Their earlier agents exercised legitimate authority when they enacted legislation. While such efforts may be repealed, this is not the same as retrospective eradication. A decision that bills defeated by prior legislatures can now be enacted and treated as if they had been enacted earlier arguably runs afoul of this same principle.[24] The then-authorized representatives made a choice, and this decision demands recognition as the choice of the polity for that point in time. Each set of elected officials ought to be viewed as endowed by their sovereign with the mandate to make policy choices only within a bracketed temporal zone. Just as the delegation of authority does not encompass incursions into the domain of legislatures yet to come, it does not contemplate contravening the sanctity of time past. [Emphasis supplied.]
In Bankers Trust Co of Detroit v Russell, 263 Mich 677, 684; 249 NW 27 (1933), this Court reiterated the rule that to declare what the law shall be is a legislative power, and to declare what the law is, or has been, is a judicial power. The Court went on to hold, ”[the Legislature] may not *562by statute attempt to exercise judicial power by construing a statute for the court.” Jc?.25
The members of the 1981 Legislature were the "then-authorized representatives” who made their decisions based on the demands of the time. In 1981, they declared what the law "shall be” with regard to the coordination of benefit payments. In 1985, this Court interpreted what the "meaning” of the law was. Subsequently, the 1987 Legislature attempted to exercise judicial power by "rewritpng] history” in order to retroactively construe the statute for this Court, the effect of which was to eradicate the 1981 legislation. I find this to be an unconstitutional encroachment upon the judiciary.
In speaking about the problem of retroactivity, Justice Holmes once remarked, "[p]erhaps the reasoning of the cases has not always been as sound as the instinct which directed the decisions.” Danforth v Groton Water Co, 178 Mass 472, 476; 59 NE 1033; 86 Am St Rep 495 (1901). Perhaps this is the case here. In any event, I believe that the circumstances surrounding the retroactive enactment of 1987 PA 28 evidence a particularly egregious intrusion upon the separation of powers and the "one court of justice” articles of the Michigan Constitution.26
*563IV. CONCLUSION
I am not yet prepared to accept the "slippery slope” argument that unless the Court acts now, the Legislature will usurp all of the constitutional authority granted to the judiciary. However, the Michigan Constitution of 1963 mandates the separation of powers between the three branches of government, art 3, § 2, and declares that the judicial power of the state is vested in "one court of justice,” art 6, § 1.
Throughout history, courts of last resort have been called upon to make difficult decisions that may have run contrary to popular opinion. These decisions have included, but are certainly not limited to, issues involving criminal matters, civil rights, and economic legislation. It is necessary to have an equally powerful judicial branch of government in order to ensure that the balance of power is not weighted in favor of the Legislature, and to ensure that individual rights are not circumvented by the will of the majority. Therefore, in order for this Court to maintain its equal position within our tripartite system of government, we must secure our constitutionally granted authority.
While it is understandable that emotions may run in favor of an injured employee and against a large corporation, this Court "can but construe the statute in question as it reads, and not as equitable considerations might impel us to do.” Bankers Trust Co, supra at 684-685. See n 25. In Chambers, *564we unanimously interpreted the intent of the 1981 Legislature when it enacted 1981 PA 203. In 1987, the Legislature "overruled” our decision.
Therefore, I would hold that the 1987 Legislature ran afoul of the separation of powers and the one court of justice articles of the Michigan Constitution when it gave retroactive effect to 1987 PA 28.
Accordingly, I would reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals and apply the amendment prospectively from the date of its enactment, May 14, 1987.
Quoting Northern Trust Co v Snyder, 113 Wis 516, 530; 89 NW 460; 90 Am St Rep 867 (1902).
Franks v White Pine Copper Div, 422 Mich 636, 649-650; 375 NW2d 715 (1985).
MESC Report No. 3221 (1981). Provided by the Business Research Office, Michigan Department of Commerce.
Consumer Price Index for the City of Detroit. Provided by the Business Research Office, Michigan Department of Commerce. Note, the Bureau of Labor Statistics computes the inflation rate only for major metropolitan cities. Detroit is the only city in Michigan for which the inflation rate is computed.
The Senate passed the act by a vote of 26 yeas to 12 nays, SB 595, 1981 Senate Journal 2607. The House passed the act by a vote of 62 yeas to 43 nays, 1981 House Journal 2854.
Remarks by Governor William G. Milliken to the Ann Arbor Chamber of Commerce on November 18,1981.
ld.
I quote the word "burden” because the effect of the coordination of benefits is that an injured employee will receive benefits in an amount equal to what he is entitled, but nothing extra by way of duplicate benefits.
Perhaps the reforms of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act that were enacted in 1981 served their intended purpose of helping Michigan businesses return to economic health.
MESC Report No. 3221 (1987). Provided by the Business Research Office, Michigan Department of Commerce.
1987 Consumer Price Index. Provided by the Business Research Office, Michigan Department of Commerce. Detroit is the only Michigan city for which the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics computes the inflation rate. See n 4.
Senators Arthurhultz, DeGrow, DiNello, Faust, Fredricks, Gast, Geake, Irwin, Miller, Sederburg, and Welborn.
The Senate vote in favor of 1987 PA 28 was 35 yeas, one nay, and two excused. 1987 Senate Journal 1232.
Representatives Alley, Brotherton, Bryant, Dunaskiss, Dutko, Giese, Gilmer, Gnodtke, Griffin, Hillegonds, Johnson, Knight, Maynard, Ostling, Randall, Stacey, Stopczynski, Strand, Trim, and Van Singel. 1987 House Journal 1232.
The House vote in favor of 1987 PA 28 was 95 yeas, zero nay. Id.
Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 575 adopted by the Senate on April 1, 1982, 1982 Senate Journal 626, 706; adopted by the House on May 18,1982, 1982 House Journal 1262.
At the very least, just as the 1987 Legislature felt that our decision in Franks, supra, was erroneous, it is equally plausible that the interpretation imputed to the 1981 Legislature by the 1987 Legislature was erroneous.
Romein v General Motors Corp, 168 Mich App 444, 455; 425 NW2d 174 (1988).
In fact, the language found in § 354(17) was added in an admitted attempt to “cure the [constitutional] defect.” Statement of Sen. *558DeGrow after the Senate voted in favor of SB 67 (1987 PA 28), 1987 Senate Journal 1235-1236. See text, post, pp 560-56Í.
The opinion was signed by the six justices who participated, Chief Justice Pottek and Justices Fead, Wiest, Butzel, Bushnell, and Edward M. Sharpe. Justice Nelson Sharpe did not sit.
See also Perry v Hogarth, 261 Mich 526, 530; 246 NW 214 (1933).
After the 1987 Senate voted to pass SB 67 (1987 PA 28), Sen. Cherry, a member of the conference committee that prepared the bill, stated, "Additionally, I am pleased that the language in Section 354 will finally correct the gross injustice done by the Supreme Court’s Chambers decision. It is a disgrace that has taken four years for the Legislature to act to rectify this situation which portrays a promise to many older workers.” 1987 Senate Journal 1234-Í235.
Query: Was the "gross injustice,” as perceived by Sen. Cherry, a result of this Court’s decision, or was it a result of the statutory language passed by the 1981 Legislature which this Court is duty bound to interpret?
Sen. DeGrow was a senate conferee for the Conference Report regarding 1987 PA 28. 1987 Senate Journal 1232.
Keep in mind that a bill, introduced in an attempt to limit the application of the coordination of benefits provisions, was defeated. SB 834, introduced on May 20,1982. See text, supra at 555.
Analogous to the current matter, in Bankers Trust Co, the Legislature attempted to retroactively construe the term "trust mortgage” as used in 1929 CL 13498, 13499. The purpose behind the amendment was to assist owners of property and securities who had liens placed upon them as a result of the depression. Addressing the plight of the individuals adversely affected, the Court held, "Conflicting interests are involved in these cases, and the court can but construe the statute in question as it reads, and not as equitable considerations might impel us to do.” Bankers Trust Co, supra at 684-685. (Emphasis added.)
In his concurrence, Justice Brickley writes that while he is "[troubled” by the 1987 amendment, he must concur with the majority because of the failure of the United States Supreme Court to "articulate any discernible limits on the constitutionality of retroactive . . . legislation . . . .” Ante, p 540.
*563I note that the argument advanced by the appellants, as well as my dissent are based on the Michigan Constitution of 1963. Therefore, the lack of United States Supreme Court guidance is not fatal to the appeal.
Furthermore, only in a parliamentarian system of government is the judiciary subject to a superior legislature. In our republican system, the judicial branch is the equal of legislative branch.

=== CASE 9737762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:00.896178+00 ===

Griffin, J.
(dissenting). While I agree with the Chief Justice that 1987 PA 28 violates Michigan’s constitutional requirement of separation of powers,1 I write separately to register my strong view that the enactment also contravenes the United States Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment due process guarantee.
i
In 1985, this Court unanimously held in Chambers v General Motors Corp, 422 Mich 636, 651; 375 NW2d 715 (1985), that § 354 of 1981 PA 203, which became effective March 31, 1982, "clearly and unambiguously” permitted coordination, after its effective date, of certain employer-financed benefits, regardless of the date of injury.
A subsequent Legislature passed 1987 PA 28, which amended § 3542 by reenacting the section’s original language verbatim and adding four new subsections, MCL 418.354(17)-(20); MSA 17.237(354)(17)-(20). These amendments were made effective *565May 14, 1987. Section 354(17) expressly states the purpose of the legislation:
The decision of the Michigan Supreme Court in Franks v White Pine Copper Division, 422 Mich 636 (1985) is declared to have been erroneously rendered insofar as it interprets this section, it having been and being the legislative intention not to coordinate payments under this section resulting from liability pursuant to section 351, 361, or 835 for personal injuries occurring before March 31, 1982. It is the purpose of this amendatory act to so affirm. This remedial and curative amendment shall be liberally construed to effectuate this purpose. [Emphasis added.]
Section 354(19) provides that any coordination prior to the act’s effective date "shall be considered to be an underpayment of compensation benefits, and the amounts withheld pursuant to coordination shall be reimbursed with interest . . . .”
Thus, the 1987 amendment of § 354 was enacted not only for the declared purpose of reversing this Court’s decision in Chambers, supra, but also to impose retroactively upon employers a substantial increase in liability for compensable periods prior to the act’s effective date.
n
It is fundamental that this Court, not the 1987 Legislature, is entrusted by the constitution with the power to determine the meaning of the 1981 statute. Webster v Rotary Electric Steel Co, 321 Mich 526, 531; 33 NW2d 69 (1948) (the proper construction of a statute is a judicial function); Bankers Trust Co of Detroit v Russell, 263 Mich 677; 249 NW 27 (1933) (the Legislature may not exercise judicial power by construing a statute). In the past, we have declared:
*566"It is too elementary to justify us in referring to authority on the question, that a legislative body is not permitted under any circumstances to declare what its intention was on a former occasion so as to affect past transactions. ... Its members have no more right to construe one of its enactments retroactively than has any private individual.” [Presque Isle Twp Bd of Ed v Presque Isle Co Bd of Ed, 364 Mich 605, 612; 111 NW2d 853 (1961) (quoting Northern Trust Co v Snyder, 113 Wis 516, 530; 89 NW 460 [1902]).]
Article 3, § 2 of the Michigan Constitution provides: "The powers of government are divided into three branches: legislative, executive and judicial. No person exercising powers of one branch shall exercise powers properly belonging to another branch except as expressly provided in this constitution.”
This Court has said: " 'To declare what the law shall be is legislative; to declare what it is or has been is judicial.’ ” In re Manufacturer’s Freight Forwarding Co, 294 Mich 57, 63; 292 NW 678 (1940) (quoting In re Application of Consolidated Freight Co, 265 Mich 340, 343; 251 NW 431 [1933] [Potter, J., dissenting]). The Legislature, by enacting 1987 PA 28, not only declared what the law "shall be,” but purported to declare what the intent of a prior Legislature "was.”
Like other members of this Court, I am "troubled” by the Legislature’s wording of § 354(17). I would go a step further, however, and state what should be obvious: the declaration by the 1987 Legislature concerning the intent of the 1981 Legislature is a nullity.
hi
Many years ago another court explained why *567the policy against retroactivity is a fundamental principle of justice which limits legislative power:
Our constitutions do not admit the power assumed by the Roman prince; and the principle we are considering is now to be regarded as sacred. It is not pretended that we have any express constitutional provision on the subject; nor have we any for numerous other rights dear alike to freedom and to justice. An ex post facto law, in the strict technical sense of the term, is usually understood to apply to criminal cases, and this is its meaning, when used in the constitution of the United States; yet laws impairing previously acquired civil rights are equally within the reason of that prohibition, and equally to be condemned. . . . [T]here is no distinction in principle, nor any recognized in practice, between a law punishing a person criminally, for a past innocent act, or punishing him civilly by divesting him of a lawfully acquired right. The distinction consists only in the degree of the oppression .... [Dash v Van Kleeck, 7 Johns 477, 505-506 (NY, 1811). Emphasis in original.]
The fundamental distrust of retroactive laws has found expression in our rules of statutory interpretation which favor prospective application. DeMars, Retrospectivity and retroactivity of civil legislation reconsidered, 10 Ohio N U L R 253, 259 (1983). Moreover, because "[Retroactive legislation has always been looked upon with disfavor . . . even its constitutionality has been conditioned upon a rationality requirement beyond that applied to other legislation.” Bowen v Georgetown Univ Hosp, 488 US 204, 223; 109 S Ct 468; 102 L Ed 2d 493 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring, emphasis added, citations omitted).
As the majority concedes, the retroactive aspects of 1987 PA 28 are different from those which were found constitutional by the United States Supreme *568Court in Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp v R A Gray & Co, 467 US 717; 104 S Ct 2709; 81 L Ed 2d 601 (1984), and Usery v Turner Elkhorn Mining Co, 428 US 1; 96 S Ct 2882; 49 L Ed 2d 752 (1976). The differences are materially significant. Legislation scrutinized in those cases does not compare to the enactment here which was deliberately designed to disrupt retroactively past transactions completed in reliance upon this Court’s specific holding in Chambers that all workers’ compensation payments were subject to § 354 coordination regardless of the date of injury.
In R A Gray & Co, the retroactive application of the legislation was restricted to a short five-month period preceding the statute’s effective date. This retroactivity, according to the Court, was necessary in order to provide Congress time to legislate without a governmental agency suffering severe economic consequences resulting from employers withdrawing from multiemployer pension plans. In affirming the constitutionality of the legislation, the Court explicitly noted that,
the enactment of retroactive statutes "confined to short and limited periods required by the practicalities of producing national legislation ... is a customary congressional practice.” We are loathe to reject such a common practice when conducting the limited judicial review accorded economic legislation .... [467 US 731. Emphasis added, citation omitted.]
Moreover, the Court cautioned that,
retroactive legislation does have to meet a burden not faced by legislation that has only future effects. "It does not follow . . . that what Congress can legislate prospectively it can legislate retrospectively. The retroactive aspects of legislation, as *569well as the prospective aspects, must meet the test of due process, and the justiñcations for the latter may not suffice for the former.” [Id. at 730. Emphasis added.]
In Usery, Congress enacted legislation requiring, inter alia, coal mine operators to compensate employees for black lung disease contracted during employment which had been terminated long before the effective date of the statute. In finding that the retroactive aspect of the legislation passed constitutional muster, the Supreme Court stated:
To be sure, insofar as the Act requires compensation for disabilities bred during employment terminated before the date of enactment, the Act has some retrospective effect—although, as we have noted, the Act imposed no liability on operators until 1974. . . . [0]ur cases are clear that legislation readjusting rights and burdens is not unlawful solely because it upsets otherwise settled expectations. . . . This is true even though the effect of the legislation is to impose a new duty or liability based on past acts. [428 US 15-16. Emphasis added.]
Justification for such retroactive legislation can be found in the fact that black lung disease develops over a long period of time and its symptoms, in many instances, do not become apparent until after termination of employment. Usery, supra at 7-8. No analogous justification appears in this case to justify undoing completed transactions.
More fundamentally, neither Congress nor the United States Supreme Court had affirmatively spoken on the issue of a coal mine operator’s responsibility for black lung disease prior to enactment of the legislation considered in Usery. There the Supreme Court specifically recognized that the aggrieved party’s reliance upon the prior state of *570the law is a factor in determining whether retroactive application of a statute can be legitimate. 428 US 17. It is one thing, however, to "rely” on the absence of law, and quite another to rely on an affirmative statement of the law as enacted by the Legislature and construed by the state’s court of last resort.
It should be stressed that, prior to the majority’s decision today, this Court never recognized or sanctioned a legislative attempt to overrule retroactively a decision of this Court.3 Nor has the United States Supreme Court given consideration to the effect of retroactive legislation upon conduct occurring after judicial interpretation but before the "overruling” legislation was enacted. However, one commentator noted the implications when he wrote, "Prima facie, this would seem to form a distinct problem, since such conduct would apparently be patterned after the first judicial interpretation and therefore unjustly undercut by the legislation . . . .” Slawson, Constitutional and legislative considerations in retroactive lawmaking, 48 Cal LR 216, 249 (1960). Where a particular individual can "prove he had in fact relied on the interim state of the law to his detriment ... it seems clear that he should be entitled to relief.” Id.
The reliance by appellants on our decision in Franks was substantial. It appears that their increased liability by virtue of the majority’s decision today, without reference to its effect upon other employers, will exceed $22 million. I do not agree with the majority’s position that the reliance *571interest of appellants is inconsequential because it was not reduced to judgment. Such an assertion ignores the fact that appellants had no reason to seek a judgment. As we ruled in Franks, supra, the 1981 statute permitted employers to coordinate benefits without institution of any type of proceedings. 422 Mich 661.4
*572I agree with the majority that "[t]he Legislature possesses the authority to enact workers’ compensation laws that ' "increase the burden on the employer for disability or expenses occurring or continuing after the date of enactment of the amendatory statute, even though the accident which gave rise to the disability or expenses had occurred prior to that time.” ’ ” Ante, p 531 (quoting Lahti v Fosterling, 357 Mich 578, 592; 99 NW2d 490 [1959] [emphasis added]). Unlike the majority, however, I would emphasize the word "after.” Our past cases have limited the retroactive effect of such legislation by applying a change in benefit levels to those payments due after the effective date of an enactment. See Lahti, supra (amendment eliminating twenty-four-month limit on employer’s liability for medical care could be retroactively applied to the extent that employers required to provide extended medical care to worker after the amendment’s effective date notwithstanding that the injury occurred before the effective date), McAvoy v H B Sherman Co, 401 Mich 419; 258 NW2d 414 (1977) (the statute prohibiting a stay of seventy percent of benefits pending appeal of the referee’s decision awarding compensation only applies to those benefits accruing after the statute’s effective date), Selk v Detroit Plastic Products, 419 Mich 1; 345 NW2d 184 (1984) (under statute increasing interest on workers’ compensation award, where benefit payment is made after the effective date of the statute, interest is to be computed at twelve percent from the date the *573payment was due), Franks, supra (statute permitting coordination of benefits is prospectively coordinated after the effective date of the enactment regardless of when the employee was injured).
The majority concedes that the appellants’ "reliance on the preexisting state of the law should be considered” in determining whether retroactive legislation is constitutional. Ante, p 530. However, the majority then asserts that appellants’ reliance was not reasonable because the preexisting law was in "a state of flux.” Ante, p 531. I disagree. After the Legislature enacts a statute which, according to this Court, "clearly and unambiguously” permits coordination of benefits without regard to date of injury, the law is not in a "state of flux.” Given that this Court has never before recognized legislation purporting to overrule retroactively a decision by this Court interpreting the enactment of a prior Legislature, it could hardly be said that these appellants were on notice that the law might be changed in such a manner. Under the majority’s analysis, the appellants apparently had no right to rely upon either the 1981 legislation or this Court’s decision in Franks. Presumably, if the majority’s analysis were correct, no employer or employee in this state would have the right to rely now upon 1987 PA 28 since the Legislature may change it retrospectively in its entirety tomorrow, next week, or next year.
As a matter of common sense, a citizen’s reliance upon a statute as a statement of the law reasonably increases once the state’s highest court interprets and declares what the statute means. To be sure, an individual can have no legitimate expectation that such a statute will not be subsequently changed prospectively; yet, it has been considered reasonable, at least until the majority’s decision today, to expect that a statute will not be *574altered so as to reopen and significantly alter past transactions which have been completed in reliance upon the statute and its interpretation by the Court.
To dismiss, as the majority does, the argument of, appellants that they justifiably relied on this Court’s ruling in Chambers with the shibboleth that one may not expect that a socioeconomic law will not be retroactively changed, is to ignore the bounds of reason and fairness. As pointed out by Sutherland,
Analysis of the practical considerations influencing the question whether a retroactive application of a new law is fair and just should afford more meaningful standards of judgment than either catchpenny phrases or the ambivalent concept of "vested.” . . .
One of the fundamental considerations of fairness recognized in every legal system is that settled expectations honestly arrived at with respect to substantial interests ought not be defeated. [2 Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction (4th ed), § 41.05, pp 365-366.]
Taking the majority’s analysis to its logical conclusion would permit the Legislature to overrule decades-old decisions of this Court and impose retroactive liability for completed transactions conducted in accordance with those decisions, subject only to the nebulous requirement that the legislation is supported by any "legitimate legislative purpose.” In order to protect this Court’s status as the final arbiter of what the law is, and to secure the guarantee of due process, I would hold that the Legislature may not retroactively undo past transactions completed in reliance upon a decision of this Court.
Accordingly, I would reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Const 1963, art 3, § 2 and art 4, § 1.
1987 PA 28.
Of course, no question is raised concerning the Legislature’s power to enact legislation which may have the effect prospectively of overruling a decision of this Court. See, e.g., Hurd v Ford Motor Co, 423 Mich 531; 377 NW2d 300 (1985) (enactment intended to overrule Deziel v Difco Laboratories, Inc (After Remand), 403 Mich 1; 268 NW2d 1 (1978) (has prospective effect).
To be sure, this Court has, on occasion, upheld the validity of retroactive legislation. However, a distinction must be drawn between legislation that modifies benefits and liabilities prospectively based on prior conduct, and that which alters completed transactions. We recognized the distinction in Franks. While construing the original version of § 354, the Court said,
We . . . disagree with the board’s assumption that application of the coordination of benefits provision of § 354 to workers’ compensation payments for compensable periods after the effective date of the statute would constitute retrospective application simply because the liability is based upon an injury that occurred prior thereto. As the board accurately observed . . . "it is not contended that compensation benefits should be retroactively coordinated or reduced. Rather it is argued that the benefits of all disabled workers should be prospectively coordinated after the effective date of the enactment regardless of when they were injured.” [422 Mich 652-653. First emphasis added, later emphasis in original, citation omitted.]
In contrast to a statute like original § 354 which prospectively altered benefit levels based on a past injury, this Court noted that §358 of 1980 PA 357 appeared to be "purely” retroactive. That section provided:
Net weekly benefits payable under section 351, 361, or lump sum benefits under section 835, shall be reduced by 100% of the amount of benefits paid or payable to the injured employee under the Michigan employment security act, Act No. 1 of the Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1936, as amended, being sections 421.1 to 421.67a of the Michigan Compiled Laws, for identical periods of time and chargeable to the same employer.
In determining whether § 354 was intended to operate retroactively, we said:
Although a statute is not regarded as operating retrospectively merely because it relates to an antecedent event, as we have already observed, application of the provisions of § 358 to impose a disability, in the form of a setoff, upon the amount of *572workers’ compensation time periods prior to the effective date of the legislation in question, is purely retroactive. [422 Mich 671. Emphasis added.]
This Court held that because § 358 was not merely procedural or remedial, and since it affected the substantive right of workers to receipt of payments existing prior to the statute’s effective date, the statute was not to be applied retrospectively. 422 Mich 673.

=== CASE 2211918 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.476033+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 379 (1990)
CITY OF SAINT PAUL, Respondent,
v.
NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, Centran Corporation, and Enron Gas Marketing, Inc., Petitioners, Appellants.
No. C5-89-1687.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 2, 1990.
*380 Samuel L. Hanson, Michael C. Krikava, Briggs & Morgan, and Gene R. Sommers, Northern States Power Co., Minneapolis, for NSP.
John Paul Martin, Kevin J. Dunlevy, Peterson, Tews & Squires, Mpls., for Centran Corp.
Elmer B. Trousdale, Michele L. Courneya, Oppenheimer, Wolff & Donnelly, St. Paul, for Enron Gas Mrktg., Inc.
Jane A. McPeak, City Atty., Philip B. Byrne, Asst. City Atty., St. Paul, and of counsel: Sara A. Poulos, Robins, Kaplan, Miller & Ciresi, Minneapolis, for respondent.
David J. Muchow, Miriam S. Pederson, American Gas Assoc., Arlington, Va., for amicus American Gas Assoc.
Ralph J. Pearson, Jr., Texaco, Inc., Houston, Tex., and John H. Sharp, Washington, D.C., for amicus Natural Gas Supply Assoc.
Clement F. Springer, Jr., William D. Carstedt, Defrees & Fiske, Chicago, Ill., for amicus Interstate Power Co.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
YETKA, Justice.
This case arises from an action brought by the City of St. Paul seeking a declaratory judgment that the appellants Centran Corporation and Enron Gas Marketing, Inc. (EGM) obtain a franchise to sell natural gas to end users within the city. St. Paul also sought to enjoin appellant Northern States Power (NSP) from transporting natural gas owned by others to end users through its gas lines within the city. On cross motions for summary judgment (St. Paul sought partial summary judgment), the district court ordered judgment for the appellants. The court of appeals affirmed the trial court's judgment in favor of NSP, but reversed as to Centran and EGM, holding, in effect, that Centran and EGM were furnishing natural gas to citizens of St. Paul without a franchise. 450 N.W.2d 599. The court of appeals also held that the franchise requirement was neither *381 pre-empted by federal law[1] nor violative of the commerce clause,[2] issues not reached by the trial court. We reverse and reinstate the decision of the trial court.
The facts in this case are not in dispute. Appellants Centran and EGM are gas marketing companies which purchase gas from suppliers and make sales directly to industrial and commercial consumers called "end users." Appellant NSP, a local distribution company (LDC), has been granted a franchise to supply natural gas within the City of St. Paul. St. Paul is served by a single natural gas pipeline which is owned and operated by Northern Natural Gas Company. Northern has been certified an "open access" transporter whereby it must transport gas on a nondiscriminatory basis for any shipper paying appropriate transportation fees.
The transactions at issue here involve the purchase of gas by end users from Centran and EGM. Northern transports this gas to an NSP town border station (TBS) where title passes to the end user. These TBS's are located outside the city limits of St. Paul and are owned in part by NSP and Northern. Neither Centran nor EGM owns any facilities, pipes, or conduits in St. Paul.
Once at the TBS, the gas is then transported, for a fee, by NSP through its franchised system to the end users. The end users pay Centran and EGM directly for the cost of the gas. Pursuant to a Minnesota Public Utilities Commission (MPUC) tariff, the end users also pay NSP a transportation fee. NSP must provide transportation for any entity meeting the terms of the tariff. Pursuant to its franchise, NSP pays gross earnings fees on all gas it sells to end users and on all transportation fees paid by the end users. Thus, it does not pay the gross earnings fee on the commodity cost of the gas it transports for Centran and EGM.
The role of NSP in these transactions is not clear. In some transactions, NSP functions as an agent for the purchaser and/or supplier. According to St. Paul, in this agency arrangement, NSP has been "negotiating and coming to terms with Centran and EGM on behalf of the end user, and arranging for all transportation services." St. Paul also states that "EGM sells its gas (or gas which it has the power and right to sell) to `NSP as agent' for customers within St. Paul." Appellant Centran states, however, that it has not sold gas to "NSP as agent" for customers within St. Paul.
Centran and EGM have entered into a total of 18 contracts with end users within St. Paul between October 1986 and March 1987. These contracts involved eight different end users: Centran contracted with one end user while EGM contracted with seven. All eight end users were customers of NSP prior to the contracts with Centran and EGM. Prior to these transactions, NSP made the sales of natural gas to all end users in St. Paul. Thus, St. Paul claims that it is losing revenues by the new procedures used.
Since issues in this case turn on the nature of natural gas regulation, a brief historical discussion is in order. In 1938, Congress enacted the Natural Gas Act (NGA), 15 U.S.C. §§ 717-717z (1988). The act granted the Federal Power Commission (now the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or FERC) jurisdiction to regulate three areas: sales for resale in interstate commerce; transportation in interstate commerce; and facilities used for such purposes. 15 U.S.C. at § 717; see also Pierce, Reconstructing the Natural Gas Industry from Wellhead to Burnertip, 9 Energy L.J. 1, 2-12 (1988) (tracing the history of natural gas regulation). Though section 1(b) of the NGA has traditionally pre-empted "wholesale" regulation, it "expressly carves out a regulatory role for the States, however, providing that the States retain jurisdiction over intrastate transportation, local distribution and distribution facilities, and over `the production or gathering of natural gas.'" Northwest Central Pipeline Corp. v. State Corp. Comm'n of Kansas, 489 U.S. 493, 109 S. Ct. 1262, 1272, 103 *382 L.Ed.2d 509 (1989). Thus, the states retained the right to regulate direct retail sales to consumers. Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co. v. Michigan Pub. Serv. Comm'n, 341 U.S. 329, 334, 71 S. Ct. 777, 780, 95 L. Ed. 993 (1951); Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n of Indiana, 332 U.S. 507, 516-18, 68 S. Ct. 190, 194-96, 92 L. Ed. 128 (1947); see also Colton & Sheehan, Regulatory Control of Natural Gas Procurement Practices in Illinois: Permissible Regulation or Preempted Activity? 35 De Paul L.Rev. 317, 325 (1985) ("This [NGA 1(b)] language excludes from federal regulation direct sales by pipelines to industrial users because direct sales are not sales for `resale.' Also, [FERC] jurisdiction does not extend to the local distribution of gas.").
Because of severe gas shortages in the 1970's, in 1978, Congress enacted the Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA), 15 U.S.C. §§ 3301-3432 (1988). The NGPA restructured the regulation of natural gas by merging the interstate and intrastate markets. It also provided for phased deregulation of most new (post-enactment) gas and for the continued regulation of old (pre-enactment) gas.
The structure of the natural gas industry changed once again in 1985 when the FERC issued Order 436.[3] Order 436 provides that pipelines and suppliers who apply to become "open access" transporters must offer transportation services on a non-discriminatory basis to any shipper requesting the service and paying the fee. Thus, pipeline companies have "unbundled" their services, providing separate charges for gas, transportation, storage and other services:
The essence of Order 436 is a tendency, in the industry metaphor, to "unbundle" the pipelines' transportation and merchant roles. If it is effective, the pipelines will transport the gas with which their own sales compete; competition from other gas sellers (producers or traders) will give consumers the benefit of a competitive wellhead market.
Associated Gas Distrib. v. F.E.R.C., 824 F.2d 981, 994 (D.C.Cir.1987) (wherein the court upheld the provisions of Order 436 at issue here). Thus, the LDC or end user may now select the services which best fit its needs. Michigan Consol. Gas Co. v. Panhandle Eastern Pipeline Co., 887 F.2d 1295, 1297 (6th Cir.1989).
There were many issues raised in this litigation, including the following:
1. Are gas marketers that own no facilities inside St. Paul, but which are selling gas within the city, subject to a franchise requirement?
2. Are the gas marketers operating as utilities within St. Paul?
3. Do Village of Blaine v. Independent School District No. 12, 265 Minn. 9, 121 N.W.2d 183 (1963) (Blaine I), and Village of Blaine v. Independent School District No. 12, 272 Minn. 343, 138 N.W.2d 32 (1965) (Blaine II), apply to entities owning no facilities within St. Paul?
4. Is the St. Paul franchise requirement imposed upon the gas marketers preempted by federal regulation?
5. Does the St. Paul franchise fee requirement as applied to Centran and EGM violate the commerce clause?
6. Is St. Paul's franchise requirement a per se violation of the commerce clause?
7. Is the burden imposed on interstate commerce by the St. Paul franchise requirement excessive in relation to the putative local benefits?
We do not find it necessary to discuss the federal law issues raised in this case because we believe that the case can be decided on state law alone.
On appeal from a summary judgment, if there are no issues of material fact, review is limited to a determination of whether the trial court correctly applied the law to the facts. Betlach v. Wayzata Condominium, 281 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Minn.1979). *383 Since in this matter all parties stipulated to the facts, the only issue before this court is application of the law to the undisputed facts. Id.
To be a franchise, "the right possessed must be such as cannot be exercised without the express permission of the sovereign power,  a privilege or immunity of a public nature which cannot be legally exercised without legislative grant." General Minn. Util. Co. v. Carlton County Coop. Power Ass'n, 221 Minn. 510, 519, 22 N.W.2d 673, 677 (1946). A city's franchise power is derived from Minn.Stat. § 300.03 (1988), which provides in part:
A corporation may be organized to * * * furnish power for public use, and any work for supplying the public, by whatever means, with water, light, heat, or power, including all requisite subways, pipes, or other conduits * * *. No corporation formed for these purposes may construct, maintain, or operate a * * * pipe line or other conduit * * * in or upon a street, alley, or other public ground of a city, without first obtaining from the city a franchise confirming this right and compensating the city for it.
Pursuant to section 300.03, the City of St. Paul enacted St. Paul Charter § 16.01, which states in pertinent part:
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm or corporation shall place or maintain any permanent or semipermanent fixtures in, over, upon or under any street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility without a franchise therefor from the City.
Citing the above statutory language, appellants[4] make two arguments: (1) under Minn.Stat. § 300.03, a franchise is only required "to construct, maintain or operate" a pipeline or conduit; (2) under section 16.01, the City Charter only prohibits a non-franchised public utility from placing, maintaining and operating utility fixtures in, over, on, or under the streets. Appellants contend that, since Centran and EGM have no utility fixtures within the city and that the statute or the City Charter does not require a franchise for merely marketing gas, they are not engaging in franchisal activity subject to St. Paul regulation. EGM argues that it does not operate a utility within the city for local distribution and is not a party to a local distribution contract. Since its only connection to St. Paul is its customer there, EGM argues that it is not subject to the franchise requirement. We agree.
Respondent St. Paul argues that Village of Blaine v. Independent School District No. 12, 265 Minn. 9, 121 N.W.2d 183 (1963) (Blaine I), and Village of Blaine v. Independent School District No. 12, 272 Minn. 343, 138 N.W.2d 32 (1965) (Blaine II), control in this case. In those cases, the Village of Blaine granted a non-exclusive franchise to North Central Public Services. Independent School District No. 12 (ISD No. 12) operated a school in the Village of Blaine which was located across a county road from the Village of Circle Pines. ISD No. 12 decided to purchase gas from the Circle Pines Utility Commission (CPUC), a neighboring municipal gas utility. The CPUC did not have a franchise to operate in Blaine.
ISD No. 12 and CPUC made an arrangement whereby land in Circle Pines was given to ISD No. 12. Upon this land, a metering station was built to which CPUC gas could be delivered. The arrangement also included construction of a private gas main under the village border by ISD No. 12 to the CPUC transmission station. The Village of Blaine sought to enjoin ISD No. 12 from taking gas from CPUC. The trial court denied the injunction. This court in Blaine I remanded for a trial on the merits. On remand, the trial court issued a permanent injunction, which this court upheld in Blaine II.
St. Paul argues that there are many factual similarities between the Blaine cases and this case. Specifically, the unfranchised seller had no mains, no metering stations, and did not physically extend its gas transmission system into Blaine. *384 Thus, St. Paul argues, the court did not find those facts dispositive. The court's focus, St. Paul contends, was not on where the transmission took place, but on the fact that an unfranchised entity was supplying gas without the consent or permission of the municipality.
Furthermore, in response to the appellants' argument that physical facilities are needed within the city for the franchise requirement to attach, St. Paul contends that the reasoning or result in Blaine I and II would not have been different if the CPUC had been using the pipes of North Central (as opposed to the pipes of ISD No. 12) without the consent of the municipality.
St. Paul contends that Blaine I and II determined that the franchise rights of a municipality under Minn.Stat. § 300.03 were not limited to streets, alleys, and public grounds; rather, the rights include all the territory within the municipality's border. Furthermore, since the language of section 16.01 mirrors the language of section 300.03, the same expansive reading should be given to it. In other words, since section 300.03 applies not only to public streets and grounds, but to the whole territory "within the municipal corporate limits," section 16.01 should apply to the whole territory as well.
Appellants, on the other hand, argue that Blaine I and II are distinguishable. The franchise in the Blaine cases received no revenue from the transportation of the gas akin to the tariffs granted by the MPUC. Furthermore, the pipeline was in direct competition with the franchised entity. Appellants also contend that, in Blaine I and II, the court did not find objectionable the fact that ISD No. 12 was intending to purchase the gas from CPUC, but that the pipeline circumvented the franchised utility. Here, neither Centran or EGM has tried to bypass NSP or St. Paul. Appellants contend that they are not "concocting a scheme," as the court found in Blaine I and II, but are following a federally mandated system. Finally, appellants note that, in Blaine I, this court set out the following requirements for a franchise:
To "operate," the utility must not only lay pipes and install equipment, but also must provide service, collect charges, and do other things necessary to conduct a utility business. Thus a franchise must be obtained not only to lay pipes to conduct gas across or over the boundaries of the village, or over its streets, alleys, and public grounds if necessary, but also to do all other things required to establish and operate a utility.
265 Minn. at 17, 121 N.W.2d at 189-90. Thus, the Blaine I court held that, to "operate" a utility, the company must both lay pipes and do those other things necessary to conduct a utility business. Appellants contend that Centran and EGM engage in none of these activities.
We find appellants' argument persuasive. Thus, we find the Blaine cases distinguishable.
The Blaine language on which St. Paul relies  that entities supplying gas to a municipality must first acquire the consent of the municipality  is attributable to this court's analysis of Minn.Stat. § 412.321 (1988) in Blaine II, 272 Minn. at 361, 138 N.W.2d at 45. While it is true that, pursuant to section 412.321, a municipality cannot extend its utility system into another municipality without the latter's consent, it is also undisputed that section 412.321 is not at issue in this case. Thus, the consent required pursuant to that statute is not applicable here.
The facts surrounding this court's analysis of Minn.Stat. ch. 300 in the Blaine cases are also distinguishable. In the Blaine cases, the question of whether the entity supplying the natural gas, the CPUC, was a public utility was not at issue. St. Paul argues that Centran and EGM are utilities operating within the city. To hold that they are would require a very broad definition of "utility," a definition that would stretch the meaning of section 300.03, section 16.01, and the Blaine cases beyond their proper reading.
While chapter 300 allows a corporation to be formed in order to supply natural gas and requires it to be franchised to do so, the statute appears to be tailored to cover *385 those companies which install the means to supply the power. St. Paul Charter § 16.01 also appears to be so tailored. Thus, an entity, to operate as a utility, must "not only lay pipes and install equipment, but also must provide service, collect charges, and do other things necessary to conduct a utility business." Blaine I, 265 Minn. at 17, 121 N.W.2d at 189-90. Neither Centran nor EGM has laid pipes or installed the necessary equipment. As stated in Griffin v. Oklahoma Natural Gas Corp., 37 F.2d 545, 548 (10th Cir.1930), a case cited in Blaine I, 265 Minn. at 17, 121 N.W.2d at 190:
[T]he word "franchise" [as defined by state statute] means a special franchise to establish and maintain a public utility, to use the streets therefor and to collect compensation for services, and not an ordinary contract to purchase gas, such as the contracts involved in the instant case, which are expressly authorized by [state law].
Griffin, 37 F.2d at 548. Since Centran and EGM are only engaging in the sale of gas, they are not operating as utilities.
Pursuant to Minn.Stat. ch. 300, St. Paul may impose a franchise and set the compensation therefor. The City of St. Paul's ordinance with NSP imposes a franchise fee in the form of gross earnings of NSP. Under the ordinance, "gross earnings" is defined as "all sums * * * received by the Company from the sale of gas distributed and used within the corporate limits of the City." St. Paul, MN, Ordinance No. 17,210, § 5. If the main objective of appellants here is to avoid payment of the franchise fee, that objective is proper if the effort to avoid the fee is not a conspiracy or an illegal combination. St. Paul has admitted in the record that appellants have not attempted to avoid the fee by fraudulent means. Thus, that question is not at issue.
On the other hand, if St. Paul's main objective in attempting to require a franchise of Centran, EGM, and similar entities is to collect a fee on all sales of natural gas within the city, it appears to us that it would have been more appropriate to include that objective in Ordinance No. 17,210. While it is not our province to tell the city what it should or should not have done, that objective could have been easily achieved. NSP is the sole local distributor for the city and owns and operates the transmission system within the city. The fee could have applied to all sales by NSP or all gas transported by NSP within the city, with the fee based on cost of delivery and sale price to the end user. However, the ordinance, as adopted, only applies the fee to the gross earnings of NSP. If the city intends to impose a non-discriminatory tax on sales of natural gas within the city, it should do so by direct ordinance, or if it lacks existing legal authority to do so, seek such approval from the Minnesota Legislature.
While we do not deem it necessary, therefore, to reach the federal issues raised by the parties in their briefs, it is difficult to envision how the franchise scheme advocated by St. Paul would not pose a very heavy burden on interstate commerce. Though the record does not disclose how many possible sellers of natural gas to end users in St. Paul might exist, either within or without the State of Minnesota, the record does indicate that there are currently eight large end users within St. Paul taking advantage of direct sales from out-of-state suppliers, and these numbers are expected to grow. Thus, the unreasonableness of requiring every seller to acquire a franchise to sell gas within the City of St. Paul becomes apparent. If each seller were required to secure a franchise in St. Paul (or Minneapolis or any other municipality in the State of Minnesota), would a seller of natural gas located in the southwest be encouraged to make a bid to supply such gas without knowing whether it would receive a franchise or not? Would the franchise be adopted in time to complete the sale? It appears that the result in cost and effort would discourage these sellers from making a bid for the sale in the first instance.
Since we find that the Blaine cases do not control the transactions here, that sections 300.03 and 16.01 do not grant St. Paul power over Centran and EGM, and that City Ordinance No. 17,210 does not include *386 the type of sales made by Centran and EGM, the court of appeals is reversed, and the decision of the trial court is reinstated.
NOTES
[1]  The Supremacy Clause, U.S. Const. art. 6, cl. 2 mandates that federal law overrides lower authority when there is a conflict between the two.
[2]  U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3.
[3]  Order 436, Regulation of Natural Gas Pipelines After Partial Wellhead Decontrol, [1982-1985 Regs.Preambles] F.E.R.C. Stats. & Regs. ¶ 30,665 at 31,463, 31,467, 50 Fed.Reg 42,408 (1985).
[4]  Not all appellants or amici curiae have made the arguments ascribed to them in this opinion, but for ease of reference, the collective term "appellants" is used.

=== CASE 2211928 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.580896+00 ===

10 Mass. App. Ct. 792 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 354
IRWIN KATZ
vs.
MORDECAI SAVITSKY & others.[1]
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 3, 1980.
December 10, 1980.
Present: GRANT, CUTTER, & ARMSTRONG, JJ.
Martha B. Kleinerman for the plaintiff.
Robert J. Sherer for the defendants.
GRANT, J.
In 1978 the plaintiff commenced an action for damages in the Superior Court by the filing of a complaint *793 in which he alleged that the defendants had intentionally and wrongfully interfered with certain contractual rights which the plaintiff had with one Marvin S. Antelman. The defendants answered and pleaded, among other defenses, that the action was time-barred under G.L.c. 260, § 2A. The action was eventually dismissed under Mass.R.Civ.P. 56(b), 365 Mass. 824 (1974). The defendants seasonably filed a motion under G.L.c. 231, § 6F, inserted by St. 1976, c. 233, § 1, for an award of counsel fees and expenses in connection with the defense of the action. That motion was heard and denied by a judge of the Superior Court other than the one by whose order the action had been dismissed.[2]
The defendants filed a timely notice of appeal to a single justice of this court under G.L.c. 231, § 6G, also inserted by St. 1976, c. 233, § 1. The appeal was heard and determined on the original papers and the arguments of counsel. The single justice entered an order by which he awarded the defendants the sum of $2,248.77 by way of counsel fees and expenses in connection with the defense of the action in the Superior Court.[3] Within thirty days of the date of the award the plaintiff filed a notice of appeal therefrom to a panel of the Justices of this court.
We deal first with certain questions which arise out of some of the obscurities in the provisions of G.L.c. 231, § 6G.
1. The first question, one which we raised on our own motion at the argument, is whether the award of the single justice is reviewable by a panel of the Justices of this court. The second paragraph of Rule 2:01 of the Appeals Court, as amended, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 806 (1975), does not apply because a single justice of the Supreme Judicial Court has no *794 jurisdiction to determine an appeal from a decision under G.L.c. 231, § 6F, unless he transfers the appeal to that court under the last paragraph of G.L.c. 211, § 4A. Although the second paragraph of § 6G, which is concerned with procedural matters, speaks of "[a]ny appeal to ... the appeals court,"[4] the only express grants of appellate jurisdiction are found in the first paragraph of the same section, which speaks of (1) an "appeal ... to the single justice of the appeals court" with respect to a "matter [which] arises in the superior, land, housing or probate court" and (2) an "appeal ... to the full bench of the supreme judicial court" with respect to a "matter [which] arises in the appeals court or before a single justice of the supreme judicial court."
On the other hand, there is nothing in § 6G which purports to attribute any measure of finality to an order entered by one of our single justices under that section. Contrast G.L.c. 261, § 27D, as originally inserted by St. 1974, c. 694, § 3, and as now appearing in St. 1980, c. 539, § 8, which has always provided that a decision by one of our single justices on costs for an indigent party "shall be final." Any conclusion by us that one of our panels could not review an order entered by one of our single justices under G.L.c. 231, § 6G, would lead to a practice under which persistent counsel would take those orders by complaints in the nature of certiorari (G.L.c. 249, § 4, as appearing in St. 1973, c. 1114, § 289) to the single justices of the Supreme Judicial Court, who could not transfer the cases elsewhere under G.L.c. 211, § 4A, and whose judgments would be subject to still further appeal under G.L.c. 231, § 114, as appearing in St. 1973, c. 1114, § 202.
We have recently said that the "unnecessary traditional baggage" of certiorari (Loring Hills Developers Trust v. Planning Bd. of Salem, 374 Mass. 343, 350 [1978]) should be dispensed with "when[ever] another and simpler means of securing judicial review is adequate and available." Doherty *795 v. School Comm. of Boston, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 805, 811-812 (1979). The panels of this court are quite capable of eradicating the sins of our single justices (see, e.g., John Donnelly & Sons v. Outdoor Advertising Bd., 4 Mass. App. Ct. 847 [1976]; Cassidy v. Commissioner of Environmental Management, 7 Mass. App. Ct. 898, 899 [1979]; Pemberton v. Pemberton, 9 Mass. App. Ct. 809 [1980]; Greenberg v. Greenberg, post 827, 828 [1980]; Ward v. Coletti, ante 629, 632-633 [1980]), and it would hardly serve the purpose for which this court was created for us to throw the orders entered by our single justices under G.L.c. 231, § 6G, into the Supreme Judicial Court. We think that sound principles of judicial administration dictate the conclusion that such orders are reviewable by a panel of this court, subject to the possibility of further appellate review under G.L.c. 211A, § 11.
We believe, however, that appeals from orders by the single justices under G.L.c. 231, § 6G, should be stayed until the entry in this court of any appeal from the final judgment which may ultimately be entered in the lower court, or until such time as it becomes apparent that there will be no such appeal.[5] The first and last paragraphs of G.L.c. 231, § 6F, contemplate that interlocutory orders may be entered under that section. The last sentence of § 6G provides that the payment of any award under § 6F "shall be stayed until the completion of all appeals relating to the civil action in which the award was made." And the possibility always exists that the disposition of the appeal from the final judgment may undermine or obliterate the basis for an order entered in the lower court under § 6F or in this court under § 6G. It is only by staying the appeal from the order of a single justice for the period indicated that we can avoid the evils of piecemeal appellate review. See Giacobbe v. First Coolidge Corp., 367 Mass. 309, 312-313 (1975); Kargman *796 v. Superior Court, 371 Mass. 324, 329-330 (1976); Cappadona v. Riverside 400 Function Room, Inc., 372 Mass. 167, 169 (1977).
2. The defendants urge in their brief before us that we should decline to hear the present appeal because it was not claimed within the ten-day period provided in the first sentence of the second paragraph of § 6G. As we read that paragraph, the ten-day period applies (in a case such as the present) only to an appeal to a single justice from a decision on a "matter [which] arises in the superior, land, housing or probate court," as provided for in the second sentence of the first paragraph of § 6G. No time limit is expressly set on an appeal from an order of a single justice, but the third sentence of the second paragraph of § 6G provides that "[a]ny appeal to ... the appeals court[6] ... shall proceed according to the Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure." That provision has the effect of invoking the thirty- and sixty-day appeal periods found in Mass.R.A.P. 4(a), as amended, 378 Mass. 928 (1979) (compare Boston Seaman's Friend Soc. v. Attorney Gen., 379 Mass. 414, 416 [1980]), with the result that the plaintiff's appeal from the award of the single justice, which was claimed within thirty days, is properly here.
3. Also discussed at the argument, but not in the briefs of the parties, was the question whether the single justice has the power to make an award which has been denied by the lower court. The words "review the finding" and the words "withdraw or amend any finding or reduce or rescind any award" which appear in the last sentence of the first paragraph of § 6G do not aptly describe what has occurred in the present case. However, the first sentence of that section affords a right of appeal to the single justice to "[a]ny party aggrieved by a decision on a motion pursuant to" § 6F, and the third sentence of that section contemplates that the appeal may be from the denial of an award when it states that what the single justice is to "review" are the "finding and award, if any, appealed from" (emphasis supplied). Accordingly, *797 we have no hesitation in concluding that the single justice has the power to make an award which has been sought and denied in the lower court.
4. We need not dwell at length on the merits of the present appeal. The plaintiff's response to a notice of the taking of his deposition was to file a groundless motion to disqualify the defendants' counsel which the plaintiff pursued without success in the Superior Court and in the single justice sessions of this court and the Supreme Judicial Court. When finally brought to bay on deposition, the plaintiff was either unable or unwilling to give a coherent explanation of the contractual relationship with Antelman which had allegedly been interfered with, and his testimony was such as to require the conclusion that the allegations of the complaint under which he had hoped to escape the operation of the statute of limitations were false. It is clear from the papers that when the action was brought, neither the plaintiff nor his counsel had had any reason to believe that any of the defendants was even aware of any contractual relationship between the plaintiff and Antelman (see Grammenos v. Zolotas, 356 Mass. 594, 597 [1970]; National Right to Life Convention '76, Inc. v. Million Dollar Round Table, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 857 [1978]), with the result that there had been no factual support for the allegation in the complaint that the "defendants did intentionally interfere with the performance of this said contract."[7] Shortly after the completion of the deposition the plaintiff caused the action to be dismissed with prejudice as to one of the defendants, for no apparent reason. The plaintiff's appeal from the judgment of the Superior Court had been dismissed for lack of prosecution by the time the single justice acted. He was clearly correct in concluding that the plaintiff's claim was "wholly insubstantial, frivolous and not advanced in good faith" within the meaning of G.L.c. 231, § 6F. The same is true of the present appeal, in which the plaintiff's counsel has argued *798 only that her client's claim was not frivolous and was advanced in good faith.
The order and award of the single justice are affirmed, with counsel fees to the defendants on this appeal in the amount of $1,800 (see Goodwin Bros. Leasing v. Nousis, 373 Mass. 169, 177 [1977][8]) and double costs on appeal (G.L.c. 211A, § 15), including in such costs the cost of the supplemental appendix filed by the defendants pursuant to leave of court first obtained; the execution is to issue out of the Superior Court.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The other defendants named in the complaint are Samuel J. Fox and "Massachusetts Council of Rabbis." We have been given no information from which we could conclude that the Council is a suable entity.
[2]  We disapprove of such a practice whenever the proper resolution of a motion under § 6F requires an assessment of the credibility of witnesses. There was no in-court testimony in the present case.
[3]  The reasonableness of the award has not been contested by any of the parties.
[4]  Which we take to mean a panel comprised of at least three Justices of the court, as contemplated by G.L.c. 211A, § 3.
[5]  The plaintiff's appeal from the final judgment in this case has been dismissed for lack of prosecution.
[6]  See note 4, supra.
[7]  We shall leave to others the question whether the plaintiff's counsel should be disciplined under Mass.R.Civ.P. 11(a), 365 Mass. 753 (1974).
[8]  See also Mass.R.A.P. 25, as most recently amended, 378 Mass. 925 (1979); Fed.R.A.P. 38; First Natl. Ins. Co. v. Lynn, 525 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir.1975); Teledyne Indus. Inc. v. Podell, 546 F.2d 495 (2d Cir.1976); Overmyer v. Fidelity & Deposit Co., 554 F.2d 539, 543 (2d Cir.1977); In re Newport Harbor Associates, 589 F.2d 20, 24 (1st Cir.1978); Ralston Purina Co. v. Navieras de Canarias, S.A., 619 F.2d 152, 153 (1st Cir.1980); 9 Moore's Federal Practice pars. 238.01 and 238.02 (2d. ed. 1980).

=== CASE 2211931 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.613698+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 302 (1980)
Dr. Bernard WAGNER, As Superintendent of New Castle State Hospital, Department of Mental Health, State of Indiana, Appellants (Petitioners below),
v.
Rex KENDALL, Jack Thurman, Jack V. Squires, Appellees (Respondents below).
No. 1-580A132.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 10, 1980.
*303 Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Frank A. Baldwin, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellants.
Charles S. Brown, Jr., Brown & Brown, New Castle, for appellees.
ROBERTSON, Presiding Judge.
We are presented with the novel question of whether an arbitration award arising out of a dispute between the State and one of its employees is judicially reviewed under the procedures of the Administrative Adjudication Act (AAA) or under the procedures found in the Uniform Arbitration Act (UAA).
The facts, briefly stated, are that three employees of the New Castle State Hospital filed grievances concerning the failure by the Hospital to control an allegedly dangerous mental patient with the result of danger to the employees. The grievance procedure for these State employees is controlled by statute and consists of several administrative steps if settlement is not reached at any level. If the employee is not satisfied with the last step before the State Employees Appeal Board, he "may elect to submit the complaint to arbitration" and "the arbitrator's findings and recommendations shall be binding on both parties and shall immediately be instituted by the Commission." Ind. Code 4-15-2-35.
Apparently, the employees here went through all the stages preceding arbitration and having obtained an adverse decision, elected to submit the case to arbitration. Such arbitration was had and the arbitrator gave a favorable award to the employees, including alternative methods of protecting employees from the dangerous patient.
The State filed a petition in the Henry Circuit Court to vacate the arbitrator's award on the ground that the arbitrator exceeded his authority as granted in IC X-XX-X-XX. The employees filed a motion to dismiss, which was granted by the trial *304 court on the ground that the method of reviewing an arbitrator's decision under IC X-XX-X-XX, if at all, is under the Administrative Adjudication Act and that the State did not follow these procedures.
We disagree and reverse.
We first examine the AAA. The Act states in its definitional section (IC 4-22-1-2), "`Administrative Adjudication' means the administrative investigation, hearing and determination of any agency of issues or cases applicable to the particular person ... ."
The first issue is whether a delegation to an arbitrator of an unresolved administrative adjudication and the resultant arbitrator's determination is still an "administrative adjudication."[1]
We determine that, although the final resolution may be delegated to an arbitrator, the process is still in the nature of an administrative adjudication. There is no question that all administrative steps up to arbitration are reviewable under the AAA. See, e.g., Fromuth v. State ex rel. Indiana State Employees' Ass'n., (1977) Ind. App., 367 N.E.2d 29. The very term "delegation" implies that the power flows from, and in a sense is still retained by, the administrative body responsible for determining this grievance. It is the administrative body which must carry out the arbitration award under the statute. Thus, upon first examination, the AAA would seem to apply.
We turn, however, to an examination of the Uniform Arbitration Act. We have found very little authority on the issue of whether the arbitration contemplated in IC X-XX-X-XX is guided by the procedures of the UAA. We first note that the Act itself expressly includes "arbitration agreement between employers and employees." IC 34-4-2-1. State employees are not specifically excluded.
An Illinois Appellate decision, Board of Education, South Stickney School District III, Cook County v. Johnson, (1974) 21 Ill. App. 3d 482, 492, 315 N.E.2d 634, 642, after determining that the resolution of grievances between public employees and the State or a political subdivision thereof by arbitration is not an illegal delegation of the duties of an administrative body responsible for the resolution, stated:
Further, we see no reason why the dictates of the Illinois Arbitration Act ... should not apply and govern the resolution of minor disputes. In this way, although the initial determination is left to the arbitrator, the court retains the power to vacate an arbitrator's award under Section 12(e) of the Act if the issue is one that is not arbitrable or if the arbitrator has exceeded his power. See Champaign Ed. Ass'n, supra, where it was stated:
`Where there is an agreement to arbitrate and its scope is reasonably in doubt, the issue of arbitrability should be initially determined by the arbitrators, subject to the protective restrictions of Section 12 of the Act-under which the court may vacate an award under the varying conditions therein specified.'
See also: Maine School Administrative Dist. # 5 v. M.S.A.D. # 5 Teachers Ass'n., (1974) Me., 324 A.2d 308.
We also see no reason why not to apply the procedures of the Uniform Arbitration Act to arbitration under IC X-XX-X-XX. However, we note that the Uniform Arbitration Act contains a section providing for judicial review from an arbitration award. See IC XX-X-X-XX and IC XX-X-X-XX. We must, therefore, conclude that potentially the judicial review statutes of both the Uniform Arbitration Act and the Administrative Adjudication Act apply to this case and we are faced with the problem of which prevails. In a case such as this, *305 where the statutes cannot be harmonized or reconciled, it is a general principle of statutory construction that the more specific or detailed statute should prevail. County Council of Bartholomew County v. Department of Public Welfare of Bartholomew County, (1980) Ind. App., 400 N.E.2d 1187, 1190. The Uniform Arbitration Act statute obviously is the more specific statute.
In this case we further discern a policy reason for application of the judicial review statute of the Uniform Arbitration Act. It has been said:
The purpose of the Uniform Arbitration Act is to afford the opportunity to reach a final disposition of differences between parties in an easier, more expeditious manner than by litigation.
MSP Collaborative Developers v. Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland, 596 F.2d 247, 250 (7th Cir.1979).
Thus, judicial review of arbitration is strictly limited as found in the Uniform Arbitration Act, IC XX-X-X-XX.[2] We note that the judicial review provided in the Administrative Adjudication Act is much more broad. See IC X-XX-X-XX.
Although there is a countervailing policy of extending the Administrative Adjudication Act to provide the protection of due process to agency determinations, we think the Uniform Arbitration Act provides this due process protection as well and in a manner such as to fulfill the policy that led to the selection of arbitration for conflict resolution in this case.[3]
We, therefore, reverse and remand.
YOUNG, P.J., and NEAL, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The parties do not enlighten us as to the effect of what appears to be a subdelegation of power by the legislature to a private individual. The statute provides for delegation of power to settle grievances to various administrative groups and then further delegates its authority to an independent arbitrator. The possibility of an unlawful delegation of power is not raised by either party, and therefore, we will not examine it.
[2]  The grounds for vacating an award under IC XX-X-X-XX(a) are:
(1) The award was procured by corruption or fraud; (2) there was evident partiality by an arbitrator appointed as a neutral or corruption in any of the arbitrators or misconduct prejudicing the rights of any party; (3) the arbitrators exceeding [exceeded] their powers and the award cannot be corrected without affecting the merits of the decision upon the controversy submitted; (4) the arbitrators refused to postpone the hearing upon sufficient cause being shown therefor or refused to hear evidence material to the controversy or otherwise so conducted the hearing, contrary to the provisions of section 6 [34-4-2-6] of this act, as to prejudice substantially the rights of a party; or (5) there was no arbitration agreement and the issue was not adversely determined in proceedings under section 3 [34-4-2-3] and the party did not participate in the arbitration hearing without raising the objection; but the fact that the relief was such that it could not or would not be granted by a court of law or equity is not ground for vacating or refusing to confirm the award.
[3]  Question has been raised regarding the failure to make a record for judicial review in this case. We refer the State to IC 34-4-2-6 which states in relevant part, "any party may require that the hearing be recorded in a manner sufficient for appeal." We leave it to the trial court upon remand to determine the effect of the apparent failure of the State to so request.

=== CASE 2211933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.652767+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 295 (1980)
Charles PUCKETT, Appellant (Claimant below),
v.
REVIEW BOARD OF THE INDIANA EMPLOYMENT SECURITY DIVISION AND YOUNGSTOWN SHEET AND TUBE COMPANY, Appellees.
No. 2-879A262.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 9, 1980.
Rehearing Denied January 23, 1981.
*297 Albert C. Hand, Hand, Muenich & Wilk, Hammond, for appellant.
Theo. L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Jeff G. Fihn, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
YOUNG, Presiding Justice.
Claimant Charles Puckett seeks review of a decision of the Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division holding him ineligible for Trade Readjustment Allowance (TRA) under the federal Trade Act of 1974 because of his participation in an employer sponsored apprentice training program. Puckett challenges the Board's ineligibility decision as being contrary to law and inconsistent with its findings of fact. More particularly, he argues that certification by the Department of Labor of employees of Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. who became "totally or partially separated from employment" as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance mandated payment by the Division of TRA benefits. Additionally, he argues that under the Indiana Employment Security Laws, he is eligible for TRA benefits. Concluding that Department of Labor eligibility certification does not, as claimant argues, mandate payment of TRA benefits, we affirm the Review Board's decision holding claimant, electing participation in the apprentice program, ineligible for TRA benefits because he was employed and unavailable for work.
The Trade Act of 1974, 19 U.S.C. § 2271, et seq. (1976) provided a new adjustment assistance program for workers displaced because of increased imports. Under its terms a worker separated from employment certified by the Department of Labor as adversely affected by imported products is eligible to apply for adjustment assistance. The administration of TRA was contractually undertaken by the Indiana Employment Security Division pursuant to 19 U.S.C. § 2311. In accordance with 19 U.S.C. § 2272, claimant's employment at Youngstown Sheet and Tube was found to be adversely affected employment and thus, Youngstown employees totally or partially separated from employment were certified as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance.
Claimant, pursuant to the terms of a contract between the United Steelworkers Union and Youngstown, on August 26, 1977, elected placement in an apprentice training program as an alternative to being laid off. Only employees who had completed at least 25% of the total hours required to complete their apprenticeship program were eligible to make this binding election. In lieu of his regular pay, claimant received, by the terms of the union-employer contract, 100% of the amount he would have received from unemployment compensation and S.U.B. pay if laid off. (Supplemental Unemployment Benefits, an account into *298 which the employer pays 17 cents per employee hour worked.) The money to pay claimant, although paid in the form of corporate payroll checks with income tax and union dues deducted therefrom, came from the S.U.B. fund. Apparently, claimant's apprentice program salary for a 40 hour week equalled 80% of his regular earnings. He was required to attend both classroom sessions and on the job training five days a week, 8 hours per day.
On these facts, the Board made the following findings and conclusions:
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS: The record reflects the claimant was employed by this employer until on or about August 26, 1977 when he accepted placement in an apprentice retention program as an alternative to being entirely laid off by the company. The record reflects as an employee under the apprentice retention program he would receive an amount in pay in excess of what he would receive as a laid off employee on unemployment and sub-pay in amount exceeding this by ten percent. Claimant argued at the hearing that in fact he was laid off from his regular full-time employment where he was adversely affected, which statement is unrebutted. However, claimant, at the same time he was laid off, was reemployed by the company through the apprentice retention program, and although not in his regular employment and technically laid off from that employment he was still employed by the company in an alternate area specifically through apprentice retention program where he earned an amount in excess of the amount he would have earned as a laid off employee and which apparently constituted eighty percent of his regular earnings. As an employee under the apprentice retention program the claimant was required to make himself available on a full time basis to the company for employment on the company premises either in classroom work or in on the job training through the apprentice program. Resultingly the claimant could not have sought employment or otherwise made himself able and available for employment as required by the Indiana Employment Security Act while he was regularly employed by the apprentice retention program.
From the foregoing findings it is concluded that the claimant on or about August 26, 1977 did become employed in the apprentice retention program as an alternative to a regular layoff with this company. It is further concluded that the claimant while having been separated from his regular employment in an affected area was reemployed by the company in a capacity earning at least 80% of his prior average weekly wage and was regularly employed in the apprentice retention program and therefore cannot be considered to be unemployed and separated from his employment with this Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company as required by the Trade Act of 1974.
Before addressing the issues raised by claimant, we first consider the appropriate standard of review. Insofar as Puckett attacks the Review Board's findings of fact, we will uphold those findings if they are supported by substantial evidence of probative value. Siddiqi v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1979) Ind. App., 388 N.E.2d 613; Skirvin v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1976) Ind. App., 355 N.E.2d 425. Insofar as Puckett challenges the Board's application of relevant statutory provisions in reaching its conclusions of law, we will affirm so long as the decision meets the test of reasonableness. Osborn v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1978) Ind. App., 381 N.E.2d 495; City of Evansville v. Southern Indiana Gas and Electric Co., (1975) 167 Ind. App. 472, 339 N.E.2d 562.
Turning to the issues before us, claimant first argues that the findings of the Review Board are in direct conflict with its decision. He apparently advances the position that the legal result flowing from Department of Labor certification and the Board's finding of separation from adversely affected employment is automatic entitlement to TRA. Without authority to deny such benefits, *299 Puckett argues that the Board's action in so doing is arbitrary and contrary to law.
It is true that the Board found specifically that Puckett was separated from adversely affected employment.[1] Such a finding is not, as Puckett urges however, in conflict, directly or indirectly, with the ineligibility decision of the Review Board. As the effect of Department of Labor certification is a question of law, we look to the federal Trade Act. The Trade Act, 19 U.S.C. § 2291 states in pertinent part that "[p]ayment of a trade readjustment allowance shall be made to an adversely affected worker covered by a certification ... for any week of unemployment ... ." Week of unemployment is defined in § 2319(14) as:
... any week for which his remuneration for services performed during such week is less than 80% of his average weekly wage and, in which, because of lack of work
(A) if he has been totally separated, he worked less than the full-time week (excluding overtime) in his current occupation, or
(B) if he has been partially separated, he worked 80 percent or less of his average weekly hours.
It is undisputed that Puckett was paid 80% of his average weekly wage and most importantly, that he participated in the apprentice program 40 hours per week. Thus by definition, there was no week of unemployment for which Puckett was entitled to TRA.
In addition, before actual entitlement to TRA is determined, resort must be had to Indiana Employment Security law, utilizing the availability and disqualification provisions found thereunder:
Except where inconsistent with the provisions of this part and subject to such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the availability and disqualification of the State law-
(1) under which an adversely affected worker is entitled to unemployment insurance (whether or not he has filed a claim for such insurance), or
(2) if he is not so entitled to unemployment insurance, of the State in which he was totally or partially separated,
shall apply to any such worker who files a claim for trade readjustment allowances. The State law so determined with respect to a separation of a worker shall remain applicable, for purposes of the preceding sentence, with respect to such separation until such worker becomes entitled to unemployment insurance under another State law (whether or not he has filed a claim for such insurance.)
19 U.S.C. § 2294.
It is, therefore, incorrect to assert, as claimant here does, that certification by the *300 Department of Labor mandates payment of TRA benefits by the Review Board. Rather, denial of TRA benefits by the Review Board was proper so long as there existed substantial evidence of probative value to support its conclusion that Puckett was ineligible because employed and unavailable for work. We find there is such evidence.
The Board found that Puckett, although technically laid off from his regular employment, was reemployed by the company in an alternate area through the apprentice retention program. Thus, the Board concluded that Puckett, regularly employed in the apprentice program, could not be considered unemployed and separated from his employment as required by the Trade Act. Puckett challenges the Board's finding that he was reemployed. He argues that the apprentice retention program was just a "special layoff status" program, his position by participating in the program in effect no different than the position of those employees actually laid off. He also argues that the payments he received for participation in the apprentice program were not remuneration as defined by the Indiana Employment Security Act and, if he received no "remuneration" for services, then he is not disqualified under the federal act "week of unemployment" language earlier discussed.
In support, he relies upon language in the contract which makes reference to "the layoff training status" of apprentice retainees and company payroll records showing his status as "inactive"; the fact that payment comes from the S.U.B. fund; the provision for the program's discontinuance if the fund drops below 35%; the reduction in his hours and wages under the apprentice program to 80% of when regularly employed and his ineligibility for certain company benefits as evidence the training program is just a special layoff status program.
Support for the Board's conclusion is found in the following facts: the apprentice retention option was offered only to certain eligible employees who were required to make a binding election to participate; the program required a 40 hour per week commitment from the participating employee; participation accelerated completion of claimant's craft status and rate, enabled him to receive 80% of his regular earnings and 10% more than a laid off employee receiving unemployment and S.U.B. pay.
The various facts relied upon to support both the Board's finding that Puckett was reemployed in an alternative program and Puckett's finding that he was laid off from employment are not in dispute. A basic premise of appellate review is that we cannot weigh the evidence. We conclude there was substantial evidence of probative value to support the Board's finding that Puckett was employed.[2] From such finding of fact, the Board could properly conclude, on the basis of both federal and state law, that Puckett was ineligible for TRA.
We are equally unpersuaded by Puckett's argument that the compensation received while retained in the apprentice program is not remuneration. Remuneration is very broadly defined by Ind. Code 22-4-4-1 as "all compensation for personal services, including, but not limited to, commission, bonuses, dismissal pay, vacation pay, sick pay, ... payments in lieu of compensation for services... ." "Compensation" has been defined as a quid pro quo for services rendered. Kirby v. Indiana Employment Security Board, (1973) 158 Ind. *301 App. 643, 304 N.E.2d 225, 227. "Personal services" are defined as labor performed by an individual for the benefit of another. Id., at 228. Although mindful that the apprentice program benefits participating employees like claimant by accelerating completion of their craft status, we believe the employer Youngstown is similarly benefitted. The employees work on the job four of the five days in which they are in training and, more importantly, they are being trained for work in the employer's business.
Puckett nonetheless argues the money received was not "wages" as defined by Ind. Code 22-4-4-2. TRA benefits are available to those workers separated from adversely affected employment for any "week of unemployment." "Unemployment", under both federal and state legislation is defined in terms of the amount of "remuneration for personal services" received. Because we have concluded that the compensation is "remuneration", we need not decide whether the money received is "wages."
Puckett also challenges the findings and conclusion of the Board that, because claimant was required to "make himself available on a full time basis to the company for employment on the company premises" ..., he could not, as required by the Indiana Act, have sought employment or otherwise made himself able and available for employment. The availability requirements are specifically made applicable to the Trade Readjustment Act by 19 U.S.C. § 2294. Puckett argues his work in the apprentice retention program fits within a statutory exception to the availability rule. Thus, he argues the Board's conclusion, being arbitrary and erroneous, is contrary to law. His position is that Ind. Code 22-4-14-3[3] enables him to engage in the training program without disqualification on availability grounds. Ind. Code 22-4-14-3 exempts from availability requirements individuals in Board approved training programs. There is no evidence that the apprentice retention program was Board approved. Indeed, 640 I.A.C. 1-9-24 makes this private employer sponsored training program ineligible for Board approval:
The Board or its duly authorized representative may approve such course for an individual only if he finds that (a) reasonable work opportunities for which the individual is fitted by training and experience do not exist in his locality, or the individual has been selected and referred to training under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973; (b) the training course relates to an occupation or skill for which there are, or are expected to be in the immediate future, reasonable work opportunities in his locality; (c) the training course is offered by a competent and reliable agency, educational institution, or employing unit other than an employing unit training workers for positions in its own establishment; (d) the individual has the required qualifications and aptitudes to complete the course successfully; (e) the individual is not receiving and is not eligible for subsistence payments or similar assistance under any public or private retraining program other than the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973.
640 I.A.C. 1-9-24 (emphasis added). In light of the above regulation, the conclusion of the Board that claimant was unavailable for work is not contrary to the statute.
Claimant nonetheless argues he was available for work and "did attempt to work by selecting the apprentice layoff benefit to protect his job and go back to work *302 when work was available." By this argument, Puckett suggests as a matter of policy that participation in a training program, whether or not Board approved, should not defeat his right to unemployment benefits. In effect, he asks us to hold as a matter of law the apprentice retention program within the spirit even though not the letter of the statute. This we cannot do. We must affirm the Board's decision concerning the interpretation of the statute because it has "warrant in the record and a reasonable basis in law." Osborn v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1978) Ind. App., 381 N.E.2d 495, 498. We must affirm the Board's decision even though we might have been inclined to decide the matter differently had we ourselves been members of the Board. Were the rule otherwise, this court would displace the administrative department of government. Id.
We also find substantial evidence of probative value to support the Board's finding of unavailability. The phrase "available for work" is not defined by statute. Whether an individual is "available for work" within the meaning of the statute depends, Indiana courts have held, upon the facts and circumstances of each case as considered against the background and purposes of the legislation. Miles v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1951) 120 Ind. App. 685, 96 N.E.2d 128. It is a question of fact to be determined by the Review Board. Its decision is conclusive and binding so long as supported by substantial evidence of probative value. Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, (1954) 124 Ind. App. 273, 116 N.E.2d 650. Puckett's presence at employer premises was required 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week. His activity brought him financial benefit and prevented him from being available to a substantial field of employers. The Review Board could properly conclude on the basis of such evidence that Puckett, having removed himself from the job market, was not attached to the labor force, and was therefore unavailable for substitute employment. Thus, we conclude the Review Board's decision is supported by substantial evidence of probative value, and, as such, is not contrary to law.
Affirmed.
CHIPMAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Claimant also premises error on the Board's failure to consider him partially separated from employment. It is clear, however, from a reading of the definitional section of the Trade Act, 19 U.S.C. § 2319(6), that claimant was not partially separated from adversely affected employment:
(6) The term "partial separation" means, with respect to an individual who has not been totally separated, that he has had-
(A) his hours of work reduced to 80 percent or less of his average weekly hours in adversely affected employment, and
(B) his wages reduced to 80 percent or less of his average weekly wage in such adversely affected employment.
Claimant, instead, was totally separated from adversely affected employment:
(11) The term "total separation" means the layoff or severance of an individual from employment with a firm in which, or in a subdivision of which, adversely affected employment exists.
19 U.S.C. § 2319(11). (Emphasis added). Even if claimant was not totally separated from adversely affected employment, he is ineligible under the definition of partial separation because his hours of work in the apprentice program-40 per week-are not a reduction to 80% or less, of his "average weekly hours" in adversely affected employment, the term "average weekly hours" being defined to exclude overtime. 19 U.S.C. § 2319(5).
Neither is claimant partially unemployed as defined by Ind. Code 22-4-3-2. To be partially unemployed, an individual must be earning less than his weekly benefit amount. Claimant here earned more than his weekly benefit amount. There was, therefore, no error in the Board's refusal to consider claimant partially separated from adversely affected employment.
[2]  Claimant's argument that his status is that of a laid off employee receiving an employer benefit, if accepted by this court, would lead to the irrational and untenable conclusion that the compensation received from the apprentice program work is non-deductible income under Ind. Code 22-4-15-8:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, . .. benefits otherwise payable for any week under this act shall not be denied or reduced on account of any payment or payments the claimant receives, has received, will receive or accrues right to receive with respect to or based upon such week under a private unemployment benefit plan financed in whole or part by his employer or former employer.
As such, claimant, if otherwise eligible and qualifying would be entitled to full unemployment benefits under the Indiana Employment Security Act. Clearly such a Byzantine result was not contemplated by the legislature.
[3]  Ind. Code 22-4-14-3 provides in pertinent part:
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, or IC XX-X-XX-X; no otherwise eligible individual shall be denied benefits for any week because he is in training with the approval of the board, nor shall such individual be denied benefits with respect to any week in which he is in training with the approval of the board by reason of the application of the provisions of this section with respect to the availability for work or active search for work or by reason of the application of the provisions of IC XX-X-XX-X relating to failure to apply for, or the refusal to accept, suitable work. The board shall by regulation prescribe the conditions under which approval of such training will be granted.

=== CASE 9737763 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:12.142232+00 ===

SIMONETT, Justice.
Petitioner’s claim that its auxiliary facilities were entitled to a property tax exemption, either as a “public hospital” or as a “purely public charity,” was denied by the Tax Court. We affirm the Tax Court.
As the result of studies commissioned over a period of years by the Chisago Lakes Hospital District and the Chisago Lakes Medical Center, P.A., the two entities reorganized. This reorganization is believed to be the first merger of its kind of a rural public hospital and a practicing group of physicians and was accomplished in the following manner.
A new corporation was formed in 1986, named the Chisago Health Services (CHS), the petitioner in this case. CHS assumed the operation of the Chisago Lakes Hospital (hereinafter the Hospital), formerly operated by its owner, the hospital district. It also took over the operation of the Hospital Annex, an addition to the Hospital which includes an outpatient medical clinic, sometimes called an ambulatory care facility. CHS also took over operation of two ambulatory care facilities in the neighboring small towns of North Branch and Wyoming. In this proceeding, petitioner claims that the Wyoming facility and the Hospital Annex are entitled to a property tax exemption.
Under the reorganization, the employees of the hospital district have become employees of CHS. The doctors’ professional corporation transferred its medical practice and leasehold interest in the Hospital Annex to CHS, and its physicians and other employees are now also full-time employees of CHS.
The Wyoming clinic building, newly built by the District, is about 7 miles from the Hospital. Aside from space devoted to mechanical operations, about 19 percent of the space is used for physical therapy, 53 percent for patient examination rooms, and 28 percent for a waiting room, reception area and hallways for all patients of the facility.
In the Hospital Annex, aside from area devoted to mechanical operations, about 32 percent of the space is used as a business office serving all the facilities operated by CHS; approximately 51 percent is used by the physicians for their offices, examination rooms, and a waiting room.1
The Hospital consists of a 49-bed acute care facility and an attached 40-bed skilled nursing care facility. Unquestionably, the Hospital is exempt from property taxes as a “public hospital.” Some of the ambulatory care services formerly performed only at the Hospital are now performed at the Hospital Annex and the neighboring ambulatory care facilities.
Since CHS has commenced operations, the number of employee-physicians has grown from 11 to 14. These physicians staff the ambulatory care service in the Hospital Annex, as well as at the Wyoming (and North Branch) facilities. The doctors are supervised by CHS, and CHS does all the billing and collections. Only employee-physicians on the active staff of the Hospital may admit patients to the Hospital. Physicians who are neither active staff nor consulting staff (there are some 25 consultant physicians) are not permitted to admit patients to the Hospital. Active staff physicians may not admit patients to hospitals other than the CHS Hospital.
The employee-physicians are paid in accordance with a salary scale set by a CHS committee which does not include the physicians. Physician compensation is de*388signed to take into consideration: (1) tenure; (2) productivity measured by services generated; and (3) market compensation for physicians practicing in similar specialty areas.
All CHS facilities have an open door policy, ie., patients may receive care even if they are unable to pay for it. This policy appears in the patient information packets. In practice, most patients do not discuss their finances prior to admission. Rather, the patients receive the usual billing. CHS then follows its customary collection process for unpaid bills; if CHS determines during its collection efforts that a patient lacks ability to pay, any unpaid balance is written off. From June 1, 1986, to August 31, 1988, CHS has recorded close to $1 million in bad debts, more than half attributable to the ambulatory care facilities. Actual write-offs during this period were $190,492. All Minnesota nonprofit hospitals have a similar open door policy. Most private medical clinics do not. The Chisago Lakes Medical Center, P.A., did not have such a policy.
The reorganization came about because of radical changes in the nature and delivery of health care, changes which have particularly affected rural hospitals. Ninety percent of area households in the Chisa-go Lakes Hospital District were using Twin Cities health care facilities. Area residents and the physicians lacked confidence in their local Hospital, and the physicians saw their relationship with the Hospital as adversarial. The Hospital saw a three-fold need: to have a better working relationship with the doctors; to promote its market by taking advantage of the extraordinary population growth (unusual perhaps for a rural area) along the Highway 35E corridor; and to improve its outpatient services.
The District was aware, too, of radical changes in health care economics. Government payments for Medicare and Medicaid patients, a large part of a small hospital’s revenue, were, respectively, about 15 to 40 percent below the Hospital’s charges to private paying patients. Health insurers were stressing efforts to keep people out of hospitals and aggressively seeking to negotiate discounts for hospital services. In 1987, 56.7 percent of CHS’ revenue came from Medicare, Medicaid, and Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO’s); this figure was projected to be 66.8 percent in 1988. Revenue from self-paying patients was 12.3 percent in 1987 and was expected to decline to 9.5 percent in 1988.
From 1982 through 1986, the average length of stay in the Hospital had declined by 41 percent, the number of admissions had declined by 20 percent, and the total number of hospital patient days had dropped by 52 percent. Yet, from 1982 to the time of the trial, outpatient revenue grew from 15 to 45 percent of total revenues. Similar increases were occurring in hospitals throughout the state.
The reorganization was designed to ensure unified planning with physician involvement, to offer better quality and cost control, and to encourage the physicians to develop specialty programs for the Hospital. The new program, too, would help reduce the risk of competition from Twin Cities clinics and physicians, while at the same time enabling the District to do a better job of providing an integrated health care program to the communities it served.
The foregoing facts were found by the Tax Court and are not disputed. More facts will be added during our discussion of the issues.
I.
The first issue is whether the Hospital Annex and the Wyoming ambulatory care facility qualify for a property tax exemption as “public hospitals.” Minn. Const. art. 10, § 1 and Minn.Stat. § 272.02, subd. 1(3) (1990).
Preliminarily, we note this exemption is not limited to buildings actually used as hospitals. It applies to any property “devoted to and reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of” public hospital purposes. State v. Fairview Hospital Ass’n, 262 Minn. 184, 187, 114 N.W.2d 568, 571 (1962). The auxiliary property need not be “essential” or “indispensable” to the accomplishment of an exempt purpose; nor *389must it necessarily be adjacent or close to the public hospital itself. Id. at 187, 114 N.W.2d at 571. The term “necessity” is to be given a “reasonable, natural, and practical interpretation in the light of modern conditions.” Abbott-Northwestern Hospital, Inc. v. County of Hennepin, 389 N.W.2d 916, 919 (Minn.1986), quoting Community Hospital Linen Services, Inc. v. Commissioner of Taxation, 309 Minn. 447, 452, 245 N.W.2d 190, 193 (1976).
In this case the Tax Court concluded that the Wyoming outpatient facility and the Hospital Annex were not reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of a public hospital. We “will not disturb a decision of the tax court if the evidence is such that the tax court could reasonably reach the conclusion that it did.” City of Springfield v. Commissioner of Revenue, 380 N.W.2d 802, 805 (Minn.1986), citing Red Owl Stores v. Commissioner of Taxation, 264 Minn. 1, 5, 117 N.W.2d 401, 405 (1962).
The parties disagree on what the “reasonably necessary” test means. The petitioner contends the test is met if the evidence establishes that the auxiliary facilities are reasonably necessary to continue to operate the Chisago Lakes Hospital in “a financially sound manner.” In other words, according to CHS, “reasonably necessary” may mean reasonable economic necessity. The Commissioner, on the other hand, says the test is not of economic health or viability; rather, the Commissioner contends, the question is whether the auxiliary property must be reasonably necessary to the functional operation of the Hospital.
Both parties look for guidance to our two most recent cases on this subject. In City of Springfield, supra, we held certain auxiliary facilities not exempt, while in Abbott-Northwestern, supra, we held certain other auxiliary facilities to be exempt. A brief survey of these two eases is instructive.
In City of Springfield, a small rural municipality owned and operated a municipal medical clinic adjacent to its municipal hospital, which it had built to attract doctors. The business affairs of the clinic were handled by the hospital. The physicians in the clinic were paid 60 percent of their gross accounts receivable, while the hospital retained 40 percent. The Tax Court found that (1) the clinic was not devoted entirely to a public purpose because the physicians were really carrying on a private practice in the clinic building on a basis similar to the fee basis of other doctors; and (2) the clinic property was not reasonably devoted to the accomplishment of the hospital’s purposes. We concluded that the Tax Court’s findings were not clearly erroneous and affirmed.
Important for our purposes, the city in Springfield argued that the medical clinic was essential for the hospital’s existence because it generated patients for the hospital and because the clinic was operated and managed by the hospital as though it were an extension of the hospital. Id. at 805. Significantly, we rejected both arguments. In other words, we rejected a “reasonably necessary” test based predominantly on economic necessity.
In Abbott-Northwestern, the Tax Court determined that a lodging facility, part of a hospital complex used for preadmission patients, outpatients, and families of patients, was exempt from property taxes. We affirmed. There was evidence that hospital treatment included having family members attend the inpatient. Consequently, we said, the Tax Court might find that the lodging facility "was reasonably necessary in this modern age for the accomplishment of its purpose of furnishing health care services to patients.” 389 N.W.2d at 919. In other words, we applied the reasonably necessary test in a functional sense. See also State v. Fairview Hospital Ass’n, supra (recreational lake property used by nursing students exempt because “well within the concept of its [the nursing school’s] normal operations” designed to train nurses for the parent hospital).
*390We agree with the Tax Court that this case is much closer to Springfield than to Abbott-Northwestern. It may well be—indeed, the Tax Court found—that the auxiliary facilities and the creation of CHS were a necessary part of a plan to maintain and increase the patient base and revenues of the hospital, to build its market, and generally to do a better job of providing an integrated health care program in its service area. Nevertheless, the Tax Court also found that the CHS health care system was “not so fully integrated” as to meet the reasonably necessary test. Neither, noted the Tax Court, were the ambulatory care facilities as fully integrated as in St. Elizabeth Hospital, Inc. v. City of Appleton, 141 Wis.2d 787, 416 N.W.2d 620, 621 (App.1987); there the hospital provided “walk-in medical care services in its emergency room facility, under the licensed trade name ‘First Care.’ ”
Auxiliary facilities to qualify for tax exemption must, first of all, be devoted to what it is that a public hospital does and, secondly, be reasonably necessary to accomplish that purpose. The test, in a sense, measures the degree to which the auxiliary facilities and the public hospital are functionally interdependent.
Here, as in Springfield, the District has devised a plan to attract physicians and patients to its Hospital and to remain competitive with neighboring health care providers; but, as in Springfield, this purpose, though it makes good economic sense, does little to advance a tax exemption. Petitioner seeks to distinguish Springfield on the grounds the physicians in that case received a fixed percentage of gross accounts while the CHS physicians are on a fixed salary. This distinction loses much of its force, however, because, as the Tax Court points out, the CHS physicians’ salaries take into account an individual doctor’s productivity measured by the services he or she generates. In other words, there is a substantial nonpublic aspect to the way in which the physicians practice in the medical clinic facilities.
The Tax Court found that an assured increase of inpatients, while desirable, was not necessary for the Hospital to function as a hospital;2 that the CHS rule requiring its employee-doctors to admit all their patients to the Hospital was a self-imposed requirement, not a functional need; and while the ambulatory care facilities furnished some of the same services offered by the Hospital, this was done “for the purpose of maximizing geographic localities to generate revenue.” Finally, the Tax Court was not persuaded that the merger of the Hospital and the physicians group was reasonably necessary to remedy the Hospital’s lack of equipment and to cure the adversarial relationship existing between the Hospital and the outpatient clinics; both of these problems could be resolved by measures other than merger.
CHS claims also that the Tax Court and the Commissioner erred in treating the Hospital as only an inpatient facility for purposes of the reasonably necessary test. This argument, of course, questions exactly what it is that hospitals do, and the question arises at a time when the old distinctions between hospitals and doctors’ clinics are being blurred and their respective services tend somewhat to overlap. But even in view of these changing circumstances, we cannot say that the Tax Court erred in treating the CHS reorganization as primarily one to enhance the Hospital’s economic viability, not its functional purpose.
The difficulty with granting tax exemption to auxiliary properties which help an exempt institution to survive or to prosper financially is two-fold. First, it is difficult to know where to draw the line; almost any auxiliary facility can be found to im*391prove the financial well-being of a hospital. Secondly, these exemptions, because they are exceptions to the requirement of uniform taxation, tend to give an unfair competitive advantage to the exempted facility over similar facilities privately operated.
Moreover, if economic well-being were to be the test, the court would be required to weigh the competing economic interests of the currently volatile health care marketplace, thus placing the court in the position of legislating tax relief. Recently, in being asked to evaluate the new HMO’s in this same context of tax exemption, we said, “[T]he legislature, with its ability to explore all issues with respect to these health care facilities, is the appropriate body to make such a determination.” Share v. Commissioner of Revenue, 363 N.W.2d 47, 53 (Minn.1985).
In any event, our role is a limited one. We review the record and the findings and conclusions of the Tax Court not to make our own decision on the merits, but to determine “if the evidence is such that the tax court could reasonably reach the conclusion that it did.” Springfield, 380 N.W.2d at 805. We believe the Tax Court’s understanding of the reasonably necessary test was correct and that it could reach the decision it did. The Tax Court’s denial of an exemption as a public hospital is affirmed.
II.
The second issue is whether the auxiliary property is exempt as included within “institutions of purely public charity.” Minn. Const. art. 10, § 1; Minn.Stat. § 272.02, subd. 1(6). We think not.
In North Star Research Institute v. County of Hennepin, 306 Minn. 1, 6, 236 N.W.2d 754, 757 (1975), we listed six factors bearing on whether a facility qualifies as a purely public charity. Three of these factors (the first, fourth, and sixth) are admittedly met here, namely: (a) the stated purpose of CHS is charitable; (b) income received and produced does not produce a profit; and (c) upon dissolution, the assets go to the Chisago Lakes Hospital District.
The second North Star factor considers the extent to which the entity is supported by donations and gifts. CHS argues that Medicare and Medicaid payments, comprising 26 percent of its revenue, should be counted as donations. We have allowed certain government subsidies in the area of public housing to qualify as donations. See Rio Vista Non-Profit Housing Corp. v. Ramsey County, 277 N.W.2d 187, 190 (Minn.1979) (federal construction loan and rent subsidies, to which “the very existence of Rio Vista can be attributed”); In re Claim of Assembly Homes, Inc. v. Yellow Medicine County, 273 Minn. 197, 140 N.W.2d 336 (1966) (care for nursing home patients paid by county welfare or veteran benefits). We do not think the Rio Vista rationale should be extended to apply here. It seems to us, as it did to the Tax Court, the government’s payments under the Medicare and Medicaid programs are more accurately characterized as payments for services rendered, not as donations.
The third North Star factor examines whether the “charity” recipients are required to pay for the assistance they receive. CHS contends it provides services to many patients at reduced rates or without charge, and it also points to its open door policy, as well as its volunteer and outreach programs. The fact that CHS discounts its market fees in accepting Medicare and Medicaid payments does not, by itself, constitute the extension of charity to the patients involved. As the Tax Court noted, there is little conceptual difference between these discounts and the business discounts negotiated by HMO’s and health insurers on behalf of their insureds with both public and private clinics and hospitals. As to the open door policy, the Tax Court found it did benefit a relatively small number of patients, but that, in practice and on the whole, the open door policy was no more than writing off uncollectible bills, a business practice not unlike that of other health care providers. Moreover, the community outreach programs nowhere came near the medical research and education *392programs of the Mayo facilities. See footnote 2, supra.
Finally, the fifth North Star factor asks whether the beneficiaries of the “charity” are restricted and, if so, if the restricted class bears a reasonable relationship to the entity’s charitable objectives. The restricted class, in this case, would be those patients of the medical clinics at the Hospital Annex and at Wyoming who are financially unable to pay. The Tax Court found that the CHS medical clinics were operated in essentially the same manner as any private medical clinic, i.e., furnishing outpatient services at market level fees. In other words, CHS’ operation of its medical clinic facilities did not really lessen the burden of government in the overall field of health care. See Chateau Community Housing v. Hennepin County, 452 N.W.2d 240, 244 (Minn.1990).
Consequently, the evidence supports the Tax Court’s decision that the auxiliary properties do not qualify as a purely public charity, and we must affirm that decision.
It would seem that some portion of the Hospital Annex, that portion which serves as the central administration center, would qualify as reasonably necessary to accomplishment of the Hospital’s purposes. The Tax Court so noted, but indicated that at least for now the record does not identify that space.
Affirmed.
. The remaining 15 percent of the Annex is rented to dentists. No exemption is claimed for this space.
Neither, we should add, does CHS claim an exemption for its ambulatory care facility at North Branch, apparently because the facility is leased from a non-exempt owner.
. Compare Mayo Foundation v. Commissioner of Revenue, 306 Minn. 25, 38, 236 N.W.2d 767, 774 (1975), where the need for a large patient base was found to be functionally necessary to the charitable entities, the court stating: "The quality of a clinical education program depends, to a large extent, on the availability of a large and diverse patient population to provide exposure to various medical problems and situations. Similarly, the Mayo research program depends on a large patient population in order to function successfully."

=== CASE 9737764 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:12.147509+00 ===

YETKA, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority holding. It is my opinion that the Hospital Annex and Wyoming facilities which are detached from the main hospital building in Chisago City ought to be exempt from property taxation. The Commissioner of Taxation ruled that they are not.
The health care system in America has undergone dramatic change within the past decade. Medicare and Medicaid have systematically reduced their payments to hospitals for patient services. Third-party payors — HMO’s and private insurers — have imposed restrictions on reimbursement. As a result, hospital revenues have dropped drastically. In order to survive, hospitals have had to look for alternative, more cost-effective ways to provide patient service. Many have set up outpatient and ambulatory care facilities, often in shopping malls and neighborhood centers remote from the hospital inpatient unit.
Small rural hospitals especially have suffered in the new environment. They lack a large patient base and opportunities for growth. They have fewer sources of patient revenue and charitable donations than large institutions. Moreover, they face fierce competition from large metropolitan hospitals that seek to expand their own patient base in these difficult times.
The hospital in Chisago City, like other small rural hospitals, was in financial trouble. Hospital occupancy was dropping rapidly. Admissions were down. Average length of stay was declining. There were several doctor clinics in the area, but the doctors were referring patients to the Twin Cities, Forest Lake, or elsewhere because the hospital facilities were not adequate.
In response to these problems, the hospital district and the doctors formed a nonprofit corporation, Chisago Health Services (CHS). CHS took over both the clinics and the hospital and operated them for nonprofit purposes. The doctors became employees of CHS. Non-doctor members of the CHS Board of Directors set the doctors’ salaries annually. The new corporation is non-profit, so there are no profits to distribute to the doctors, and their sole remuneration is their salaries. The detached facilities at Wyoming and the Hospital Annex, formerly private clinics, now are organized as ambulatory care centers. They perform outpatient surgery, physical therapy, and other outpatient services which modern full-service hospitals provide.
The commissioner held that, while the main hospital in Chisago City is exempt from property taxes as a public hospital, the facilities at Wyoming and the Hospital Annex are not exempt. It seems to me that these facilities qualify for tax exemption as “reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of [the hospital’s] purposes.” *393Abbott-Northwestern Hosp., Inc. v. County of Hennepin, 389 N.W.2d 916, 919 (Minn.1986).
The form of providing hospital services is changing. Today many hospitals have only a 10 or 20 percent occupancy rate compared to 30 years ago when 90 to 100 percent of inpatient beds were filled. Today Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers demand that patient care be delivered in a more cost-effective way, that is, on an outpatient basis. Today hospitals derive their revenues more from short-term patients and those who receive ambulatory care than from long-term inpatients. It is reasonable for a hospital to enlarge its outpatient service and to provide care in remote locations which are more accessible to walk-in patients.
Within the spectrum of hospital services, even under the traditional inpatient model, there have always been services that operated at a loss. Other services broke even. Some brought in revenue, and they offset the losses from those services which a community hospital must offer to its public even if it loses money on them. There have always been hospital-based employee physicians staffing the laboratory, radiology, anesthesia and other departments. There have always been outpatient care programs, most visibly in emergency departments. CHS has brought together elements which, if placed under the roof of the main hospital building, would undisput-ably be tax exempt. It appears to me that they are challenged because they are physically separated from the main hospital.
CHS was formed in order to meet the needs of a changing health care environment and to attract more doctors. Before CHS was organized, there were 11 doctors in the area; now, 14 doctors serve the area as CHS employees. The number of patients has increased and so have revenues. Under its new structure, CHS is financially viable and may survive to serve this rural community. In this light, the two ambulatory care facilities may be more than “reasonably necessary” to accomplish the hospital’s purposes; they may be essential to this hospital’s survival.
I believe, therefore, that relator has met the test required by the legislature; thus, I dissent.

=== CASE 2211888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.091712+00 ===

244 Cal. App. 2d 283 (1966)
WARD BROOKS, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
HOWARD R. ALLARD, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 22533.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 17, 1966.
Cushing, Cullinan, Hancock & Rothert and Robert V. Campbell for Defendant and Appellant.
Hill & Hill, Arthur W. Hill and Victor M. Corbett for Plaintiff and Respondent.
AGEE, J.
Defendant appeals from a judgment decreeing specific performance of an option agreement, executed on June 16, 1959, wherein defendant agreed to sell to plaintiff a parcel of timber land, excepting a portion thereof.
The crucial issue on appeal is whether this excepted portion is described in the agreement with sufficient certainty to permit specific performance.
Our opinion is confined to this single issue, the lower court having deferred the trial of the issue of damages until the termination of the specific performance issue. (Cf. Brudvig v. Renner, 172 Cal. App. 2d 522 [342 P.2d 276].)
The description of the main parcel is adequate, including as it does the appellant's entire holding in that area and specifying the three quarter quarter sections of approximately 40 acres each wherein it lies. The total holding is approximately 116 acres.
After describing the main parcel, the excepted portion is described as follows: "Excepting therefrom that portion of the North east portion of the SW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 24 which is to be surveyed and retained by the family."
[1] "It has often been stated that one of the tests for determining the sufficiency of a description is whether a competent surveyor would have any difficulty in locating the land and establishing its boundaries from the description *285 contained in the agreement to convey. [Citations.]" (Leider v. Evans, 209 Cal. App. 2d 696, 703 [26 Cal. Rptr. 123].)
The description of the excepted portion does not meet this test. Nothing ties it down to any location on the ground, except that the agreement indicates it was to include certain "cabin sites" and "building sites" planned. There is no designation of the size or acreage of said portion. The most that can be said is that it is located somewhere in the northeast portion of a specified quarter quarter section (40 acres).
In Brudvig v. Renner, 172 Cal. App. 2d 522 [342 P.2d 276], specific performance of a contract of sale of real property was sought, the descriptive provisions reading: " '2-acres more or less, with New Home, located at 4053 Branciforte Drive, Santa Cruz, California; legally known as Dr. J. H. Renner property.' " The court held that since the 2-acre parcel was to come out of a larger 3-acre parcel, and the only characteristic required of it was that it encompass within its perimeter the site of a certain house, the uncertainty of the description precluded specific performance.
As to the admission of parol evidence, Presiding Justice Draper (then Justice) said: "In an action for specific performance, parol evidence may aid the contract description only in limited situations (see review of the cases in Corona Unified School Dist. v. Vejar, 165 Cal. App. 2d 561 [332 P.2d 294].) The description before us could be made definite only by resorting to parol evidence for addition of terms to the contract, rather than for aid in construction of the contract terms. But even if we disregard all restrictions upon the use of the parol evidence in this case, the evidence introduced falls far short of spelling out a description sufficiently certain to support the relief here sought. Lacking the required specificity (Civ. Code,  3390 [6]; Corona Unified School Dist. v. Vejar, supra), the decree cannot be affirmed."
[2] Respondent calls attention to several California cases holding that an agreement containing an indefinite or uncertain description is nevertheless capable of specific performance if the otherwise deficient description contains a "means or key" by which the description can be made definite, complete and identifiable with a specific location on the ground.
One of these cases is Leider v. Evans, 209 Cal. App. 2d 696 [26 Cal. Rptr. 123]. There the option agreement provided: " '... excepting therefrom a parcel of two acres at the end of Toll Road which parcel will include the domestic well and *286 dwelling said portion to be reserved to be surveyed when option is taken up at the expense of the undersigned Evans [seller].' "
The court stated: "This is not a 'floating' two acre portion that could be located anywhere within the entire holding. It was 'tied down' to the end of Toll Road, apparently for the purpose of ingress and egress, and was to include the dwelling and the 'domestic well.' "
Another factor which aided plaintiff Leider in his request for specific performance was that he formally offered to accept any description defendants desired so long as it was for two acres and utilized the end of Toll Road as a tie point and included the domestic well and the dwelling.
In the instant case there is no "means or key" contained in the description. Respondent attempts to meet this deficiency by calling attention to certain references in the agreement which he says make the excepted portion "readily identifiable."
First, he substitutes "quarter" for the second "portion" in the description of the exception, so as to have it read, "Excepting therefrom that portion of the North east [TEXT STRICKEN]-[portion]- [quarter]. ..." By so doing, respondent is able to confine the excepted portion to a definite 10-acre area, namely, a specific one-fourth of a quarter quarter of section 24.
There was no request for reformation of the agreement and appellant did not at any time agree or admit that the word "portion," as used the second time, was synonymous with "quarter." Even so, such a narrowing of location would not cure the deficiency in the description. (See Brudvig v. Renner, supra.) Furthermore, even respondent's own survey of what he contends is the extent and location of the excepted portion shows that a substantial part lies outside of said 10-acre quadrant.
The remaining references in the agreement which are cited by respondent are italicized in the footnote below.  [fn. 1] We fail to see how any of these references would aid in determining the *287 exact location on the ground of the excepted portion. If anything, the reference to "building sites" corroborates the appellant's contention that the excepted portion was intended to include an area where he and his sons intended to build additional cabins. This is contrary to respondent's contention that the exception was to include only the existing cabins and the area surrounding them.
The "key or means" which may be utilized to make certain an otherwise deficient description must be contained in the description and cannot be supplied from a source extrinsic to such description. (Corona Unified School Dist. v. Vejar, 165 Cal. App. 2d 561, 564-567 [332 P.2d 294]; Best v. Wohlford, 144 Cal. 733, 737 [78 P. 293].)
In our opinion it would be impossible for a surveyor to find a starting- point from the description contained in the agreement. Even if he could, where would he run his lines? If, in the language of the agreement, he could locate "the building sites of the seller," how much surrounding space should he allow, keeping in mind that the agreement does not specify the acreage of the exception? All of these matters would require the taking of extrinsic evidence.
The following statement in Best v. Wohlford, supra, is significant: "Parol evidence will not be admitted to help out a defective description, or to show the intention with which it was made, or to resolve an ambiguity in its terms; but the rule that the description must be certain and definite and sufficient in itself to identify the land, does not exclude evidence for the purpose of applying the description to the surface of the earth, and thus identifying it with the tract in controversy. If a monument is given as the starting-point, evidence may be given to show its location, but if the direction of the course *288 from that monument is not given, evidence will not be received to show what direction was intended. If the land is described by some name or designation, evidence will be received for the purpose of showing that the tract in controversy was well and generally known by that name or designation." (144 Cal., at p. 737.)
We have concluded that the agreement does not designate the excepted portion with sufficient certainty to support a decree of specific performance. However, this does not by itself preclude specific performance.
The agreement provides that the excepted portion "is to be surveyed and retained by the family." If the survey then made had been accepted by appellant, we would have no hesitancy in holding that such acceptance completed the agreement and made it specifically enforceable.
[3] The trial court found that appellant did in fact accept the survey. However, it is our opinion that this finding is not supported by any substantial evidence. We shall state the evidence in the light most favorable to respondent.
At the time that the written agreement was executed, the parties orally agreed that surveyor Bushnell would be asked to make the survey of the exception. Respondent contacted Bushnell and went with him to the subject property, and there pointed out what he considered to be the extent of the excepted portion. Based on this information, Bushnell made a rough plat of said portion and prepared a metes and bounds description thereof. He also prepared an estimate of the amount and kind of timber standing on said portion. His charge of $100 was paid by appellant.
All of the foregoing data was placed in appellant's hands some time during the early part of July. Respondent thereafter telephoned appellant three or four times in an effort to find out whether the survey was agreeable so that a deed could be drawn and the transaction closed. Each time appellant replied that he had not had an opportunity to go on the property and compare the description of the excepted portion with his own conception of what was to be retained by him.
On or about August 18 the parties met on the property for the first time. Appellant stated that the survey did not include all of the land which was supposed to be excepted. The survey outlined approximately 9 1/2 acres. A survey later prepared based upon appellant's conception of the portion to be excepted, added approximately 6 1/2 acres, making a total exception of approximately 16 acres.
There is no question that the parties understood that the *289 survey called for by the agreement was subject to appellant's acceptance. Respondent's own testimony makes this very clear. We shall refer to the highlights.
Respondent testified that he telephoned to appellant "right after" the date of Bushnell's survey (June 27, 1959) and told him that "it was imperative that we finish the deal as soon as possible"; that appellant replied that "he had not had a chance to come up and see the property and at that time I also offered to fly him up. He said it was such a long drive, took so many hours to drive from Willows."
Respondent further testified that he told appellant that he "was anxious for him to come up and see the water line and the way that it--how I had followed his instructions on having the survey made by Mr. Bushnell."
Respondent stated that he had "at least three or four" such telephone conversations with appellant of this nature prior to August 17 or 18, when they met at the property; that appellant's "reply was always that he had not had a chance to come up and look at the property"; that during this period appellant did not at any time voice any objection to Bushnell's survey; that "at one of the telephone conversations he told me that he had the title already transferred to his name [other members of appellant's family were also record owners] and that ... we would soon be able to finish the contract."
Respondent testified that, on the occasion of the meeting at the property, appellant refused to go through with the transaction on the basis of the Bushnell survey and that he "wanted to reserve the whole bottom forty."
Respondent contends that appellant, by his actions, accepted the surveyed exception. These will be discussed in the order made in respondent's brief.
Appellant failed to object to Bushnell's survey until he went to the subject property and saw the area on the ground which it encompassed. Respondent's own testimony shows that this procedure was contemplated by the parties and it was understood that appellant would not be in a position to either accept or reject said survey until he had made such comparison.
Appellant failed to return the $30,000 paid by respondent at the time of the signing of the agreement. Respondent testified that he never asked for its return. Apparently a tender of the money was not made until after this action was filed. The tender was refused by respondent. *290
Actually, the agreement did not call for any payment to be made until "a survey is made of the above reservation and when a deed is ready for execution." However, immediately after the signing of the agreement, respondent wrote out his check for $30,000 and said, "this ... is not an option, this is a sale."
Appellant was motivated by his sons' desire to retain more land than was called for by the agreement because, as one of the sons testified, "Basically, we did not object as long as the area that was to be excluded included that section of the property which we wished could be continued to be retained in the hands of the family which would include the property where the houses were and the property where we hoped to build additional houses."
Appellant used the water carried through a plastic pipe from a creek on land owned by respondent. This pipe was installed by respondent a few days after the agreement was signed in accordance with a provision in the agreement. (See fn. 1, supra, for wording of provision.)
In our opinion the foregoing actions by appellant do not meet the requirement that a finding of fact, in this case, "which survey was accepted by defendant," must be supported by substantial evidence.
[4] It is true that "A finding of the trial court upon conflicting evidence will not be disturbed on appeal if there is evidence of a substantial character which reasonably supports the judgment. [Numerous citations.] If, however, the evidence is so slight and tenuous that it does not create a real and substantial conflict the finding may be set aside." (Fewel & Dawes, Inc. v. Pratt (1941) 17 Cal. 2d 85, 89 [109 P.2d 650]; see also Estate of Teed (1952) 112 Cal. App. 2d 638, 644 [247 P.2d 54]; Potter v. Pacific Coast Lumber Co. (1951) 37 Cal. 2d 592, 597-598 [234 P.2d 16].)
However, a weakness in appellant's position at the trial was that he had never definitely advised respondent or the court what he contended was the extent and location of the excepted portion.
[5] During a recess of the trial, from June 12 to July 18, 1963, appellant employed Bushnell to survey such portion and prepare a plat thereof. Upon resumption of the trial this plat was admitted in evidence. (Exh. I.) It includes the original portion surveyed by Bushnell and an adjacent approximate 6 1/2 acres, making a total exception of approximately 16 acres.
Appellant testified that, if these 16 acres were excepted, he *291 would transfer the entire remaining property to respondent in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
We have no power to compel respondent to accept this as the agreement. However, we do have the power to give him an opportunity to do so.
Ontario Downs, Inc. v. Lauppe, 192 Cal. App. 2d 697 [13 Cal. Rptr. 782], illustrates such power. There the plaintiff was entitled to receive 15.87 unspecified acres out of a 450-acre tract owned by defendants. The plaintiff had the right under the option agreement to choose the acreage to be transferred to him but this choice was " 'subject to approval by the Optionor.' "
Upon failure of the parties to agree, the plaintiff, "apparently in desperation, ... offered to accept any 15.87 acre tract which the respondents [optionors] might designate." (Italics ours.) Judgment for defendants (optionors) was reversed, the opinion stating that the court could require defendants to make such designation and, upon refusal to do so, plaintiff would be allowed to make it.
In the instant case, respondent at one time indicated a willingness to except 16 acres. On April 9, 1959, two months before the parties executed the contract of sale, he made an offer in writing to appellant which contained the following wording: "I ... will make a firm offer for all of the timber and land less the land to be reserved around the houses, not to exceed 16 acres; ..." (Italics ours.) Appellant had previously told respondent, in March 1959, that "we expected to reserve approximately sixteen acres of the property where the buildings were and for building sites."
For the reasons stated the judgment decreeing specific performance must be and is reversed unless respondent will agree to this modification: from the main parcel described, appellant will retain the approximate 16 acres as shown on the survey made by Bushnell in July 1963, which survey is in evidence herein as Exhibit I.
Such a modification will also require an evaluation of the timber on the approximate 6 1/2 acres to be added to the excepted portion so that the value may be deducted from the purchase price. The trial court valued the timber on the original excepted portion of approximately 9 1/2 acres at $3,717.
Acceptance of the judgment as modified must be made in writing and filed with the trial court within 10 days after the remittitur is issued. Thereafter, the trial court shall take such further action as is consistent with this modified judgment. *292
If respondent does not consent to such modification, the judgment is reversed and the trial court shall proceed to try the issue of damages, which issue is not before us on the present appeal. (Cf. Brudvig v. Renner, supra, 172 Cal.App.2d, at 524-525 [342 P.2d 276].)
If respondent does so consent, each party shall bear his own costs on appeal. If respondent does not so consent, appellant shall recover his costs on appeal.
Appellant has also appealed from an order dismissing his cross- complaint but, in his closing brief, has conceded the propriety of such order under the authority of Ghera v. Sugar Pine Lumber Co., 224 Cal. App. 2d 88 [36 Cal. Rptr. 305]. The appeal from this order is therefore dismissed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Taylor, J., concurred.
"The purchaser to install and deliver to the building site of the seller a 1/2" pipe line and water from his property, to replace springs destroyed in the logging operations.
"The purchaser agrees not to log off any timber on the side hills near the cabin sites except as requested by the seller, to protect his property."
"The purchaser agrees not to do any cutting of timber near the cabin reserved property during the months that the buildings are occupied."
"The purchaser agrees to make a fire trail to protect the timber around the reserved property from fire from the balance of the land."
"The purchaser agrees to allow the seller to use his right of way along the north side of the reserved property for access or egress to the highway."
"The purchaser agrees to pay cash for the property and timber to be sold when a survey is made of the above reservation and when a deed is ready for execution."
"The seller agrees to furnish a clear title to the property to be sold."
Tabular Material Omitted
"Purchase price $60,000.00 Less value of timber to be retained around cabins WB" (In handwriting of seller-appellant.)
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "The purchaser to give the seller an undescribed right-of-way thru his property for the purpose of carrying water to the building sites of the seller;