=== CASE 2230398 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:44.435987+00 ===

96 Ill. App. 3d 591 (1981)
421 N.E.2d 1042
LIVINGSTON SERVICE COMPANY, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BIG WHEELS, INC., Defendant and Counterplaintiff-Appellee and Cross-Appellee.  (JOHN E. MITCHELL COMPANY, Defendant and Counterdefendant-Appellee and Cross-Appellant.)
No. 16605.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
Opinion filed June 3, 1981.
*592 Dunn, Brady, Goebel, Ulbrich, Morel, Kombrink & Hundman, of Bloomington (William M. Goebel, of counsel), for appellant.
Westervelt, Johnson, Nicoll & Keller, of Peoria (Robert D. Jackson, of counsel), for appellee John E. Mitchell Company.
Heyl, Royster, Voelker & Allen, of Peoria (Rex Linder, of counsel), for appellee Big Wheels, Inc.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
Mr. JUSTICE GREEN delivered the opinion of the court:
A custom-built fertilizer spreader vehicle caught fire and burned on April 11, 1977, while being used by its owner, plaintiff, Livingston Service Company, Inc., to spread fertilizer upon a farm field. The predominant issue in this appeal from trial court judgments against plaintiff in its suit to recover for the loss of the vehicle is whether, from the circumstances shown in the trial court, the jury could infer from the vehicle having caught fire and burned that the fire resulted from a defect in the vehicle which existed at the time the vehicle was delivered by the seller to plaintiff on February 3, 1976.
On July 24, 1978, plaintiff filed suit in the circuit court of Livingston County against defendant, Big Wheels, Inc., who had built the vehicle and sold it to plaintiff. Later, defendant, John E. Mitchell Company (Mitchell), manufacturer of the air-conditioning equipment installed by Big Wheels, Inc., was added as a defendant. Still later, Big Wheels, Inc., counterclaimed against Mitchell seeking indemnity. The case was tried before a jury on a breach of warranty count against Big Wheels, Inc., strict liability for defective product counts against both defendants and the counterclaim. At the close of the evidence, the trial court directed a verdict against plaintiff on the breach of warranty count and in favor of Big Wheels, Inc., on the counterclaim. The jury found for the defendants on the defective product counts. Judgments were entered accordingly.
Plaintiff has appealed and Mitchell has cross-appealed the judgment on the counterclaim. The warranty count was based upon a claimed breach of the implied warranty of merchantability. The trial court's stated reason for the directed verdict on that count was that it deemed the warranty to have been disclaimed and excluded as a matter of law and *593 replaced by an express one-year warranty which had expired by the time of the fire. Plaintiff maintains that the warranty of merchantability had not been disclaimed or excluded as a matter of law. Big Wheels, Inc., asserts the trial court's rationale to be correct and argues that in any event the directed verdict was correct because plaintiff had failed to make a prima facie case. Plaintiff also claims the trial court erred in the issues instruction given as to the defective product counts. Defendants claim that the given instruction was correct, and plaintiff failed to make a prima facie showing as to those counts as well. Mitchell also maintains the directed verdict of indemnity was erroneous because of a limited warranty agreement between it and Big Wheels, Inc.
Both the breach of warranty count and the strict liability for defective product counts required the plaintiff to establish that the fire had, as a proximate cause, a defect in the vehicle existing at the time the vehicle left the possession of the party to be charged. As to each, proof of defectiveness was governed by the same rules. (Dunham v. Vaughan & Bushnell Manufacturing Co. (1969), 42 Ill. 2d 339, 247 N.E.2d 401.) Because we agree with defendants that the proof was insufficient to raise a question of fact, we deem the point controlling and discuss it first.
The only occurrence witness to the start of the fire was Lee Cleary, plaintiff's employee who was operating the vehicle at the time of the fire. He testified that he suddenly saw a puff of smoke on his left, looked out and saw flames coming up the back of the cab, dismounted, and attempted in vain to put out the fire with a fire extinguisher. He described the flames as coming from underneath the cab towards the middle and on the back. He did not recall any noise until the air lines blew and saw nothing which indicated to him the cause of the fire. The evidence was undisputed that all flammable portions of the vehicle were destroyed by the fire.
Plaintiff's proof of causation depended largely upon the testimony of Donald Miller, an investigative engineer who had examined the vehicle at plaintiff's request. Unable to otherwise focus upon a likely cause of the fire, he deemed consideration of the areas of the wreckage containing the greatest amount of metal warpage, heat discoloration, and consumption of materials by the fire to be significant. He testified that he found the left rear corner of the cab to have shown those qualities to the greatest degree and the right front corner of the engine compartment to be next. Miller stated that he found no evidence of breakdown in the engine compartment, the wiring inside the cab area or in the vehicle's instruments but that he found severe damage to the air-conditioner mounted on the roof of the cab.
Miller testified to an opinion that the fire was caused by "faults" in a cable bringing power from the battery to the air conditioner on the top of *594 the cab. He described a "fault" as a short circuit. He described evidence of short circuits having occurred at (1) the place of the entry of the cable into the air-conditioning unit, (2) a spot where he thought the cable had passed and which was some 15 inches from the cable's entry into the air-conditioner, and (3) a place at the lower left rear of the cab where he also thought the cable had passed. He found the cable to have vaporized at the first and third spots. Miller theorized that the first short circuit would have occurred at the point furthest from the battery and that this would have brought about, almost simultaneously, other short circuits progressively closer to the battery. He did not give an opinion as to any particular defect having caused the short circuits and, thus, necessarily gave no opinion as to whether any causative defect existed when plaintiff received the spreader.
In support of its theory that under the circumstances shown the jury could have inferred that the fire resulted from a defect existing in the vehicle when delivered, plaintiff relies strongly upon Tweedy v. Wright Ford Sales, Inc. (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 570, 357 N.E.2d 449, where evidence of the failure of an automobile's brakes to function was held to raise an inference that the brakes were defective six months earlier when the car was sold by a dealer as a new car although it was slightly used. That court stated:
"A prima facie case that a product was defective and that the defect existed when it left the manufacturer's control is made by proof that in the absence of abnormal use or reasonable secondary causes the product failed `to perform in the manner reasonably to be expected in light of [its] nature and intended function.' See Annot., 51 A.L.R. 3d 8 (1973); Rhinegold, Proof of Defect in Product Liability Cases, 38 Tenn. L. Rev. 325, 337 (1971). Here the evidence shows that the brakes of an automobile driven approximately 7,500 miles, inspected by Wright prior to delivery, inspected again at 6,000 miles, and subjected to no abnormal use prior to the occurrence failed to function in the manner reasonably to be expected. Plaintiff was driving carefully at a reasonable rate of speed, the weather was good, the roads were dry, he knew the intersection well, and there was no evidence of any reasonable secondary cause." 64 Ill. 2d 570, 574-75, 357 N.E.2d 449, 451.
The evidence here may well have been sufficient for the trier of fact to have inferred that the fire resulted from a defect in the cable which existed at the time of the fire, but we determine the evidence insufficient to permit an inference that such defect existed when the unit was delivered to plaintiff. The evidence indicated that no abnormal use of the spreader had taken place and that it was being put to its normal use at the time of the fire, but we cannot agree that there was no circumstantial *595 evidence of a reasonable explanation for the defect other than that it had existed 16 months earlier. In Tweedy, the brake parts were encased by the mechanism of the wheel. Here, the cable was exposed. The spreader vehicle traveled on much rougher surfaces than the Tweedy car and had been in use about twice as long.
When Tweedy was in the appellate court (Tweedy v. Wright Ford Sales, Inc. (1975), 31 Ill. App. 3d 72, 334 N.E.2d 417), our opinion noted that the situation there differed from Shramek v. General Motors Corp. (1966), 69 Ill. App. 2d 72, 216 N.E.2d 244, and Van Winkle v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. (1969), 117 Ill. App. 2d 324, 253 N.E.2d 588. Those courts found no inference that a tire was defective to have arisen from the tire having a blowout because a blowout often occurs from causes other than a defect in a tire. In Erzrumly v. Dominick's Finer Foods, Inc. (1977), 50 Ill. App. 3d 359, 365 N.E.2d 684, evidence that a Coca Cola bottle exploded in the hands of a six-year-old child was held insufficient to create an inference that the bottle had been defective 15 or 20 minutes earlier when purchased at a grocery store. Evidence indicated that the bottle had been carried in the trunk of an automobile from the store to the purchaser's residence and was being carried up stairs by the minor when the explosion occurred. The court emphasized that the bottle could have been damaged while being carried from the grocery store, while in the automobile trunk, or while being carried up the stairs. The court deemed the evidence presented by the plaintiff insufficient in detail to negate those possibilities. Here, the chances for the cable to have been damaged in the 16-month period were much greater than for the bottle to have been damaged sufficiently in the 15- to 20-minute period to have caused it to explode.
We deem the lack of proof sufficient to justify the judgments of the trial court on both the warranty and defective product counts. We need not discuss the questions of whether the implied warranty of merchantability was disclaimed or whether error occurred in instructing the jury as to defective product counts. However, we choose to note that we find no error to have occurred in instructing the jury as to the latter counts.
Dissatisfied with issues instructions tendered by the parties, the court gave its own issues instruction concerning the defective product counts. Its second paragraph stated plaintiff's claim to be that:
"A defect existed in the electrical cable which permitted the wires contained in the cable to come into contact with each other or into contact with the grounded air conditioner case which caused a short circuit to occur in the cable of the air conditioner at or near the point of entry of the cable into the air conditioner unit."
Plaintiff maintains that it was not required to prove the nature of the defect which caused the fire in order to recover. However, if the evidence *596 was insufficient to give rise to an inference that a defect in the cable which might have caused the fire existed 16 months earlier upon sale, it was clearly insufficient to support an inference that the fire resulted from some other type of defect and that defect had existed 16 months earlier.
As the proof was insufficient to prove the vehicle to have been defective when it left the hands of Big Wheels, Inc., it was clearly insufficient to prove any defect existing at the time the air-conditioner left Mitchell's hands. Accordingly, the judgment on the counterclaim must be reversed.
The judgments in favor of defendants on plaintiff's complaint are affirmed. That on the counterclaim is reversed.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part.
WEBBER and LEWIS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9742254 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:09:16.623039+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge.
The marriage of the parties to this appeal, appellant Charles Breedlove and ap-pellee Jean Breedlove, was dissolved in November 1968. As part of the divorce decree, Charles was ordered to pay the sum of $175 per week for the support of the five (5) minor children. In July 1979, Jean brought this action to recover $83,015 in support arrearages. After Charles answered the complaint, Jean propounded interrogatories to Charles, some of which Charles failed to answer even though he was twice ordered to do so by the trial court. As a result of Charles’s disobedience of the trial court’s orders, default judgment was entered against him. Following a hearing on the amount of support owed, Jean was awarded $90,540 in support ar-rearages and $2,250 attorney fees.
Charles appeals from this judgment raising the issues that the trial court erred:
I. In defaulting Charles for violation of orders compelling discovery because of an inadequate factual basis and because it failed to make adequate findings;
II. In not giving him adequate notice of the hearing on damages;
III. In not retroactively reducing the support order as a result of the emancipation of children of the marriage;
and
IV. In not crediting Charles’s obligation of support with amounts paid directly to the children.
We affirm.
*741Issue I
Charles first argues the trial court erred in defaulting him for violation of the trial court’s order compelling discovery.1 First he reasons the trial court erred because it had an inadequate factual basis for the sanction.
The record reveals Jean filed interrogatories on September 11, 1979. Answers were designated due within 30 days after service. Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 33(A). Jean’s first motion to compel answers to the interrogatories, filed December 19, 1979, was denied because the motion failed to comply with a local court rule. Her amended motion was filed January 4, 1980 and, after a hearing on January 28,1980, Charles was ordered to answer the interrogatories, without objection, within 15 days. Although late, answers to most of the interrogatories were filed February 26, 1980. Objections were propounded to the unanswered interrogatories. Jean filed a motion for default on February 29, 1980 which the trial court struck as moot because answers had been filed. On April 3, 1980 another motion for default with affidavits2 was filed. After a hearing Charles was ordered to answer, without objection, the objected-to questions within 15 days of May 22,1980. ,Jean’s next motion for default with accompanying affidavits3 was filed June 20,1980; Charles filed a motion to dismiss; both motions were heard on July 8, 1980. There was no evidence submitted at this hearing on the issue of the default itself.
Although discovery is designed to be self-executing with little, if any, supervision or assistance by the trial court, Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 37 provides the trial court with tools to enforce compliance in order to encourage a just and speedy determination of the lawsuit. The trial court may impose various sanctions ranging from allowance of expenses to entry of dismissal or judgment by default.4 The choice of *742sanction is a matter within the discretion of the trial court. Chrysler Corporation v. Reeves (1980) Ind.App., 404 N.E.2d 1147; Hawkins v. Means Auto, Inc. (1980) Ind.App., 403 N.E.2d 1106; Farinelli v. Campagna (1975) 166 Ind.App. 587, 338 N.E.2d 299.
The sanction of dismissal or default is obviously more drastic and severe than other available sanctions. Because the law favors the disposition of cases on their merits, the imposition of these sanctions is appropriate only under limited circumstances or in extreme situations. Where an alternate less drastic sanction would be effective it must be utilized. T.R. 37(B)(4). However, where a responsible party has in bad faith abusively resisted or obstructed discovery or violated a court order enforcing discovery, and the court finds such conduct has delayed or obstructed, or threatens to so delay or obstruct, the rights of the opposing party so that other relief would be inadequate, it is within the discretion of the trial court to dismiss the action or to render judgment by default against the party responsible for the noncompliance. National Hockey League v. Metropolitan Hockey Club, Inc. (1976) 427 U.S. 639, 96 S.Ct. 2778, 49 L.Ed.2d 747; Margoles v. Johns (1978 7th Cir.) 587 F.2d 885; G-K Properties v. Redevelopment Agency, Etc. (1978 9th Cir.) 577 F.2d 645; Norman v. Young (1970 10th Cir.) 422 F.2d 470; Hawkins v. Means Auto, Inc. (1980) Ind.App., 403 N.E.2d 1106; Clark County State Bank v. Bennett (1975) 166 Ind.App. 471, 336 N.E.2d 663.
As was stated by the United States Supreme Court in National Hockey League v. Metropolitan Hockey Club, Inc. (1976) 427 U.S. 639 at 642-3, 96 S.Ct. 2778 at 2980-1:
“There is a natural tendency on the part of reviewing courts, properly employing the benefit of hindsight, to be heavily influenced by the severity of outright dismissal as a sanction for failure to comply with a discovery order. It is quite reasonable to conclude that a party who has been subjected to such order will feel duly chastened, so that even though he succeeds in having the order reversed on appeal he will nonetheless comply promptly with future discovery orders of the district court.
“But here, as in other areas of the law, the most severe in the spectrum of sanctions provided by statute or rule must be available to the district court in appropriate cases, not merely to penalize those whose conduct may be deemed to warrant such a sanction, but to deter those who might be tempted to such conduct in the absence of such a deterrent. If the decision of the Court of Appeals remained undisturbed in this case, it might well be that these respondents would faithfully comply with all future discovery orders entered by the District Court in this case. But other parties to other lawsuits would feel freer than we think Rule 37 contemplates they should feel to flout other discovery orders of other district courts.”
In reviewing the dismissal or default judgment (total or partial), the question before this court is whether the trial court abused its discretion. Here, Charles failed to make timely answers or objections to Jean’s interrogatories. He further failed to comply with the trial court’s order to answer the interrogatories, without objection, within 15 days. When he did file late answers to most of the interrogatories, he also filed objections to some, contrary to the trial court’s order. Charles disobeyed another trial court order to answer the objected-to questions within 15 days of May 22, 1980. In fact, on the day of the hearing on Jean’s motion for default filed as a result of his previous disobedience, answers were still outstanding. This record amply supports the determination made by the trial court that orders enforcing Jean’s discovery rights were violated by Charles.
We further find the record supports the trial .court’s implicit determination that Charles’s conduct “has or threatens to so *743delay or obstruct” Jean’s rights that any other relief would be inadequate. Delay is apparent. The day Charles was defaulted, Jean remained without answers to interrogatories she had requested ten months earlier.
Charles does not suggest other sanctions against him which would have produced his answers. Contempt was not a viable alternative because the trial court earlier dismissed Jean’s petition for citation against Charles based on the trial court’s determination that Charles was not a resident of Indiana subject to the court’s powers of contempt. Nor are we convinced that an order for expenses incurred by Jean in obtaining orders to comply would have obtained the answers. Charles’s indifference to the trial court’s orders is readily apparent.
Interestingly, the basis for Charles’s motion to dismiss Jean’s last motion for default was that the amount of the arrearage was disputed and not that there was no arrearage or that default was an inappropriate sanction. In fact, his motion to dismiss asserts:
“That the efforts of . .. (Jean) .. . are the efforts of one seeking a judgment much larger than is due. Therefore, ... (Jean) should not be granted a default judgment until she has proved the specific amount due.” (Our emphasis)
At the hearing on the two motions Charles similarly failed in any manner to dispute the appropriateness of the sanction, choosing to introduce evidence solely on the issue of the amount of the arrearage.
We conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion in its application of the T.R. 37(B)(4) sanction. Necessarily then, we take exception to the footnote in Chrysler Corporation v. Reeves (1980) Ind.App., 404 N.E.2d 1147, 1154, that: “the sanction of default is never appropriate without entry of a lesser sanction first.” We cannot agree with such an unsupported broad absolute statement. In most situations and circumstances the sanction of dismissal or default would be so extreme it would constitute an abuse of discretion without first attempting “lesser” sanctions. However, in rare circumstances, such as here, the sanction is not inappropriate as the imposition of other “lesser” sanctions without reasonable belief in their effectiveness merely adds to the innocent party’s delay and frustration.
Charles also argues the court failed to make the findings required by T.R. 37(B)(4). There is no merit to this argument. When the trial court enters a dismissal or a default judgment on the opposing party’s motion for sanctions, it implicitly makes these findings. There is no requirement within T.R. 37(B)(4) that the court make specific written findings of fact upon its own motion nor does T.R. 52 apply.
Issue II
Charles next complains the trial court erred in proceeding to assess the ar-rearage immediately after the entry of default. He argues that “[g]iven the necessity for a hearing on damages the Court’s notice did not reasonably alert counsel that the Court intended to proceed immediately to an assessment of such damages.”
The record, however, does not support Charles’s contention that he was without notice the hearing would encompass the issue of the amount of support owed.
Jean’s third motion for default prayed for a hearing, a judgment in the amount of $90,540 for support arrearages, and attorney fees of $15,000. This motion was accompanied by affidavits of Jean and her counsel setting forth the amount of support owed and the legal services rendered by counsel to Jean. Charles countered with a motion to dismiss the motion for default in which he only challenged the amount claimed by Jean. In addition, the court’s notice provided that all pending matters were set for hearing. Further, at the hearing, Charles not only did not object to the proceeding but proceeded to introduce sev*744eral exhibits and indeed called the only witnesses.5
Under these circumstances we do not find error.
Issue III
Charles next argues the trial court committed reversible error when it refused to consider the issue of emancipation of any of the children in determining the amount of arrearage.
We disagree.
The support order required Charles to pay $175 per week for the support of the five minor children.
When a support order is undivided, the emancipation of less than all the children does not automatically reduce the obligated parent’s duty under the support order. Unless the order is modified, the obligated parent is required to make the payments in the manner, amount, and at the time required by the original order as long as an unemancipated minor child remains. Reffeitt v. Reffeitt (1981) Ind.App., 419 N.E.2d 999; Ross v. Ross (1979) Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 1066.
Charles’s argument that this order is divisible is without merit.
Issue IV
Charles contends the court erred when it refused to consider direct payments to the children as credits upon the support arrearage.
Again, we must disagree.
Recently in Whitman v. Whitman (1980) Ind.App., 405 N.E.2d 608, we expressly held that expenditures or payments which did not comply with the terms of the support order may not be allowed as credits.
The support order in question did not provide for payments directly to the children and therefore Charles was not entitled to credit for such nonconforming payments.
Judgment affirmed.
BUCHANAN, C. J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs, with opinion.
. It is interesting to speculate on the default. Jean’s motion for default sought a hearing followed by a judgment. Charles’s motion sought the dismissal of the motion for default because Jean was seeking “too much” and, hence, a default judgment should not be granted until she proved the specific amount due. At the hearing all the evidence was directed just to that issue. Thus, the issue of the amount of the arrearage, if any, was in fact litigated. Consequently, although the trial court in its entry, “grants defendant’s Motion for Default and enters a default of plaintiff and upon such default finds that the defendant is entitled to recover judgment and attorney fees against plaintiff ...we are at a loss to determine upon what issues, if any, Charles was in fact defaulted or indeed the effect, if any, of the default. However, the parties address the issue of a default and, consequently, so do we.
. The affidavits concerned the amount of unpaid support and the services rendered Jean by her attorney.
. The affidavits concerned the amount of unpaid support and the services rendered Jean by her attorney.
. T.R. 37(B) provides:
“To avoid abuse of discovery proceedings and to secure enforcement of the discovery provisions of these rules in any enforcement or protective proceedings under the discovery provisions of these rules or upon motion and notice by a party, witness or person to any persons affected thereby:
(1) The court may ,enforce the attendance of witnesses by attachment, and punish disobedience of a subpoena or order issued or made under these discovery rules as a contempt of court in the manner as provided in Rule 45(G).
(2) The court may allow expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by a party, witness or person, against a party, witness or person, responsible for unexcused conduct that is:
(a) punishable for disobedience of a subpoena or order under subdivision (B)(1) of this rule; or
(b) in bad faith and abusively making or seeking a deposition, interrogatories, production of evidence, inspection, examination, request question, enforcement order, subpoena, protective order or any other remedy under the discovery provisions of these rules; or
(c) in bad faith and abusively resisting or obstructing a deposition, interrogatories, production of evidence, inspection, examination, request, question, enforcement order, subpoena, protective order or any other remedy under the discovery provisions of these rules.
(3) The court may order evidence upon matters to be taken as established or may order that evidence upon matters be refused as against a party subject to subdivision (B)(2) of this rule.
(4) The court may enter total or partial judgment by default or dismissal with preju*742dice against a party who is responsible under subdivision (B)(2) of this rule if the court determines that the party’s conduct has or threatens to so delay or obstruct the rights of the opposing party that any other relief would be inadequate.”
. The trial court indicated it would consider the affidavits in support of Jean’s case. Charles did not object.

=== CASE 2230082 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.932807+00 ===

94 N.Y.2d 775 (1999)
720 N.E.2d 863
698 N.Y.S.2d 587
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
WAYNE GREAVES, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued September 14, 1999.
Decided October 14, 1999.
Kannan Sundaram, New York City, M. Sue Wycoff and Michele S. Maxian for appellant.
Robert T. Johnson, District Attorney of Bronx County, Bronx (Edward L. Schnitzer, Joseph N. Ferdenzi and Allen H. Saperstein of counsel), for respondent.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY and ROSENBLATT concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted of robbery, reckless endangerment and criminal possession of a firearm. The issue on this appeal by leave of a Judge of this Court is whether the trial court's refusal to instruct the jury that "the indictment is not evidence of anything" constitutes reversible error.
*776 We conclude that the omission in this case of this instruction does not constitute reversible error. We agree with the Appellate Division that, while the instruction should be given, defendant was not deprived of a fair trial, considering the court's jury instructions in their entirety. The absence from the final charge to the jury of the instruction that the indictment is not evidencewhich was given during jury selectiondoes not warrant a reversal of the conviction in this case. In the whole context here, we also note that the trial court gave ample emphasis in the final jury charge that the jury's verdict must be based on an assessment only of the evidencewhich the court summarizedand that the defendant was always protected by the presumption of innocence.
Carter v Kentucky (450 U.S. 288) and Taylor v Kentucky (436 U.S. 478) are distinguishable and therefore do not compel a different result. Lastly, defendant's additional reliance on People v Newman (46 NY2d 126) is misplaced. There, this Court concluded that the trial court's refusal to inform the jury in its charge that the prosecution had the burden of proving every element of the crimes charged beyond a reasonable doubt as specifically mandated by CPL 300.10 (2) was reversible error.
We have considered defendant's other claim and conclude that it is without merit.
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2230085 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.97061+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 703 (2005)
In the Matter of the CHILDREN OF T.A.A.
No. A04-1345.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
August 4, 2005.
Rehearing Denied September 6, 2005.
*704 Douglas H. Johnson, Washington County Attorney, Gregory J. Tavernier, Assistant County Attorney, Stillwater, MN, for appellant Washington County.
Wright S. Walling, Sherri D. Hawley, Walling, Berg & Debele, PA, Minneapolis, MN, for respondent T.A.A.
Gregory J. Schmidt, Gregory J. Schmidt Law Offices, PA, St. Paul, MN, for children K.B. and J.B.
Heard, considered, and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
MEYER, Justice.
The district court terminated respondent T.A.A.'s parental rights to her four children based on findings that statutory grounds for termination exist, that termination is in the children's best interests, and that the county made reasonable efforts to reunite T.A.A. with her children. *705 The court of appeals reversed on the ground the county failed to make reasonable efforts toward reunification because the county did not offer T.A.A. chemical dependency treatment at an earlier time. We reverse.
T.A.A. is the mother of two daughters, J.B., born November 1990, and K.B., born May 1992, and of two sons, C.T., born February 1999, and H.B., born August 2001. The children were placed in protective custody on May 1, 2003, and a petition alleging the children were in need of protection or services (CHIPS petition) was filed on May 6, 2003. The CHIPS petition alleged that there had been a report of physical abuse of H.B. based on a handshaped bruise on H.B.'s face after being left in the care of respondent mother's current boyfriend. The CHIPS petition also alleged that C.T. suffered severe burns on his thighs and groin area as a result of playing with matches while under the supervision of T.A.A., that T.A.A. had J.B. and K.B. supervise and care for H.B. and C.T. for extended periods of time, and that the family home was unclean and unsafe. The CHIPS petition also alleged a history of neglect and abuse of the children by men with whom T.A.A. was romantically involved. The CHIPS petition stated that J.B. and K.B. were abused by respondent's live-in boyfriend, R.T., when they were ages five and four, and that J.B. was sexually abused by a subsequent live-in boyfriend in 2001. J.B. reported the abuse to T.A.A., but T.A.A. allowed R.T. to live in the home an additional six months, at which time the abuse was reported to the police. T.A.A. admitted the children were in need of protection or services at the hearing on the CHIPS petition.
The court approved a case plan for T.A.A. that identified five goals for her: (1) appropriately parent the children in a consistent manner; (2) maintain stable mental health; (3) remain abstinent from drugs and alcohol; (4) meet the children's educational needs; and (5) maintain a legal, stable, clean and safe environment and housing for the children.
The county conducted a parenting assessment that indicated T.A.A. has problems acknowledging that she could protect her children from abuse by others and that she has problems acting as a parent figure to her children. T.A.A.'s refusal to recognize her responsibility to protect her children from abuse was a concern in light of the history of abuse of the children by others. The county provided her with services to address these concerns, including in-home sessions with social workers, and the district court found that the services provided were reasonable. Despite the services provided, the district court found that respondent did not make progress in the area of parenting. One social worker, who provided services in the final months preceding the petition for termination of parental rights, testified at the hearing on the petition for termination of T.A.A.'s parental rights that T.A.A. at times would show no concern when her children were involved in dangerous situations or activities.
The county provided respondent with mental health services as recommended by a psychiatrist. T.A.A. cooperated in a mental health evaluation. An evaluating psychologist concluded that T.A.A. suffers a personality disorder that causes her to deny the problems with her parenting and to lack insight into her history of abusive relationships. T.A.A. failed to participate in a women's group or a support group as recommended, but she did agree to participate in individual therapy. Her treating psychologist, Dr. Fran Stawarz, testified that T.A.A. did not make any progress in therapy. She further testified that she continued sessions with T.A.A. even after *706 she had concluded that T.A.A. was not a candidate for further treatment, because the county had requested she continue. Dr. Stawarz testified at the termination hearing that T.A.A. did not believe there was anything "she could have done * * * to [keep] the children safe" from the prior abuse. Dr. Stawarz acknowledged that T.A.A. loves her children, but Dr. Stawarz did not believe that T.A.A. "would recognize a problem if it occurred in the future" and that the children were at risk of future abuse if returned to T.A.A. Dr. Stawarz opined that T.A.A. does not currently have the ability to safely parent her children, that T.A.A. would not have the ability to do so in the reasonably foreseeable future, and that the children should not be returned to T.A.A. now or in the reasonably foreseeable future. There was no evidence presented that T.A.A.'s lack of progress in therapy was related to her drug use.
As part of addressing the requirement of abstinence from drugs and alcohol, T.A.A. was required to submit to random drug testing. She was tested for drugs and alcohol 11 times between May 6 and November 2003. T.A.A. testified positive for marijuana in May and tested positive for methamphetamine in June, August, and November. During this period, T.A.A. also provided three samples that tested negative and three samples that were diluted and could not be tested. Because there is a possibility of false positive methamphetamine results, the county sent the four samples that tested positive for methamphetamine for confirmation testing, which confirmed the positive test results.
The county referred T.A.A. for four chemical health assessments after the positive results from the May, June, August, and November tests. The assessments were performed by Gary Paulson. T.A.A. denied using drugs and claimed that the positive test results were false positives and on one occasion attributed a positive test for methamphetamine to the use of diet drugs. After the first three assessments, Paulson concluded that T.A.A. did not have a chemical dependency problem and did not refer T.A.A. for treatment because T.A.A. denied having a drug problem. At the times of these three assessments, Paulson was not aware that the positive methamphetamine tests had been confirmed.
The fourth chemical dependency assessment occurred in November 2003 after a court hearing at which the county asked the court for permission to terminate reasonable efforts based on T.A.A.'s lack of progress in addressing her parenting problems and continued use of controlled substances. Pursuant to the county's request, the court entered an order ceasing all reasonable efforts with the exception that T.A.A. complete a chemical dependency treatment program if recommended after another chemical dependency evaluation. Paulson was informed at the time of the fourth chemical dependency evaluation that T.A.A.'s most recent positive test for methamphetamine had been confirmed. T.A.A. continued to deny using drugs. Despite T.A.A.'s continued denial of drug use, Paulson referred T.A.A. to the Tapestry Women's Program for a chemical dependency evaluation and treatment at the request of the county.
T.A.A. entered Tapestry on December 17, 2003. Although T.A.A. participated in treatment and worked on assignments, she did not make any progress in treatment because she continued to deny that she used drugs or had a chemical dependency problem. On December 31, 2003, T.A.A. attended a review hearing in the CHIPS matter. She called Tapestry later that day to report that she would not be returning to the program. T.A.A. was told *707 to call if she wanted to return. Because it was not known if she would be returning, the county canceled a visitation session with the children at Tapestry scheduled for January 2, 2004. T.A.A. returned to Tapestry on January 1. She permanently left the program on January 2 after learning that the visitation had been canceled. Because of the impending permanency deadline[1] and because the district court had already issued an order permitting the county to cease providing services, no further treatment was offered to T.A.A. T.A.A. never requested additional opportunities for treatment and has never asserted that she is chemically dependent. At the termination hearing in May 2004, she continued to deny the use of drugs.
To fulfill the fourth case plan goal of meeting the children's educational needs, the county provided T.A.A. with the services of in-home parent educators, and required T.A.A. to participate in meetings relating to the educational needs of the children and to follow through with any recommendations for addressing special education. T.A.A.'s case manager, Jackie Johnson, testified that while T.A.A. attended meetings, she refused to recognize the need for recommended speech therapy for C.T., who was diagnosed with speech delays. Johnson also testified that the in-home parent educators reported that T.A.A. was inconsistent in the attention and direction she provided to the children.
The fifth goal of the case plan required T.A.A. to maintain a safe and suitable home for the children. The record indicates that the issues regarding the condition of the family home had been substantially addressed at the time of the termination hearing, and the district court did not find that the condition of the home was unsuitable for the children.
After T.A.A. left the Tapestry program, the county filed a petition to terminate her parental rights. Following a trial, the district court found that the county had made reasonable efforts toward reunification and that termination was warranted because: (1) T.A.A. failed to comply with the duties imposed by the parent-child relationship; (2) T.A.A. is palpably unfit to be a party to the parent-child relationship; (3) reasonable efforts failed to correct the conditions leading to the out-of-home placement; and (4) the children had experienced egregious harm in the care of T.A.A. The district court further found that termination was in the best interests of the children.[2]
T.A.A. appealed and a divided panel of the court of appeals reversed. In re Children of T.A.A., No. A04-1345, 2005 WL 288776 (Minn.App. Feb.2, 2005). The court of appeals concluded that the county's failure to provide T.A.A. with chemical *708 dependency treatment at the time it first learned that T.A.A. had tested positive for illegal chemicals constituted a failure to provide reasonable efforts, precluding termination of her parental rights. In reaching this conclusion, the court of appeals concluded that T.A.A.'s drug use was the "crux" of the district court's decision to terminate parental rights. Because it concluded that the county failed to provide reasonable efforts, the court of appeals did not reach the issues of whether statutory grounds for termination existed or whether termination was in the best interests of the children.
I.
An order terminating parental rights is reviewed "to determine whether the district court's findings address the statutory criteria and whether those findings are supported by substantial evidence and are not clearly erroneous." In re Welfare of P.R.L., 622 N.W.2d 538, 543 (Minn.2001). This court gives deference to a trial court's decision to terminate parental rights but closely inquires into the sufficiency of the evidence to determine whether it was clear and convincing. In re Welfare of J.M., 574 N.W.2d 717, 724 (Minn.1998).
In reviewing a decision to terminate parental rights, the appellate court determines whether there is clear and convincing evidence to support at least one statutory ground for termination and, if so, whether termination is in the best interests of the child. In re Welfare of Children of R.W., 678 N.W.2d 49, 55 (Minn.2004). If statutory grounds for termination exist and termination is in the best interests of the child, the appellate court then determines whether there is clear and convincing evidence that the county made reasonable efforts to reunite the family. See In re Welfare of S.Z., 547 N.W.2d 886, 892 (Minn.1996) (noting mandatory nature of reasonable efforts by social services agency to reunite family).
II.
The district court found four statutory grounds for involuntary termination of T.A.A.'s parental rights. Only one ground must be proven for termination to be ordered. In re Children of R.W., 678 N.W.2d at 55. We conclude that the district court's findings support termination of T.A.A.'s parental rights based on palpable unfitness under Minn.Stat. § 260C.301, subd. 1(b)(4) (2004).[3]
Parental rights may be terminated under Minn.Stat. § 260C.301, subd. 1(b)(4), based on clear and convincing evidence
that a parent is palpably unfit to be a party to the parent and child relationship because of a consistent pattern of specific conduct before the child or of specific conditions directly relating to the parent and child relationship either of which are determined by the court to be of a duration or nature that renders the parent unable, for the reasonably foreseeable future, to care appropriately for the ongoing physical, mental, or emotional needs of the child.
The record and the district court's findings support the conclusion that T.A.A. was unable to provide appropriate care for her children because she refused to acknowledge her responsibility to protect her children from abuse by others. T.A.A.'s own treating psychologist testified that T.A.A. had not made any progress in addressing this issue and she opined that the children would be at risk for future abuse if reunited with T.A.A. now or in the reasonably *709 foreseeable future. T.A.A.'s history, which includes abuse of her daughters by two different boyfriends and permitting one of the boyfriends to continue to live in her home with her children for six months after learning of the abuse, demonstrates that she has failed to protect her children from abuse by others in the past. T.A.A. refused to acknowledge her responsibility to protect her children from abuse by others despite the therapy and other services offered by the county to help her address this issue. The record demonstrates that T.A.A. does not now, nor will in the reasonably foreseeable future, recognize her responsibility to protect her children from abuse and this provides clear and convincing evidence to support the district court's determination that her parental rights should be terminated based on palpable unfitness.
III.
Having concluded that statutory grounds for termination exist, we must determine whether termination is in the best interests of the children. In re Children of R.W., 678 N.W.2d at 57. The district court made extensive findings regarding the children's best interests and concluded that the children's best interests are served by termination of T.A.A.'s parental rights. Specifically, the district court found that J.B. and K.B. believed they were responsible for the past abuse, that T.A.A. has not taken any steps to help them understand that it was not their fault, nor has she taken responsibility to keep her daughters safe from future abuse, and that T.A.A. "will repeat this behavior of placing her children in harm's way." The district court also found that the children have adjusted to permanent placement with their relatives and that the relatives are meeting the needs of the children. The district court's conclusion that termination is in the best interests of the children is supported by clear and convincing evidence.
IV.
Because we affirm the district court's conclusions that statutory grounds for termination exist and that termination is in the best interests of the children, we now turn to the issue of whether the county made reasonable efforts to reunite T.A.A. and her children. Under Minn.Stat. § 260.012(c) (2004), the district court is required to "make findings and conclusions as to the provision of reasonable efforts" or must find that the provision of services or additional services would be futile. In determining whether reasonable efforts have been made, the court considers whether the services offered to the child and family were: (1) relevant to the safety and protection of the child; (2) adequate to meet the needs of the child and family; (3) culturally appropriate; (4) available and accessible; (5) consistent and timely; and (6) realistic under the circumstances. Id. Another statutory provision, Minn.Stat. § 260C.301, subd. 8(1) (2004), requires, in a proceeding to terminate parental rights, that the district court make specific findings "that reasonable efforts to prevent the placement and to reunify the child and the parent were made including individualized and explicit findings regarding the nature and extent of efforts made by the social services agency to rehabilitate the parent and reunite the family[.]" Alternatively, the district court may find "that reasonable efforts at reunification are not required as provided under [Minn.Stat. §] 260.012." Minn.Stat. § 260C.301, subd. 8(2).
The court of appeals concluded that the county had not made reasonable efforts because it failed to provide T.A.A. with chemical dependency treatment earlier in the proceeding. The court of appeals' decision *710 was based on its conclusion that the "crux of the trial court's decision to terminate [T.A.A.'s] parental rights is its determination that [T.A.A.] had not complied with her case plan because she had not satisfied the portions of that plan requiring [her] not to abuse chemicals[.]" In re Children of T.A.A., 2005 WL 288776, at *4.
We do not agree that "the crux of the [district] court's decision to terminate parental rights" was based on T.A.A.'s drug use. The district court's order and the record in this case indicate that the primary concern of the district court and the county was T.A.A.'s refusal to acknowledge her duty to protect the children from abuse. The district court made extensive, detailed findings regarding the testimony of T.A.A.'s social worker, her treating psychologist, and other service providers regarding their conclusion that T.A.A. had failed to make adequate progress towards recognizing her obligation to protect her children from abuse. While T.A.A.'s drug use may have been the proverbial "last straw" in the county's decision to seek termination of her parental rights, it is apparent from the record that T.A.A.'s drug use was not the "crux" of the district court's decision.
The county reasonably provided services specifically aimed at correcting the problems cited as grounds for termination; namely, T.A.A.'s refusal to accept responsibility for keeping her children safe. The county provided T.A.A. with individual therapy to help her address her personality disorder that prevented her from recognizing her responsibility to protect her children from abuse. The county also provided T.A.A. with social workers who provided in-home services to assist T.A.A. in developing her parenting skills. T.A.A. has consistently refused to acknowledge that one of her responsibilities as a parent is to recognize people and situations that could pose a danger to her children and there is no evidence in the record that additional efforts could have adequately addressed this issue in the reasonably foreseeable future.
The court of appeals concluded that the county should have provided chemical dependency treatment earlier because T.A.A.'s "chemical abuse permeates, and is inextricably intertwined with, her parenting deficiencies and her failure to correct those deficiencies." In re Children of T.A.A., 2005 WL 288776, at *5. In support of this assertion, the court of appeals cites portions of the district court's order that indicate T.A.A.'s case worker believed drug use was an "ongoing issue for reunification" and that other service providers were concerned about T.A.A.'s drug use and her denial of such use. Id. While T.A.A.'s drug use was an issue in the case, there is nothing in the record or the district court's findings to support a conclusion that T.A.A.'s drug use caused or contributed to her parenting deficiencies. At best, the record supports the conclusion that T.A.A.'s problems in acknowledging her responsibility to protect her children and admitting her drug use both stem from her personality disorder, for which the county offered treatment.
Because there was no causal relationship established between T.A.A.'s drug use and her inability to parent her children, the county's failure to provide drug treatment does not support a conclusion that the county failed to make reasonable efforts where termination was not based on T.A.A.'s drug use. Therefore, we hold that the district court's finding that the county made reasonable efforts to reunite is supported by clear and convincing evidence *711 in the record[4] and reverse the courts of appeals.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  Because two of the children were under eight years of age, the district court was required to conduct a permanency hearing within six months of the date the children were placed out of the home. Minn.Stat. § 260C.201, subd. 11a (2004). The county obtained a three-month extension of the permanency deadline to February 1, 2004.
[2]  The district court adopted the county's proposed findings verbatim. While we have declined to adopt a blanket prohibition on the practice, we take this opportunity to repeat that "[o]ur preference is `for a court to independently develop its own findings.'" Pederson v. State, 649 N.W.2d 161, 163 (Minn.2002) (citation omitted). We recognize the short deadline facing district courts in issuing an order on a petition to terminate parental rights. See Minn. R. Juv. Prot. P. 39.05, subd. 1 (requiring district court to issue order within 15 days of conclusion of trial in juvenile protection matter). However, the district court's findings should reflect the court's independent assessment of the evidence and this is best accomplished by the district court exercising its own skill and judgment in drafting its findings.
[3]  Because we conclude termination was appropriate based on palpable unfitness, we do not address the remaining grounds for termination cited by the district court.
[4]  The county filed a motion to strike T.A.A.'s appendix and T.A.A. filed a responsive motion to strike portions of the county's brief. The materials that are the subject of the motions were not considered in reaching our decision in this case and therefore we decline to rule on the motions.

=== CASE 2230098 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:36.465127+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 779 (2005)
Dan CONAWAY, Respondent,
v.
ST. LOUIS COUNTY, Appellant.
No. A04-2350.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 16, 2005.
*780 Mitchell J. Brunfelt, John M. Colosimo, Colosimo, Patchin, Kearney & Brunfelt, Ltd., Virginia, MN, for respondent.
Alan L. Mitchell, St. Louis County Attorney, Timothy O. Lee, Assistant County Attorney, Duluth, MN, for appellant.
*781 Considered and decided by MINGE, Presiding Judge; LANSING, Judge; and HALBROOKS, Judge.
OPINION
MINGE, Judge.
In challenging summary judgment, appellant argues that the district court erred in determining that respondent is entitled to continued health-insurance coverage under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 (2004) because (1) respondent began suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder before the statute became effective, and the statute cannot be applied retroactively; (2) Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 (2004) provides the only benefits for a peace officer disabled by posttraumatic stress disorder; and (3) respondent is not disabled, as defined by Minn. Stat. § 299A.465, or there is at least a genuine issue of material fact as to whether respondent is disabled. We conclude that because respondent did not retire until after Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 was effective, there is no retroactive application of the statute here. We further conclude that because Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 provides benefits for peace officers who are temporarily disabled, while Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 provides benefits for officers with long-term or permanent disabilities, section 299A.411 does not provide the exclusive remedy for officers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Finally, we conclude that under the Minnesota statutes the determination made by the Minnesota Public Employee Retirement Association (PERA) that respondent is disabled is binding on appellant, and appellant is not entitled to further discovery. For these reasons, we affirm.
FACTS
In November 2001, respondent Dan Conaway applied for duty-related disability retirement benefits with PERA. In November 2001, respondent's doctor wrote a letter to PERA stating that respondent was suffering from depression, panic disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder. The doctor stated that respondent's "prognosis for returning to work as a police officer or firefighter is extremely poor. I do not anticipate that he will be able to work in law enforcement in the future." PERA's reviewing physician confirmed that respondent was occupationally disabled and that his disability arose in the line of duty. In February 2002, respondent notified the St. Louis County Sheriff's Department that his application for disability benefits had been approved by PERA and that he was retiring. PERA designated respondent's disability as duty-related. But appellant St. Louis County declined to provide respondent with the continued health-insurance coverage which, under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 (2004), is available to officers disabled in the line of duty.
Respondent sued appellant alleging that the county's failure to provide continued health-insurance benefits was a violation of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 and a breach of contract. He also made a claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2000), asserting that appellant's actions violated his right to equal protection. Appellant moved to remove the claim to federal district court, but pursuant to the parties' stipulation for partial dismissal and remand, the federal district court dismissed the equal protection claim and remanded the case to state court.
Respondent requested summary judgment, arguing that appellant was required to pay for his continued health-insurance coverage under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465. Appellant argued that Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 does not apply to respondent because respondent began suffering from psychological-related issues before the statute was passed. Finally, appellant asserted *782 that it was entitled to undertake its own discovery, including an independent medical examination of respondent, because the following material facts were at issue: whether respondent suffered a disabling injury and whether a disabling injury occurred in the line of duty.
The district court granted respondent's motion for summary judgment. The district court determined that Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 applies to both physical and mental injuries/disabilities, such as posttraumatic stress disorder. The district court also determined that because respondent retired after the effective date of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, he was not attempting to apply the statute retroactively. Finally, the district court determined that because PERA decided respondent is entitled to disability benefits, appellant must pay for respondent's continued health-insurance coverage. The district court concluded that there were no genuine issues of material fact, and granted summary judgment. This appeal follows.
ISSUES
I. Did the district court err by determining that Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 (2004) applies to a peace officer who retires after the statute became effective if the officer began suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder before the statute became effective?
II. Does Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 provide benefits for a peace officer disabled by posttraumatic stress disorder?
III. Did the district court err by deciding that appellant could not conduct discovery after a PERA determination of disability?
ANALYSIS
I.
The first issue is whether the district court erred by determining that Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 (2004) applies to a peace officer who retires after the statute became effective even if the officer began suffering from injuries before the statute became effective. Appellant argues that awarding respondent benefits is an unlawful, retroactive application of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 because respondent experienced multiple traumatic events at work before 1997 and began having difficulty performing his job at that time. Minn. Stat. § 299A.465 became effective on June 1, 1997. 1997 Minn. Laws 1st Spec. Sess. ch. 1, § 1.
"No law shall be construed to be retroactive unless clearly and manifestly so intended by the legislature." Minn.Stat. § 645.21 (2004). There is no indication that the legislature intended Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 to apply to officers who retired before June 1, 1997.
Respondent continued to work as a police officer until he retired on March 1, 2002. PERA did not designate respondent as disabled until 2002. Respondent did not meet the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 until 2002, when his disabling injury caused his retirement and he was approved to receive a disability pension.[1] Granting benefits to respondent is not a retroactive application of the statute.
II.
The second issue is whether the health-insurance benefit provided under *783 Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 is available for officers suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Nash v. Wollan, 656 N.W.2d 585, 589 (Minn.App.2003), review denied (Minn. Apr. 29, 2003). "Words and phrases are construed according to rules of grammar and according to their common and approved usage...." Minn.Stat. § 645.08 (2004). The courts should give words their ordinary meaning unless the legislature has specifically provided otherwise or unless such construction would be inconsistent with legislative intent. Summers v. R & D Agency, Inc., 593 N.W.2d 241, 244 (Minn.App.1999). When the language in a statute is ambiguous, we may consider the legislature's intent. Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (2004).
A. Appellant contests the applicability of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 at two levels. First, it argues that Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 provides the exclusive remedy for officers who suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder. Appellant reasons that if officers suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder were entitled to benefits under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, then the later enactment of Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 was unnecessary. Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 provides that a peace officer who is diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder and is unable to perform his job is entitled to
(1) payment by the employer for unreimbursed loss of wages during the time period the officer is disabled, but not to exceed one year; and
(2) payment by the employer for unreimbursed expenses for medical treatment, including psychiatric or psychological counseling, to cure and relieve the effects of the posttraumatic stress syndrome during the time period the officer is disabled, but not to exceed one year.
(Emphasis added.) Minn.Stat. § 299A.411 provides short-term benefits for officers who suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder.
Not all officers who suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder are out of work for more than one year. Before Minn. Stat. § 299A.411 became law, officers could not recover lost wages or unreimbursed medical expenses incurred due to posttraumatic stress disorder if they were able to return to work within one year. See Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 (providing benefits only if an officer qualifies for a duty-related disability pension); Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 2 (2004) (providing that an officer qualifies for a duty-related disability pension only if the officer is mentally unable to perform his or her duties for one year or longer). Sections 299A.411 and 299A.465 serve different purposes and benefit different classes of officers. Minn. Stat. § 299A.411 is short term, while § 299A.465 is long term. Thus, the district court correctly ruled that § 299A.411 is not the exclusive remedy for officers who suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder. Respondent's disability is classified as permanent, and Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 provides him with benefits in his situation.
B. At another level, appellant argues that respondent is not disabled under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 because the statute only entitles officers with physical injuries to continued health-insurance coverage. The statute states:
(a) This subdivision applies when a peace officer or firefighter suffers a disabling injury that:
(1) results in the officer's or firefighter's retirement or separation from service;
(2) occurs while the officer or firefighter is acting in the course and scope of *784 duties as a peace officer or firefighter; and
(3) the officer or firefighter has been approved to receive the officer's or firefighter's duty-related disability pension [under Minn.Stat. § 353.656].
Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1. We note that the term "disabling injury" does introduce some element of ambiguity into the statute.
When the legislature has intended to limit the term "injury" to physical injuries, the legislature has used the terms "physical injury" or "bodily injury." See, e.g., Minn.Stat. §§ 15.31 ("The state shall pay premiums on insurance policies insuring its employees against liability from claims for bodily injuries ...."), 38.013, subd. 2(3) ("This subdivision does not limit the liability of a member of the board for physical injury...."), 60A.06, subd. 1(5)(a) (Insurance companies may be authorized to insure "against loss or damage by the sickness, bodily injury or death by accident of the assured."), 123B.25(b) (School district must provide legal counsel for teacher who is sued for causing "physical injury."), 447.32, subd. 9 ("Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the liability of a member of the board for physical injury ...."), 604.16, subd. 3 ("[A] person fleeing the police officer is liable for all bodily injury....") (2004). The legislature's choice to use the term "disabling injury" here signals that it did not intend to limit the term to physical injuries.
We also observe that the legislature linked Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 to Minn.Stat. § 353.656 (2004). As the statutory language already quoted indicates, Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1(a)(3), provides that an officer must be approved to receive a "duty-related disability pension" under Minn.Stat. § 353.656 in order to receive continued health-insurance coverage. That latter section provides benefits to an officer
who becomes disabled and physically unfit to perform duties as a police officer... as a direct result of an injury, sickness, or other disability incurred in or arising out of any act of duty, which has or is expected to render the member physically or mentally unable to perform the duties as a police officer ... for a period of at least one year, shall receive disability benefits.
Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 1. We see a remarkable similarity between the two statutes. The phrase "suffers a disabling injury that . . . results in the officer's or firefighter's retirement or separation from service" in Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1(a)(1), is the functional equivalent of the phrase "becomes disabled and physically unfit to perform duties as a police officer... as a direct result of an injury, sickness, or other disability ... which has or is expected to render the member physically or mentally unable to perform the duties as a police officer" in Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 1. Because Minn.Stat. § 353.656 recognizes mental injuries as duty-related disabilities, it seems even more clear that Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 does not exclude mental injuries such as posttraumatic stress disorder from the definition of disabling injuries. The district court did not err in concluding that that section covers respondent's disorder.
III.
The third issue is whether appellant, as the employer of respondent, was entitled to conduct further discovery, including its own independent medical examination, after PERA had determined that respondent was disabled and entitled to benefits under Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 1. The district court concluded that because appellant, as a county and as an *785 employer, is bound by PERA's determination that respondent has a duty-related disability and it could not conduct further discovery.
As set forth above, Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1(a), provides three criteria for determining if an officer is entitled to continued health coverage: (1) the officer must suffer a disabling injury that results in retirement; (2) the disabling injury must occur while the officer is acting in the course and scope of his or her duty; and (3) PERA must have approved the officer to receive a duty-related disability pension. When PERA approves an officer to receive a duty-related disability pension, PERA must conclude that the officer is suffering a disabling injury that results in a long-term disability and that the injury occurred while the officer was acting in the course and scope of his or her duties. See Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 1 (stating that an officer is entitled to duty-related pension benefits if he or she is disabled "as a direct result of any injury, sickness, or other disability ... which has or is expected to render the member physically or mentally unable to perform the duties as a police officer," and the injury was "incurred in or [arose] out of any act of duty"). In other words, if an officer satisfies the third criterion of Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1(a), by qualifying for a duty-related disability pension, the officer necessarily has satisfied the other two criteria as well.
Although examining the legislative history is not necessary, we note that the legislative comments on Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 show that the legislature believed PERA would be an effective screen in determining an officer's eligibility for benefits. See Hearing on S.F. No. 233 Before the Senate Comm. on State Gov't Operations Veteran Affairs (Apr. 8, 1997); House Floor Debate on H.F. No. 333 (Mar. 3, 1997) (statement of Rep. Farrell). PERA has the ability to access all of an applicant's medical records and related information from any source to determine whether an officer is disabled. Minn.Stat. § 353.656, subd. 5. Additionally, PERA has its own physicians review evidence of an applicant's disability. Minn. Stat. § 353.33, subds. 4, 6a (2004).
Appellant questions the fairness of the legislature's actions to the county and the county's financial interests.[2] Minn. Stat. § 299A.465 transfers the financial responsibility for continued health coverage to the counties without guaranteeing funding. We acknowledge that the county has an interest in PERA's disability determinations.[3] Perhaps the county has the right to participate independently in the disability-determination process. However, because appellant failed to raise or pursue the issue of the accuracy of PERA's disability determination during the discovery period, because appellant acknowledged that several identifiable incidents in respondent's work history caused or played a significant role in the development of respondent's posttraumatic stress disorder, and because it appears that appellant does not disagree with PERA's determination *786 of respondent's eligibility for pension benefits, we do not reach the issue of a county's right to participate in the PERA disability proceeding.
DECISION
Because applying Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 to respondent's situation is not a retroactive application of the statute and because the statute covers a peace officer disabled by posttraumatic stress disorder, we determine that the district court correctly determined that respondent is entitled to continued health-insurance coverage under Minn.Stat. § 299A.465 for that disorder. Because PERA's disability determination is binding on appellant, we conclude that the district court did not err in rejecting appellant's discovery effort. The district court's decision granting summary judgment to respondent is affirmed.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The statute also requires that the injury occur in the course of the officer's duties. Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 1(a)(2). Although appellant claims the statute is limited to physical injuries and we address this issue in this opinion, there was no factual dispute that respondent's posttraumatic stress disorder occurred as a result of his work as a law enforcement officer.
[2]  Appellant does not argue that the legislature lacks the authority to give PERA responsibility for making disability determinations for peace officers or to impose financial responsibility on the county. We note that counties are subordinate agencies of the state government and subject to legislative control. See Kasch v. Clearwater County, 289 N.W.2d 148, 151 (Minn.1980); Mid-City Hotel Assocs. v. Hennepin County Bd. of Comm'rs, 516 N.W.2d 574, 576 n. 1 (Minn.App.1994).
[3]  Although the statute authorizes the counties to seek reimbursement from the Commissioner of Public Safety for a part of the benefits provided, appellant represents that it has not received full reimbursement. See Minn.Stat. § 299A.465, subd. 4.

=== CASE 9742162 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:52.10646+00 ===

NEFF, J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right an order of the trial court granting summary disposition for defendant and dismissing plaintiffs wrongful death action following his son’s death in a farm equipment accident on defendant’s property. We reverse and remand.
I. ISSUE
The decedent, Rodney Laier, was killed in an accident on defendant’s property while assisting defendant with hydraulic hose repairs on the front-end loader of a tractor borrowed from plaintiff, which defendant broke while using it to compress materials in a dumpster. During the attempted repair, the bucket on the loader dropped, pinning Rodney against the tractor and killing him. The question presented is whether the open and obvious danger doctrine applies to limit defendant’s liability under a theory of ordinary negligence as well as a theory of premises liability. We hold that the open and obvious danger doctrine is inapplicable to plaintiffs ordinary negligence claim. We further hold that al*485though the open and obvious doctrine applies to plaintiffs premises liability claim, genuine issues of material fact preclude summary disposition on the record before us.
II. FACTS
On July 30, 1999, defendant and Rodney borrowed a 1967 John Deere model 3020 tractor from plaintiff to use on defendant’s horse farm. The tractor was equipped with a large front-end loader bucket that was powered by the tractor’s hydraulic system. Defendant used the tractor to compress materials in a dumpster on his property. As defendant lowered the bucket into the dumpster to compress the materials, he struck the dumpster with a hydraulic hose on the front-end loader. The hose was torn from the connector fitting, causing hydraulic fluid to spew from the hose and making the front-end loader inoperable. Defendant clamped off the hose with a Vise-Grip to prevent more fluid from leaking out, permitting the front-end loader to partially function.
The following day, defendant contacted Rodney and asked for his assistance in repairing the front-end loader. Defendant and Rodney traveled into town and obtained parts to fix the hydraulic hose. While the factual record of the accident is limited, upon returning to defendant’s farm, defendant got on the tractor and raised the bucket four or five feet, then got off the tractor to assist Rodney, who stood between the tractor and the bucket to repair the hose and fitting. It appears that Rodney then removed the broken fitting, and either removed the hose from the good fitting or the hose blew off the good fitting. When the pressure in the hydraulic system was released, the bucket dropped, pinning Rodney between the bucket and the front-end *486of the tractor. Rodney suffered a large laceration to the left side of his chest and crushing chest trauma that caused his death.
Plaintiff filed this wrongful death action alleging that Rodney’s death was caused by defendant’s negligence. The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition and dismissed plaintiffs action on the ground that a landowner has no duty to protect or warn an invitee1 of open and obvious dangers. The court found that the dangers of releasing a Vise-Grip on a hydraulic system were open and obvious and there was no special aspect of the dangerous condition that made the open and obvious condition unreasonably dangerous. The court noted that defendant knew little, if anything, about the repair of the tractor, while Rodney was quite knowledgeable and decided how to undertake the repair.
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
This Court reviews de novo questions of law. Dressel v Ameribank, 468 Mich 557, 561; 664 NW2d 151 (2003). Likewise, the trial court’s decision on a motion, for summary disposition is reviewed de novo.
The trial court granted summary disposition for defendant pursuant to MCR 2.116(0(10), which tests the factual support for a claim. Dressel, supra. On review, this Court must consider the record in the light most favorable to the nonmovant to determine whether any genuine issue of material fact exists that precludes entering judgment for the moving party as a matter of *487law. Id.; Morales v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 458 Mich 288, 294; 582 NW2d 776 (1998). Review is limited to the evidence presented to the trial court at the time the motion was decided. Peña v Ingham Co Rd Comm, 255 Mich App 299, 313 n 4; 660 NW2d 351 (2003).
IV. OPEN AND OBVIOUS DANGER DOCTRINE
The trial court held that plaintiffs claim was precluded by the open and obvious danger doctrine. However, this case involves claims of both ordinary negligence and premises liability, and it must be analyzed accordingly. The distinction in theory is important and is one that the bench and bar have increasingly failed to recognize in applying the open and obvious danger doctrine.
The open and obvious danger doctrine is commonly applied in products liability and premises liability cases as a limitation on the duty of care owed, often in the context of a duty to warn. Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606, 610, 614; 537 NW2d 185 (1995); Glitten-berg v Doughboy Recreational Industries (On Rehearing), 441 Mich 379, 390, 403; 491 NW2d 208 (1992). In general, there is no obligation to warn someone of dangers that are so obvious and apparent that a person may reasonably be expected to discover them and protect himself or herself. Prosser & Keaton, Torts (5th ed), § 61, p 427. The rationale underlying this doctrine is that “there should be no liability for failing to warn someone of a risk or hazard [that] he appreciated to the same extent as a warning would have provided.” Prosser & Keaton, § 96, p 686. Further, invitors “are not absolute insurers of the safety of their invitees.” Bertrand, supra at 614.
As our Supreme Court explained in Lugo v Ameritech Corp, Inc, 464 Mich 512, 516; 629 NW2d 384 (2001), the *488open and obvious danger doctrine should not be viewed as an exception to the duty generally owed to invitees; rather, it is an integral part of the definition of that duty. “Duty exists because the relationship between the parties gives rise to a legal obligation.” Bertrand, supra at 614. However, public policy may limit the scope of that duty. Id.
In the context of premises liability, the general rule is that a “premises possessor owes a duty to an invitee to exercise reasonable care to protect the invitee from an unreasonable risk of harm caused by a dangerous condition on the land.” Lugo, supra at 516. This duty does not require a premises possessor to protect an invitee from open and obvious dangers unless special aspects of a condition make even an open and obvious risk unreasonably dangerous:
“When §§ 343 and 343A [of the Restatement Torts, 2d] are read together, the rule generated is that if the particular activity or condition creates a risk of harm only because the invitee does not discover the condition or realize its danger, then the open and obvious doctrine will cut off liability if the invitee should have discovered the condition and realized its danger. On the other hand, if the risk of harm remains unreasonable, despite its obviousness or despite knowledge of it by the invitee, then the circumstances may be such that the invitor is required to undertake reasonable precautions.” [Id. at 516-517, quoting Bertrand, supra at 611.]
In the context of products liability, the rules are analogous and based on similar policy. “For policy reasons, the law qualifies a manufacturer’s duty to warn by declaring some risks to be outside that duty.” Glittenberg, supra at 389. In general, “[m]anufacturers have a duty to warn purchasers or users of dangers associated with the intended use or reasonably foreseeable misuse of their products ....” Id. at 387. However, *489the open and obvious danger rule applies to limit that duty. Id. at 390. “A manufacturer has no duty to warn if it reasonably perceives that the potentially dangerous condition of the product is readily apparent or may be disclosed by a mere casual inspection, and it cannot be said that only persons of special experience will realize that the product’s condition or characteristic carries with it a potential danger.” Id. at 390-391.
With regard to simple products, “the duty inquiry asks whether people must be told what they already know,” e.g., that a knife cuts or a stove burns. Id. at 391. That is, “an obvious danger is no danger to a ‘reasonably’ careful person.” Id. at 396. “[I]f the risk is obvious from the characteristics of the product, the product itself telegraphs the precise warning that plaintiffs [would claim] is lacking.” Id. at 394. Accordingly, a “manufacturer of a simple product has no duty to warn of the product’s potentially dangerous conditions or characteristics that are readily apparent or visible upon casual inspection and reasonably expected to be recognized by the average user of ordinary intelligence.” Id. at 385.
Whether a defendant may properly rely on the defense of open and obvious danger depends on the theory of liability at issue. Walker v Flint, 213 Mich App 18, 20-22; 539 NW2d 535 (1995). The defense is clearly available in response to a premises liability or products liability claim based on a failure to warn. Glittenberg, supra at 390, 403; Riddle v McClouth Steel Products Corp, 440 Mich 85, 96-97; 485 NW2d 676 (1992); Walker, supra. This Court has further held that the doctrine applies to a premises liability case whether the plaintiff has pleaded the claim as a failure to warn of a dangerous condition or as a breach of duty in allowing the dangerous condition to exist. Millikin v Walton *490Manor Mobile Home Park, Inc, 234 Mich App 490, 497; 595 NW2d 152 (1999) (injured plaintiff, who fell over a supporting wire for a utility pole, alleged that the defendant allowed the support wire to be where it was in an unreasonable and negligent manner). However, the doctrine does not exonerate a defendant from liability where the claim is one of a statutory duty to maintain and repair the premises. Walker, supra at 22. It is with this background in mind that we now consider the claims before us.
V. ANALYSIS OF PLAINTIFF’S CLAIMS
In this case, plaintiffs complaint alleged a single count of negligence without identifying any specific theory of liability. It was clear from the duties alleged in the complaint, and plaintiffs argument, however, that plaintiff was relying in part on a theory of premises liability. Accordingly, defendant argued, and the trial court apparently agreed, that plaintiffs claim was precluded by the open and obvious danger doctrine, regardless of the theory of liability.2 To the extent that plaintiff pleaded a viable claim of ordinary negligence, dismissal on the basis of the open and obvious danger doctrine was improper. There is no doctrinal basis for extending the open and obvious danger defense to ordinary negligence.
Although case law may appear to support the extension of the open and obvious danger doctrine to circum*491stances similar to the negligence claim in this case, these cases merely reflect differing applications of the doctrine in the contexts of premises liability and products liability. Michigan law concerning the open and obvious danger doctrine is derived from § 343A(1) of 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, p 218, which provides:
A possessor of land is not liable to his invitees for physical harm caused to them by any activity or condition on the land whose danger is known or obvious to them, unless the possessor should anticipate the harm despite such knowledge or obviousness. [Emphasis added. See Bertrand, supra at 610.]
The confusion that has arisen apparently stems from the Restatement’s reference to “any activity or condition on the land,” thus prompting a misconception that the doctrine applies whenever the alleged negligence involves an activity or condition on the land. However, that language is clearly relevant only if the claim concerns the liability of a possessor of land to his invitees, i.e., premises liability. Likewise, the reference to a “condition on the land” in cases involving licensees is derived from § 342 of 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, p 210, and concerns only liability as a possessor of land, not negligent conduct in general.
In Klimek v Drzewiecki, 135 Mich App 115; 352 NW2d 361 (1984), this Court applied the open and obvious danger doctrine in a premises liability case. The plaintiff sought recovery for injuries sustained by her four-year-old son, who was bitten on the face by a dog while the child was playing, unsupervised, outside the home of the defendant, the plaintiffs sister. Id. at 117-118. The plaintiff and her son were social guests of the defendant, and the dog belonged to the defendant’s neighbor. Id. at 118. The Court held “that a loose, unsupervised and dangerous dog either on the defen*492dant’s land or in close proximity to the defendant’s land without any obstacle to prevent it from entering [the] defendant’s land constituted a ‘condition on the land’ as that term is used in... 2 Restatement Torts, (2d), § 342, p 210.” Id. at 119.
Similarly, Eason v Coggins Mem Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, 210 Mich App 261; 532 NW2d 882 (1995), was a premises liability case in which the plaintiffs decedent, an invitee, was fatally injured when a ladder and scaffolding set up by the defendant’s agents collapsed, allegedly because the ladder was missing a safety latch. Id. at 262-263. The Court observed that the care required of a landowner to make premises safe for invitees extended to instrumentalities on the premises that the invitee uses at the invitation of the premises owner. Id. at 264. Accordingly, the Court concluded that the defendant may be liable on a theory of premises liability because the defect in the ladder was alleged to be latent and not open and obvious. Id. at 266. In Eason, as in Klimek, the analysis addressed no allegation of negligent conduct by the defendant beyond the mere failure to exercise care as the owner of the premises.
In Resteiner v Sturm, Ruger & Co, Inc, 223 Mich App 374; 566 NW2d 53 (1997), this Court applied the open and obvious danger doctrine to a revolver because the claim was a products liability claim involving a failure to warn against the danger of theft. Id. at 380 (opinion by WHITE, P.J.). The analysis in Resteiner is therefore grounded in product liability law. “[T]he manufacturer of a simple product has no duty to warn of the product’s potentially dangerous conditions or characteristics when they are readily apparent or visible upon casual inspection and reasonably expected to be recognized by the average user of ordinary intelligence.” Id.; *493see also Glittenberg, supra (discussing application of the open and obvious danger doctrine in the context of products liability law).3
In a negligence case, the theory of liability determines the nature of the duty owed and whether the open and obvious danger doctrine is applicable. In a premises liability claim, liability emanates merely from the defendant’s duty as an owner, possessor, or occupier of land. However, that does not preclude a separate claim grounded on an independent theory of liability based on the defendant’s conduct, as in this case. Here, defendant sought Rodney’s assistance in repairing the front-end loader. Plaintiff alleged liability based on defendant’s failure to exercise care in the repair of the front-end loader and his operation of the equipment before the bucket fell and injured Rodney, which was an additional theory of liability separate from that of premises liability. See Walker, supra at 21-22 (failure to warn was an additional theory of liability where the plaintiff also alleged a breach of statutory duty).
A. ORDINARY NEGLIGENCE CLAIM
Plaintiffs complaint stated that defendant “owed a duty to Rodney to use due care and caution in the operation and control of the tractor and bucket.” Defendant’s conduct was thus an alleged basis of liability, independent of premises liability. James v Alberts, 464 *494Mich 12, 19; 626 NW2d 158 (2001). Although there was evidence that Rodney was employed by defendant as a farm manager, the record is inconclusive regarding his employment status at the time of the accident. Regardless, the fact that Rodney was voluntarily assisting defendant does not necessarily preclude plaintiffs alleged claim. “[I]f a person is injured by the direct negligence of another, whom he is attempting to assist, the latter’s duty generally turns on foreseeability.” Id. at 15; see also 18A Michigan Civil Jurisprudence, Negligence, § 15, p 103 (“Every person who engages in the performance of an undertaking has an obligation to use due care or to act so as not to unreasonably endanger the person or property of another.”). Moreover, “[a] higher degree of care is required in dealing with a dangerous agency than in the ordinary affairs of life or business, which involve little or no risk, and, as no absolute standard can be fixed by law, every reasonable precaution suggested by experience and the known danger ought to be taken.” Id., § 29, pp 122-123.
Plaintiff thus alleged a claim of ordinary negligence, to which the open and obvious danger defense is inapplicable. That is not to say that other similar defenses may not be properly applied. However, the defense must be considered in light of the duty at issue. For example, a premises owner’s liability with regard to dangerous power tools, such as lawn mowers, is not grounded in mere premises liability:
It is generally true that one’s right to maintain for a lawful purpose a dangerous appliance or instrumentality on his own premises is not limited or qualified by the degree in which it may be dangerous. Moreover, liability for negligence in keeping a dangerous instrumentality is not an absolute liability, and the mere fact that an instrumentality may become dangerous to others does not constitute its possessor an insurer against injury that may result *495therefrom. On the contrary, liability for negligence in respect to dangerous instrumentalities, as liability for negligence generally, arises from the failure to use due care, and one who causes or authorizes the use of a dangerous instrument or article in a negligent manner, or under such circumstances that he has reason to know it is likely to produce injury, is responsible for the natural and probable consequences of his act to any person injured who is not himself at fault. [Anno: Liability of owner or occupant of premises to injured person permitted to use power tools or appliances, § la, 46 ALR2d 1377-1378.]
Both Rodney and defendant were aware that the tractor’s hydraulic system was broken. The two set out to repair it, and defendant was in the position to control the bucket, which he raised four or five feet so that Rodney could get into a position to work on the hydraulic hose and fitting. It is not at all clear what happened next to cause the bucket to fall and fatally injure Rodney, but it is arguable that some action or inaction of defendant resulted in the fatal event.4 What is clear is that defendant failed to secure the bucket in the raised position. Under these circumstances, questions of negligence and comparative negligence are properly left to the jury.
“To establish a prima facie case of negligence, a plaintiff must prove four elements: (1) a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, (2) breach of that duty, (3) causation, and (4) damages.” Case v Consumers Power Co, 463 Mich 1, 6; 615 NW2d 17 (2000). “Duty” is a legally recognized obligation “ ‘to conform to a particu*496lar standard of conduct to protect others against an unreasonable risk of harm.’ ” Burnett v Bruner, 247 Mich App 365, 368; 636 NW2d 733 (2001), quoting Riddle, supra at 96. Ordinarily, whether a duty exists is a question of law for the court. Burnett, supra at 368. If there is no duty, summary disposition is proper. Beaudrie v Henderson, 465 Mich 124, 130; 631 NW2d 308 (2001). However, if factual questions exist regarding what characteristics giving rise to a duty are present, the issue must be submitted to the fact-finder. Howe v Detroit Free Press, Inc, 219 Mich App 150, 156; 555 NW2d 738 (1996), affd 457 Mich 871 (1998). Determination of the existence of duty, as a question of law, is subject to review de novo on appeal. Fultz v Union-Commerce Assoc, 470 Mich 460, 463; 683 NW2d 587 (2004).
An adult plaintiff has a duty to exercise reasonable care for his own safety and protection. Berry v J & D Auto Dismantlers, Inc, 195 Mich App 476, 484; 491 NW2d 585 (1992). Thus, the doctrine of pure comparative negligence distributes responsibility according to the proportionate fault of the parties. It requires that a plaintiffs damages be reduced in the same proportion by which the plaintiffs own conduct contributed to his or her injuries. MCL 600.2959; Placek v Sterling Hts, 405 Mich 638, 660-661, 681; 275 NW2d 511 (1979). The standards for determining the comparative negligence of a plaintiff are the same as those of a defendant — the jury must consider the nature of the conduct and its causal relationship to the damages — and the question is one for the jury unless all reasonable minds could not differ or because of some ascertainable public policy consideration. MCL 600.6304(2); Rodriquez v Solar of Michigan, Inc, 191 Mich App 483, 488; 478 NW2d 914 (1991).
*497Defendant owed the decedent a duty of ordinary care not to act negligently with regard to the repairs undertaken and control of the tractor’s front-end loader. That is, plaintiffs decedent was in a position of peril under the bucket and involved in an undertaking with defendant at the time the fatal injury occurred. That the bucket fell and killed Rodney may or may not have been the proximate result of defendant’s negligence. The fact that Rodney was in a position of peril may or may not have been the result of his own comparative negligence. On the record and pleadings before us, it appears that there may be genuine issues of material fact regarding all these matters.
B. PREMISES LIABILITY CLAIM
In addition to the duty owed concerning conduct, plaintiff alleged a duty based on Rodney’s status as an invitee, i.e., a duty to protect Rodney from unreasonable risks of injury known to defendant and to warn Rodney about those risks. This allegation was the basis of plaintiffs claim of premises liability, to which the open and obvious danger doctrine properly applies.
As discussed previously, in general, a premises possessor has no duty “to protect an invitee from open and obvious dangers, but, if special aspects of a condition make even an open and obvious risk unreasonably dangerous, the possessor has a duty to undertake reasonable precautions to protect invitees from that risk.” Lugo, supra at 517.
[W]ith regard to open and obvious dangers, the critical question is whether there is evidence that creates a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether there are truly “special aspects” of the open and obvious condition that differentiate the risk from typical open and obvious risks so as to create an unreasonable risk of harm, i.e., whether the *498“special aspect” of the condition should prevail in imposing liability upon the defendant or the openness and obviousness of the condition should prevail in barring liability. [Id. at 517-518.]
A plaintiffs knowledge and level of care used are irrelevant in determining whether a condition that was either created or allowed to continue by a premises possessor was unreasonably dangerous. Lugo, supra at 523-524. The correct inquiry focuses on the condition of the premises and whether it was open and obvious, and, if so, whether special aspects of the situation nevertheless made it unreasonably dangerous. Id. at 523. Because Michigan follows the rule of comparative negligence, the fact that a plaintiff was also negligent does not bar a cause of action. Id. Accordingly, in deciding a motion for summary disposition in an open and obvious danger case, the court must focus on the objective nature of the condition of the premises at issue. Id. at 524.
Whether a danger is open and obvious depends on whether it is reasonable to expect an average user of ordinary intelligence to discover the danger upon casual inspection. Kenny v Kaatz Funeral Home, Inc, 264 Mich App 99, 105; 689 NW2d 737 (2004); Weakley v Dearborn Hts, 240 Mich App 382, 385; 612 NW2d 428 (2000). This test focuses on the “reasonably prudent person,” and is, therefore, objective in nature. Mann v Shusteric Enterprises, Inc, 470 Mich 320, 329 n 10; 683 NW2d 573 (2004); Kenny, supra at 105-106. Thus, courts are required to determine whether a reasonable person in the plaintiffs position would foresee the danger, and not whether a particular plaintiff should have foreseen the danger. Mann, supra at 329; Lugo, supra at 518 n 2; Kenny, supra at 106.
*499In the present case, the trial court found:
[T]he dangers of releasing a vice grip [sic] on a hydraulic system were open and obvious. That is, decedent could have discovered the condition upon casual inspection. Because decedent was knowledgeable about the attempted repairs and no special aspect “of the dangerous condition existed” in this particular case. Indeed the evidence is uncontro-verted that the defendant knew little, if anything about the repair of the tractor. While decedent was quite knowledgeable and decided how to fix it.
Accordingly, there is no duty for defendant to warn or instruct the decedent on how to fix the tractor. [Emphasis added.]
The trial court erred in relying on this subjective analysis to determine that the dangerous condition of the tractor was open and obvious. The court subjectively weighed Rodney’s knowledge of farm machinery maintenance and repair, rather than evaluating whether a reasonably prudent person of ordinary intelligence would have discovered the danger on casual inspection. Rodney’s knowledge of farm equipment, general maintenance, and repair, and defendant’s awareness of that knowledge, are irrelevant under the reasonably prudent person standard of the open and obvious danger doctrine.
Likewise, the record suggests that the trial court applied the same incorrect subjective standard in determining whether special aspects existed based on what Rodney did and did not know. In Bertrand, supra at 617, the Court considered whether a special aspect was created by the character, location, or surrounding conditions of the risk, in that case, steps. Subsequently, in Lugo, the Court noted that special aspects such as an unavoidable condition or one that poses an unreasonably high risk of severe harm can render an open and obvious condition unreasonably dangerous. Lugo, supra *500at 518. The consideration of any special aspects in this case should be considered accordingly.
Summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C) (10) is properly granted if there is no genuine issue regarding any material fact and if the moving party is entitled to judgment or partial judgment as a matter of law. Kenny, supra at 104. “A genuine issue of material fact exists when the record, giving the benefit of reasonable doubt to the opposing party, leaves open an issue upon which reasonable minds might differ.” West v Gen Motors Corp, 469 Mich 177, 183; 665 NW2d 468 (2003). Given the trial court’s erroneous subjective analysis of the open and obvious danger issues, summary disposition of plaintiffs premises liability claim was improper. On the record before us, it cannot be said that no genuine issue of material fact exists on which reasonable minds could differ regarding whether plaintiffs claim was barred by the open and obvious danger doctrine.
VI. CONCLUSION
Plaintiffs complaint sounds in both ordinary negligence and premises liability, and these claims must be considered in the proper contexts. To the extent that plaintiff seeks recovery on a theory of premises liability, the application of the open and obvious danger doctrine is proper. However, to the extent that plaintiffs alleged claim is based on ordinary negligence, a traditional negligence analysis applies, and no basis exists for applying the open and obvious danger doctrine. Even if the tractor is properly considered an “activity or condition on the land,” this circumstance is relevant only in analyzing defendant’s liability as owner of the premises and not in analyzing whether defendant breached a duty otherwise owed to plaintiff. We reverse the grant of *501summary disposition for defendant and remand for further proceedings with regard to both theories of liability.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Although a duty owed by a premises owner depends on the status of the injured party, James v Alberts, 464 Mich 12, 19-20; 626 NW2d 158 (2001), quoting Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591, 596-597; 614 NW2d 88 (2000), defendant did not dispute plaintiffs classification of Rodney as an invitee.
Part of the difficulty in this case stems from plaintiffs lack of specificity in his pleadings and arguments. It is incumbent on plaintiffs to properly set forth their causes of action and theories of liability, particularly in the complex area of negligence law, to enable the parties to argue, and the courts to apply, appropriate legal analysis. In an effort to assist in that regard, we give due consideration to what we presume are plaintiffs claims despite these shortcomings.
Valinski v Little Mexico Restaurant, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued September 24, 2002 (Docket No. 233446), also appears to apply the open and obvious danger doctrine to claims analogous to those in this case. The Court concluded that a hot skillet used by the defendant restaurant to serve food to the plaintiff was within the scope of the open and obvious doctrine. Id. at slip op pp 2-3. However, a review of the cases cited reveals that the analysis is merely an amalgamation of products liability and premises liability precedents. Regardless, Valinski is not binding precedent. MCR 7.215(C)(1).
To the extent that plaintiff failed to fully articulate the nature of the duty at issue in his complaint, the claim is nonetheless properly considered on remand. See Eason, supra at 266 (although the plaintiff went beyond the four corners of the complaint to explain her specific theory of latent defect in the ladder at the motion hearing, her comments merely showed that further factual development may establish a theory of recovery).

=== CASE 9742163 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:52.111487+00 ===

SCHUETTE, J.
(concurring in the result only). The issue before this Court involves a tragic accident where the bucket on a front-end loader crushed plaintiffs decedent, who was attempting to fix a broken hydraulic hose fitting on the front-end loader.
The record of this case is about as thick as the bent grass on a putting green is tall and is about as factually underdeveloped as a fourth-world economy.
I concur in Judge Neff’s conclusion that the decision of the trial court should be reversed and the case remanded for further proceedings. Plaintiff should be offered an opportunity to amend his complaint. In so doing, plaintiff is encouraged to state with clarity his theory or theories of action and the grounds proposed for imposing liability, if any, upon defendant.
Given the paucity of the factual record before this Court, it is premature to utilize this specific case as an analytical tool to measure the breadth of the open and obvious danger doctrine in premises liability cases. Several opinions have expanded the application of the open and obvious danger doctrine. In Valinski v Little Mexico Restaurant, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued September 24, 2002 (Docket No. 233446), although not binding precedent, this Court held that a restaurant’s serving food items on a hot skillet could be considered an activity or condition on the land. In Klimek v Drzewiecki, 135 Mich App 115, 119; 352 NW2d 361 (1984), this Court held that a loose dog is a “condition on the land.” In *502Resteiner v Sturm, Ruger & Co, Inc, 223 Mich App 374, 380; 566 NW2d 53 (1997), this Court applied the open and obvious danger doctrine to a revolver as a product. In Eason v Coggins Mem Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, 210 Mich App 261, 264; 532 NW2d 882 (1995), this Court applied the open and obvious danger doctrine to a ladder with a defective safety latch, which ladder was placed on the outside of defendant’s church building, and held that the ladder was an instrumentality in that premises liability case. On the other hand, some advocate a narrower reading of § 343A(1) of the Restatement Torts, 2d, wherein the doctrine of open and obvious does not apply whenever the alleged negligence involves an activity or condition on the land. I would not delve into this type of doctrinal analysis on such a sparse record.
Therefore, while I concur in the result reached by my colleague, I decline to join Judge NEFF in her thoughtful analysis.

=== CASE 9742164 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:52.115542+00 ===

HOEKSTRA, P.J.,
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the lead opinion that plaintiffs complaint arguably sounds in ordinary negligence and that, for the reasons stated in part IV of the opinion, the open and obvious danger doctrine is inapplicable to such a claim. Accordingly, because the trial court and the parties failed to recognize ordinary negligence as a theory of recovery separate from premises liability and thus failed to develop a record sufficient to permit any meaningful review by this Court, I would remand for further proceedings regarding that theory of liability. However, to the extent that the lead opinion suggests that plaintiff may possess a viable claim for ordinary negligence, I defer to the development of evidence on remand and express no opinion regarding what that evidence may show.
*503With respect to plaintiffs premises liability claim, on review de novo I would affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition, albeit on a different ground.1 As recognized by the lead opinion, “[i]n the context of premises liability, the general rule is that ‘a premises possessor owes a duty to an invitee to exercise reasonable care to protect the invitee from an unreasonable risk of harm caused by a dangerous condition on the land.’ ” Ante at 488, citing Lugo v Ameritech Corp, Inc, 464 Mich 512, 516; 629 NW2d 384 (2001). Here, however, the evidence is clear that the tractor, as it was before plaintiffs decedent and defendant took it to repair it, presented no danger. Indeed, it is not disputed that the bucket was safely on the ground until repairs to the tractor’s hydraulic system commenced. Moreover, the rationale for imposing premises liability is that the invitor is in a better position to control the safety aspects of his or her property when invitees entrust their protection to the invitor while entering the property. Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606, 609; 537 NW2d 185 (1995). In this case, however, defendant was in no better position to protect plaintiffs decedent than was plaintiffs decedent himself. Indeed, it is not disputed that the bucket was raised from its innocuous position on the ground as a collective effort of plaintiffs decedent and defendant in order to effectuate the necessary repairs. Under such circumstances, the rationale for imposing premises liability is neither implicated nor advanced by application in this case. Conse*504quently, because the evidence fails to present a question of material fact concerning breach of the duty owed by defendant as a possessor of land, I would affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition of plaintiffs premises liability claim. MCR 2.116(C)(10); Kraft v Detroit Entertainment, LLC, 261 Mich App 534, 539-540; 683 NW2d 200 (2004).
In remanding plaintiffs claim for premises liability on the ground that the trial court erred in applying a subjective analysis to determine that the dangerous condition of the tractor was open and obvious, the lead opinion fails to recognize that our review of a trial court’s resolution of a motion for summary disposition is de novo and that, therefore, we may uphold the trial court’s ruling where it has reached the right result albeit for the wrong reason. See Hess v Cannon Twp, 265 Mich App 582, 589; 696 NW2d 742 (2005).

=== CASE 9742165 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:53.523673+00 ===

JUSTICE BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Joseph M. Glisson, filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief in the circuit court of Williamson County against defendants, the City of Marion, Illinois, and its mayor, Robert Butler. Plaintiffs complaint sought a declaration that defendants’ construction of a dam and reservoir on Sugar Creek, located in Williamson and Johnson Counties of Illinois, violates the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/1 et seq. (West 1998)). The complaint alleged, inter alla, that the project will destroy the habitat for two species that Illinois lists as threatened and endangered, resulting in the elimination of those species from the area in violation of the Act. Plaintiff also sought to enjoin defendants from constructing such a project on Sugar Creek. The circuit court granted defendants’ motion to dismiss plaintiffs complaint for lack of standing. The appellate court reversed, holding that plaintiff has standing to pursue an action against defendants. 297 Ill. App. 3d 841. Defendants filed a petition for leave to appeal, which this court allowed. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315. We also allowed the Sierra Club, Defenders of Wildlife, and the Environmental Law and Policy Center of the Midwest leave to file a joint brief as amici curiae in support of plaintiff. 155 Ill. 2d R. 345. For the reasons that follow, we reverse the judgment of the appellate court and conclude that plaintiff lacks standing to bring this action against defendants. BACKGROUND The City of Marion has a water supply problem. In the past, the City has drawn most of its water from Marion City Lake. The City’s requirement of 1.7 million gallons per day of water far exceeds Marion City Lake’s capacity of 1.1 million gallons per day. Furthermore, the raw water from Marion City Lake is of poor quality, requiring substantial chemical treatment to render it suitable for human consumption. The City proposed to solve its shortage of water by constructing a dam and reservoir on Sugar Creek, located approximately seven miles southeast of Marion. The result would be a lake that is approximately 2,500 feet wide and 20,000 feet long, and a reservoir that is capable of supplying 8.9 million gallons of water per day. Because Sugar Creek is a navigable water of the United States, the City was required to obtain a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1344 (1988)), which requires anyone seeking to discharge dredged or fill materials into the navigable waters of the United States to obtain a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (Corps). In 1989, the City submitted an application to the Corps for a permit to construct the dam and reservoir on Sugar Creek. The Corps prepared an environmental assessment of the project pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and its related regulations. 42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C) (1994); 40 C.ER § 1501.4 (1998). Copies of that assessment were provided to various federal and state agencies, including the Illinois Department of Conservation (Department). The Department recommended that the City enter into formal consultation with the Department pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/11(b) (West 1998)). The City subsequently met with the Department to discuss the potential impact of the construction project on threatened and endangered species in the project area. The Department later concluded that the City had completed the consultation process and that “[n]o additional discussions regarding endangered and threatened species” were required before the project could begin. The Corps concluded that the proposed project would create no significant environmental impact and, therefore, that no environmental impact statement was required. Thus, the Corps issued a permit to the City. A group of plaintiffs filed suit in federal district court challenging the issuance of the permit. The district court determined that the permit was not properly issued because the Corps had not prepared an environmental impact statement pursuant to NEPA (42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C) (1994)) before issuing the permit. Simmons v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, No. 91— 4188 — JLF (S.D. Ill. June 25, 1992) (Simmons I). The district court thus vacated the permit. The Corps subsequently prepared both an environmental impact statement and a supplemental environmental impact statement, which concluded that the project would be “environmentally sustainable.” The Corps then issued a second permit to the City. A group of plaintiffs challenged the issuance of the second permit. The district court ruled against the plaintiffs (Simmons v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, No. 96— 4246 — JPG (S.D. Ill. December 18, 1996)), and they appealed. The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit held that the Corps improperly issued the second permit because the Corps failed to comply with its duty under NEPA to consider all reasonable alternatives in the environmental impact statement. Simmons v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, 120 F.3d 664 (7th Cir. 1997) (Simmons II). The Court of Appeals therefore reversed the district court in Simmons II and remanded the cause to the district court with directions to vacate the second permit issued by the Corps. While the litigation challenging the second permit was pending before the Court of Appeals, plaintiff in this case filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief. Plaintiff claimed that construction of the dam and reservoir violates sections 3 and 11(b) of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/3, 11(b) (West 1998)) because it will destroy the essential habitat of two species listed as threatened and endangered by Illinois, namely the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish, and thereby will eliminate the species from the area. Plaintiff further claimed that he would suffer “intense harm” as a result of the dam and reservoir project because he is a naturalist who enjoys and uses Sugar Creek for “food gathering, recreation, spiritual, and educational activities,” and because his lifestyle is “intertwined with and dependent on the natural world in general and Sugar Creek.” Plaintiff requested that the circuit court (1) enter an order declaring that the dam and reservoir project violates the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, and (2) enjoin defendants from constructing the dam and reservoir. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss plaintiffs complaint pursuant to section 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619 (West 1998)), arguing, inter alla, that plaintiff lacks standing to sue under the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act. In defendants’ memorandum of law in support of the motion to dismiss, defendants argued that plaintiff does not allege any legally cognizable interest in the conservation, preservation or protection of the threatened or endangered species that would allegedly be harmed by the dam and reservoir project. According to defendants, plaintiff’s interest is not in protecting the two species at issue, but rather, in opposing the construction of the dam and reservoir. During a hearing on both the City’s motion to dismiss and plaintiff’s motion for a preliminary injunction, plaintiff responded to defendants’ claim of lack of standing by contending that article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 provides plaintiff with standing to pursue an action against the City. After considering the parties’ arguments, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to dismiss. The circuit court therefore ordered plaintiff’s complaint dismissed for plaintiff’s lack of standing as a private citizen to pursue an action against defendants for violation of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act. The circuit court determined that plaintiff has no direct standing to enforce the Act as an individual because the Act is implemented by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and enforced by the Attorney General.1 The circuit court noted that since 1989, when the dam and reservoir project was first proposed, two governors and three attorney generals have served the state, and none chose to contest the City’s project. The circuit court also determined that article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution does not accord plaintiff standing to enforce the Act. The circuit court reasoned that, while article XI, section 2, apparently authorizes plaintiff to sue to preserve human health in appropriate circumstances and subject to legislative restriction, it does not grant plaintiff the right to file suit to protect endangered and threatened species. Rather, the protection of endangered and threatened species is delegated by statute to administrative agencies of the state and federal government. Plaintiff appealed to the appellate court, which initially determined that the appeal was not moot because defendants were still pursuing a permit for the construction of the dam and reservoir. The appellate court also held that plaintiff has standing to pursue an action against defendants. 297 Ill. App. 3d 841. The appellate court determined that the test for whether a plaintiff has standing to maintain an action for a violation of a statute is whether the plaintiff has alleged an injury in fact to a legally cognizable interest. The court further stated that article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution provides that each person has the right to a healthful environment, and that this provision creates a legally cognizable interest. The court then found that defendants failed to demonstrate that plaintiffs right to a healthful environment did not include the right to protect endangered or threatened species. Consequently, defendants failed to demonstrate that the destruction of the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish was not an infringement of plaintiffs right to a healthful environment. Thus, defendants failed to prove that plaintiff suffered no injury to any legally cognizable interest, and as a result, defendants failed to prove that plaintiff lacked standing. The court concluded that plaintiff has standing, under article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution, to sue defendants to seek declaratory and injunctive relief for violations of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act. The court, however, noted that it did not decide whether plaintiffs complaint states a cognizable cause of action. The court therefore reversed the judgment of the circuit court and remanded the case for further proceedings. ANALYSIS The issue before this court is whether plaintiff has standing to maintain an action against defendants for an alleged violation of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/1 et seq. (West 1998)). As noted, this appeal arises from the circuit court’s order granting defendants’ section 2 — 619(a)(9) motion to dismiss plaintiffs complaint for lack of standing. Section 2 — 619(a)(9) permits involuntary dismissal where “the claim asserted *** is barred by other affirmative matter avoiding the legal effect of or defeating the claim.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 619(a)(9) (West 1998). The phrase “affirmative matter” refers to something in the nature of a defense that negates the cause of action completely or refutes crucial conclusions of law or conclusions of material fact contained in or inferred from the complaint. Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 486 (1994). Lack of standing is an “affirmative matter” that is properly raised under section 2 — 619(a)(9). Cf. Greer v. Illinois Housing Development Authority, 122 Ill. 2d 462, 494 (1988) (holding that lack of standing is an “affirmative” defense). An order granting this type of motion to dismiss is given de nova review on appeal. Kedzie & 103rd Currency Exchange, Inc. v. Hodge, 156 Ill. 2d 112, 116 (1993). Accordingly, we conduct de nova review of the circuit court’s dismissal of plaintiffs complaint on the ground of lack of standing and consider whether dismissal was proper as a matter of law. The doctrine of standing is designed to preclude persons who have no interest in a controversy from bringing suit. The doctrine assures that issues are raised only by those parties with a real interest in the outcome of the controversy. See People ex rel. Hartigan v. E&E Hauling, Inc., 153 Ill. 2d 473, 482 (1992). This court has set forth the general principle that standing requires some injury in fact to a legally cognizable interest in Greer v. Illinois Housing Development Authority, 122 Ill. 2d 462, 492 (1988). The claimed injury may be actual or threatened, and it must be (1) distinct and palpable; (2) fairly traceable to the defendant’s actions; and (3) substantially likely to be prevented or redressed by the grant of the requested relief. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 492-93. Moreover, in the context of an action for declaratory relief, there must be an actual controversy between adverse parties, and the party requesting the declaration must possess some personal claim, status or right that is capable of being affected by the grant of such relief. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 493. In setting forth the requirements for standing, this court in Greer rejected federal principles on standing by declining to adopt the “zone-of-interests” test as an additional requirement for standing. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 491-92. The zone-of-interests test, which arises in cases where it is alleged that injury is due to the violation of a statute, requires that the interest asserted by the plaintiff lies within the zone of interests sought to be protected by the statute in question. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 489. In rejecting the zone-of-interests test, we criticized the test for confusing the issue of standing with the merits of the suit. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 492. Defendants in this case argue that we should adopt the test for standing that was set forth in Lynch v. Devine, 45 Ill. App. 3d 743 (1977), as an additional requirement for standing. We reject the Lynch test for the same reason we rejected the zone-of-interests test in Greer. The Lynch test provides that, where the suit alleges injury due to violation of a statute, the doctrine of standing requires that the plaintiff be a member of the class designed to be protected by the statute, or one for whose benefit the statute was enacted, and to whom a duty of compliance is owed. Lynch, 45 Ill. App. 3d at 748. This test is similar to the zone-of-interests test. Both tests require a consideration of the underlying purposes of the statute at issue so as to determine whether the plaintiff was among its intended beneficiaries such that the statute was designed to protect the plaintiffs interest. Both the zone-of-interests test and the Lynch test improperly confuse standing with the merits of the underlying suit. For the reason set forth in Greer, we therefore refuse to expand the requirements for standing to include the additional requirements set forth in Lynch. Having set forth the requirements for standing, we now consider them in light of plaintiffs complaint. We must determine whether plaintiffs claimed injury is an injury in fact to a legally cognizable interest. Plaintiff alleges that construction of the dam and reservoir on Sugar Creek violates the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act by destroying the essential habitat of the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish, thereby eliminating the two species from the area. The basis of plaintiffs complaint is the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (Act). The Act is designed “to prohibit the possession, taking, disposal, or transport of specimens or products of animals or plants of species in danger of extinction and statewide extirpation, to provide penalties for violation thereof, and to ere-ate a Board to perform certain duties relative to the protection of such species and their habitats.” 520 ILCS 10/1 (West 1998). The Act provides that it is unlawful for any person to take or otherwise dispose of any species on the Illinois list of endangered or threatened species without a permit issued by the Department of Natural Resources. 520 ILCS 10/3 (West 1998). The Act, among other things, limits the basis for the issuance of a permit; requires a consultation process between state and local agencies and the Department of Natural Resources regarding any project that may impact Illinois endangered or threatened species; and establishes that anyone who violates a provision of the Act is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. 520 ILCS 10/4, 9, 11 (West 1998). The Act also imposes an obligation on the Department of Natural Resources to implement a program for the conservation of endangered and threatened species and to adopt rules to implement the Act. 520 ILCS 10/11(a), (c) (West 1998). The Act, however, does not expressly confer standing on plaintiff to bring this private cause of action. The Act does not contain any language that expressly grants a private cause of action for a violation of the Act, with the exception of allowing the enforcement of the consultation process by a writ of mandamus (520 ILCS 10/ll(b) (West 1998)). Defendants argue that plaintiff lacks standing because plaintiffs alleged injury is not an injury in fact to a legally cognizable interest. Plaintiff responds that he has standing pursuant to article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. Plaintiff argues that this provision grants him a constitutional right to a “healthful environment,” and that the construction of the dam and reservoir on Sugar Creek would infringe on that right because the protection of endangered and threatened species is necessary to the maintenance of a “healthful environment.” Plaintiff therefore contends that the Sugar Creek project results in injury to his legally cognizable interest in a “healthful environment,” which includes the protection of endangered and threatened species. Defendants respond that plaintiff waived any reliance on article XI, section 2, as a basis for standing because plaintiff failed to specifically raise that argument in his complaint or other pleadings. Defendants note that plaintiff did not raise the applicability of article XI, section 2, as a basis for standing until the circuit court hearing on defendants’ motion to dismiss and plaintiff’s motion for a preliminary injunction. We reject defendants’ claim of waiver. Lack of standing is an affirmative defense, which the defendant bears the burden to plead and prove. Greer, 122 Ill. 2d at 494. Consequently, plaintiff properly raised article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution in response to defendants’ claim of lack of standing. We now address whether article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution accords plaintiff standing. Article XI of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 is known as the environment article and consists of two sections. Section 1 provides that the “public policy of the State and the duty of each person is to provide and maintain a healthful environment for the benefit of this and future generations. The General Assembly shall provide by law for the implementation and enforcement of this public policy.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. XI, § 1. Section 2 provides that “[e]ach person has the right to a healthful environment. Each person may enforce this right against any party, governmental or private, through appropriate legal proceedings subject to reasonable limitation and regulation as the General Assembly may provide by law.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. XI, § 2. In determining whether plaintiff has standing, we must interpret the provisions of article XI. It is well established that interpretation of a constitutional provision begins with the language of the provision. Graham v. Illinois State Toll Highway Authority, 182 Ill. 2d 287, 301 (1998). Where the language is not ambiguous, it will be given effect without resort to other aids for construction. Graham, 182 Ill. 2d at 301. Where, however, the meaning of a provision is not clear from its language, a court may consult the drafting history to ascertain the meaning of the provision. Graham, 182 Ill. 2d at 301; Client Follow-up Co. v. Hynes, 75 Ill. 2d 208, 216 (1979). The dispute in this appeal concerns whether article XI accords plaintiff standing to maintain an action against defendants to protect the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish on the basis that their destruction violates plaintiffs right to a healthful environment. At the center of this dispute is the meaning of the term “healthful environment” and the scope of standing afforded to individuals pursuant to article XI, section 2. Plaintiff contends that “healthful environment” includes the health of the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish. In contrast, defendants argue that the term “healthful environment” is limited to an environment conducive to human health. What article XI means by the term “healthful environment” is not clear from the language itself. It is therefore appropriate to consult the drafting history of article XI to discern the meaning of “healthful environment.” Our analysis of this history leads us to conclude that “healthful environment” was intended to refer to the relationship between the environment and human health. The primary concern of the drafters of article XI was the effect of pollution on the environment and human health. The right to a “healthful'environment” was therefore not intended to include the protection of endangered and threatened species. We also conclude that the drafting history of article XI indicates that plaintiffs standing is limited to providing him with an opportunity to enforce his right to a “healthful environment.” Sections 1 and 2 of article XI were proposed to the constitutional convention by the General Government Committee as part of that Committee’s Proposal No. 16, which proposed an environment article for the 1970 Constitution. 6 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 693, 695 (hereinafter cited as Proceedings). The Committee’s explanatory report stated that the proposed environment article was designed to address the problem of environmental pollution. 6 Proceedings 696. The Committee sought to resolve the problem of environmental pollution by creating constitutional rights and duties concerning the environment. Particularly significant is the Committee report’s explanation for its use of the term “healthful environment.” The Committee stated: “The Committee selects the word ‘healthful’ as best describing the kind of environment which ought to obtain. ‘Healthful’ is chosen rather than ‘clean’, ‘free of dirt, noise, noxious and toxic materials’ and other suggested adjectives because ‘healthful’ describes the environment in terms of its direct effect on human life while the other suggestions describe the environment more in terms of its physical characteristics. A description in terms of physical characteristics may not be flexible enough to apply to new kinds of pollutants which may be discovered in the future.” (Emphasis added.) 6 Proceedings 697-98. The Committee’s proposal also outlined the right of each person to a “healthful environment” and each person’s ability to enforce that right. This proposal ultimately became section 2 of article XI. The Committee determined that the right to a “healthful environment” is a “fundamental right” and that expression of this right “provides the vehicle for the individual to prosecute a violator.” 6 Proceedings 700. The Committee explained that the standing provision set forth in section 2 was intended to “add practical significance” to the constitutional expression of the individual’s right to a “healthful environment.” (Emphasis omitted.) 6 Proceedings 702. The Committee further explained that, in drafting section 2, it recognized that individuals should “not be denied the opportunity to seek relief when so fundamental a right as that to a healthful environment is involved.” 6 Proceedings 702. The Committee nevertheless limited the scope of section 2 as follows: “The Committee emphasizes that this Section [2] affords individuals the opportunity to seek relief. It wants to be very clear that it does not, by this Section (or by any Section in this Article for that matter) create or establish a new remedy. Nor does this Section assume the individual’s ability to prove a violation of his right. It merely declares that individuals have ‘standing’ to assert violations of his right. *** Because the wrong here has reached crisis proportions and because it affects individuals in so fundamental a way, the Committee is of the view that the ‘special injury’ requirement for standing is particularly inappropriate and ought to be waived. Section [2], therefore, allows the individual the opportunity to prove a violation of his right even though that violation may be a public wrong, or one common to the public generally. It must be emphasized that allowing standing does not assume proof of the claim. *** Section [2] merely affords the individual the opportunity to prove his claim and to convince the court or administrative body that he is entitled to. relief. This Section does riot create any new remedies. *** ** * The term ‘subject to reasonable limitation and regulation by law’ is included to emphasize not only the leadership function the Committee envisions for the Legislature in this package but also the power of the General Assembly to reasonably limit and regulate the declared ability of the individual to enforce his right. The Committee conceives that a reasonable exercise of this power would include a law which required the individual to fde any environmental claims with the Attorney General and that only if he did not act could the individual file suits; a law creating an administrative agency in which all claims against polluters [sic] would have to be filed, with judicial review provisions; the creation of a special court, such as traffic court, which would handle all pollution suits; or a law requiring that all pollution suits be brought by the Attorney General with the individual’s right to intervene.” (Emphasis in original.) 6 Proceedings 702-05. This report evinces the intent of the General Government Committee in drafting what became article XI of the 1970 Constitution. The Committee intended to address environmental pollution and to encourage an environment conducive to human health. The Committee also intended to provide individuals with the opportunity to combat environmental pollution. The Committee sought to achieve this result by giving each person standing to bring suit to enforce the right to a healthful environment and restricted such standing by making it subject to limitations and regulations imposed by the General Assembly. It was the intent of the committee to broaden the law of standing by eliminating the traditional special injury prerequisite for standing to bring an environmental action. As such, section 2 gives standing to an individual for a grievance common to members of the public. The committee comments also indicate that section 2 is limited to granting standing and does not create any new causes of action. See also City of Elgin v. County of Cook, 169 Ill. 2d 53, 85 (1995) (holding that section 2 does not create any new causes of action). Further support for this interpretation of article XI is found in the comments made during the discussion of article XI at the constitutional convention. In response to an inquiry about what was meant by the term “healthful environment,” Delegate McCracken stated that the Committee was concerned with “the essence of what people were complaining about, and that was damage to their health and damage to the health of future generations,” and that the term was restricted “to the field of human concern.” 4 Proceedings 2997. Delegate Mc-Cracken" further indicated that the environment article was not attempting to cover aesthetics. 4 Proceedings 2998. The following colloquy took place between Delegate Woods and Delegate Leahy regarding the scope of a “healthful environment:” “MR. WOODS: Did you consider that inadequate food and medicine contributes to an unhealthful environment, or poor housing? MRS. LEAHY: No, we did not consider those factors in arriving at this article. MR. WOODS: So that your concern was centered primarily on the pollution aspects of health? MRS. LEAHY: That is correct. MR. WOODS: Would it be your thought, or the thought of any other member of the committee that bad roads or inadequate food and housing, medicine, and so forth would be excluded or included in the purview of this article? MRS. LEAHY: I’m sure we meant them to be excluded. MR. WOODS: It’s the committee’s intention that they would be excluded? MRS. LEAHY: That is correct. MR. WOODS: So that, seriously, you’re really looking at a pollution control with all of its ramifications — air, water, land pollution and so forth. That is what you were looking at — noise pollution, too. MRS. LEAHY: In connection with health.” 4 Proceedings 3002. In addition to discussing the term “healthful environment,” the drafters also discussed the issue of standing given to individuals by article XI, section 2. Delegate McCracken stated that section 2 provides private citizens standing, but does not create a new remedy. 4 Proceedings 2997. The foregoing comments, like the Committee report, show that the framers of the 1970 Constitution viewed article XI as a response to the issue of environmental pollution and its effect on human health, and as granting standing to an individual to enforce the right to a “healthful environment.” The protection of endangered and threatened species does not fall within the intended scope of a person’s right to a “healthful environment.” Therefore, article XI does not encompass the protection of endangered and threatened species. Plaintiff nonetheless contends that another comment made in the Committee report reveals that the term “healthful environment” was intended to include the preservation of endangered and threatened species. Plaintiff refers to an instance where the Committee stated: “The word ‘healthful’ is meant to describe that quality of physical environment which a reasonable man would select for himself were a free choice available ***. The word ‘environment’ means the aggregate of all conditions affecting the existence, growth and welfare of organisms.” 6 Proceedings 701. Plaintiff takes these comments out of context. The Committee explained just prior to the aforementioned language that, in providing for a right to a “healthful environment,” it gives “recognition to the problem of environmental pollution as one of fundamental significance.” 6 Proceedings 700. The Committee also explained that it selected the word “healthful” as best describing the kind of environment that ought to be the objective. 6 Proceedings 697. Thus, the comments referred to by plaintiff do not support plaintiff’s position that “healthful environment” includes conditions affecting threatened and endangered species. We also reject the argument raised by amici curiae that the protection of endangered and threatened species is necessary for a “healthful environment.” Amici contend that endangered and threatened species serve an important role in human health in the areas of medicine and economics, and as a food supply. Although this may be true, amici fail to recognize that “healthful environment,” as that term is used in article XI, section 2, arose in the context of addressing the problem of environmental pollution. In view of the intention of the drafters of article XI, section 2, there is no basis for expanding the scope of “healthful environment” to include the preservation of endangered and threatened species. We therefore conclude that plaintiff does not have standing under article XI, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution. Plaintiffs interest in preserving the least brook lamprey and the Indiana crayfish is not a legally cognizable interest for purposes of standing because it is not included in plaintiffs constitutional right to a “healthful environment,” as that term is used in article XI, section 2. Thus, plaintiff cannot rely on article XI, section 2, as a basis for standing to sue defendants to enforce the Act. As a final matter, plaintiff argues that, even if article XI, section 2, is not applicable, he nevertheless has standing to bring this action. Plaintiff points to the allegations in his complaint regarding the harmful impact of the reservoir and dam project on plaintiffs interest as a naturalist, including his use of Sugar Creek for food gathering, recreation, spiritual and educational activities, and on his lifestyle which he claims is “dependant on” Sugar Creek. Plaintiff contends that these interests constitute legally cognizable interests for purposes of standing. We disagree. This court has held that a party cannot gain standing merely through a self-proclaimed interest or concern about an issue, no matter how sincere. Landmarks Preservation Council v. City of Chicago, 125 Ill. 2d 164, 175 (1988). Accordingly, we hold that plaintiff lacks standing to pursue an action against defendants. Having determined a lack of standing, there is no reason to examine whether plaintiff has stated a cause of action. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment of the appellate court and affirm the circuit court’s dismissal of plaintiffs complaint for lack of standing. Appellate court judgment reversed; circuit court judgment affirmed.   The Illinois Department of Conservation was the first state agency charged with implementing the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act. 520 ILCS 10/2, 11 (West 1994). The agencies of the State of Illinois have since been reorganized, and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources now has the authority to adopt rules to implement the Act. 520 ILCS 10/2, 11 (West 1998).

=== CASE 9742166 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:53.528438+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: Contrary to my colleagues, I believe that section 2 of Article XI of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 (Ill. Const. 1970, art. XI, § 2) does authorize Dr. Glisson to bring this action to enforce the provisions of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/1 et seq. (West 1998)). A proper analysis of section 2 should begin with the long-recognized principle that the meaning of any given constitutional provision depends on the common understanding of the citizens who, by ratifying the Constitution, “gave it life.” Kalodimos v. Village of Morton Grove, 103 Ill. 2d 483, 492 (1984). To assess that understanding, we must give effect to the plain language of the Constitution, for it is the language itself which provides the best evidence of what the drafters intended to convey to the citizens for ratification. Cincinnati Insurance Co. v. Chapman, 181 Ill. 2d 65, 77 (1998). The plain language of section 2 states that “[e]ach person has the right to a healthful environment” and that “[e]ach person may enforce this right against any party, governmental or private, through appropriate legal proceedings.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. XI, § 2. Nothing in this language suggests in any way that the right to bring an action to enforce the right to a healthful environment is restricted to cases of environmental pollution. That being so, we have no authority to create such a limitation ourselves. Our construction of section 2 is guided by the same principles applicable to the construction of statutes (Nevitt v. Langfelder, 157 Ill. 2d 116, 134 (1993)), and those principles dictate that where the language used is clear and unambiguous, we must give it effect as written, without reading into it exceptions, limitations, or conditions that the legislature did not express (Garza v. Navistar International Transportation Corp., 172 Ill. 2d 373, 378 (1996)). My colleagues’ resort to legislative history is inappropriate. Justice Miller explained the principle clearly some years ago. He wrote that where the language of a constitutional provision is clear, “we should have no occasion to consult the convention debates of th[at] provision [ ]. The same rules of construction applicable to statutes apply as well to the constitution [citations], and a basic rule of statutory construction forbids a court to canvass legislative history for evidence of legislative intent if the meaning of a provision can be determined from its text.” Nevitt, 157 Ill. 2d at 134. Altering a watercourse in a way that will eradicate species of threatened or endangered wildlife clearly has obvious and important implications for the healthfulness of the environment. To dismiss those implications, as my colleagues do, is to ignore the substantial and well-documented importance of biodiversity to human welfare. The brief filed by amici curiae includes a passage from Raymond Dasman’s work, Wildlife and America (Council on Environmental Quality 1978), which makes a compelling point regarding the importance of species preservation: “[M]edical science now makes use of species once considered worthless — that might easily have been allowed to become extinct on the grounds that they were ‘good for nothing.’ The present use of Penicillium mold (antibiotics), Rhesus Monkeys (blood groups), sea urchins (embryology), cinchona bushes (quinine), Xenopus toads (pregnancy tests), Strychnos vines (curare), foxgloves (digitalis), and Rauwolfia (hypertension), could not have been predicted (except perhaps by practitioners of folk medicine, who were familiar with the curative properties of many of these species). Similar contributions are made by wild species to agricultural production, to pest control, and to the development of new domestic varieties. Each species is a storehouse of irreplaceable genetic material whose loss we cannot afford.” We protect threatened and endangered species because, in so doing, we protect ourselves and the welfare of the Illinoisans who will inherit this land when we are gone. It is our obligation and it is an obligation I believe that most Illinoisans believed they were assuming when they ratified section 2 of article XI of our Constitution. Under any fair reading, that provision cannot be confined to industrial pollution. To suggest, as my colleagues do, that the only environmental threats implicated by our Constitution are those that emanate from a smoke stack, drain pipe or car exhaust ignores wisdom, science and the plain language of the law. Under section 2 of article XI, “every person” has the right to bring an enforcement action. Whether Dr. Glisson has a personal stake in the outcome is therefore legally irrelevant. I note, however, that his concern over the fate of the least brook lamprey and Indiana crawfish is more than just abstract or theoretical. He lives in the immediate area of the proposed dam project and has included allegations in his complaint demonstrating the adverse effects the project will have on him personally. Under these circumstances, his interest in the matter is certainly adequate “to assure sufficient sharpness in defining the issues so that the court may be aided in deciding the case.” Kluk v. Lang, 125 Ill. 2d 306, 315 (1988). That, in the end, is the whole purpose of the standing requirement. Kluk, 125 Ill. 2d at 315. For the foregoing reasons, I would hold that section 2 of article XI authorizes private citizens to bring suit to enforce the requirements of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act and that Dr. Glisson has standing to initiate such a proceeding. I therefore dissent.

=== CASE 2230110 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:36.835736+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1030 (1999)
188 Ill. 2d 235
242 Ill. Dec. 75
Alicia WASHINGTON, Appellant,
v.
The CITY OF CHICAGO, Appellee.
John Knight, Appellant,
v.
The City of Chicago, Appellee.
Nos. 86420, 86435.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 23, 1999.
Rehearing Denied November 29, 1999.
*1031 David A. Novoselsky, David A. Novoselsky & Associates, Paul T. Julian, Julian & Associates, Chicago, for John Knight.
Victor F. Ciardelli, Law Offices of Ciardelli & Cummings, Dom J. Rizzi, Miller, Faucher, Cafferty & Wexler, LLP, Chicago, for Alicia Washington.
Benna Ruth Solomon, Chief Assistant Corporation Counsel, Joshua D. Davidson, Myriam Zreczy, Assistant Corporation Counsel, Chicago, for City of Chicago.
Justice HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court:
The issue in these two consolidated cases is whether the City of Chicago had a duty to construct a road median in such a way as to make it safe for use by emergency road vehicles. In reversing judgment against the City, the appellate court held that no such duty existed. 298 Ill.App.3d 797, 233 Ill. Dec. 9, 700 N.E.2d 110. We granted leave to appeal (177 Ill.2d R. 315) and now affirm the appellate court.
The incident giving rise to this litigation took place near midnight on the night of September 11, 1989. In responding to an emergency call, a Chicago fire department snorkel truck proceeded south on South Halsted Street at approximately 35 miles per hour. In order to bypass a vehicle ahead of it, the fire truck left the roadway and drove onto a raised median that separates the street's southbound traffic lanes from its northbound lanes.
Unbeknownst to the fire truck's driver, the median contained planter boxes for flowers and cut outs to accommodate trees. As the truck proceeded along the median, its left front tire hit one of the planter boxes. The impact caused the vehicle to *1032 lose control and enter the oncoming traffic lanes, where it struck an automobile driven by Dovie Knight. Knight was killed, as was her unborn child, Laquitta. Alicia Washington, a passenger in Knight's car, was injured.
As a result of this accident, three lawsuits were filed. Knight's father, as administrator of her estate and as special administrator of the estate of Laquitta, brought suit against the City under the Wrongful Death Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 70, par. 1 et seq.). A wrongful death action against the City was also brought by Edward Newson, Jr., who claimed to be Laquitta's father. In addition, a personal injury action was filed by Washington against both the City and the driver of the fire truck.
Knight's case was consolidated with the case brought by Newson. Those proceedings were, in turn, consolidated with the personal injury action filed by Washington. Following various developments not relevant here, the matter proceeded to trial before a jury.
As submitted to the jury, the case consisted of the claims asserted against the City by Knight in his wrongful death action involving Dovie and the claims asserted against the City by Washington in her personal injury action. Both Knight and Washington argued that the City should be held liable based on negligence. Specifically, they contended that the City was negligent on the grounds that it had constructed the median on Halsted Street "in a manner that created a condition that was not reasonably safe" and that their injuries were proximately caused by that unsafe condition.
The jury returned a verdict in favor of Knight and Washington and against the City. It awarded damages to Knight in the amount of $1.5 million and to Washington in the amount of $200,000. After the circuit court entered judgment on that verdict, the City filed a timely post-trial motion pursuant to section 2-1202(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-1202(b) (West 1994)). In that motion, the City requested that the court enter judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, in the alternative, that it be granted a new trial.
The City's post-trial motion was denied, and it appealed. On appeal, the appellate court ruled that the circuit court had erred in refusing to grant the City's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. In the appellate court's view, the City was not liable, as a matter of law, because it had no duty to make the road median safe for use by emergency vehicles. Accordingly, the appellate court reversed the circuit court's judgment.
The legal principles governing our review are well established. Judgment notwithstanding the verdict is properly granted where all the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors the movant that no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand. Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co., 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510, 229 N.E.2d 504 (1967). Where plaintiffs have obtained recovery against a defendant based on negligence, as was the case here, judgment notwithstanding the verdict is required if the defendant did not owe the plaintiffs a duty. See Redlin v. Village of Hanover Park, 278 Ill.App.3d 183, 190, 214 Ill. Dec. 893, 662 N.E.2d 459 (1996). That is so because "[u]nless a duty is owed, there is no negligence" (American National Bank & Trust Co. v. National Advertising Co., 149 Ill. 2d 14, 26, 171 Ill. Dec. 461, 594 N.E.2d 313 (1992)), and plaintiffs cannot recover as a matter of law (see Redlin, 278 Ill.App.3d at 190, 214 Ill. Dec. 893, 662 N.E.2d 459).
Whether a duty exists is a question of law for the court to decide. In resolving whether a duty exists, a court must determine whether there is a relationship between the parties requiring that a legal obligation be imposed upon one for the benefit of the other. Rhodes v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R., 172 Ill. 2d 213, 227, 216 Ill. Dec. 703, 665 N.E.2d 1260 (1996). *1033 The factors relevant to the courts' imposition of a duty include the reasonable foreseeability of injury, the likelihood of such injury, the magnitude of guarding against the injury, and the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant. Jackson v. TLC Associates, Inc., 185 Ill. 2d 418, 425, 235 Ill. Dec. 905, 706 N.E.2d 460 (1998).
The City is subject to the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (the Act) (745 ILCS 10/3-102 (West 1994)). Section 3-102(a) of the Act states:
"Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a local public entity has the duty to exercise ordinary care to maintain its property in a reasonably safe condition for the use in the exercise of ordinary care of people whom the entity intended and permitted to use the property in a manner in which and at such times as it was reasonably foreseeable that it would be used * * *." 745 ILCS 10/3-102(a) (West 1994).
This provision does not impose any new duties on municipalities. Rather, it codifies a municipality's general duty at common law to maintain its property in a reasonably safe condition. Wagner v. City of Chicago, 166 Ill. 2d 144, 150, 209 Ill. Dec. 672, 651 N.E.2d 1120 (1995).
Under the common law, governmental entities, including municipalities such as the City, have discretion in determining whether to perform a public work or make an improvement. Once the decision to perform the work is made, however, the work must be done with reasonable care and in a nonnegligent manner. Snyder v. Curran Township, 167 Ill. 2d 466, 474-75, 212 Ill. Dec. 643, 657 N.E.2d 988 (1995). Moreover, a municipality is liable if, after it constructs or improves public property, the construction or improvement causes injury and "it appears from its use that it has created a condition that is not reasonably safe." 745 ILCS 10/3-103(a) (West 1994). When a city creates a hazardous condition and someone is injured as a consequence, it must respond in damages. Baran v. City of Chicago Heights, 43 Ill. 2d 177, 181, 251 N.E.2d 227 (1969).
In order for a public entity to owe a duty to protect a party from unreasonably dangerous conditions existing on its property, that party must be both a permitted and an intended user of the property. Boub v. Township of Wayne, 183 Ill. 2d 520, 524, 234 Ill. Dec. 195, 702 N.E.2d 535 (1998). There is no question that Dovie Knight and Washington, the passenger in her auto, were permitted and intended users of the roadway where this accident occurred. Nevertheless, we agree with the appellate court that the scope of the City's duty to maintain property in a reasonably safe condition does not extend to the circumstances present here.
In order for a duty to be imposed, the occurrence at issue must have been reasonably foreseeable. Cunis v. Brennan, 56 Ill. 2d 372, 375-76, 308 N.E.2d 617 (1974). Where injury results from freakish, bizarre or fantastic circumstances, no duty is present and no negligence claim can be asserted. Widlowski v. Durkee Foods, 138 Ill. 2d 369, 376, 150 Ill. Dec. 164, 562 N.E.2d 967 (1990). In the case before us today, the accident which gave rise to plaintiffs' injuries was not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the condition of the median.
In making this determination, we note that the median was not dangerous in itself. The median was not meant to be driven on by any vehicular traffic, much less a fire truck, and was not intended to serve as an auxiliary traffic lane for emergency vehicles. Its purpose was simply to separate traffic lanes. There was no evidence that it presented any risk of harm to the motoring public as so used. The median became dangerous only when the fire truck's driver decided to drive onto it in a large piece of equipment at night at an excessive rate of speed. Under these circumstances, the occurrence at issue here could be regarded as reasonably foreseeable *1034 only if it were foreseeable that fire truck drivers would operate their vehicles as the driver did in this case. See Ziemba v. Mierzwa, 142 Ill. 2d 42, 49-50, 153 Ill. Dec. 259, 566 N.E.2d 1365 (1991). There is no support for such a view in the record before us.
Testimony presented at trial did show that firefighters are trained in how to operate emergency vehicles outside normal traffic lanes, that they routinely traverse medians that are flush with the road surfaces, and that they sometimes drive upon curb-height medians such as the one involved in this case. None of the testimony, however, indicated that it was proper, acceptable or normal to drive a snorkel truck onto a raised median at night at 35 miles per hour. To the contrary, the witnesses stated that when firefighters do take their vehicles onto a raised median, the normal procedure is to proceed slowly and gradually. According to Chicago Fire Department Battalion Chief Casey, who was in the truck at the time of the accident, the driver is supposed to approach the median at an angle, come to a complete stop, accelerate slightly to "creep" the front tires onto the raised area, proceed a short distance, stop again, then "creep" the rear tires up. Battalion Chief Casey had never been in another fire truck that attempted to mount a raised median at 35 miles per hour, nor, indeed, had the driver of the truck. The driver testified that the maneuver was not safe and that he attempted it only because he thought quickly deteriorating traffic conditions left him no better alternative.
Finally, we note that there is no merit to plaintiffs' contention that the use of raised medians by fire trucks is sanctioned by law. Plaintiffs premise their contention on section 11-205 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-205 (West 1994)), which provides that drivers of authorized emergency vehicles may disregard certain provisions of the Vehicle Code when responding to an emergency call, pursuing an actual or suspected violator of the law, or responding to a fire. None of the provisions specified in that statute, however, pertain to use of the medians.
For the foregoing reasons, the City could not reasonably have foreseen that the median at issue in this case would cause an accident of the kind that killed Knight's daughter and injured Washington. Where one cannot reasonably foresee any injury as the result of one's act, or if one's conduct was reasonable in light of what one could anticipate, there is no negligence and no liability. W. Keeton, Prosser & Keeton on Torts § 43, at 280 (5th ed.1984). The appellate court was therefore correct in holding that the City was entitled to judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Accordingly, the appellate court's judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2230114 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.055024+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 270 (1999)
308 Ill. App. 3d 483
241 Ill. Dec. 815
MIRAR DEVELOPMENT, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
Peter KRONER, Jr., Patricia A. Kroner, Harris Bank of Frankfort, and Unknown Others and Non-Record Claimants, Defendants-Appellants and Cross-Appellees.
No. 3-98-0761.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
August 13, 1999.
Rehearing Denied December 10, 1999.
*271 Alan R. Bruggeman, Kipnis, Kahn & Bruggeman, New Lenox, David C. Hurst, Brian G. Hiatt, Bruggeman, Hurst & Associates, Ltd., New Lenox, for Harris Bank Frankfort, Patricia Kroner, Peter Kroner, Jr.
Steven D. Rakich, Mokena, for Mirar Development, Inc.
*272 Justice KOEHLER delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, Mirar Development, Inc., cross-appeals from the judgment of the Will County circuit court in its favor on its action to foreclose a mechanics lien, for breach of contract, and quantum meruit but denying the plaintiff's attorney fees. The question before this court is: Was the circuit court's denial of attorney fees in error because: (1) attorney fees may be granted under the Illinois Mechanics Lien Act (Act) (770 ILCS 60/17 (West 1996)), as amended; (2) attorney fees may be granted under the construction contract entered into between the plaintiff and the defendants; and (3) Mirar's release and satisfaction of judgment did not render their appeal moot? Because we conclude that the circuit court erred, we reverse.
FACTS
The plaintiff, Mirar Development, Inc. (Mirar), and the defendants, Peter Kroner, Jr., and Patricia Kroner (Kroners), entered into a written contract for construction of a single-family residence which specified that, in the event of litigation to enforce the contract, the successful party is entitled to payment of its attorney fees by the unsuccessful party. After construction was completed, Mirar filed a two-count complaint against the Kroners to foreclose its mechanics lien and to recover for breach of contract. The Kroners counterclaimed for breach of contract, breach of express warranty and breach of warranty of habitability. Subsequently, Mirar amended its complaint to include a count for quantum meruit. After trial, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of Mirar for the balance due for labor and materials furnished to the Kroners. The circuit court: (1) concluded that Mirar had a lien claim on the property in the amount of $48,000 plus 10% per annum beginning December 20, 1994, the date on which the circuit court determined that Mirar had substantially performed the contract; (2) directed the Will County sheriff to sell the property if the Kroners failed to pay the judgment amount within 10 days of the order; and (3) concluded that the Illinois Mechanics Lien Act provided no basis for the assessment of attorney fees. The Kroners appealed the judgment order and Mirar cross-appealed on that portion of the circuit court's order denying an award of attorney fees. On January 6, 1999, the Kroners tendered $48,000 plus interest. The circuit court ordered Mirar to furnish defendants a release and satisfaction of the judgment for $48,000.00 plus 10% interest on the mechanics lien claim. On February 22, 1999 this court granted the Kroners' motion to dismiss their appeal and continued the cross-appeal. On April 14, 1999, the Kroners filed a motion to supplement the record on appeal with the January 6, 1999, circuit court order. The motion was taken with the case.
ANALYSIS
A circuit court has broad discretionary powers in awarding attorney fees and its decision will not be reversed on review unless the court abused its discretion. In re Estate of Callahan, 144 Ill. 2d 32, 43-44, 161 Ill. Dec. 339, 578 N.E.2d 985, 989 (1991). However, although the question sub judice is whether the circuit court properly denied attorney fees, the fundamental issue we must decide is whether the circuit court properly applied the law when it denied attorney fees. Where facts are uncontroverted and the issue is the circuit court's application of the law, a question of law is presented, and we review de novo. Bank One, Milwaukee, N.A. v. Loeber Motors, Inc., 293 Ill.App.3d 14, 20, 227 Ill. Dec. 629, 687 N.E.2d 1111, 1115-16 (1997).
Waiver/Mootness
Does Mirar's acceptance of the Kroners' payment of the judgment prior to Mirar's filing of the appeal constitute waiver? The Kroners filed a motion pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 329 (134 Ill.2d R. 329), to supplement the brief with the circuit *273 court's order directing Mirar to file a release and satisfaction of judgment. Mirar responds that order was not before the circuit court at the time the judgment order was entered and, therefore, this court should deny the motion. Under Supreme Court Rule 329, a party may "supply omissions, correct errors, and settle any controversy as to whether the record on appeal actually reflects what occurred at the trial level." Johnson v. Matviuw, 176 Ill.App.3d 907, 912, 126 Ill. Dec. 343, 531 N.E.2d 970, 973 (1988). Where there may be "events occurring after the entry of a judgment which might render issues on appeal moot * * * those events or occurrences need be presented in some appropriate form such as a supplement to the record." Bailey v. Meador, 91 Ill.App.3d 143, 147, 46 Ill. Dec. 557, 414 N.E.2d 279, 283 (1980). Because the Kroners argue that this order makes the Mirar appeal moot, we will grant the motion to supplement the record.
Generally, in civil cases when a judgment has been voluntarily paid or its benefits accepted, appeal is waived. County of Cook v. Malysa, 39 Ill. 2d 376, 379-80, 235 N.E.2d 598, 600-01 (1968). However, "[i]t would be unfair * * * to compel the entry of a satisfaction and then, as a result of the compelled satisfaction, deny the right to appeal." In re Marriage of Pitulla, 202 Ill.App.3d 103, 110, 147 Ill. Dec. 479, 559 N.E.2d 819, 826 (1990). See also Herron v. Anderson, 254 Ill. App. 3d 365, 371-72, 193 Ill. Dec. 484, 626 N.E.2d 1035, 1040 (1993); Meyer v. First American Title Insurance Agency of Mohave, Inc., 285 Ill.App.3d 330, 336-37, 220 Ill. Dec. 953, 674 N.E.2d 496, 499 (1996).
In the instant case, the Kroners claim Mirar accepted their payment of the judgment and, therefore, Mirar waived its appeal. However, as evidenced by the circuit court's order directing Mirar to furnish the Kroners a release and satisfaction of the judgment, the satisfaction was compelled and, therefore, does not deprive Mirar of its right to appeal.
Award of Fees Under the Mechanics Lien Act
May the circuit court award Mirar attorney fees under the amended Illinois Mechanics Lien Act? Attorney fees are recoverable when specifically authorized by statute or contract. Midwest Concrete Products Co. v. La Salle National Bank, 94 Ill.App.3d 394, 398, 49 Ill. Dec. 968, 418 N.E.2d 988, 991 (1981), citing Qazi v. Ismail, 50 Ill.App.3d 271, 273, 7 Ill. Dec. 434, 364 N.E.2d 595, 596 (1977). Where a law has been amended, the law as it exists at the time of the appeal should be applied unless doing so would interfere with a vested right. First of America Trust Co. v. Armstead, 171 Ill. 2d 282, 289, 215 Ill. Dec. 639, 664 N.E.2d 36, 40-41 (1996). However, the primary rule of statutory construction is to give effect to the legislative intent behind it, and in so doing, the language of the statute must be given its plain and ordinary meaning. Sostak v. Sostak, 113 Ill.App.3d 954, 960, 69 Ill. Dec. 658, 447 N.E.2d 1345, 1349-50 (1983).
At the time the parties signed the contract, the Act read in pertinent part:
"The costs of proceedings as between all parties to the suit shall be taxed equitably against the losing party, and where taxed against more than one party, shall be so taxed against all in favor of the proper party but equitably as between themselves; and the costs, as between creditors aforesaid in contests relative to each other's claims, shall be subject to the order of the court, and the same rule shall prevail in respect to costs growing out of the proceedings against and between incumbrances." 770 ILCS 60/17 (West 1994) (prior to amendment).
The Act, as amended, further provides:
"(b) If the court specifically finds that the owner who contracted to have the improvements made failed to pay any lien claimant the full contract price, including extras, without just cause or *274 right, the court may tax that owner * * * the reasonable attorney's fees of the lien claimant who had perfected and proven his or her claim.
* * *
(e) This amendatory Act of 1995 applies to any mechanics lien claim that is perfected on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995." 770 ILCS 60/17 (West 1996) (as amended by Pub. Act 89-253, eff. August 8, 1995).
Mirar apparently argues that its lien claim was perfected prior to the effective date of the Act and, therefore, the amended Act applies in this case because the lien was perfected as of the effective date. However, its interpretation of the amendment is not consistent with the amendment's plain language. Such an interpretation is correct only if the amendment read, "before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995." Applying the Act, as amended, the way it now exists at the time of appeal, the Mirar claim is excluded because it was perfected prior to the amendment's effective date. Accordingly, we conclude that the circuit court did not err when it concluded that the Act does not provide a basis for awarding attorney fees.
Attorney Fees Under the Contract
Should the circuit court have granted Mirar attorney fees pursuant to the terms of the contract? "Mechanics' liens exist only by virtue of the statute creating them [citation] and the liens act becomes a term of every construction contract between the owner and the contractor for construction of a building." J & K Cement Construction, Inc. v. Montalbano Builders, Inc., 119 Ill.App.3d 663, 673, 75 Ill. Dec. 68, 456 N.E.2d 889, 896 (1983). "A mechanics' lien must be based upon a valid contract, and in its absence the lien is unenforceable." Pascal P. Paddock, Inc. v. Glennon, 32 Ill. 2d 51, 53, 203 N.E.2d 421, 422 (1964).
"The general rule is that an unsuccessful party * * * is not responsible for the payment of the other party's attorney fees. [citations.] However, provisions in contracts for awards of attorney fees are an exception to this rule." Myers v. Popp Enterprises, Inc., 216 Ill.App.3d 830, 838, 159 Ill. Dec. 783, 576 N.E.2d 452 457 (1991). Contract provisions regarding attorney fees are to be strictly construed and enforced at the discretion of the circuit court. Ferrara v. Collins, 119 Ill. App. 3d 819, 825, 75 Ill. Dec. 319, 457 N.E.2d 109, 113 (1983). In construing the contract, "the court must determine the intention of the parties with respect to the payment of attorney fees. [Citation.]" Jackson v. Hammer, 274 Ill.App.3d 59, 70, 210 Ill. Dec. 614, 653 N.E.2d 809, 818 (1995). Further, the party requesting attorney fees bears the burden of presenting sufficient evidence from which the circuit court can make a decision regarding the reasonableness of the fees. Tomlinson v. Dartmoor Construction Corp., 268 Ill. App. 3d 677, 688, 206 Ill. Dec. 371, 645 N.E.2d 376, 384 (1994).
The construction contract entered into between Mirar and the Kroners expressly states:
"[I]n the event either party hereto is required to file a law suit to enforce the terms of this Agreement, the successful party in said suit shall be entitled to recover his reasonable attorney's fees and costs from the unsuccessful party."
We have identified no Illinois case supporting the Kroners' position that a contract cannot provide the basis for awarding attorney fees under the Mechanics Lien Act. To the contrary, a mechanics' lien is the product of an express or implied contract and, as noted above, the Act becomes a part of the contract. Indeed, in Midwest Concrete Products Co., 94 Ill.App.3d at 398, 49 Ill. Dec. 968, 418 N.E.2d at 991, the second district granted Midwest attorney fees on its suit to foreclose its subcontractor's lien based on the terms of the subcontract which included an agreement to *275 pay attorney fees in connection with a default on the subcontract.
We agree with the circuit court that the Act does not provide for attorney fees in this instance. However, the contract does so provide and the Act does not prohibit such a provision. We see no reason not to consider, from the evidence presented, the extent to which Mirar may be entitled to attorney fees. In Tomlinson, the parties entered into an agreement that, similar to the agreement in the case at bar, provided that "`[i]n the event that a dispute arises hereunder, the prevailing party shall be entitled to receive from the other party any and all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the prevailing party in connection with such dispute.'" (Emphasis omitted.) Tomlinson, 268 Ill.App.3d at 687, 206 Ill. Dec. 371, 645 N.E.2d at 383. In an action brought for breach of warranties, the Tomlinson court concluded that the prevailing party was entitled to an award of attorney fees under this provision. Tomlinson, 268 Ill. App.3d at 687, 206 Ill. Dec. 371, 645 N.E.2d at 383. Additionally, in Wilmette Partners v. Hamel, 230 Ill.App.3d 248, 265, 171 Ill. Dec. 657, 594 N.E.2d 1177, 1190 (1992), the first district concluded that the appeal was part of the contract enforcement effort and, where the contract provided for reimbursement of attorney fees, the defendant could be reimbursed attorney fees incurred on appeal.
Pursuant to the circuit court's order, the Kroners and Mirar each presented fee affidavits. Subsequently, the circuit court concluded that the fees had been proven up by affidavit as was agreed by the parties and then determined that attorney fees could not be provided under the Act. We discern no conflict between the Act and the contract's fee-shifting provision; the provision simply mirrors the amended Act. In the case before us, the circuit court simply did not consider the fee-shifting provision and the intent of the parties reflected therein. Accordingly, we conclude that the circuit court erred when it denied attorney fees without considering the contract's fee-shifting provision.
CONCLUSION
In sum, we conclude that the compelled release and satisfaction does not render the appeal moot and that the circuit court erred when it denied attorney fees solely based upon the Act: although the amended Act does not apply to lien claims perfected before its effective date, the circuit court must give effect to the intent of the construction contract. Accordingly, we reverse and remand to the circuit court to determine whether and to what extent Mirar may be entitled to reasonable attorney fees.
Reversed and remanded.
LYTTON and SLATER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2230120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.148979+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 431 (1999)
Mark A. REED, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 20A03-9902-CR-72.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 6, 1999.
Transfer Denied February 2, 2000.
*432 Kenneth R. Martin, Goshen, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, Teresa Dashiell Giller, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
BAILEY, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant-Defendant Mark A. Reed ("Reed") appeals his conviction, following a jury trial, for Possession of Cocaine, as a class A felony.[1] We affirm.
Issues
Reed raises several issues on appeal which we consolidate and restate as:
I. Whether IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B) violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and article 1, § 9 of the Indiana Constitution in that it is unconstitutionally vague.
II. Whether the trial court improperly instructed the jury.
Facts/Procedural History
The facts most favorable to the judgment indicate that in the early morning hours of August 26, 1996, Reed violated a restraining order issued against him by going to the residence of his former wife, Julie Reed ("Julie"). (R. 85, 158-59). After Reed repeatedly rang the door bell and knocked on the windows, Julie called the police. (R. 86). Elkhart County Deputy Sheriff Brent Cummings ("Officer Cummings") responded to the police dispatch; and, after obtaining a copy of the restraining order against Reed and verifying that Reed knew there was a retraining order against him, Officer Cummings placed Reed under arrest for Invasion of Privacy. (R. 93).
During the booking process at the jail, some rock-like items were found in the toe of Reed's shoe. (R. 93). The rocks subsequently *433 tested positive for cocaine. (R. 94). The weight of the rock cocaine was 8.9 grams. (R. 130). Reed was thereafter charged with Possession of Cocaine within one thousand feet of a public park pursuant to IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B). (R. 9).
At trial, the County Surveyor estimated the distance between Julie's residence, the place of the arrest, to Eagle Park, a public park, to be 750 feet based on an aerial photograph. (R. 120). Additionally, the State introduced evidence that a survey crew calculated the distance between the two locations using a method called "traversing" which utilizes trigonometry to arrive at a direct sight measurement. (R. 124-25). To utilize this method, the crew located a random point which afforded a line-of-sight measurement point to Eagle Park, and then measured back to Julie's residence. (R. 124-25). The surveying crew then brought back the data, entered it into a coordinate geometry computer package, calculated it, and made a drawing. (R. 125). The distance which was calculated by using this method was 736.6 feet. (R. 120, 126, 136). Reed introduced evidence calculating that the distance between Julie's residence and Eagle Park was 1,880 feet by using a rollertape on the public roadways. (R. 142-43).
A jury convicted Reed of the charged offense and the trial court subsequently ordered Reed to serve an executed sentence of twenty years. (R. 62, 65). The following appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Constitutionality of IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6
Reed contends that the portion of IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B) pertaining to the 1,000 foot enhancement is void for vagueness under the First and Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and article 1, § 9 of the Indiana Constitution. Specifically, Reed argues that because this statute does not provide notice that the enhanced punishment will be based on a line-of-sight measurement, it is unconstitutionally vague, especially under the facts of his case where the "epicenter of the 1000 foot zone cannot even be glimpsed from the defendant's location." (Appellant's brief at 7). Reed's challenge regarding the constitutionality of IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(B)(3) is a case of first impression in Indiana.
Standard of Review
A statute is unconstitutional under the "vagueness doctrine" if the accused establishes that the statute forbids conduct in terms so vague that persons of ordinary intelligence must necessarily guess at the statute's meaning and differ as to its application. Vaillancourt v. State, 695 N.E.2d 606, 610 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. Further, this Court has found that a statute is not unconstitutionally vague if "individuals of ordinary intelligence would comprehend it to adequately inform them of the conduct to be proscribed." Id.
Analysis
Reed's constitutional challenge in the case at bar fails for two reasons. First, we note that Reed failed to file a motion to dismiss raising a constitutional challenge to IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6. Accordingly, this claim is waived. See Vaillancourt, 695 N.E.2d at 610 (holding that the failure to file a proper motion to dismiss raising a constitutional challenge to a criminal statute waives the issue on appeal). Secondly, the argument that IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6 is unconstitutionally vague because it fails to set forth a specific method for measuring the 1,000 foot "drug-free zone" fails on its own merits, waiver notwithstanding.
Indiana Code section 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B) reads in pertinent part as follows:
A person who ... knowingly or intentionally possesses cocaine ... commits possession of cocaine or a narcotic drug, a class D felony, except ... [t]he offense is ... a class A felony if the person *434 possesses the cocaine or narcotic drug in an amount (pure or adulterated) weighing at least 3(3) grams ... in, on, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of ... a public park....
We find nothing indefinite or uncertain in the above quoted language. By this statute, every person is put on notice that the possession of cocaine or narcotic drug within 1,000 feet of a public park is an unlawful act in the state of Indiana. Further, we hold that the phrase, "within one thousand feet of a public park" is sufficiently clear and unambiguous such that a person of ordinary intelligence would be capable of comprehending that it means exactly what it says, within one thousand feet of the park itself, not that it refers to the measurement of the shortest route a person could take to get to the park via public streets, as Reed suggests.
Based on the foregoing, we reject Reed's contention that IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6 is unconstitutionally vague because it fails to provide fair notice that the "line-of-sight" technique for measuring distance will be utilized. Contrary to Reed's argument on appeal, we find that the State's use of the measuring methods discussed above comport with the legislative intent of the statute. See Charley v. State, 651 N.E.2d 300, 303 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (finding that "the State is only required to show that the measuring device [used] was accurate and was operated correctly in order to allow the admission of the distance as evidence"), Cf. Steelman v. State, 602 N.E.2d 152, 157 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (holding that the direct line-of-sight technique used to determine the 1,000 foot perimeter around school property conforms to the legislative intent).
We likewise reject Reed's additional contention that IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6 "does not provide notice sufficient to meet due process requirements that his ... proximity to the [park] would be measured by line-of-sight when the prohibited area was not even within sight." (Appellant's brief at 14). When the legislature created IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6, it clearly intended to create certain "drug-free zones" by increasing the penalty for those individuals who choose to possess cocaine or narcotic drugs within 1,000 feet of schools, public parks, and family housing complexes. See IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6; Cf. Steelman, 602 N.E.2d at 157 (stating that, "when the legislature created the 1,000 foot drug-free zone surrounding our schools, it made no allowance for barriers such as buildings or homes or fences or concrete barriers or creeks ... the legislative intent [was] plain: to punish those who deal drugs within 1,000 feet of school property."). Reed, at his own peril, chose to possess 8.9 grams of cocaine within 1,000 feet of Eagle Park.
II. Jury Instruction
Argument
Next, we address Reed's contention that the trial court misstated the law in instructing the jury. Reed argues that, as given, jury instruction eight misstated the law as well as foreclosed the possibility of the jury considering a lesser included offense by effectively endorsing as correct the State's argument concerning how to measure the 1,000 foot distance between the park and the location where Officer Cummings found Reed. (Appellant's brief at 8). We disagree.
Standard of Review
Our standard for deciding whether the trial court erred in instructing the jury is well settled and affords great deference to the trial court. Crose v. State, 650 N.E.2d 1187, 1189 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). When determining whether a trial court erroneously gave or refused a tendered instruction on appeal, this Court looks to the following factors: (1) whether the tendered instruction correctly stated the law; (2) whether there was evidence presented at trial to support the giving of the instruction; and, (3) whether the substance of the instruction was covered by other instructions. Fields v. State, 679 N.E.2d 1315, 1322 (Ind.1997).
*435 Instruction of the jury is left to the sound judgment of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent an abuse of discretion. Hanson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 152, 156 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Jury instructions are not to be considered in isolation but as a whole and in reference to each other. Hollowell v. State, 707 N.E.2d 1014, 1023 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Thus, to constitute an abuse of discretion, the instruction given must be erroneous, and the instructions taken as a whole must misstate the law or otherwise mislead the jury. Coleman v. State, 703 N.E.2d 1022, 1032 (Ind.1998), petition for cert. filed. Finally, before a defendant is entitled to a reversal, he must affirmatively show that the instructional error prejudiced his substantial rights. Hollowell, 707 N.E.2d at 1023.
Analysis
At trial, Reed objected to jury instruction eight which read as follows:
You are instructed that it is the law in the State of Indiana that when the legislature created the 1000-foot drug free zone surrounding our parks, it made no allowance for barriers such as buildings or homes or fences or concrete barriers or creeks. A surveyor's line-of-sight technique to determine the 1000-foot perimeter around park property is an appropriate method of measurement.
(R. 31, 187). The instruction given immediately after instruction eight informed the jury as follows:
You are instructed that there are no statutory requirements regarding the method of measurement of distance or operation of measurement devices in drug cases.
(R. 187). The trial court also informed the jury that if the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt each of the elements of IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B), which included the element of whether Reed was within the 1,000 foot drug-free zone, that it should find Reed not guilty. Additionally, the trial court correctly instructed the jury about the elements of Possession of Cocaine as a lesser included offense.
Our review of the record reveals that a major point of contention at trial was whether Reed possessed the cocaine within the 1,000 foot drug-free zone. In fact, both the State and Reed presented evidence regarding how to measure or determine this distance. Finally, as stated earlier, in Steelman, a case where the defendant challenged the method employed by the State to determine whether he was within the 1,000 foot drug free zone surrounding a school and thereby in violation of this State's corollary marijuana statute located at IND.CODE § 35-48-4-10, we held that "[t]he surveyor's line-of-sight technique to determine the 1,000-foot perimeter around the school property conforms to the legislative intent." Id. at 157.
Based on the foregoing and our previous determination that the State's use of the "traversing" method for measuring distance comports with the legislative intent of IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6, we conclude that jury instruction number eight was a correct statement of the law, was applicable to the evidence presented at trial, and was relevant to the issues the jury was required to decide in reaching its verdict. Further, in reading this instruction in conjunction with the entire jury charge, we perceive no misstatement of the law and do not find the instruction to be misleading. Accordingly, reversal is not warranted.
Affirmed.
GARRARD, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result as to part I, and concurs as to part II.
NOTES
[1]  See IND.CODE § 35-48-4-6(b)(3)(B) (possession of at least three grams of cocaine or narcotic drug within one thousand feet of a public park).

=== CASE 9742167 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:57.792733+00 ===

OPINION
HALBROOKS, Judge.
Appellant father challenges the decision of the district court construing the agreement between him and respondents as an equitable mortgage rather than a contract for deed. The parties in this case have appeared before this court in the past regarding this same issue. In 2002, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of respondent wife on her claim that father had an equitable mortgage and hence that father’s statutory cancellation of the contract for deed was not effective. Father appealed, and we remanded for the district court to resolve the question of the intent of the parties to the conveyance. After a court trial, the district court once again held that father held an equitable mortgage on the property, concluding that respondents conveyed title to the property as security for a loan from appellant. Father moved for amended findings or a new trial. The district court denied the motion, and father appealed from the judgment. Because the district court did not clearly err, we affirm.
FACTS
Respondents James Fraser (husband) and Jayne Fraser (wife) (collectively, the *286couple) sought to buy a home in Big Lake, but were unable to obtain financing due to credit problems. According to husband, his father, appellant Gerald Fraser (father), a real-estate broker, then agreed “that if [husband] could find a house that [husband] could afford[,] [father] would help [husband] acquire it by ... purchasing it and selling it to [husband] in a contract for deed.”
The couple subsequently found property in which they were interested. The property was encumbered by substantial federal- and state-tax liens. Husband, an accountant, negotiated settlements with the IRS and the State of Minnesota to clear the title. The couple entered into a purchase agreement with the sellers to buy the property for $55,250, a figure that included a $6,250 credit for husband’s services in negotiating the lien settlements.
Father then transferred money to husband. The couple used the funds to get cashier’s checks to pay the tax liens. At the closing, the sellers quitclaimed the property to husband and wife, who quit-claimed it to father. Father, in turn, sold the property back to husband and wife on a contract for deed. The couple was represented by counsel during these dealings, but father was not.
Husband later filed for divorce and moved from the property. Under the temporary order, wife was awarded use of the home, and husband was ordered to make the contract-for-deed payments. When husband failed to make the payments, father attempted to serve husband and wife with a notice of cancellation of the contract for deed. The district court initially joined father as a party to the couple’s dissolution proceeding and enjoined him from canceling the contract for deed, but later reversed itself and vacated the injunction, ruling that it had lacked jurisdiction over father and that the injunction against canceling the contract for deed had been incorrectly issued. Wife then filed a separate action against husband and father, asserting equitable defenses to the contract-for-deed cancellation, including that father’s interest in the house was an equitable mortgage. On reconsideration in the dissolution action, the district court concluded that, because the earlier injunction was void for lack of jurisdiction, the period to cure the contract-for-deed default had expired.
Father then filed an eviction action against wife and obtained a writ of recovery for the property, which was stayed to allow wife to appeal. Wife separately appealed the eviction and the dissolution order vacating the injunction. This court consolidated the appeals and remanded portions of the eviction for the district court to address wife’s claims of defective service of the notice of cancellation and the propriety of addressing wife’s equitable defenses in the eviction action. Fraser v. Fraser, 642 N.W.2d 34, 41 (Minn.App.2002) (“Fraser I ”). If appropriate, the district court was also to address the equitable defenses. Id.
On remand in the eviction proceeding, the district court rejected wife’s service arguments, did not address wife’s equitable claims, and ruled that father was entitled to immediate possession of the property. In the meantime, the parties made cross-motions for summary judgment in the wife’s suit that alleged equitable defenses to the contract-for-deed cancellation. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of wife on her claim that father had an equitable mortgage and, hence, that father’s statutory cancellation of the contract for deed was ineffective.
On appeal, this court noted that “a deed absolute on its face” will be held to be an equitable mortgage only if it “appear[s] that both parties so intended.” Fraser v. *287Fraser, No. C3-02-2219, 2003 WL 21743707, at *3 (MinruApp. July 29, 2003) (“Fraser II ”) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Ministers Life & Cas. Union v. Franklin Park Towers Corp., 307 Minn. 134, 140, 239 N.W.2d 207, 211 (1976)). “Because the record [was] unclear regarding the intent of the parties to the conveyance, we remand[ed] for the district court to resolve the intent-related questions.” Fraser II, 2003 WL 21743707, at *4. The district court was, to the extent required, to construe any documents necessary for the resolution of the case. Id.
On remand, the district court once again determined that father had an equitable mortgage on the property, concluding that “[t]he facts surrounding the transaction at issue provide[d] clear and convincing evidence that the parties intended a security agreement rather than an absolute conveyance.” In support of its decision, the district court noted that “[a]ll of the parties at various times characterized the transfer of funds as a loan” and that husband and wife held title to the property prior to conveying it to father “without further consideration.” The district court also concluded that the value of the property conveyed exceeded the amount of money transferred to husband by father, a situation “favoring the finding of an equitable mortgage.” This appeal follows.
ISSUES
1. Did the district court err by holding that the transaction created an equitable mortgage?
2. Did the district court err by concluding that there was no agency relationship between father and husband and wife?
3. Is wife equitably estopped from claiming relief in the form of an equitable mortgage?
ANALYSIS
A district court’s findings of fact “shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the [district] court to judge the credibility of the witnesses.” Minn. R. Civ. P. 52.01. We defer to the district court’s assessment of credibility. See Sigurdson v. Isanti County, 386 N.W.2d 715, 721 (Minn.1986) (stating that “[a]n appellate court cannot judge the credibility of a witness or the weight, if any, to be given to testimony”). A finding is clearly erroneous only if it is “manifestly contrary to the weight of the evidence or not reasonably supported by the evidence as a whole.” Randall v. N. Milk Prods., Inc., 519 N.W.2d 456, 458 (Minn.App.1994) (quotation omitted).
I. Equitable Mortgage
In general,
when the real nature of the transaction between the parties is that of a loan, advanced upon the security of realty granted to the party making the loan, it may be treated as an equitable mortgage, without regard to the actual form of the instrument of conveyance. It is within the province of the [district] court to determine, by looking beyond that form, the actual character of the transaction. An equitable mortgage is created when the parties to the transaction intended it to be essentially a security transaction.
First Nat’l Bank of St. Paul v. Ramier, 311 N.W.2d 502, 503 (Minn.1981) (citations omitted). “[A] deed absolute in form is presumed to be, and will be treated as, a conveyance unless both parties in fact intended a loan transaction with the deed as security only.” Ministers Life & Cas. Union v. Franklin Park Towers Corp., 307 *288Minn. 134, 137-38, 239 N.W.2d 207, 210 (1976) (emphasis added).
[B]efore a court will hold a deed absolute on its face to be an equitable mortgage, it must appear that both parties so intended, ... even if one party actually intended to enter into a mortgage agreement, unless the other party had the same intention, the transaction should not be construed to be an equitable mortgage.
Id. at 140, 239 N.W.2d at 211 (second emphasis added). The relevant intention is that of the parties at the time of conveyance. St. Paul Mercury Indem. Co. v. Lyell, 216 Minn. 7, 11, 11 N.W.2d 491, 494 (1943). “[I]ntention is to be ascertained by the written memorials of the transaction and the attendant facts and circumstances.” Westberg v. Wilson, 185 Minn. 307, 309, 241 N.W. 315, 316 (1932).
Father contends that the district court erred in finding that the parties intended to enter into an equitable mortgage, arguing that both the relevant documents and the testimony of the parties demonstrate an unequivocal intention to enter into a contract for deed.1 Specifically, father cites his testimony that he “[a]b-solutely” did not intend to enter into a mortgage and husband’s testimony that “[a] loan was never discussed,” as well as a letter from father to the couple’s attorney stating that he had “no intention of granting [the couple] a mortgage.” Father also maintains that wife never testified regarding her intent. Further, father points to supplemental language added to the contract for deed, which states that “[the][c]ontraet shall not be construed and interpreted as a title transaction and shall not be construed and interpreted as an ‘equitable mortgage’ as that term is defined by Minnesota law.”
But, as the district court noted, there was also evidence supporting a conclusion that the parties intended to enter into an equitable mortgage.2 The district court *289pointed to testimony from all of the parties characterizing the fund transfer as a loan. In an affidavit, husband stated that
[father] loaned us $56,000.00 to purchase the house.... The final result was that we purchased a home and [father] financed the purchase. [Father] gave us $56,000.00, and in return he received fee ownership of the property in question and gave us a [contract for [d]eed so that the money he loaned us was secure.
(Emphasis added.) Husband also testified at trial that “father financed the house and the financing vehicle was a contract for deed.”
Father likewise testified that he “certainly did lend $56,000” and that he “lent [the] money only on security of the house.” Even father’s denial evinces a loan agreement:
Q: Isn’t it true ... that you lent the monies to [husband] and [wife] so that they could purchase the house—
A: I did not lend money to anyone. I gave the money to [husband] to buy the house which he was to pay back in the form of a contract for deed.
(Emphasis added.)
Moreover, despite father’s contention to the contrary, the record includes testimony from wife that goes to the question of intent.
Q: And what was your understanding as to [father’s] involvement in this transaction?
A: [Father] was always a lender. He was never anything more.
The record indicates that father, a former real-estate agent and broker, knew and accepted the potential consequences of the financing arrangement. On May 5, 1997, father sent a letter to Steven Thor-son, the attorney for the couple, about financing the purchase of the property, stating, “I agreed to finance the house for [husband] on the basis that I would be the owner and sell the property to him on a contract-for-deed. I have no intention of granting [the couple] a mortgage.” The next day, Thorson responded:
[F]rom your perspective, a contract for deed is the worst way for you to secure your interest in the property. The reason for this is that, if you insist on a contract for deed, [husband] and [wife] are going to need to deed the property to you immediately after their closing with [sellers] and then sign a recordable contract for deed with you. The net result, in spite of the words “contract for deed” appearing on the document, is that you will have an equitable mortgage under Minnesota law, not a contract.
To get a good contract for deed, you would need to be the purchaser directly from [sellers]. But, we cannot do that here because part of the purchase price is being paid with personal-serviees-ren-dered from [husband].[3]
(Emphasis added.) Father subsequently wrote back, noting that he had received *290Thorson’s letter and acknowledging that neither Thorson nor Thorson’s firm represented him in the matter. Father then stated:
I have consulted with my own lawyer [and] I hereby waive any requirement to consult with [my] own lawyer regarding my request to obtain a contract for deed as the security instrument secunng a loan to be made to [husband] and [ ] wife for the purchase of real property. I further acknowledge that you have characterized the security arrangement as one which will create an equitable mortgage and that you asked me to consider the consequences.
I understand that [husband] and [wife] will receive a deed from [sellers], and that they will deed the property to me, and that I will receive a contract for deed from [husband] and [wife]. This is my request. I understand the consequences.
(Emphasis added.)
The record thus contains evidence that reasonably supports the district court’s finding regarding the intent of the parties. On this record, we cannot say that the district court clearly erred in finding that the parties intended to enter into an equitable mortgage. Randall, 519 N.W.2d at 458.
Father also argues that there can be no equitable mortgage in this case because the couple never held title to the property. He notes that “[i]f one never owned the property and was only trying to purchase the property in the first instance ... equity does not require she be prevented from purchasing property on a contract for deed.” As we noted in Miller v. Anderson, 394 N.W.2d 279 (Minn.App.1986), “[t]itle to the property involved in an equitable mortgage starts with the borrower and passes to the lender as security for the money borrowed.” Id. at 283. Where, in contrast, title originates with the lender, no equitable mortgage is created. Id.
Father contends that such is the situation here. He asserts that “[h]ad [husband] and [wife] owned the home and pledged it to [father] for money they needed, an equitable mortgage might apply. Yet that never happened here. [The couple] owned nothing and had nothing to pledge.” (Emphasis added.)
But this is a plain misstatement of fact. It is uncontested that the sellers quit-claimed the property to the couple, who then quitclaimed it to father. During the interim, husband and wife owned the property. That they owned it for only a short time is immaterial. Father has not pointed to any authority suggesting that, in order to create an equitable mortgage, there is a minimum time for which borrowers must hold property prior to pledging it as security for a loan.
Father suggests that because the documents were executed at the same time, they should be “construed as forming one contract, rather than separate and distinct contracts.”4 In support, he cites Farrell v. Johnson, 442 N.W.2d 805 (Minn.App.1989), which states, “Generally, instruments executed at the same time, by the same parties, relating to the same transaction will be considered and construed together, since they are, in the eyes of the law, one contract or instrument.” Id. at 806.
*291But Farrell is inapposite — the instruments in question neither involved the “same parties” nor related to the “same transaction.” Here, two separate transactions occurred. The parties to the first transaction — transferring title to the couple — were husband, wife, and the sellers. The parties to the second transaction— transferring title to father — were husband, wife, and father. Father was not a party to the first transaction, nor were the sellers parties to the second.
Although the two transfers occurred at the same closing, they were separate transactions. Accordingly, the district court did not err in concluding that an equitable mortgage existed when the couple held title to the property and then conveyed title to father as security for a loan. Cf. Miller, 394 N.W.2d at 283 (noting that, in an equitable mortgage, title passes from the borrower to the lender as security).
At oral argument, father noted that if the sellers had conveyed the property directly to him, without title passing through the couple, there would be no question that the conveyance in question was a contract for deed. We agree that, had the parties handled the transaction differently, the outcome would also be different. But we must consider the events as they actually occurred, not as they might have transpired. For whatever reason, the sellers declined to sell the property to father. Nonetheless, he chose to continue the transaction, rather than withdrawing. In a letter to the couple’s attorney, father indicated that he understood the consequences of that decision. He cannot now avoid those consequences by positing alternative scenarios.
Father also challenges the district court’s finding that the value of the property exceeded the contract price and contends that, even if this were the case, it has no bearing on the question of the existence of an equitable mortgage. At trial, wife testified that the original listing price for the home was $99,000. The district court found, based on the evidence at trial, that the face value of the federal-and state-tax liens on the property was $85,000 to $90,000. Father affirms that the couple ultimately paid less than $50,000 to satisfy the hens on the property. The purchase agreement that husband and wife signed with the sellers was for $55,250 plus credit for husband’s services in negotiating settlement of the liens. Thus, there is evidence from which the district court could reasonably conclude that the value of the property exceeded the contract price.
While not determinative of the issue, when considering whether an equitable mortgage was intended, “[a district] court could take into consideration the fact that the value of the property was greater than the consideration given for the deed.” Gagne v. Hoban, 280 Minn. 475, 480, 159 N.W.2d 896, 900 (1968). Accordingly, the district court did not err in so doing.
II. Agency
Father next argues that husband was acting as his agent in purchasing the property and contends that the district court erred by concluding that no agency relationship existed. In Fraser II, we
rejected] this argument because it assumes that, in acquiring the property from the sellers, husband and wife were, essentially, agents of father through whom the property passed on its way to father. The purchase agreement, however, (a) was between the sellers and husband and wife; (b) does not state that husband and wife were agents of father or otherwise acting on father’s behalf; and (c) states that neither the sellers nor the buyers could convey their *292interests under the purchase agreement without the other side’s consent. Thus, if husband and wife were only agents for father, they either entered the agreement knowing that they were not the actual buyers and that father was or, after entering the purchase agreement as legitimate purchasers, they improperly transferred their rights under the agreement to father without the sellers’ consent. Also, part of the purchase price was “paid” when the sellers gave husband credit for CPA work he had done for the sellers. Because this credit made the sale possible in the form that it occurred, we cannot say on this record that husband was acting in a mere representative capacity.
2003 WL 21743707, at *3 (emphasis added).
This determination is thus the law of the case and will not be re-examined here. Brezinka v. Bystrom Bros., Inc., 403 N.W.2d 841, 843 (Minn.1987).
The doctrine of law of the case is distinct from the doctrines of res judica-ta and stare decisis, even though similar underlying policy considerations are involved. Law of the case applies most commonly to situations where an appellate court has passed on a legal question and remanded to the court below for further proceedings. The legal question thus determined by the appellate court will not be re-examined on a second appeal of the same case.
Id.
III. Equitable Estoppel
Finally, father argues that wife should be equitably estopped from asserting the existence of an equitable mortgage because she slept on her rights and came before the court with unclean hands. Specifically, father contends that wife should have been denied equitable relief because she did not raise the equitable mortgage issue until the contract for deed had already been cancelled. Although the district court did not explicitly address the equitable-estoppel issue, it implicitly rejected father’s argument by finding the existence of an equitable mortgage.
Father’s argument is without merit. It is well settled that an equitable-mortgage defense to a contract-for-deed cancellation may be asserted after the redemption period has expired. See Albright v. Henry, 285 Minn. 452, 462-63, 174 N.W.2d 106, 112 (1970) (noting that because cancellation does not effect a valid foreclosure of an equitable mortgage, the contention that an equitable-mortgage claim must be asserted within the contract-for-deed redemption period is “entirely without authority or merit”); Coddon v. Youngkrantz, 562 N.W.2d 39, 44 (Minn.App.1997) (holding that equitable defenses to a contract for deed may be asserted despite the expiration of the redemption period), review denied (Minn. July 10, 1997). Moreover, we concluded in Fraser I that wife could raise the equitable-mortgage defense in a proper proceeding, such as the current action. 642 N.W.2d at 39-40. Consequently, the district court did not err in implicitly rejecting father’s equitable-estoppel argument.
DECISION
Because title to the property in this case passed first from the original seller to the borrower and subsequently passed from the borrower to the lender as security on a contract for deed, the possibility arose that an equitable mortgage had been created. The existence of an equitable mortgage depends upon the intent of the parties at the time of conveyance. The record contains evidence from which the district court could reasonably find that the parties intended to enter into an equitable *293mortgage. An equitable-mortgage defense need not be asserted within a contract-for-deed redemption period. We therefore affirm the district court’s decision.
Affirmed.
. Structuring a real-estate transaction as a contract for deed or a mortgage carries with it substantial consequences. One remedy available to a seller upon the buyer’s defaulting under the terms of the contract for deed is the seller's ability to cancel the contract. Depending on when they were executed and the proportion of the purchase price paid by the purchaser, contracts for deed may be terminated in 30-90 days after notice of default. Minn.Stat. § 559.21 (2004). Once statutory notice has been served and cancellation effected, all rights between the parties under a contract for deed are terminated. West v. Wallcer, 181 Minn. 169, 171, 231 N.W. 826, 827 (1930).
In contrast, a mortgage must be foreclosed, either by advertisement or by action. As we have stated:
A foreclosure by advertisement takes place without recourse to the courts, and is a proceeding in pais, ex parte, and in rem. A foreclosure by action requires a judicial decree and approval of sale and is an in personam proceeding, although it is in the nature of a proceeding in rem since its purpose is to enforce a lien on the mortgaged property.
Norwest Bank Hastings Nat’l Assoc, v. Franz-meier, 355 N.W.2d 431, 433 (Minn.App.1984) (citation omitted). After foreclosure, depending upon the date of the mortgage and the nature of the real estate, a mortgagor has 6-12 months in which to redeem the property. Minn.Stat. § 580.23 (2004).
The financial effects of cancellation versus foreclosure also differ dramatically.
A statutory cancellation of a contract for deed results in the vendee’s forfeiture of all payments made and restoration of full legal and equitable title in the property to the vendor. This result is different from that in a mortgage foreclosure sale, where the defaulting party may receive proceeds of a mortgage foreclosure sale above the amount owed on the property.
Shields v. Goldetsky (In re Butler), 552 N.W.2d 226, 230 (Minn. 1996).
. In Fraser II, we noted the presence of conflicting evidence regarding intent. 2003 WL 21743707, at ⅜3. It was for the purpose of *289resolving this issue that we remanded. Id. at *4.
. Father contends that the district court erred in considering this letter because it was admitted with the provision that it was not to prove the truth of the matter asserted under Minn. R. Evid. 801. But contrary to father's assertion, the district court did not rely on this letter to establish that an equitable mortgage existed. Rather, the district court used the letter to establish that father had been informed of Thorson's opinion that the structure of the transaction would create an equitable mortgage. The district court further noted that father then responded to Thorson, acknowledging Thorson’s characterization and indicating that father understood the consequences.
. The district court likewise addressed father’s argument that "the 'unified closing' provided no break in the chain of title and that [the couple] had no interest in the property to transfer as security,” noting that this argument "ignores the reality of the transaction” and is "contrary to the evidence and the law.”

=== CASE 9742168 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:57.797498+00 ===

MINGE, Judge
(concurring specially).
I concur in the opinion of the court and add the following analysis. Parties are generally accorded the right to contract between themselves with respect to their business affairs and to enforce their contracts according to their terms. Pollock-Halvarson v. McGuire, 576 N.W.2d 451, 454-55 (Minn.App.1998), review denied (Minn. May 28, 1998). Similarly, real-estate documents are commonly recorded and third parties rely on those documents. Cf. In re Bernard, 584 N.W.2d 272, 275 (Minn.1995) (noting that “[t]he vast number of people who rely on the real[-]estate recording system as a valid and efficient process rely on the genuineness of the documents recorded thereunder”). Predictability and enforceability of contracts is important in our legal system. This principle is subject to limitations that reflect important public policies. Important among these limitations is the doctrine of equitable mortgages. This doctrine is designed to protect borrowers from overreaching by lenders who seek to use absolute deeds to avoid the delay and expense of a foreclosure and to obtain the borrower’s residual equity in real estate. See Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 3.2, cmt. a (1997) (discussing the courts’ use of equitable-mortgage doctrine to counter attempts by lenders to avoid mortgagors’ “equity of redemption”).
In Minnesota, the contract for deed is a well established, specifically recognized arrangement for financing the purchase of real estate. In re Butler, 552 N.W.2d 226, 230 (Minn.1996). Cancellation of such contracts must follow certain statutory procedures. MinmStat. § 559.21 (2004). These accord the buyer notice and opportunity for cure. Also, with respect to family farmers purchasing farmland, the statute provides a right to mediation. MinmStat. § 559.209 (2004).5
One of the issues before us is whether the parties have the flexibility to structure this transaction as a contract for deed. There is no dispute that the father intended to finance the purchase of the property. The terms of the contract are not onerous; it uses the uniform conveyancing blank format. In fact, if this transaction is classified as a mortgage, the parties agree that the same terms would be used and that the entire balloon payment is due. But the statutory redemption period for this contract is short compared to the redemption period that would be required if the transaction had been set up as a mortgage with foreclosure by advertisement. Compare MinmStat. § 559.21 with Minn.Stat. § 580.23 (2004). In addition, given the evidence of the actual value of the land, the wife’s apparent financial circumstances and likely title complications, refinancing or sale may be difficult and a quick contract-for-deed cancellation exposes her to a substantial risk of forfeiting all equity while the public sale and redemption process in a mortgage foreclosure minimizes that risk. See Butler, 552 N.W.2d at 230 (stating that in contrast to a mortgage foreclosure sale, cancellation of a contract for deed restores full ownership to vendor and terminates all rights between the parties to the contract for deed).
*294Furthermore, as this court’s opinion demonstrates, the transaction is not a good fit for a contract for deed. The original seller is not financing the sale. Instead, the buyers served as a conduit to transfer nominal title to father to give him the status of seller and to then sell the premises back to the buyers on what the parties agreed would be a “contract for deed.” This unusual combination of transactions appears in the real-estate record and should be adequate to place third parties on notice that the arrangement is unusual.
On balance, I concur in the result. The district court did not err or abuse its discretion in treating the transaction as an equitable mortgage. This is a heavily regulated area of real-estate financing. It is not a commercial transaction. Although the buyers had counsel, they were economically stressed. The father was not the real seller. The nominal price did not reflect the son’s contribution to the purchase or the apparent fair market value of the property. The father knew the risks involved. The public record discloses that the parties deeded the property in a fashion that is inconsistent with the normal contract for deed transaction. Thus, predictability and stability in contractual arrangements is not sacrificed by the result reached in this case. Probably the most difficult aspect of the result is that the flexibility of financing is denied. This may be a detriment and may preclude some transactions that are not so unfair as to require application of the equitable-mortgage doctrine. But given the debtor’s rights in real estate transactions, this limitation on flexibility reflects a deeply-rooted policy in this state.
. This section has been repealed as of June 30, 2005. 2001 Minn. Laws 1st Spec. Sess. ch. 1, art 2 § 25.

=== CASE 3027471 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:20.058105+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-28-2007
Mei-Chia Li v. Atty Gen USA
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 05-5269
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Mei-Chia Li v. Atty Gen USA" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 870.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/870
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NON-PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 05-5269
MEI-CHAI LI
Petitioner,
v.
ATTORNEY GENERAL
OF THE UNITED STATES,
Respondent
Petition for Review of an Order of the
United States Department of Justice
Board of Immigration Appeals
BIA File No. A78-842-774
Argued March 1, 2007
BEFORE: SCIRICA, Chief Judge,
McKEE and NOONAN*, Circuit Judges
(Opinion filed: June 28, 2007)
THOMAS V. MASSUCCI, Esq. (Argued)
401 Broadway, Suite 404
New York, NY 10013
Attorney for Petitioner
MARY C. FRYE, Esq. (Argued)
Assistant United States Attorney
*
The Honorable John T. Noonan, Jr., United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth
Judicial Circuit, sitting by designation.
PATRICK L. MEEHAN, Esq.
United States Attorney
VIRGINIA A. GIBSON, Esq.
Assistant United States Attorney
Chief, Civil Division
615 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Erica B. Miles, Esq.
United States Department of Justice
Office of Immigration Litigation
P.O. Box 878
Ben Franklin Station
Washington, DC 20044
Attorneys for Respondent
OPINION
McKEE, Circuit Judge.
Petitioner Mei-Chai Li, a native and citizen of China, petitions for review of an
order of the Board of Immigration Appeals affirming the Immigration Judge’s denial of
her application for asylum, withholding of removal and relief under the Convention
Against Torture. For the reasons set forth below, we will grant the petition.
I.
Petitioner, Mei-Chai Li is a native and citizen of the People’s Republic of China.
She entered the United States on or about May 13, 2001, without valid documentation.
2
Removal proceedings were instituted against her on May 16, 2001.
At her merits hearing before Immigration Judge Eugene Pugliese, Li asserted
claims for asylum, withholding of removal and withholding under the Convention
Against Torture (“CAT”).
Li testified that she had been a Falun Gong practitioner since August 2000 and that
she fears that if she returns to China she will be arrested by the Chinese government
because of her practice. She further testified that her fear is based on the events of an
evening in February 2001 when several public security officials came to her home to
arrest her. They were apparently acting on a tip from someone who had reported that Li
was practicing Falun Gong.
During the visit, although Li’s mother denied Li’s Falun Gong involvement, the
police told Li’s mother to surrender Li for interrogation and investigation. Li was not
home when the police arrived, however, her mother later called to inform her that the
police had come to arrest and interrogate her. Li testified that she became frightened and
went into hiding as a result of that visit. She hid in China for close to half a month until
she was able to leave China in April 2001.
In addition to her testimony, Li submitted corroborative documents in the form of
a letter from her parents describing the events that occurred the night that the police
visited her home and statements describing their knowledge of Li’s Falun Gong practice
while in China. She also submitted a letter from the friend who introduced her to the
practice of Falun Gong. That letter described the changes her friend observed in Li after
3
she began the practice, as well as threats, detentions and interrogations that he had
personally experienced as a result of his own Falun Gong practice. Li also submitted
various country reports to support her fear of arrest. The 2003 Country Report on Human
Rights Practices in China states that “[a]rbitrary arrest and detention [remain] serious
problems.” Administrative Record (“A.R.”) at 166. It also reports that “[t]he law permits
authorities, in some circumstances, to detain persons without arresting or charging them,
and persons may be sentenced administratively to up to 3 years in reeducation-through-
labor camps and other similar facilities without a trial.” Id. Some Falun Gong adherents
are confined to psychiatric hospitals. Id.
After consideration of Li’s evidence of persecution, including her testimony, her
application for asylum and the various supporting documents, the IJ denied her
application for relief. His decision was based primarily on his conclusion that Li’s
testimony was not credible. He also found Li had not carried her burden of proof.
II.
The Board of Immigration Appeals considered Li’s timely appeal and affirmed the
IJ’s decision. The BIA adopted and affirmed the IJ’s decision as its own. However, the
Board supplemented the IJ’s decision by concluding that, even if Li’s testimony was
credible, she had still failed to establish past persecution or a well founded fear of future
persecution if returned to China.
When the BIA adopts the decision of the Immigration Judge, we review the
decision of the IJ as the final decision of the agency. Xie v. Ashcroft, 359 F.3d 239, 242
4
(3d Cir. 2004) (citing Abdulai v. Ashcroft, 239 F.3d 542, 549 n.2 (3d Cir. 2001)).
However, since the BIA also ruled that Li failed to establish her eligibility for relief even
if her testimony is accepted, we must review the decision of both the BIA and the IJ. See
Miah v. Ashcroft, 346 F.3d 434, 439 (3d Cir. 2003); see also Chen v. B.I.A., 435 F.3d 141,
144 (2d Cir. 2006) (review extends to the entirety of the IJ’s decision as well as the
alternative Board findings where the Board adopts and affirms the IJ’s decision and then
assumes credibility in making an alternative finding for denial of relief).
We must uphold the agency’s decision if it is “supported by reasonable,
substantial, and probative evidence on the record considered as a whole.” Gao v.
Ashcroft, 299 F.3d 266, 272 (3d Cir. 2002) (internal quotation and citation omitted).1
III.
To be eligible for asylum under Section 208 of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (“INA”), 8 U.S.C. § 1158, an applicant must establish “persecution or a well-founded
fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular
social group, or political opinion.” See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42)(A). To be eligible for
withholding of removal under Section 241(b)(3) of the INA, the applicant must
demonstrate that his/her “life or freedom would be threatened in [the country of removal]
because of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political
opinion.” 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3)(A). To qualify for relief under the CAT, the applicant
1
We have jurisdiction to review the Board’s decision under 8 U.S.C. § 1252 which
grants federal courts of appeals jurisdiction to review final orders of the BIA.
5
must demonstrate that it is more likely than not that he/she would be tortured if removed.
8 C.F.R. § 208.16(c)(2).
A. Credibility
We first consider whether substantial evidence supports the IJ’s adverse credibility
determination. We “look at an adverse credibility determination to ensure that it was
‘appropriately based on inconsistent statements, contradictory evidences, and inherently
improbable testimony . . . in view of the background evidence on country conditions.”
Dia v. Ashcroft, 353 F.3d 228, 249 (3d Cir. 2003) (en banc) (quoting In re S-M-J, 21 I. &
N. Dec. 722 (BIA 1997)). “Generally, minor inconsistencies and minor omissions that
reveal nothing about an asylum applicant’s fear for his safety are not an adequate basis
for an adverse credibility finding . . . [because] [t]he discrepancies must involve the heart
of the asylum claim.” Berishaj v. Ashcroft, 378 F.3d 314, 323 (3d Cir. 2004) (internal
quotations and citations omitted).
The IJ based his credibility determination on what he identified as a discrepancy
between Li’s written asylum application and her testimony at the immigration hearing.
A.R. at 49. On her asylum application, Li stated that she was fired from her job because
she practiced Falun Gong. Id. at 50. In her testimony, however, Li did not mention
losing her job. Id. In the IJ’s view, this cast doubt on her credibility. We disagree.
This purported “inconsistency” does not go to the heart of Li’s claim. Indeed, her
termination because of her Falun Gong practice was not even relevant to her asylum
claim because she does not allege that the government caused her to be fired from her job.
6
A claim of asylum must be based on persecution by a government actor or forces the
government is either unable or unwilling to control.2 See Gao, 299 F.3d at 272 (citation
and quotations omitted).
A reasonable fact finder would not have rested an adverse credibility
determination on this perceived inconsistency. Although the “omission” need not be
ignored, the IJ failed to recognize that it may well have signified nothing more than Li’s
attorney’s understandable conclusion that Li’s loss of employment was not relevant to her
claim for refugee status.
Moreover, in Toure v. Attorney General, we recognized that “an IJ has a duty to
develop an applicant’s testimony, especially regarding an issue that [he/]she may find
dispositive.” 443 F.3d 310, 325 (3d Cir. 2006) (citing In re S-M-J-, 21 I. & N. Dec. at
723-726 (“Although the burden of proof in establishing a claim is on the applicant, the
Service and the Immigration Judge have a role in introducing evidence into the record.”).
Yet, the IJ did not make any inquiry about Li’s employment or the circumstances under
which she lost her job.
The IJ’s second justification for an adverse credibility ruling relied upon Li’s
letters from her parents, and from a school friend in China who introduced her to Falun
Gong practice. The IJ concluded that these letters suggested fraud. A.R. at 50-52. In the
IJ’s view, they were too similar, too vague and too general because they provided no
2
There is nothing in the record to suggest that Li was employed by a government-
owned construction company, rather than by a private company.
7
information beyond that relevant to Li’s asylum application. Id. at 51. He thought the
letters were unrelated to events that the writers actually saw or heard, and he therefore
placed little credence in them. Id. at 50-52.
The IJ’s characterization of this evidence is wholly inconsistent with the record.
The only similarity we can identify between the two letters and the statement Li attached
to her I-589 asylum application is that they both refer to the government’s renewed
interest in punishing Falun Gong members in January of 2001 as a “crackdown.”
However, the letters have a common translator. It should therefore come as no surprise
that both letters refer to a “crackdown” as it is logical to assume that the translator
interpreted whatever the letters actually said as a statement that the Chinese government
was “cracking down” on Falun Gong practitioners. “Crackdown” is a perfectly accurate
description of what happened. Indeed, it is hard for us to think of a more appropriate
word to use.
We have previously cautioned against penalizing aliens for “inconsistencies” that
result from translation errors. See Balasubramanrim v. I.N.S., 143 F.3d 157, 162-64 (3d
Cir. 1998). Similarly, consistencies ought not to be seized upon as indicia of fraud or
collusion absent some evidence of misconduct. If we ignore the unremarkable fact that
the two letters both speak of a “crackdown,” it is clear that they are not so similar as to
suggest fraud. It is not only reasonable, it is to be expected, that both letters would relate
the events that caused Li to flee China and seek asylum in the United States. That is why
the authors were requested to write the letters in the first place; to confirm the events
8
leading up to her departure. Rather than suggesting fraud, the similarity of the events
mentioned in the letters corroborates Li’s claim that she had to flee China because of the
government’s response to her Falun Gong practice.
Furthermore, rejecting these letters because “they don’t really say anything new”
creates an impossible “catch-22” for asylum petitioners. If petitioners produce letters
that are too similar in content, the letters can be viewed as fraudulent. Yet, if the letters
are too dissimilar, they lack the required corroboration. Here, for reasons that are not at
all apparent, the IJ rejected Li’s corroborative letters because they offered “no new
elements to the case, . . . [and because] they provide a different point of view of the same
story.” A.R. 51.
This “explanation” is troubling. The letters did not have to provide anything new;
they were offered to corroborate testimony Li had already provided. Corroboration is
evidence that presents “a different point of view of the same story.” See, e.g., Black’s
Law Dictionary 344 (6th ed. 1990) (defining corroboration as testimony that “corresponds
with the representation of other witnesses . . . or . . . comport[ing] with some facts
otherwise known or established.”); see also id. at 344-45 (“corroborating evidence,” is
“[a]dditional evidence of a different character to the same point.”). Yet, Immigration
Judge Pugliese rejected Li’s letters for that very reason. Given his analysis and
explanation for rejecting Li’s corroboration, we can not help but be concerned that the
explanation offered appears more consistent with attempting to dispute Li’s claim than to
objectively adjudicate it.
9
Our concern regarding the IJ’s apparent predisposition to find against Li is
heightened by his reliance on the hearsay nature of her testimony about the police visit to
her home. The IJ explains: “[t]he respondent has no direct knowledge of any security
officer wanting to see her . . . the respondent is relating things that her mother told her,
nothing that she herself experienced.” A.R. at 48. However, “hearsay evidence is, in
fact, admissible in removal proceedings. Though the hearsay nature of evidence certainly
affects the weight it is accorded, it does not prevent its admissibility in immigration
cases.” Kiareldeen v. Ashcroft, 273 F.3d 542, 549 (3d Cir. 2001). Although the IJ may
have been commenting on the probative value of Li’s account of the visit, it appears from
his oral decision and the context of that statement that he was troubled by the very fact of
the hearsay rather than the reliability of it. Of course, Li would not have to have first
hand knowledge of the incident to demonstrate a “well-founded fear.” A well-founded
fear can be based on information she received from her mother. The pertinent inquiry is
therefore not whether she had first hand knowledge of the visit to her home; but rather
whether the information that she did have—from whatever source—was sufficient to
support a well-founded fear that she would be persecuted “on account of” a protected
classification if she returned to China. Moreover, if she had been home and therefore in a
position to have firsthand knowledge of the visit, it is unlikely she would ever have been
able to file for asylum because she would have been arrested before she could have fled to
the United States.
Judge Pugliese’s characterization of Li’s letters as fraudulent is also troubling. In
10
fact, his analysis of that evidence serves to corroborate Li’s testimony, rather than
undermine it. The letter from Jiang Min, a former schoolmate, explains how he
introduced Li to the practice of Falun Gong as well as his personal perspective on the
treatment of Falun Gong practitioners by the Chinese government. A.R. at 136. Min also
describes threats and warnings he personally received, as well as a notorious January
2001 demonstration where six Falun Gong practitioners tried to burn themselves. Id.
After that demonstration the Chinese government began another wave of crackdowns
following the 1999 ban on practicing Falun Gong. Id. The timing of the protest, and the
Chinese government’s response, supports statements by Li and her parents that one of
Li’s neighbors thereafter reported her involvement with Falun Gong and that the police
came to Li’s home to interrogate and/or arrest her as a result.
Nor do we believe that the letter from Li’s parents suggests fraud. Contrary to the
IJ’s characterization of the letters as vague and general, failing to relate “things that they
saw, things that they heard,” Li’s parents describe firsthand their account of their
interaction with two police officers who came to their home looking for Li at the end of
February, 2001. A.R. at 127. Her parents state that the police officers told them that they
had received a report from a neighbor regarding Li’s “cult” Falun Gong practice and that
the parents must immediately surrender Li for investigation and interrogation. Id. Her
parents state that, as a result of the police visit, they were “scared to death” and instantly
called [Li] to warn her.” Id. There is nothing “vague” or “general” about that testimony,
and we therefore conclude that the IJ’s negative credibility determination can not stand.
11
Indeed, given the IJ’s analysis of the evidence, more specific letters may well have been
rejected as being “too similar” in reporting unnecessary detail.
The IJ was also concerned about the absence of corroborating evidence from Li’s
husband, her fellow Falun Gong practitioners and her roommate, all of whom reside in
the United States. A.R. at 45-47. Li argues that corroboration of her Falun Gong practice
here in the United States is irrelevant to her claims of fear of persecution in China. We
agree. An applicant can be expected to corroborate “‘facts which are central to his or her
claim and easily subject to verification.’” Abdulai, 239 F.3d 542 (quoting In re S-M-J-,
21 I. & N. Dec. 722). However, whether or not Li is currently practicing Falun Gong in
the United States is not relevant to the Chinese government’s perception of her as a Falun
Gong practitioner or her fear of persecution if she returns to China.3
We realize, of course, that the absence of this testimony could have a bearing on
Li’s credibility as it may suggest that she is not really a Falun Gong practitioner at all and
therefore didn’t practice in China as she now claims. However, Li did produce two letters
that corroborate her practice in China that the IJ never properly factored into his analysis
3
In Abdulai, we set out a three-step test to determine whether the BIA can require
and consider corroboration evidence. 239 F.3d at 554. First, the BIA must identify the
facts for which “it is reasonable to expect corroboration.” Id. Second, the BIA must
decide whether an applicant has provided corroboration for the relevant facts. Id. Third,
with regard to facts the applicant was unable to corroborate, the BIA must decide whether
the applicant adequately explained his/her failure to corroborate them. Id. Having
determined that it was unreasonable for the IJ to expect corroboration of Li’s Falun Gong
practice in the United States, we need not reach the second and third steps of the test.
12
of the evidence.
Having determined that the IJ’s credibility determination is unsupported by the
record, we will assume that she is credible and determine whether the evidence she
presented satisfies her burden of proving her status as a refugee under the INA. As we
noted above, the BIA ruled she had not satisfied her burden even if her evidence is
accepted.
B. Corroboration & the BIA Decision
The BIA’s view of Li’s evidence is also perplexing. The BIA cited Matter of Y-B-,
21 I. & N. Dec. 1136 (BIA 1998) in finding Li’s testimony “too vague to establish that
she was sought after [by] Chinese authorities on account of an enumerated ground in the
Immigration and Nationality Act.” A.R. at 2.
Matter of Y-B- involved a petitioner from Mauritania who testified that he had
been arrested by the military because of his race. 21 I. & N. Dec. 1136. The Board ruled
that he had failed to meet his burden under the asylum statute, in part, because his account
of his arrest was suspiciously lacking in detail regarding the murder of his cousin that had
allegedly taken place during the arrest. Id. at 1138. Because the petitioner’s testimony
was weak, the Board required corroborative evidence. Id. at 1139.4 “Testimony is ‘too
vague’ if it doesn’t identify facts corresponding to each of the elements of one of the
4
We note that Matter of Y-B- is distinguishable from the instant facts because Li
was not present when the security officials came to her home to arrest her and therefore
cannot reasonably be expected to provide details of an event that she herself did not
witness.
13
‘refugee’ categories of the immigration statutes, as interpreted by the BIA and the federal
courts.” Qiu v. Ashcroft, 329 F.3d 140, 151 (2d Cir. 2003). Li must demonstrate that she
has a well-founded fear that the government sought to persecute her on the basis of her
affiliation with Falun Gong.
Although Li’s testimony is succinct, it is certainly not “vague.” She testified that
government officials came to her house and told her mother to tell her to surrender to
them because they had information she was practicing Falun Gong. She fears being
returned to China because she believes her status as a Falun Gong practitioner will result
in her arrest, interrogation, and possible detention in a reeducation-through-labor camp in
China. This certainly constitutes persecution “on account of” a protected ground under
the INA, and it is consistent with findings contained in the 2003 State Department Report
that was introduced into evidence. We therefore fail to see how her claim could be
rejected because of an absence of “detail.” It is true, of course, that she did not testify
about the specific date that the police came to her home, what they were wearing, or how
long they stayed. It is just as true that she didn’t have to, as long as the details that she
did provide establish her eligibility for “refugee” status, and they clearly did.
The BIA’s affirmance of the IJ’s denial of relief can not, therefore, be justified by
characterizing Li’s evidence as “vague.” This is particularly true since she introduced
corroboration that included the letters we have discussed above, and evidence of general
country conditions that support her claim. Although the BIA purports to base its decision
on the “vagueness” of Li’s testimony, the decision appears influenced by the unsupported
14
adverse credibility finding the Board said it would ignore. See Chen v. Gonzales, 434
F.3d 212, 221 (3d Cir. 2005) (impermissible to blur the lines between the credibility of a
claimant and their adequacy of proof). Accordingly, we will grant the petition for review.
IV.
Where, as here, we reverse an adverse credibility finding, the appropriate remedy
is remand, “to determine whether [the petitioner] qualifies as a refugee . . . ”. Chen v.
Gonzales, 447 F.3d 468, 477 (6th Cir. 2006) (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted). We will therefore vacate the BIA’s decision and remand this case to the BIA
and instruct the agency to consider Li’s evidence without considering the adverse
credibility determination. See Senathirajah v. I.N.S., 157 F.3d 210, 222 (3d Cir. 1998)
(remanding to BIA with instructions to remand to IJ for decision on asylum and
withholding application, but without consideration of erroneous adverse credibility
finding reversed on appeal).
Lastly, in light of the concerns we have expressed about the IJ’s assessment of Li’s
credibility, if the BIA deems it appropriate to further remand this matter to an
Immigration Judge, we urge the Board to remand to a different IJ. See Cham v. Gonzales,
445 F.3d 683, 694 (3d Cir. 2006) (citing Sukwanputra v. Gonzales, 434 F.3d 627, 638 (3d
Cir. 2006). “[W]hile we ‘recognize that the assignment of an [IJ] is within the province of
the Attorney General,’ if on remand an IJ’s services are needed, we believe ‘the parties
would be far better served by the assignment to those proceedings of a different IJ.’”
Korytnyuk v. Ashcroft, 396 F.3d 272 (3d Cir. 2005) (quoting Paramasamy v. Ashcroft,
15
295 F.3d 1047, 1055 n.4 (9th Cir. 2002)).
16

=== CASE 2230127 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.299719+00 ===

94 N.Y.2d 772 (1999)
720 N.E.2d 864
698 N.Y.S.2d 588
CATERINA FARICELLI et al., Appellants,
v.
TSS SEEDMAN'S, INC., Respondent, et al., Defendant. (And a Third-Party Action.)
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Decided October 14, 1999.
*773 Barbara Conroy Singer, Brooklyn, and Stephen A. Harrison for appellants.
Gordon & Silber, P. C., New York City (Jon D. Lichtenstein of counsel), for respondent.
Tromello, Jennings & Siegel, New York City (Peter E. Vairo of counsel), for defendant.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK and WESLEY concur; Judge ROSENBLATT taking no part.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
Plaintiff-wife slipped and fell on a blackened banana peel on the floor in the housewares section of a department store operated by defendant TSS Seedman's, Inc., and brought suit for damages. Plaintiffs contended that, because the peel was blackened, defendant must have had notice of a dangerous *774 condition on the premises. Defendant moved for summary judgment, arguing that there was no triable issue of fact on the issue of notice. Supreme Court denied summary judgment, and defendant appealed but failed to perfect its appeal, which the Appellate Division dismissed for want of prosecution.
After trial, the jury found defendant 95% liable and plaintiffs 5% liable. Defendant then filed the instant appeal, arguing that plaintiffs did not present sufficient proof of constructive notice to support the verdict. Plaintiffs moved to dismiss defendant's appeal on the ground that, having abandoned its earlier appeal, defendant should not be permitted to re-litigate the issue of constructive notice. The Appellate Division denied plaintiffs' motion and reversed, concluding that plaintiffs did not establish constructive notice. We now affirm.
The Appellate Division did not err when it declined to dismiss defendant's appeal. As we stated in Bray v Cox (38 NY2d 350, 353), "a prior dismissal for want of prosecution acts as a bar to a subsequent appeal as to all questions that were presented on the earlier appeal" (see also, Rubeo v National Grange Mut. Ins. Co., 93 NY2d 750 [decided today]). However, an appellate court has the authority to entertain a second appeal in the exercise of its discretion, even where a prior appeal on the same issue has been dismissed for failure to prosecute (see, Aridas v Caserta, 41 NY2d 1059, 1061). Thus, in the case at hand, the Appellate Division had the authority to hear defendant's second appeal in the exercise of its discretion, even if it could have dismissed the appeal under Bray.
On the merits, the Appellate Division correctly concluded that the verdict was not sufficiently supported. There was no evidence that defendant knew about the banana peel, or that it had been on the floor long enough prior to the accident that notice might be inferred (see, Anderson v Klein's Foods, 73 NY2d 835, 836, affg on opn at 139 AD2d 904; Gordon v American Museum of Natural History, 67 NY2d 836, 837-838). The simple fact that the peel was blackened did not establish constructive notice.
On review of submissions pursuant to section 500.4 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.4), order affirmed, with costs, in a memorandum.

=== CASE 3027475 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:21.296049+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-28-2007
Christopher v. Nestlerode
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 05-3516
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Christopher v. Nestlerode" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 872.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/872
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
Nos. 05-3516 and 05-3837
RAPHAEL CHRISTOPHER,
Appellant at No. 05-3516
v.
FREDERICK NESTLERODE,
MATTHEW KERR, in their individual capacities;
WILLIAM HOSE; THE COUNTY OF YORK, PENNSYLVANIA,
Appellants at No. 05-3837
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
D.C. Civil Action No. 04-cv-00977
(Honorable Christopher C. Conner)
Argued November 6, 2006
Before: SCIRICA, Chief Judge, BARRY and ALDISERT, Circuit Judges
(Filed: June 28, 2007)
GARY S. GILDIN, ESQUIRE (ARGUED)
150 South College Street
Carlisle, Pennsylvania 17013
PAULA K. KNUDSEN, ESQUIRE
American Civil Liberties Foundation of Pennsylvania
105 North Front Street, Suite 225
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17101
Attorneys for Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
Raphael Christopher
DAVID L. SCHWALM, ESQUIRE (ARGUED)
CRYSTAL H. WILLIAMSON, ESQUIRE
Thomas, Thomas & Hafer
305 North Front Street
P.O. Box 999
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17108-0999
Attorneys for Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
Frederick Nestlerode, Matthew Kerr,
William Hose and The County of York, Pennsylvania
OPINION OF THE COURT
SCIRICA, Chief Judge.
This is a civil rights action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 alleging racial profiling in a
traffic stop. The plaintiff is an African American Pennsylvania State Trooper who was
driving his personal automobile while off duty. The defendants are two Caucasian York
County Deputy Sheriffs who made the traffic stop, the York County Sheriff, and York
County. Plaintiff Raphael Christopher appeals the District Court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of Sheriff William Hose and the County, as well as a jury verdict in
favor of Deputies Frederick Nestlerode and Matthew Kerr. Additionally, Hose, the
County, Nestlerode, and Kerr (“the York Defendants”) cross-appeal from any and all
orders denying their motions.
We will affirm the final judgment in favor of Hose and the County. We will affirm
in part and vacate in part the final judgment in favor of Nestlerode and Kerr, and will
remand for a new trial on Christopher’s Fourth Amendment claim on the basis of error in
2
the District Court’s jury instruction. We do not reach the York Defendants’ cross-appeal
and will dismiss it.
I.
A.
On August 5, 2003, Christopher was driving in the right-hand lane of a two-lane,
one-way street in York, Pennsylvania, with a posted speed limit of twenty-five miles per
hour. Nestlerode was driving a marked car in the left-hand lane and training Kerr in
traffic enforcement. The road surface was wet from a light rain. Parked cars were
present, but there were no pedestrians on the street. Upon spotting Christopher’s
automobile, Nestlerode made an immediate estimate that it was traveling at between fifty
and fifty-five miles per hour. Accordingly, Nestlerode pulled Christopher over to cite
him for driving at an unsafe speed, a violation of § 3361 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code. Kerr agreed with Nestlerode that Christopher was driving at an unsafe
speed, and aided Nestlerode by notifying the Sheriff’s Department and monitoring
Christopher’s automobile while Nestlerode spoke with Christopher. During the course of
the stop, Nestlerode noticed that the addresses on Christopher’s driver’s license and
automobile registration did not match, a violation of § 1515 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code, and also cited him for that offense.
At trial, Nestlerode testified he had decades of experience enforcing and training
subordinates in enforcement of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. He had worked in
law enforcement in Pennsylvania since 1969. As a police corporal in Springettsbury
3
Township, York County in the 1980s, Nestlerode had implemented a departmental
training program in traffic enforcement. At the time he stopped Christopher, he was the
York County Sheriff’s Department field training officer. Certified in the use of several
speed timing devices, Nestlerode testified he was aware that a police officer’s testimony
on a vehicle’s speed was inadmissible in Pennsylvania courts without the use of such a
device. Nestlerode testified he had not had “probable cause” to stop Christopher for
exceeding the posted speed limit (a different violation from driving at an unsafe speed),
because he had not measured Christopher’s speed with a speed timing device. His
testimony also displayed familiarity with state court decisions on deputy sheriffs’
authority to make traffic stops.
B.
The Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code contains separate prohibitions on driving in
excess of a posted speed limit (§ 3362) and driving at an unsafe speed regardless of the
posted limit (§ 3361). Christopher was cited for violating the latter, though the District
Court instructed the jury on both offenses. The prohibition on unsafe speed is context-
dependent: “No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then
existing . . . .” 75 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. § 3361 (West 2006). On the other hand, a citation
for exceeding the speed limit must state precisely how fast the motorist was driving. Id. §
3366. Furthermore, that rate of speed must have been electronically or mechanically
measured—it may be measured by an officer referring to the calibrated speedometer in a
4
police car, but only if the motorist’s vehicle is observed for at least 3/10 of a mile. Id. §
3368. It is undisputed that Nestlerode’s marked car did not have a calibrated
speedometer, and that Nestlerode and Kerr observed the speed of Christopher’s
automobile for less than 3/10 of a mile.
While the Motor Vehicle Code details prohibited conduct by motorists,1 the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court has weighed in on when a law enforcement officer may
have reason to believe the Motor Vehicle Code is being violated. In Commonwealth v.
Whitmyer, the court found that, in order for an officer to have “probable cause” under the
Fourth Amendment to stop a motorist for violating § 3361 (unsafe speed), the officer
must observe either (1) a vehicle’s speed with a speed timing device (for 3/10 of a mile if
the device is a calibrated speedometer) or (2) special hazards. 668 A.2d 1113, 1117–18
(Pa. 1995). Whitmyer also appears to require use of a speed timing device in order for an
officer to have Fourth Amendment “probable cause” to stop a motorist for violating §
3362 (exceeding the speed limit).2 In fact, Nestlerode testified that a speed timing device
1
It also states: “Whenever a police officer . . . has reasonable suspicion that a violation
of this title is occurring or has occurred, he may stop a vehicle . . . .” 75 Pa. Cons. Stat.
Ann. § 6308(b) (West 2006). This standard was changed from “probable cause” to
“reasonable suspicion” effective February 1, 2004. See Commonwealth v. Spieler, 887
A.2d 1271, 1275 n.2 (Pa. Super. 2005).
2
Section 3368 of the Motor Vehicle Code, which lays out the speed measurement
requirements, explicitly applies to § 3362 (exceeding the speed limit). But in Whitmyer
the court interpreted those requirements as also applying to § 3361 (unsafe speed), even
though the text of the statute does not state so. 668 A.2d at 1117–18, 1115 n.5. Several
Pennsylvania Superior Court cases state that a speed timing device is required for
(continued...)
5
was required for “probable cause” to stop a motorist for violating § 3362, and that he had
not had “probable cause” to stop Christopher for that offense because he had used no such
device.
C.
Christopher challenged both citations. A District Justice found him not guilty of
driving at an unsafe speed but guilty of failing timely to notify PennDOT of his new
address. Christopher appealed this conviction, contending Nestlerode and Kerr lacked
“probable cause” for the underlying traffic stop, so that his license and registration were
inadmissible. Ruling on both suppression and the merits, the York County Court of
Common Pleas found there was “probable cause” for the stop and affirmed Christopher’s
conviction for failing to report his address change. Christopher appealed to the
Pennsylvania Superior Court, which reversed, relying on Whitmyer to find there was no
“probable cause” for the stop. The Superior Court considered both sources of “probable
cause” under Whitmyer to believe a violation of § 3361 has occurred—a valid
measurement of speed or special hazards. It found Nestlerode’s speed estimate was
statutorily invalid because it was not obtained with a speed timing device. Furthermore,
because Nestlerode had testified visibility was not impaired and that he had observed no
2
(...continued)
conviction under § 3362. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Gordon, 633 A.2d 1199, 1201–03
(Pa. Super. 1993). Moreover, in Shamnoski v. PG Energy, Division of Southern Union
Co., 858 A.2d 589, 601 (Pa. 2004), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court stated that, whereas
§ 3361 sets forth a “traditional reasonable man standard,” § 3362 “speaks in absolutes;
there is no room for the flexibility of the reasonable man standard.”
6
pedestrians or other moving vehicles in the vicinity, the Superior Court found special
hazards could not have formed the basis for “probable cause.” The court concluded there
was insufficient evidence Nestlerode formed an objectively reasonable belief that
Christopher was violating § 3361, and held that because Christopher’s license and
registration had been obtained pursuant to a traffic stop for which there was no “probable
cause,” they should have been suppressed.
II.
Christopher sued the York Defendants under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging four
counts: (1) by stopping Christopher’s automobile without “probable cause,” Nestlerode
and Kerr committed an unreasonable seizure in violation of Christopher’s Fourth
Amendment rights; (2) by purposefully stopping Christopher on account of his race,
Nestlerode and Kerr deprived Christopher of the equal protection of the law in violation
of his Fourteenth Amendment rights; (3) through his deliberate indifference as to
supervision, training, and ratification of Nestlerode and Kerr’s actions, Hose caused the
violations of Christopher’s Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights; and (4) the County,
through Hose’s action and inaction, was liable for the violations of Christopher’s Fourth
and Fourteenth Amendment rights. Second Am. Compl. ¶¶ 3–43, Christopher v.
Nestlerode, No. 04-0977 (M.D. Pa. Jan. 3, 2005). Following discovery, the parties filed
cross-motions for summary judgment.
The District Court granted summary judgment in favor of Hose and the County,
but denied all other summary judgment motions. Noting that § 1983 liability can only be
7
imposed on a person acting under color of state law who directly participates in or
causally facilitates the violation of an individual’s federally secured rights, Christopher v.
Nestlerode, 373 F. Supp. 2d 503, 511 (M.D. Pa. 2005), the court found Hose’s conduct
had not met the standard for liability through deliberate indifference, see id. at 523
(“Neither Hose nor the County of York had any reason to suspect that an incident of this
type would arise or that additional training was necessary.”). A jury trial followed on the
claims against Nestlerode and Kerr.
In instructing the jury on “probable cause” under the Fourth Amendment, the
District Court stated: “The relevant question for these purposes is whether based on the
facts then known to the officer an objective, reasonable person could conclude that the
plaintiff had committed any criminal offense.” (J.A. 1235.) It added that the specific
criminal offenses the jury should consider were violations of §§ 3361 (unsafe speed) and
3362 (exceeding the speed limit), even though (1) Nestlerode testified he had not had
“probable cause” to stop Christopher for violating § 3362 and (2) Christopher had not
been cited for violating § 3362. The court specified that the Motor Vehicle Code’s speed
timing requirements (which are viewed as relevant to “probable cause” by the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court) “are not relevant to the issue of whether probable cause
existed to believe that the plaintiff had committed a violation of either Section 3361 or
Section 3362 . . . . You must not consider these requirements in considering whether
probable cause existed.” (J.A. 1237–38.)
8
On the Fourteenth Amendment equal protection claim, the District Court instructed
the jury that discriminatory intent may be inferred based on evidence that the defendant
did not believe or could not reasonably have believed that his act served a legitimate
purpose. It added:
In other words, you may consider the defendant’s subjective beliefs as to
the grounds for the stop, including the defendant’s understandings of the
requirements of Pennsylvania law that an officer must follow a vehicle for
3/10 of a mile and must use a calibrated speedometer in order to obtain a
valid estimate of speed in deciding whether the defendant reasonably
believed that the act served a legitimate purpose and whether the defendant
acted with discriminatory intent.
(J.A. 1243.) The court specified: “you may find that an act has a discriminatory purpose
even if you find that it served another legitimate purpose.” (J.A. 1242–43.)
The jury returned a verdict for Nestlerode and Kerr, finding Christopher had failed
to prove by a preponderance of the evidence all the elements either of an unreasonable
seizure claim or of an equal protection claim. Christopher appealed both the jury verdict
and the grant of summary judgment in favor of Hose and the County. The York
Defendants cross-appealed “from any and all Memorandum Decisions and Orders, or
other final orders denying Defendants’ Motions.” Notice of Cross-Appeal, Nestlerode,
No. 04-0977 (M.D. Pa. Aug. 11, 2005).
III.
A.
The District Court had jurisdiction over Christopher’s § 1983 action under 28
U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1343(a)(3), and we have jurisdiction over Christopher’s appeal under
9
28 U.S.C. § 1291. Ordinarily, only a party “aggrieved” by a judgment or order of a
district court may exercise the statutory right to appeal therefrom, and a party that
receives all that it has sought generally is not aggrieved by the judgment affording the
relief. Deposit Guaranty Nat’l Bank v. Roper, 445 U.S. 326, 333 (1980). See also
IPSCO Steel, Inc. v. Blaine Constr. Corp., 371 F.3d 150, 154 (3d Cir. 2004). When a
prevailing party seeks to appeal an adverse ruling collateral to the judgment in its favor, it
may not do so if the collateral ruling was not necessary to the judgment. Partmar Corp.
v. Paramount Pictures Theatres Corp., 347 U.S. 89, 100 n.6 (1954). The York
Defendants prevailed on the merits and seek to cross-appeal from collateral rulings
adverse to them but unnecessary to support the judgments in their favor. We hold they
lack standing to bring their cross-appeal, and do not consider it.
Where, as here, a party properly objects to a jury instruction, we exercise plenary
review to determine whether the instruction misstated the applicable law. Franklin
Prescriptions, Inc. v. N.Y. Times Co., 424 F.3d 336, 338 (3d Cir. 2005). We must
consider “whether the charge, taken as a whole, properly apprised the jury of the issues
and the applicable law.” Smith v. Borough of Wilkinsburg, 147 F.3d 272, 275 (3d Cir.
1998). We review the phrasing of jury instructions for abuse of discretion to determine
whether they were misleading. Woodson v. Scott Paper Co., 109 F.3d 913, 929 (3d Cir.
1997). Harmless errors in a jury instruction that do not prejudice the complaining party
are not sufficient grounds on which to vacate a judgment and order a new trial, Watson v.
S.E. Penn. Transp. Auth., 207 F.3d 207, 221–22 (3d Cir. 2000), but error in a jury
10
instruction will be harmless only if it is “highly probable” that it did not affect the verdict,
Hill v. Reederei F. Laeisz G.M.B.H., Rostock, 435 F.3d 404, 410 (3d Cir. 2006). See also
Mosley v. Wilson, 102 F.3d 85, 95 (3d Cir. 1996) (finding inapplicable jury instruction on
deliberate indifference in § 1983 action was capable of misleading jury into improperly
considering law enforcement officer’s subjective intentions, and was thus not harmless
error).
We exercise plenary review over the grant or denial of summary judgment.
Summary judgment is appropriate if, viewing all evidence in the light most favorable to
the non-moving party and giving that party the benefit of all reasonable inferences, there
is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. Creque v. Texaco Antilles Ltd., 409 F.3d 150, 152 (3d Cir. 2005).
B.
Section 1983 creates liability for anyone who, under color of state law, “subjects,
or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the
jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by
the Constitution and laws.” 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2000). Here, Christopher contends the
York Defendants deprived him of his right to be secure against “unreasonable searches
and seizures.” U.S. Const. amend IV.
“[A] traffic stop will be deemed a reasonable ‘seizure’ when an objective review
of the facts shows that an officer possessed specific, articulable facts that an individual
was violating a traffic law at the time of the stop.” United States v. Delfin-Colina, 464
11
F.3d 392, 398 (3d Cir. 2006) (citing Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 808–09
(1996); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21 (1968)).3 A law enforcement officer’s subjective
intentions “play no role in ordinary . . . Fourth Amendment analysis.” Whren, 517 U.S. at
813. Rather, demanding “objective specificity,” we have stated that “[t]he ultimate
question is whether a reasonable, trained officer standing in [the seizing officer’s] shoes
could articulate specific reasons justifying [the seized individual’s] detention.” Johnson
v. Campbell, 332 F.3d 199, 206 (3d Cir. 1996).
This Court recently rejected the argument that an arrest made in violation of state
law is per se unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment, but advocated a totality of the
circumstances approach:
[T]he validity of an arrest under state law must never be confused or conflated
with the Fourth Amendment concept of reasonableness[;] the validity of an arrest
under state law is at most a factor that a court may consider in assessing the
broader question of probable cause.
United States v. Laville, 480 F.3d 187, 192 (3d Cir. 2007). The Supreme Court has held
that the Fourth Amendment totality of the circumstances inquiry includes the officer’s
“own experience and specialized training to make inferences from and deductions about
the cumulative information.” United States v. Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266, 273 (2002). The
District Court’s Fourth Amendment instruction was both legally erroneous and
misleading, because it instructed the jury that the state law speed timing requirements,
3
In Delfin-Colina, 464 F.3d at 397, we reaffirmed our understanding that “probable
cause” is not required for a traffic stop to be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment.
12
rather than being a possible factor in a totality of the circumstances Fourth Amendment
analysis, were simply “not relevant” to “probable cause,” and that the jury “must not
consider” those requirements and Nestlerode’s knowledge of them. (J.A. 1237–38.)
Nestlerode testified about his extensive knowledge of the Motor Vehicle Code, as
well as his awareness of case law governing traffic stops. It has been the law in
Pennsylvania since 1995 that without a speed timing device an officer cannot have
“probable cause” to stop a motorist for driving at an unsafe speed in violation of § 3361
based on an estimate of the vehicle’s speed alone. See Whitmyer, 668 A.2d at 117–18.
And Nestlerode testified that, because he had not used a speed timing device, he had
lacked “probable cause” to stop Christopher for violating § 3362, as well. But he also
testified as to his ability to calculate vehicle speed instantaneously: “I’m very familiar
with timing devices, and I have used stopwatches standing out on the highway and
throughout all my years experience I have come to be able to estimate speed I would say
very efficiently . . . .” (J.A. 671.) After hearing Nestlerode’s testimony on his ability to
estimate speeds instantaneously, the jury was instructed that it must not consider the
speed timing device requirements (which Nestlerode had not complied with) in
determining whether Nestlerode and Kerr had “probable cause” to stop Christopher.
The objective Fourth Amendment reasonableness inquiry requires examining the
totality of the circumstances, Laville, 480 F.3d at 189, that is, whether a law enforcement
officer with Nestlerode’s experience could have held an objectively reasonable belief that
Christopher was violating §§ 3361 or 3362. We believe the jury should have been
13
instructed that it could choose to consider, as part of this inquiry, the requirements for
“probable cause” under Pennsylvania law to stop a motorist for violating those provisions
as one of the factors in its totality of the circumstances analysis. Because the District
Court instructed the jury that these requirements must not be considered, that instruction
was both legally erroneous and misleading.
After having heard Nestlerode’s speed estimate and his basis for it, the jury was
instructed to ignore the state law requirements with which it was inconsistent. This error
was not harmless, because it is not “highly probable” that the instruction to ignore
Pennsylvania speed timing requirements did not affect the jury’s finding on “probable
cause.” See, e.g., Fisher v. Volz, 496 F.2d 333, 338 (3d Cir. 1974) (holding instruction
that allowed jury to return verdict against § 1983 plaintiffs where warrantless home
entries by police could be justified by exigent circumstances even in the absence of
probable cause was not harmless error, even though jury’s verdict against plaintiffs might
actually have been based on probable cause). Accordingly, the instruction constituted
reversible error.4
C.
1.
4
We recognize that, until our holding in Laville, the standard in this Circuit was
unsettled. The able District Judge’s scholarly summary judgment opinion cogently and
comprehensively discussed case law and scholarship on this question.
14
Christopher contends he is entitled to a new trial on his equal protection claim.
Because both parties linked the presence or absence of “probable cause” to whether
Nestlerode and Kerr stopped him on account of his race, Christopher contends the court’s
“probable cause” jury instruction tainted his equal protection claim.
The Equal Protection Clause “prohibits selective enforcement of the law based on
considerations such as race.” Whren, 517 U.S. at 813. As we explained in Carrasca v.
Pomeroy, 313 F.3d 828, 836 (3d Cir. 2002), “[t]he fact that there was no Fourth
Amendment violation does not mean that one was not discriminatorily selected for
enforcement of a law. . . . [E]qual protection claims under the Fourteenth Amendment
require a wholly separate analysis from . . . claims under the Fourth Amendment”
(internal citations omitted). Whereas a law enforcement officer’s subjective intentions
have no place in Fourth Amendment analysis, they are relevant to equal protection
analysis. Gibson v. Superintendent of N.J. Dep’t of Law and Pub. Safety, 411 F.3d 427,
440–41 (3d Cir. 2005). Here, the District Court’s equal protection instruction correctly
stated: (1) the equal protection inquiry is distinct from the “probable cause” inquiry, and
the presence of “probable cause” does not mean an officer acted without discriminatory
intent; (2) the equal protection inquiry considers both subjective and objective intent; and
(3) the jury could consider state law speed timing requirements in determining whether
Nestlerode and Kerr acted with discriminatory intent.
Jury instructions do not constitute reversible error so long as, “taken as a whole
and viewed in the light of the evidence, [the instructions] fairly and adequately submit the
15
issues in the case to the [jurors without confusing or misleading them].” United States v.
Simon, 995 F.2d 1236, 1243 n.9 (3d Cir. 1993). The equal protection instruction here was
fair, adequate, and correct. Nor was Christopher’s equal protection claim tainted by the
District Court’s Fourth Amendment instruction.5
2.
Christopher contends the District Court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
Hose and the County was improper. A plaintiff claiming municipal § 1983 liability for a
constitutional violation through failure to train6 is held to the exacting requirement of
showing “deliberate indifference” on the part of a municipal policymaker, such that the
policymaker is effectively the moving force behind the violation. City of Canton v.
Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 389 (1989). “That a particular officer may be unsatisfactorily
trained will not alone suffice to fasten liability on the [municipality], for the officer’s
shortcomings may have resulted from factors other than a faulty training program.” Id. at
390–91. There was no pattern of racial profiling by the deputies under Hose’s command.
5
Christopher cites our decision in Parks v. Alliedsignal, Inc., 113 F.3d 1327, 1336 (3d
Cir. 1997), for the proposition that “‘instructions that contain some characterizations of
the law that are accurate may nonetheless become unacceptably tainted by the presence of
other, misleading comments.’” Christopher Reply Br. 30. Parks, however, concerned a
single instruction that was internally inconsistent.
6
Christopher contends Hose and the County were liable for failure to promulgate
policies, failure to train, and failure to monitor or supervise. We apply the same
“deliberate indifference” standard to all three arguments. See Beck v. City of Pittsburgh,
89 F.3d 966, 972 (3d Cir. 1996) (noting “courts have adopted the ‘deliberate indifference’
standard in other policy and custom contexts”).
16
See Nestlerode, 373 F. Supp. 2d at 523. A single constitutional violation can still provide
the basis for municipal liability for failure to train, Bd. of County Comm’rs v. Brown, 520
U.S. 397, 407–09 (1997), but only where “the need for more or different training is so
obvious, and the inadequacy so likely to result in the violation of constitutional rights”
that the policymaker’s inaction amounts to deliberate indifference. Canton, 489 U.S. at
391. We do not believe there was a genuine issue of material fact whether the deliberate
indifference standard was met here.
The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has stated that, in order to show the
need for more or different training was so obvious, “the plaintiff must show that the
situation . . . presents the employee with a difficult choice of the sort that training or
supervision will make less difficult.” Walker v. City of New York, 974 F.2d 293, 297 (2d
Cir. 1992). Where a law enforcement officer’s duty is clear (e.g., not to commit perjury
when testifying at the trial of a criminal defendant whom the officer knows to be
innocent), no such difficult choice is presented, and the need for more or different training
is not so obvious. Id. at 299–300. As to the inadequacy of training being so likely to
result in a constitutional violation, “the identified deficiency in the training program must
be closely related to the ultimate injury.” Canton, 489 U.S. at 391.
Nestlerode testified as to his “understanding [that] you should never base any
traffic stop . . . on someone’s race or ethnic group. Abolutely never.” (J.A. 628–29.)
The term “racial profiling” appears nowhere in the Deputies’ training materials, and no
specific Sheriff’s Department policy cautioned deputies not to make traffic stops on the
17
basis of race. But among the training materials Nestlerode and Kerr did receive were
instructions to: “Above all else, respect the Constitutional Rights of all men and women
to Liberty, Equality, and Justice” (J.A. 1981); “never permit . . . prejudices . . . to
influence . . . decisions” (JA. 1981); make traffic stops only when there is proper cause to
believe a violation has been committed (J.A. 3037); and “treat everyone with dignity and
respect” (J.A. 3037). We conclude there was no genuine issue of material fact such that a
reasonable jury could have found both that (1) deputy sheriffs in York County were faced
with a “difficult choice” as to whether to engage in racial profiling that any additional
training would have made easier and (2) the training deputy sheriffs received was so
inadequate as to render an incident of racial profiling likely. The District Court properly
granted summary judgment in favor of Hose and the County.
IV.
We will affirm the final judgment in favor of Hose and the County. We will affirm
in part and vacate in part the final judgment in favor of Nestlerode and Kerr, and will
remand for a new trial on Christopher’s Fourth Amendment claim on the basis of error in
the District Court’s jury instruction. We do not reach the York Defendants’ cross-appeal
and will dismiss it.
Barry, Circuit Judge, dissenting from § III(B)
18
Deputy Sheriff Nestlerode testified without contradiction that based on his decades
of experience in enforcing the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Christopher was
driving at least twice the posted speed limit on a wet city street. Exceeding the speed
limit could well be a violation of § 3361 or § 3362 of the Motor Vehicle Code if
Nestlerode had measured Christopher’s speed in accordance with § 3368, which he had
not.
But the issue before us is not whether Nestlerode’s stop of Christopher was valid
under state law or whether Christopher could have been convicted for a violation of state
law, as the Opinion of the majority would lead us to believe. Rather, the issue before us
is whether, for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, it was reasonable under the totality of
the circumstances for this highly experienced Deputy Sheriff to stop a driver he knew was
going at least twice the speed limit. As to a Fourth Amendment analysis, the validity of a
stop or an arrest under state law is “at most” a factor – a possible factor only – in
assessing the broader question of probable cause. United States v. Laville, 480 F.3d 187,
192 (3d Cir. 2007). The majority treats it as virtually dispositive.
To be sure, the District Court erred in instructing the jury that the state speed
timing requirements were “not relevant.” But whatever marginal relevance those
requirements may have had for Fourth Amendment purposes, it is clear, at least to me,
that it is not “highly probable” that the faulty jury instruction influenced the jury’s
verdict. I respectfully dissent from § III(B) of the Opinion.
19

=== CASE 2230131 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.375172+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 672 (1999)
308 Ill. App. 3d 649
242 Ill. Dec. 51
Eugene R. GERSCH, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL REGULATION, and Nikki M. Zollar, Director of Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-98-1291.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
November 5, 1999.
*675 David Blumenfeld, Ltd., Chicago (William C. Couglin, of counsel), for Appellant.
*676 James E. Ryan, Attorney General, Chicago (Paul Racette, Assistant Attorney General, of counsel), for Appellees.
Presiding Justice ZWICK delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Eugene R. Gersch, has appealed the circuit court's affirmance of a final administrative decision by the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation (the Department) which ordered a non-disciplinary cancellation of the plaintiff's registration as a licensed clinical social worker. The Department's administrative decision was premised upon the finding that plaintiff lacked the requisite educational qualifications for such a license. On appeal, plaintiff challenges the circuit court's ruling, asserting that (1) the Department's decision was against the manifest weight of the evidence, (2) the regulatory statute enacted in 1989 is unconstitutional, (3) the Department lacked the authority to issue a non-disciplinary cancellation of plaintiff's license, and (4) the doctrines of laches and estoppel preclude the Department from canceling plaintiff's license.
The record reveals that plaintiff began working as a social worker shortly after earning his bachelor's degree in 1959 and prior to the enactment of any regulatory statutes. In 1967, Illinois enacted the Social Worker's Registration Act, which regulated the licensure of social workers for the first time. That statute created two tiers of licensing. The lower tier was designated "registered social worker," and the higher tier was designated "certified social worker," which required a master's or doctorate degree in social work. This statute also included a grandfather clause, allowing licensure as a certified social worker to those practitioners who lacked an advanced educational degree, but had acquired sufficient clinical social work experience. Pursuant to that grandfather clause, plaintiff was licensed in 1969 as a "certified social worker" based upon his clinical social work experience, despite the fact that he had not earned a master's or a doctorate degree in social work.
Plaintiff's license remained in good standing when the Illinois legislature passed the Clinical Social Work and Social Work Practice Act (the Act) in 1989 (225 ILCS 20/1 et seq. (West 1996)). This statute paralleled the previous statute in that it also created two tiers of licensing. The lower tier was redesignated "licensed social worker," and the higher tier was redesignated "licensed clinical social worker." As with the prior statute, the higher tier, that of licensed clinical social worker, required a master's or doctorate degree in social work. In addition, a passing score on a required examination was necessary in order to obtain licensure at the higher tier. The 1989 statute contained a grandfather clause for those previously licensed as "registered social workers" under the lower-tier classification in the prior statute. However, no such exemption clause was included for those who, like plaintiff, had been licensed as "certified social workers" under the higher-tier classification.
Although plaintiff had not earned either a master's or doctorate degree, he submitted his application for licensure under the higher tier in 1989. His application, which accurately reflected his educational achievements, was approved by the Department, and he was permitted to sit for the necessary examination. Plaintiff took the exam twice and received a passing score the second time in June 1990. Thereafter, the Department issued plaintiff a license as a licensed clinical social worker under the higher tier specified in the 1989 Act.
In late 1994, the Department discovered that plaintiff's license had been erroneously issued, and the Department attempted to resolve the matter informally. However, those efforts were unsuccessful, and on May 30, 1995, the Department filed an administrative complaint against plaintiff. The Board adopted in its entirety the report and recommendation of the administrative law judge (ALJ), which found that *677 plaintiff was not qualified for licensure as a licensed clinical social worker under the higher-tier classification. The ALJ also concluded that plaintiff had misrepresented his qualifications on his application for licensure. Accordingly, the ALJ recommended that plaintiff's license be rescinded and that he be issued a license as a licensed social worker under the lower-tier classification. On August 25, 1997, the Department issued a final administrative decision "canceling" plaintiff's license under the higher tier and ordering that he be issued a license under the lower tier.
Plaintiff sought administrative review of this decision, and the circuit court affirmed the Department's decision in its entirety.
We initially address plaintiff's claim that the circuit court erred in finding that the 1989 Act was constitutional. We review de novo the circuit court's decision with respect to a statute's constitutionality. People ex rel. Lumpkin v. Cassidy, 184 Ill. 2d 117, 123, 234 Ill. Dec. 389, 703 N.E.2d 1 (1998); Brown's Furniture, Inc. v. Wagner, 171 Ill. 2d 410, 420, 216 Ill. Dec. 537, 665 N.E.2d 795 (1996). The party challenging the validity of a statute bears the burden of clearly establishing any constitutional invalidity. A statute is presumed to be constitutional, and when construing a statute, a court should uphold the statute's validity if reasonably possible. Cassidy, 184 Ill.2d at 123, 234 Ill. Dec. 389, 703 N.E.2d 1; People v. Jeffries, 164 Ill. 2d 104, 111, 207 Ill. Dec. 21, 646 N.E.2d 587 (1995).
Plaintiff argues that the Act violates his substantive due process rights because it failed to include a "grandfather" clause exempting him from complying with the advanced educational requirements in the licensing statute. Defendants counter this argument by asserting that the legislature was under no constitutional obligation to include a "grandfather" exception in the 1989 Act because the enactment of that statute was not the first time the profession had been regulated. We note, parenthetically, that the plaintiff and the Department rely primarily upon the same cases in support of their respective arguments.
According to the cases cited by the parties, in the context of the regulation of professions and occupations, a "grandfather" clause is a special provision made for the existing practitioner in a statute which regulates a profession for the first time. Miller v. Department of Professional Regulation, 276 Ill.App.3d 133, 140, 213 Ill. Dec. 53, 658 N.E.2d 523 (1995); Taylor v. Hayes, 131 Ill.App.2d 305, 309, 264 N.E.2d 814 (1970). "`The purpose of an exception or grandfather clause is to exempt from the statutory regulations imposed for the first time on a trade or profession those members thereof who are then engaged in the newly regulated field on the theory that they who have acceptably followed such profession or trade for a period of years, or who are engaged therein on a certain date, may be presumed to have the qualifications which subsequent entrants to the field must demonstrate by examination. Watson v. Maryland, 218 U.S. 173, 30 S. Ct. 644, 54 L. Ed. 987 [1910]; [citations]'" Taylor, 131 Ill.App.2d at 309, 264 N.E.2d 814, quoting State ex. rel. Krausmann v. Streeter, 226 Minn. 458, 33 N.W.2d 56 (1948).
In Berger v. Board of Psychologist Examiners, 521 F.2d 1056 (D.C.Cir.1975), the United States Court of Appeals, quoted that portion of the Taylor opinion which held that "`the right of the plaintiff to pursue his profession was fixed during the pre-regulatory period[,] and any subsequent legislation affecting his profession must be reasonable as it affects his special situation.'" Berger, 521 F.2d at 1063, quoting Taylor, 131 Ill.App.2d at 311, 264 N.E.2d 814.
We note, however, that the holdings of these cases were premised upon the outmoded "doctrine of vested rights" and upon the conclusion that an individual has a cognizable due process right in the continued practice of his or her profession. See Miller, 276 Ill.App.3d at 141, 213 Ill. *678 Dec. 53, 658 N.E.2d 523. None of these cases applied current constitutional analysis, which looks to whether the affected right is fundamental and recognizes the State's police power, i.e., the government's inherent right to enact legislation protecting the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. See Rios v. Jones, 63 Ill. 2d 488, 496-97, 348 N.E.2d 825 (1976). Thus, the question of whether the right to pursue one's profession constitutes a fundamental right has not been addressed in any of the cases cited above or in the briefs filed by the parties.
Substantive due process protects fundamental liberty interests against infringement by the government. Reno v. Flores, 507 U.S. 292, 301-02, 113 S. Ct. 1439, 1447, 123 L. Ed. 2d 1, 16 (1993); Collins v. City of Harker Heights, 503 U.S. 115, 125, 112 S. Ct. 1061, 1068, 117 L. Ed. 2d 261, 273 (1992). When confronted with a constitutional challenge premised upon due process grounds, the threshold inquiry is whether the challenged statute purports to restrict or regulate a fundamental right. Potts v. Illinois Department of Registration & Education, 128 Ill. 2d 322, 329, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140 (1989); Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 216, 102 S. Ct. 2382, 2394, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 798 (1982).
If the statute restricts a fundamental right, it must be examined under strict scrutiny. Plyler, 457 U.S. at 216-17, 102 S. Ct. at 2394-95, 72 L.Ed.2d at 798-99. Pursuant to that analysis, legislation which significantly interferes with the exercise of a fundamental right will be upheld only if it is necessary to promote a compelling State interest and is narrowly tailored to effectuate that State purpose. Plyler, 457 U.S. at 216-17, 102 S. Ct. at 2394-95, 72 L.Ed.2d at 798-99. If, however, the statute does not affect a fundamental right, it must be examined under the rational basis test, which requires the legislation to be upheld if it bears a rational relationship to a legitimate legislative purpose and is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 329, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140.
We acknowledge that individuals enjoy certain property rights in the continued practice of their professions, and those rights are entitled to due process protection. Potts v. Illinois Department of Registration & Education, 128 Ill. 2d 322, 332, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140 (1989); Coldwell Banker Residential Real Estate Services of Illinois, Inc. v. Clayton, 105 Ill. 2d 389, 397, 86 Ill. Dec. 322, 475 N.E.2d 536 (1985); Rios v. Jones, 63 Ill. 2d 488, 496-97, 348 N.E.2d 825 (1976); Burden v. Hoover, 9 Ill. 2d 114, 118, 137 N.E.2d 59 (1956). However, this fact does not mean that those rights cannot be affected by State legislation. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 332, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140, quoting Rios, 63 Ill.2d at 497, 348 N.E.2d 825. Indeed, the Illinois Supreme Court has unequivocally held that the right to pursue a profession is not a fundamental right for due process purposes, and legislation infringing upon that right need only be examined under the rational basis test. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 330, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140, citing People v. Gurell, 98 Ill. 2d 194, 213, 74 Ill. Dec. 516, 456 N.E.2d 18 (1983).
Because plaintiff's right to continue practicing his profession does not implicate a fundamental right, we are required to employ the rational basis test in reviewing the constitutionality of the licensing statute challenged here. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 329, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140. In so doing, we must determine whether the Act bears a rational relationship to a legitimate legislative purpose and is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 330, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140. Whether a statute is wise or whether it is the best means to achieve the desired result are matters left to the legislature, and not the courts. People v. Shephard, 152 Ill. 2d 489, 503, 178 Ill. Dec. 724, 605 N.E.2d 518 (1992). As long as there is a conceivable basis for finding the statute is rationally *679 related to a legitimate State interest, the law must be upheld. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 332, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140.
States have a compelling interest in regulating the practice of professions within their boundaries, and they have broad power to establish standards for licensing practitioners in order to protect the public health, safety, and other valid interests. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 332, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140, quoting Rios, 63 Ill.2d at 497, 348 N.E.2d 825. A State may impose those professional educational requirements which it believes necessary to protect its citizens (Abramson v. Gonzalez, 949 F.2d 1567, 1580 (11th Cir.1992)), and the deprivation of an individual's right to pursue a particular profession is not arbitrary or unreasonable if that deprivation is based upon the individual's failure to comply with conditions or requirements imposed by the State for the protection of society. Abramson, 949 F.2d at 1580, quoting Dent v. West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114, 122, 9 S. Ct. 231, 233, 32 L. Ed. 623, 626 (1889).
The stated purpose of the Clinical Social Work and Social Work Practice Act is to "protect and to benefit the public by setting standards of qualifications, education, training and experience for those who seek to engage in the independent practice of clinical social work and in the practice of social work and to promote high standards of professional performance for those engaged in the independent practice of clinical social work and in the practice of social work in the State of Illinois." 225 ILCS 20/1 (West 1996). In addition, the practice of clinical social work and the practice of social work "affect the public health, safety and welfare and [is] subject to regulation in the public interest." 225 ILCS 20/1 (West 1996).
In our view, the weight to be accorded the right to continue in the practice of a particular profession is not so great as to render the licensing statute here unconstitutional. See Rios, 63 Ill.2d at 497, 348 N.E.2d 825. We find it beyond dispute that the State has a legitimate and significant interest in regulating the practice of social work. By its very nature, the field of social work deals with the lives and health of those who seek or require the services provided by that profession. Therefore, it is essential that those engaged in the practice of social work must have achieved a certain level of education and expertise in order to fulfill this important responsibility. The State's inherent police power gives it the right to enact reasonable legislation in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. That power certainly encompasses the right to establish licensing requirements for those engaged in the practice of social work.
We find it neither arbitrary nor capricious for the legislature to require licensed clinical social workers, the higher-tier classification, to satisfy advanced educational requirements. This is warranted based upon the need for such practitioners to be informed as to recent advancements in theory or technique and based upon the fact that those social workers who are licensed at the higher-tier classification often supervise the work of those licensed at the lower tier. Such educational mandates obviously bear a rational relationship to the State's interest in protecting the public.
The legislature is presumed to have investigated the question and ascertained what is best for the good of the profession and the good of the people among whom it is practiced. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 333, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, 538 N.E.2d 1140. As noted above, the question of whether the course chosen by the legislature to achieve a desired result is either wise or the best means available is not a proper subject of judicial inquiry. Shephard, 152 Ill.2d at 503, 178 Ill. Dec. 724, 605 N.E.2d 518. It is for the legislature, not the courts, to balance the advantages and disadvantages of the requirements. Potts, 128 Ill.2d at 333, 131 Ill. Dec. 584, *680 538 N.E.2d 1140, citing Williamson v. Lee Optical of Oklahoma, Inc., 348 U.S. 483, 487, 75 S. Ct. 461, 464, 99 L. Ed. 563, 571 (1955).
We hold that the establishment of mandatory advanced educational requirements for licensed clinical social workers is rationally related to a legitimate State interest and is neither unreasonable nor arbitrary.
Admittedly, in both Taylor and Berger the court determined that the failure to include a "grandfather" clause in a licensing statute was an arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of the State's police power. See Berger, 521 F.2d at 1063; Taylor, 131 Ill.App.2d at 311, 264 N.E.2d 814. However, we observe that both of those cases involved situations where the legislature had embarked upon regulation of a particular profession for the first-time, a distinction of paramount importance. Here, the Illinois legislature had previously regulated the field of social work in 1967. The amendment of that portion of the Act relating to mandatory advanced educational requirements for licensed clinical social workers was consistent with the legislature's authority to set minimum educational standards in a regulated profession. See Abramson, 949 F.2d at 1580, citing Donahue v. District of Columbia Board of Psychology, 562 A.2d 116, 123 (D.C.App. 1989). The history of licensing and educational requirements in Illinois distinguishes this case from those in which a State has regulated a profession for the first time. See Abramson, 949 F.2d at 1580. Accordingly, we conclude that the plaintiff's substantive due process rights were not violated by the legislature's decision not to include in the Act a "grandfather" clause for licensed clinical social workers.
Plaintiff next contends that the Department lacked jurisdiction to issue a non-disciplinary cancellation of his license. We find no merit to this argument.
Express legislative grants of powers or duties to administrative agencies include the power to do all that is reasonably necessary to execute those powers or duties. Lake County Board of Review v. Property Tax Appeal Board, 119 Ill. 2d 419, 427, 116 Ill. Dec. 567, 519 N.E.2d 459 (1988); Smith v. Department of Professional Regulation, 202 Ill.App.3d 279, 289, 147 Ill. Dec. 544, 559 N.E.2d 884 (1990). Moreover, administrative agencies are to be given wide latitude in determining what actions are reasonably necessary, and a court may not overturn an agency policy or action simply because the court considers the policy unwise or inappropriate. Smith, 202 Ill.App.3d at 289-90, 147 Ill. Dec. 544, 559 N.E.2d 884; Oak Liquors, Inc. v. Zagel, 90 Ill.App.3d 379, 45 Ill. Dec. 723, 413 N.E.2d 56. (1980).
Where the legislature has granted to the Department the authority, express and implied, necessary to effectively carry out and accomplish the objectives of the Act, the provisions of the Act should be construed accordingly. O'Grady v. Cook County Sheriff's Merit Board, 260 Ill.App.3d 529, 535, 198 Ill. Dec. 28, 632 N.E.2d 87 (1994). The authority of the Department to cancel an invalid license may be implied from the terms of the Act. See O'Grady, 260 Ill.App.3d at 536, 198 Ill. Dec. 28, 632 N.E.2d 87. As noted above, the purpose of the Act is to "protect and to benefit the public by setting standards of qualifications, education, training and experience for those who seek to engage in the independent practice of clinical social work." Consequently, we hold that the Department has the authority to rescind or cancel a license which has been improperly or erroneously issued when the statutorily mandated educational requirements have not been satisfied.
Plaintiff also seeks reversal of the Department's decision, arguing that it was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
*681 On administrative review, it is not a court's function to reweigh the evidence or to make an independent determination of the facts, but merely to ascertain whether the findings and decision of the agency are against the manifest weight of the evidence. Abrahamson v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 153 Ill. 2d 76, 88, 180 Ill. Dec. 34, 606 N.E.2d 1111 (1992); Murdy v. Edgar, 103 Ill. 2d 384, 391, 83 Ill. Dec. 151, 469 N.E.2d 1085 (1984). An administrative agency decision is against the manifest weight of the evidence only if the opposite conclusion is clearly evident. Abrahamson, 153 Ill.2d at 88, 180 Ill. Dec. 34, 606 N.E.2d 1111; Whelchel v. Edgar, 195 Ill.App.3d 406, 409, 142 Ill. Dec. 44, 552 N.E.2d 394 (1990).
The mere fact that an opposite conclusion is reasonable or that the reviewing court might have ruled differently will not justify reversal of the administrative findings. Abrahamson, 153 Ill.2d at 88, 180 Ill. Dec. 34, 606 N.E.2d 1111. The reviewing court may not substitute its judgment for that of the administrative agency. Abrahamson, 153 Ill.2d at 88, 180 Ill. Dec. 34, 606 N.E.2d 1111. If the record contains evidence to support the agency's decision, it should be affirmed. Abrahamson, 153 Ill.2d at 88, 180 Ill. Dec. 34, 606 N.E.2d 1111.
In the instant case, plaintiff claims that the final administrative decision issued by the Department was against the manifest weight of the evidence because he had not actually misrepresented his qualifications on his application for licensure as a licensed clinical social worker. The Department points out, however, that the cancellation of plaintiffs license was proper based upon his lack of eligibility for such license. Plaintiff acknowledged that he had received the October 1988 memorandum, which formally advised him that the 1989 Act required a graduate degree in order to be a licensed clinical social worker. Plaintiff had not earned an advanced educational degree, and he never claimed that he had been confused by the memorandum or the requirements under the 1989 Act. Plaintiff also admitted that he was never informed that the graduate degree requirement had been waived for him. The cancellation of plaintiff's license was premised upon the uncontroverted evidence that plaintiff did not meet the mandatory advanced educational requirements and, therefore, was ineligible to be licensed as a clinical social worker. We hold this evidence was sufficient to support the decision of the Department.
We next consider plaintiff's contention that the circuit court erred in failing to impose the doctrine of equitable estoppel to preclude the Department's cancellation of his license.
Although the doctrine of equitable estoppel doctrine is applicable to municipal corporations, courts do not favor its use against a public body. Metropolitan Water Reclamation District v. Civil Service Board, 291 Ill.App.3d 488, 493, 225 Ill. Dec. 795, 684 N.E.2d 786 (1997). To invoke equitable estoppel against a public entity there must be an affirmative act on the part of the public entity and the inducement of substantial reliance by the affirmative act. Hamwi v. Zollar, 299 Ill. App. 3d 1088, 234 Ill. Dec. 253, 702 N.E.2d 593 (1998); Halleck v. County of Cook, 264 Ill.App.3d 887, 894, 202 Ill. Dec. 374, 637 N.E.2d 1110 (1994); Lindahl v. Des Plaines, 210 Ill.App.3d 281, 295, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306 (1991). The affirmative act which prompts a party's reliance must be an act of the public body itself such as a legislative enactment rather than the unauthorized acts of a ministerial officer or a ministerial misinterpretation. Hamwi, 299 Ill.App.3d at 1095, 234 Ill. Dec. 253, 702 N.E.2d 593; Lindahl, 210 Ill.App.3d at 295, 154 Ill. Dec. 857, 568 N.E.2d 1306. A public entity cannot be estopped by an act of its agent which is beyond the authority expressly conferred upon that official. Hamwi, 299 Ill.App.3d at 1095, 234 Ill. Dec. 253, 702 N.E.2d 593. If a public body were held bound through *682 equitable estoppel by an unauthorized act of a governmental employee, then that entity would remain helpless to remedy errors and forced to permit violations "`to remain in perpetuity.'" Hamwi, 299 Ill. App.3d at 1095, 234 Ill. Dec. 253, 702 N.E.2d 593, quoting Chicago v. Unit One Corp., 218 Ill.App.3d 242, 246, 161 Ill. Dec. 67, 578 N.E.2d 194 (1991).
In the case at bar, there was no evidence that plaintiff had relied to his detriment upon the Department's erroneous issuance of his license. Plaintiff's employer did not require that he be licensed as a clinical social worker, and the record does not indicate that his position was prejudiced in any way based upon the action of the Department. It is undisputed that plaintiff can continue to work as a licensed social worker without having achieved the advanced educational requirements. Moreover, the imposition of equitable estoppel would necessarily be based upon the unauthorized issuance of the plaintiff's license, which obviously resulted from a mistake by a ministerial officer. As such, it cannot be allowed here. We conclude that the circuit court correctly determined that the Department must be permitted to remedy this error. See Hamwi, 299 Ill. App.3d at 1095, 234 Ill. Dec. 253, 702 N.E.2d 593.
We also reject plaintiff's argument that the circuit court should have barred the Department from canceling his license based upon the doctrine of laches.
Generally, the doctrine of laches is applied when a party's failure to timely assert a right has caused prejudice to the adverse party. Van Milligan v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, 158 Ill. 2d 85, 89, 196 Ill. Dec. 665, 630 N.E.2d 830 (1994); People ex rel. Daley v. Strayhorn, 121 Ill. 2d 470, 482, 118 Ill. Dec. 387, 521 N.E.2d 864 (1988); Tully v. State, 143 Ill. 2d 425, 432, 158 Ill. Dec. 546, 574 N.E.2d 659 (1991). The two fundamental elements of laches are (1) a lack of due diligence by the party asserting the claim and (2) prejudice to the opposing party. Van Milligan, 158 Ill.2d at 89, 196 Ill. Dec. 665, 630 N.E.2d 830; Tully, 143 Ill.2d at 432, 158 Ill. Dec. 546, 574 N.E.2d 659. Thus, the party asserting estoppel must show prejudice or hardship rather than mere passage of time and must demonstrate that the delay induced him to adversely change his position. Schons v. Monarch Insurance Co., 214 Ill.App.3d 601, 609, 158 Ill. Dec. 289, 574 N.E.2d 83 (1991). To that end, it is essential that the party asserting the defense plead and prove, not only that a considerable period of time has elapsed and that prejudice has resulted, but also that the opposing party had prior knowledge of the facts giving rise to the claim. Patrick Media Group, Inc. v. City of Chicago, 255 Ill.App.3d 1, 7, 193 Ill. Dec. 515, 626 N.E.2d 1066 (1993).
In addition, there is considerable reluctance to impose the doctrine of laches to the actions of public entities unless unusual or extraordinary circumstances are shown. Van Milligan, 158 Ill.2d at 90, 196 Ill. Dec. 665, 630 N.E.2d 830; Hickey v. Illinois Central R.R. Co., 35 Ill. 2d 427, 447, 220 N.E.2d 415 (1966). This reluctance is founded upon the idea that the imposition of laches might "`impair the functioning of the [governmental body] in the discharge of its government functions, and * * * valuable public interests may be [158 Ill.2d at 91, 196 Ill. Dec. 665, 630 N.E.2d 830] jeopardized or lost by the negligence, mistakes, or inattention of public officials.'" Van Milligan, 158 Ill.2d at 90-91, 196 Ill. Dec. 665, 630 N.E.2d 830, quoting Hickey, 35 Ill.2d at 447-48, 220 N.E.2d 415.
In the case before us, the record established that the Department did not discover until 1994 that plaintiff's license had been issued erroneously. Immediately thereafter, the Department sought to resolve the matter informally. When it became apparent that such attempts would not be successful, the Department filed its administrative complaint in May 1995. This cannot be characterized as an unreasonable *683 delay, and plaintiff has not established that he was prejudiced in any way. Moreover, we find no compelling circumstances which would warrant the imposition of laches here. For five years, plaintiff was the recipient of a benefit, the higher-tier license, to which he was not entitled. The action taken by the Department merely restored him to the license for which he was qualified, that of the lower tier. Plaintiff has not complained that he has been prejudiced in any way by the fact that he held the higher-tier license for five years. Plaintiff has made no showing that he would have changed his position had the Department acted properly in denying him the higher-tier license in 1990. We conclude the circuit court correctly ruled that the doctrine of laches did not apply to the instant case.
Finally, plaintiff asserts that the Department waived its right to challenge the validity of his license. Yet, plaintiff cites no authority for this proposition, and it is contradicted by the record. Upon discovering the erroneous issuance of plaintiff's license in 1994, the Department immediately sought to resolve the matter informally. When it became apparent that such attempts would not be successful, the Department filed its administrative complaint in May 1995. Plaintiff had notice as early as 1994 that the Department intended to rescind or to cancel his license. Based upon this evidence, it is clear that the Department did not voluntarily relinquish its right to challenge plaintiff's license.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
CAMPBELL, J., and QUINN, J., concur.

=== CASE 2230137 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.550637+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1247 (1999)
FLYING J, INC. Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Johnnie JETER, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 45A03-9902-CV-41.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 22, 1999.
*1248 Keith A. Gaston, Carol A. Nemeth, White & Raub, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellant.
OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge
Appellant, Flying J, Inc. (Flying J), challenges the trial court's denial of its motion to set aside default judgment.
We reverse and remand.
On July 14, 1996, Johnnie Jeter (Jeter), while patronizing Flying J's convenience store, slipped and fell causing injury. She filed a complaint against Flying J for negligence on July 13, 1998, and served Flying J with the summons and complaint on July 21, 1998. Flying J did not file an answer to her complaint, and on September 15, 1998, Jeter filed a motion for default judgment. On the same date, the trial court granted the motion and set a hearing upon the issue of damages for October 14, 1998.
On October 13, 1998, Flying J filed a motion to set aside default judgment, asserting that a "breakdown in communication" had occurred with his claims adjuster, and that this breakdown constituted excusable neglect. Record at 29.
The events preceding the default were that Jeter's attorney first provided Flying J's adjuster, Theodore Conti of GAB Robbins, Inc. (Conti), with a courtesy copy of the complaint. Conti then sent a copy of the complaint to Flying J and also spoke with Jeter's attorney to advise him that he would need to perfect service through Flying J's agent. Lori Dutson (Dutson) of Flying J instructed Conti to retain the law firm of White and Raub when the suit was filed and it became necessary to file an answer. Conti assumed that Flying J would inform him when it was served with the summons and complaint, and therefore, Conti did not retain the law firm after his conversation with Dutson. Flying J thought it had confirmed with Conti that he would retain counsel immediately without being separately informed when it was served. As a result of this misunderstanding, legal counsel was not obtained to defend Jeter's action until October 5, 1998.
In support of its motion, Flying J presented the affidavit of a Flying J employee who was working at Flying J's convenience store and witnessed Jeter's fall. The employee stated that while wet floor warning signs were posted on the day Jeter fell, the floor was dry when Jeter fell. Also, the employee stated that Jeter appeared intoxicated. On December 18, 1998, the trial *1249 court denied Flying J's motion to set aside default judgment.
Upon appeal, Flying J contends that the trial court abused its discretion in concluding that Flying J had failed to demonstrate excusable neglect for not filing an answer to Jeter's complaint. Specifically, Flying J asserts that its breakdown in communication with Conti about whether he would retain legal counsel for it constituted excusable neglect.
Ind. Trial Rule 55(A) authorizes the entry of default judgment for failure to file a pleading. However, Ind. Trial Rule 55(C) allows the judgment to be set aside if grounds under Ind. Trial Rule 60(B) exist. T.R. 60(B) provides that a judgment may be set aside for "mistake, surprise, or excusable neglect." There are no fixed standards "to determine the bounds of `mistake, surprise or excusable neglect.' "Indiana Dept. of Natural Resources v. Van Keppel (1991) Ind.App., 583 N.E.2d 161, 162, trans. denied. Courts must balance the need for efficient administration of justice with the preference for deciding cases on their merits and giving a party its day in court. Id. The decision to grant or deny a motion to set aside default judgment is within the equitable discretion of the trial court, and we will only reverse a trial court's ruling upon review for an abuse of discretion. Whelchel v. Community Hospitals of Indiana, Inc. (1994) Ind. App., 629 N.E.2d 900, 902, trans. denied.
Our Supreme Court, in Whittaker v. Dail (1992) Ind., 584 N.E.2d 1084, 1087, held that a breakdown in communication between an insurance company and its client which resulted in the client not hiring an attorney was a sufficient basis to set aside a default judgment. The client was under the impression that the insurance company would hire an attorney for him, and the insurance company adjuster thought that she had hired an attorney for the client. However, the attorney mistakenly believed that he was to file a declaratory judgment action against the client, rather than defend the client. The court reasoned that there was no evidence of "foot dragging" on the part of the client, and that this breakdown in communication was excusable neglect. Id.
More recently, our Supreme Court again considered whether a breakdown in communication constituted excusable neglect. In Smith v. Johnston (1999) Ind., 711 N.E.2d 1259, a doctor failed to open his mail and thus, did not discover that a medical malpractice suit had been filed against him and his medical practice group. The person who regularly received the mail and handled all legal matters was in the process of leaving the group and was away from the office when the summons arrived. Therefore, a scrub nurse who normally did not receive mail signed for the summons delivered by certified mail and placed it on the doctor's desk. Even though the doctor was aware that the person who regularly received the mail was leaving the group, he did not open the summons until after a default judgment had been entered against him. The Court found this breakdown in communication to be "neglect, but not excusable neglect" and distinguished it from other cases which found breakdowns in communication excusable. Id. at 1262. The Court stated that in the other cases, "the defendants did all that they were required to do but subsequent misunderstandings as to the assignments given to agents of the defendants resulted in a failure to appear." Id.
Unlike Johnston where the doctor did not open the mail on his desk, in the instant case, Flying J contacted its insurance adjuster, Conti, and instructed him to hire a particular law firm to defend Jeter's negligence suit. Flying J reasonably believed it had taken the appropriate measures to hire an attorney. However, Conti misunderstood that Flying J wanted him to hire an attorney promptly and instead believed that he was to wait until Flying J notified him of when it was served with the complaint. Flying J did all it was required to do, but a misunderstanding about the assignment Conti had resulted in Flying *1250 J's failure to file an answer. Similar to the breakdown in communication in Whittaker between the insurance company and the attorney it hired, the failure on the part of Flying J to file an answer was not the result of its "foot dragging" and instead due to its misunderstanding with Conti.
Thus, we find that the neglect by Flying J in failing to file an answer to Jeter's complaint was excusable. However, "[t]o prevail on a T.R. 60(B) motion, the petitioner is not only required to show mistake, surprise, or excusable neglect, but also must show that he has a good and meritorious defense to the cause of action." Butler v. Shipshewana Auction, Inc. (1998) Ind.App., 697 N.E.2d 1285, 1289. A meritorious defense is one which would lead to a different result if the case was tried upon the merits. Id. Some admissible evidence must be presented which reveals that the defaulted party would suffer an injustice if the judgment were allowed to stand. Id.
Here, one of Flying J's employees witnessed Jeter fall on the floor. The employee stated that although wet floor warning signs were posted, the floor was dry when Jeter fell. Moreover, the employee observed that Jeter appeared to be intoxicated. If the default judgment is allowed to stand in this case, Flying J would suffer an injustice by not being permitted to disclose its employee's account of Jeter's slip and fall.
We conclude that Flying J has made a showing of a meritorious defense and should have the opportunity to be heard. We hold, therefore, that the trial court abused its discretion in failing to set aside the default judgment.
The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
GARRARD, J., and BAILEY, J., concur.

=== CASE 9742171 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:02.443254+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the judgment of the court: Plaintiffs brought separate actions in the circuit court of Cook County seeking to recover damages against defendants for alleged medical malpractice. Defendants were local public entities or their employees. In each case, defendants filed motions to dismiss. In the motions, defendants alleged that the one-year limitation period found in section 8 — 101 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Tort Immunity Act) (745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 et seq. (West 1996)) barred plaintiffs’ actions. The circuit court denied defendants’ motions to dismiss. The appellate court consolidated these cases on appeal and reversed. 293 Ill. App. 3d 544. We allowed plaintiffs’ joint petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). In addition, we granted the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association leave to submit a brief as amicus curiae. 155 Ill. 2d R. 345. We now affirm the judgment of the appellate court. BACKGROUND Cause No. 92 — L—4475 Plaintiff, Linnette Concepcion Tosado, commenced her action on April 10, 1992, by filing a complaint in the circuit court of Cook County. The complaint alleged that Drs. Miller, Kopolovic, Cohen, Barnett, and Padilla, all Cook County Hospital employees, were negligent in failing to assess the likelihood of scarring in connection with her surgery. The complaint further alleged that defendants were negligent in failing to warn her of the risks and consequences associated with the surgery and that her consent to the surgery was therefore uninformed. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619 (West 1992)). In their motion, defendants argued that Tosado’s claim must fail because her complaint was filed more than one year after the date of the injury or discovery of a cause of action. Defendants relied on the one-year limitation period contained in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act. Following a hearing, the trial judge denied defendants’ motion believing that a two-year statute of limitation applied. The trial judge, however, found that the case involved a question of law as to which there is a substantial ground for difference of opinion and certified to the appellate court, in substance, the following question: In a medical malpractice case against a local entity and/or its employees, does the one-year limitation period in the Tort Immunity Act or the two-year limitation period in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 1992)) apply? Defendants filed a petition for leave to appeal in the appellate court and leave was granted. The appellate court consolidated this cause with cause No. 94 — L— 15720 and reversed the circuit courts’ denial of defendants’ motions to dismiss. 293 Ill. App. 3d 544. In doing so, the appellate court held that “the one-year limitations period of the Tort Immunity Act controls because it is a more specific statute and because this construction comports with the plain language of the Tort Immunity Act.” 293 Ill. App. 3d at 546. We allowed plaintiffs’ joint petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). Cause No. 94 — L—15720 In cause No. 94 — L—15720, plaintiff, Gail Phipps, commenced her action on December 12, 1994, by filing a complaint in the circuit court of Cook County. Phipps subsequently filed a nine-count amended complaint. According to the allegations in the amended complaint, defendants, Cook County Hospital, Dr. K. Naidoo, an employee of the hospital, and Lincoln Medical Center, Ltd., a professional medical corporation, were negligent in providing Phipps medical care during her pregnancy. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss counts IV through IX of the amended complaint, those counts naming Cook County Hospital and its employee, Dr. K. Naidoo, as defendants, pursuant to section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 et seq. (West 1996)). Counts I through III were filed against a private corporation and are not at issue in this appeal. In their motion, defendants argued that Phipps’ action was untimely under the one-year limitation period found in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act. Phipps responded by asserting that section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the applicable limitation period. Following a hearing, the trial judge denied defendants’ motion. The trial judge, however, found that the order involved a question of law about which there are substantial grounds for a difference of an opinion. The trial judge certified to the appellate court substantially the same question as did the judge in cause No. 92 — L— 4475. Defendants filed a petition for leave to appeal in the appellate court. The appellate court granted defendants’ petition. As noted above, the appellate court consolidated these causes for appeal and reversed the circuit courts’ denial of defendants’ motions. 293 Ill. App. 3d 544. We allowed plaintiffs’ joint petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). DISCUSSION The issue presented in this case is whether the two-year limitation period in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure or the one-year limitation period in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act applies to medical malpractice actions against local governmental entities and/or their employees. Section 13 — 212 of the Code provides in pertinent part: “Physician or hospital, (a) Except as provided in Section 13 — 215 of this Act, no action for damages for injury or death against any physician, dentist, registered nurse or hospital duly licensed under the laws of this State, whether based upon tort, or breach of contract, or otherwise, arising out of patient care shall be brought more than 2 years after the date on which the claimant knew, or through the use of reasonable diligence should have known, *** of the injury or death ***.” 735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 1992). Section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act provides: “No civil action may be commenced in any court against a local entity or any of its employees for any injury unless it is commenced within one year from the date that the injury was received or the cause of action accrued. For purposes of this Article, the term ‘civil action’ includes any action, whether based upon the common law or statutes or Constitution of this State.” 745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 (West 1996). We believe the language of the statutes is plain and unambiguous. As such, there is no occasion to use aids in the construction of either statute and the plain meaning of the statutes should prevail. Fosco v. Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, 213 Ill. App. 3d 842 (1991). However, because either section 13 — 212(a) of the Code or section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act could apply to plaintiffs’ actions in the absence of the other, we must decide which of these conflicting provisions must be given effect. In doing so, we must determine which of the two statutes more specifically applies to the case at hand. Zimmer v. Village of Willowbrook, 242 Ill. App. 3d 437, 442 (1993). Plaintiffs argue that section 13 — 212(a), containing the two-year limitation period, is the more specific statute and accordingly should be applied to this case. They assert that section 13 — 212 more narrowly defines defendants, specifying physicians, dentists, registered nurses and hospitals, rather than setting forth the broader category of all governmental entities and their employees. In addition, plaintiffs argue that section 13— 212 more narrowly defines plaintiffs and the nature of the claim, specifying that the action must arise out of patient care, as opposed to the broader language of section 8 — 101 that applies to any injury. In support of these contentions, plaintiffs rely upon two appellate court decisions, Lanxon v. Magnus, 296 Ill. App. 3d 377 (3d Dist. 1998), and Cleaver v. Marrese, 253 Ill. App. 3d 778 (5th Dist. 1993), and one federal district court decision, Murry v. Sheahan, 991 F. Supp. 1052 (N.D. Ill. 1998), all of which considered the question presented here. In Cleaver v. Marrese, 253 Ill. App. 3d 778 (5th Dist. 1993), plaintiff, Donna Cleaver, filed a medical malpractice action against Dr. R. Anthony Marrese and the Wood River Township Hospital. The trial court granted the hospital’s motion for summary judgment because plaintiff filed her complaint within two years, but more than one year after the date on which the injury was received or the cause of action accrued. On appeal, the appellate court reversed, finding that the two-year limitation period contained in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure applied. The appellate court stated that, “[Biased on the type of claim plaintiff has filed, an analysis of the conflicting statutes of limitations, and the rules of statutory construction, we conclude that section 13 — 212 more specifically applies to the instant case.” Cleaver, 253 Ill. App. 3d at 783. In Lanxon v. Magnus, 296 Ill. App. 3d 377 (3d Dist. 1998), a case decided in the appellate court after the appellate court’s decision in the present case, plaintiffs Susan and Jeffery Meusel and plaintiff Amelia Lanxon, in separate cases, brought actions against Community-General Hospital Medical Center (CGH), a municipal corporation, and various other defendants for medical malpractice. In both cases, plaintiffs filed their complaints more than one year, but less than two years, after the accrual of their causes of actions. CGH moved for summary judgment arguing that plaintiffs’ claims, in both cases, were barred by the one-year limitation period set forth in section 8 — 101. Plaintiffs argued that their suits were timely filed because the applicable limitation period was the two-year period found in section 13 — 212(a). The same trial judge denied summary judgment in each case, finding the two-year limitation period in section 13 — 212(a) applicable. Because of the identity of the issues presented, the appellate court consolidated the Meusel and Lanxon cases on appeal and held that section 13 — 212(a) of the Code, containing the two-year limitation period, was more specifically applicable to the plaintiffs’ cases. The court explained: “In applying the more traditional analysis of considering the nature of the claims and the type of injuries sustained by the instant plaintiffs, we find section 13— 212(a) more specifically applicable to their cases. Section 8 — 101 applies generally to civil actions for any injury, while section 13 — 212(a) applies specifically and exclusively to actions for injuries arising out of patient care. Accordingly, section 13 — 212(a) is the more specific statute and should prevail.” (Emphasis in original.) Lanxon, 296 Ill. App. 3d at 381. Likewise, in Murry v. Sheahan, 991 F. Supp. 1052 (N.D. Ill. 1998), a federal district court was asked to consider the question of whether section 13 — 212 or section 8 — 101 applied to pendent state law medical malpractice claims brought against Cook County and its agents. In that case, the then-presiding district judge originally denied defendant’s motion to dismiss, holding that the two-year statute of limitations applied. The court was then asked to reconsider its ruling in light of the appellate court’s decision in this case. On reconsideration, a magistrate judge again held that the two-year limitation period applied. The judge explained: “Here, the Physician or Hospital’s section of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure *** provides a statute of limitations period tailored to a specific cause of action and directed at a specific class of potential defendants: ‘actions for damages for injury or death against any physician, dentist, registered nurse or hospital.’ 735 ILCS 5/13 — 212. In contrast, the *** Tort Immunity Act provides a statute of limitations period for a broad range of civil actions and potential liabilities: ‘civil actions against a local entity.’ 745 ILCS 10/8 — 101.” We agree with the result reached in the appellate court in the case before us and disagree with the result reached in Cleaver, Lanxon and Murry. We believe that the focus of the inquiry under the statutes at issue here should be on the nature of the defendants rather than on the type of the cause of action. We believe, therefore, that the one-year limitation period contained in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is more specifically applicable to these defendants. The legislature, when enacting the Tort Immunity Act, specifically stated that its purpose was “to protect local public entities and public employees from liability arising from the operation of government.” 745 ILCS 10/ 1 — 101.1(a) (West 1994). In enacting the Tort Immunity Act the legislature focused on a particular category of potential defendants and granted local governmental entities and their employees greater protection than nongovernmental entities and their employees. This court recognized the legislative intent behind the Tort Immunity Act in Saragusa v. City of Chicago, 63 Ill. 2d 288 (1976). In Saragusa, this court stated that the purpose of the limitation period contained in section 8 — 101 “is to encourage early investigation into the claim asserted against the local government at a time when the matter is still fresh, witnesses are available, and conditions have not materially changed.” Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293. Such an investigation permits prompt settlement of meritorious claims and allows governmental entities to plan their budgets in light of potential liabilities. Reynolds v. City of Tuscola, 48 Ill. 2d 339, 342 (1971). The court in Saragusa further stated that “[b]ecause a local government entity must anticipate that the number of claims made against it will far exceed those brought against a private individual, the provision of an abridged period of time within which a claim must be asserted is reasonable.” Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293. In enacting section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act, we believe, the legislature intended to protect a specific class of defendants, local governmental entities and their employees. Thus, in medical malpractice actions against local governmental entities or their employees the focus should be on the defendants rather than the cause of action or the type of injuries sustained by the plaintiffs. By focusing on the category of defendants at issue in this case, it is clear that section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is more specific than section 13 — 212 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Section 8 — 101 specifically applies to defendants which are local entities and the employees of those entities which are a more specific category of defendant within the broader group of any physician, dentist, registered nurse or hospital described in section 13 — 212(a). Because section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is the more specific statute when considering causes of action against local governmental entities and their employees, we believe the one-year limitation provision of section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act applies to actions against those defendants. Plaintiffs further argue that significant policy reasons should preclude application of the one-year limitation period to actions against local entities and/or their employees. They contend that a claim for medical malpractice is often not immediately apparent to the injured party; that medical malpractice claims involve complex issues requiring substantial prefiling investigation; and that the fact that a hospital is a municipal hospital may not be readily apparent to someone who has been injured in such a facility. They, therefore, conclude that the status of the facility may not be obvious to an injured party until it is too late and that public policy should favor the two-year limitation period. Because these concerns compete with the legislative purposes of the limitation provision of the Tort Immunity Act we believe that they are questions appropriately left to the legislature. We find the one-year limitation period in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act more specifically applies in this case. It specifically states that no civil action, which includes any action whether based upon the common law or statutes or the Constitution of this state, may be commenced in any court against a local entity or any of its employees for any injury unless it is commenced within one year from the date that the injury was received or the cause of action accrued. See 745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 et seq. (West 1996). Plaintiffs finally argue that if we determine the one-year limitation period applies to their causes of action, then our decision should be applied prospectively only. They believe that it would be unjust to apply retroactively any holding finding that section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act controls plaintiffs’ actions in this case. We disagree. Generally, when a court issues an opinion, the decision is presumed to apply both retroactively and prospectively. Deichmueller Construction Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 151 Ill. 2d 413, 416 (1992). However, this presumption is overcome when a court expressly states that its decision will be applied prospectively only. Aleckson v. Village of Round Lake Park, 176 Ill. 2d 82, 86 (1997). In Aleckson, 176 Ill. 2d at 92-94, we considered three factors in determining the question of prospective application. The three factors to be considered are: (1) whether the decision to be applied nonretroactively established a new principle of law, either by overruling clear past precedent on which litigants may have relied or by deciding an issue of first impression whose resolution was not clearly foreshadowed; (2) whether, given the purpose and history of the new rule, its operation will be retarded or promoted by prospective application; and (3) whether substantial inequitable results would be produced if the former decision is applied retroactively. Aleckson, 176 Ill. 2d at 92-94. Applying these factors, we believe that retroactive application of today’s holding is appropriate. Our decision in the cases at bar does not establish a new principle of law, for we believe that it was foreshadowed by the language of the statute, which, we have determined, requires this result. This initial consideration is a “threshold requirement” for prospective application of a new decision (Aleckson, 176 Ill. 2d at 88), and therefore we must deny prospective application in the circumstances shown here. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2230289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:41.893136+00 ===

383 Mass. 642 (1981)
421 N.E.2d 755
BLUE HILLS REGIONAL DISTRICT SCHOOL COMMITTEE
v.
MYRTLE R. FLIGHT & another.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
February 5, 1981.
June 1, 1981.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., BRAUCHER, WILKINS, LIACOS, & ABRAMS, JJ.
Maria J. Woodford (William F. Looney, Jr., & William J. Carr with her) for the plaintiff.
Alan J. McDonald (Gabriel O. Dumont, Jr., with him) for the defendants.
BRAUCHER, J.
In grievance arbitration proceedings pursuant to G.L.c. 150E, § 8, the arbitrator determined that a school committee had violated its collective bargaining agreement by failing to promote a particular teacher to an administrative position because of her sex. He ordered that she be given the promotion and paid a salary differential and interest, and a judge of the Superior Court entered a judgment confirming the award, with a modification as to interest. The Appeals Court held that the grievance was arbitrable but that enforcement of the award "would contravene *643 the non-delegability doctrine" and thus would be unlawful; the case was remanded to the arbitrator to fashion a new remedy. 10 Mass. App. Ct. 459, 466-469 (1980). We allowed the application of both parties for further appellate review. We uphold the decision of the Superior Court awarding the promotion to the grievant, and direct the entry of judgment confirming the award.
The facts found by the arbitrator are recounted at length in the opinion of the Appeals Court. In the spring of 1977 the grievant was a tenured teacher at the Blue Hills Regional Vocational-Technical School, and had served as department head of health services and culinary arts. She and thirty-seven others applied for the position of assistant director, vocational subjects. A man not on the staff of the school was recommended by the superintendent and appointed by the school committee. The arbitrator concluded that the grievant had been the victim of sex discrimination. He ordered that she be promoted to the position she sought and paid the salary differential between the two positions, with nine per cent interest from July 1, 1977, to the date of her appointment. The interest provision was later modified to eight per cent from September 18, 1978, the date the defendants filed an answer requesting confirmation of the award.
The collective bargaining agreement provided explicitly that appointments would be made without regard to sex, and the Appeals Court properly held that a claim of violation of that provision was arbitrable under the agreement. See School Comm. of Danvers v. Tyman, 372 Mass. 106, 114 (1977); School Comm. of New Bedford v. New Bedford Educators Ass'n, 9 Mass. App. Ct. 793, 797-800 (1980); Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 36, 55 (1974). But, the Appeals Court held, the enforcement of the award by compelling the school committee to appoint the grievant to the position sought "would contravene the non-delegability doctrine," intruding into the area of the school committee's nondelegable, managerial prerogative over educational policy. See Berkshire Hills Regional School Dist. Comm. v. Berkshire Hills Educ. Ass'n, 375 Mass. 522, 525-526 (1978), and cases cited; Craver, The Judicial *644 Enforcement of Public Sector Grievance Arbitration, 58 Tex. L. Rev. 329, 350-353 (1980).
The Appeals Court decision is faithful to our decisions under the nondelegability doctrine, but we think an exception is called for. See School Comm. of Braintree v. Raymond, 369 Mass. 686, 689 (1976), where we suggested an exception if committee action was "a pretense or device actuated by personal hostility." Cf. Cohoes City School Dist. v. Cohoes Teachers Ass'n, 40 N.Y.2d 774, 777 (1976) (exception if tenure refused "for constitutionally impermissible reasons or in violation of statutory proscriptions"). Denial of promotion to a public employee because of her sex is constitutionally impermissible and violates statutory proscriptions, and makes appropriate an order granting the promotion with back pay. Art. 1 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution. G.L.c. 151B, §§ 1, cl. 5; 4, cl. 1. Springfield Bd. of Police Comm'rs v. Massachusetts Comm'n Against Discrimination, 375 Mass. 782 (1978). Decision by an arbitrator in such a case is no more intrusive than decision by an independent commission, and does not unreasonably trespass on the managerial authority of the employing agency. The school committee does not contend that the grievant was not qualified for the promotion, and we do not inquire further into the correctness of the arbitrator's decision of matters within his jurisdiction.
Hence we hold that the award of the arbitrator should be confirmed. If the grievant is to be awarded the promotion, the objection to an award of future compensation disappears. Contrast School Comm. of New Bedford v. New Bedford Educators Ass'n, 9 Mass. App. Ct. 793, 801-802 (1980). For the reasons given by the Appeals Court, we uphold the power of the arbitrator to commence the accumulation of interest on July 1, 1977, and to set the rate at nine per cent.
The case is remanded to the Superior Court for the entry of a judgment confirming the arbitrator's award.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Blue Hills Educational Association.

=== CASE 9742172 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:02.447634+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring; I agree with the plurality to the extent that it holds that the one-year statute of limitation contained in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/8— 101 (West 1996)) applies to the causes of action at issue in this case. I also believe, like the plurality, that the policy considerations presented in this appeal are questions that are more appropriately left to our General Assembly. 188 Ill. 2d at 196. Nevertheless, I agree with Justice Heiple that plaintiffs “make a plausible case that the focus [in this appeal] should be on the type of the cause of action, not on the nature of the defendants.” See 188 Ill. 2d at 199 (Heiple, J., specially concurring). Therefore, I join in Justice Heiple’s special concurrence to the extent that “this is one of those instances where ‘the legislature intended to make the general act controlling’ ” and that section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act was designed to apply broadly to any possible claim against a local governmental entity and its employees. 188 Ill. 2d at 199 (Heiple, J., specially concurring), quoting Stone v. Department of Employment Security Board of Review, 151 Ill. 2d 257, 266 (1992). However, I do not join in, nor do I condone, Justice Heiple’s characterization of the dissent submitted in this matter by Justice McMorrow.

=== CASE 9742173 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:02.451143+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, also specially concurring: I agree with the plurality’s holding that the one-year statute of limitations in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 (West 1996)), not the two-year statute of limitations in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 1996)), applies to medical malpractice actions against local governmental entities and their employees. I write separately, however, because I believe the plurality’s analysis is both an oversimplification and ultimately unpersuasive. The plurality employs the familiar rule of statutory construction which states that “ ‘[w]here there are two statutory provisions, one of which is general and designed to apply to cases generally, and the other is particular and relates to only one subject, the particular provision must prevail.’ ” Hernon v. E.W. Corrigan Construction Co., 149 Ill. 2d 190, 195 (1992), quoting Bowes v. City of Chicago, 3 Ill. 2d 175, 205 (1954). Focusing on “the nature of the defendants rather than on the type of the cause of action,” the plurality concludes that section 8 — 101 is the more specific statute. (Emphasis added.) 188 Ill. 2d at 194. The plurality’s analysis is an oversimplification because section 8 — 101 is both more specific and more general than the statute of limitations in section 13 — 212(a). It is more specific in the sense that it applies to a narrow class of defendants, local entities and their employees. On the other hand, it is more general than section 13 — 212(a) because it applies to any civil action, not just to medical malpractice actions. Plaintiffs make a plausible case that the focus should be on the type of the cause of action, not on the nature of the defendants. From plaintiffs’ point of view, the plurality’s exclusive focus on the nature of the defendants in both statutes is completely arbitrary. The plurality’s analysis is ultimately unpersuasive because, to the extent that section 8 — 101 is more general than section 13 — 212(a), this is one of those instances where “the legislature intended to make the general act controlling.” Stone v. Department of Employment Security Board, 151 Ill. 2d 257, 266 (1992), quoting 2B N. Singer, Sutherland on Statutory Construction § 51.05, at 174 (5th ed. 1992). As the plurality points out, the purpose of the one-year statute of limitations in section 8 — 101 is to encourage early investigation and settlement of meritorious claims so governmental entities can plan their budgets in light of potential liabilities. 188 Ill. 2d at 195. By its very nature then, section 8 — 101 was designed to apply broadly to any possible claim against a local governmental entity and its employees. This type of comprehensive protection necessarily controls over other statutes of limitations. Nothing suggests the legislature intended to abandon this scheme with respect to medical malpractice actions. Justice McMorrow’s argument in her dissent that the one-year statute of limitations in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act does not apply to plaintiffs medical malpractice action because it does not explicitly say that it trumps the two-year statute of limitations in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is inane. The very reason this court analyzes which statute is more specific is because, arguably, either statute applies. There would be no reason to resort to this tool of statutory construction in the first place if one statute explicitly provides that it takes precedence over the other statute. Contrary to Justice McMorrow’s dissent, the fact that the legislature created an across-the-board rule limiting the time in which to file “any action” against a public entity or its employees to one year is powerful evidence that the legislature intended the more general statute to be controlling.

=== CASE 9742175 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:02.458783+00 ===

JUSTICE McMORROW, also dissenting: At issue in this appeal is whether the two-year limitation period in section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 1992)) or the one-year limitation period in section 8 — 101 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/8 — 101 (West 1996) (Tort Immunity Act)) applies to medical malpractice actions brought against local governmental entities and/or their employees. The plurality opinion holds that the one-year limitation period provided in section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is more specifically applicable. The plurality’s conclusion that section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is the more specific statute represents an unwarranted and unprecedented departure from our well-established jurisprudence. Therefore, I respectfully dissent. Based upon the plain language of the two statutes at issue, arguably either provision could apply to plaintiffs’ claims. Section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act is applicable to “civil actions” against local governmental entities and/or their employees, whereas section 13— 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure applies to “actions for damages for injury or death against any physician, dentist, registered nurse or hospital.” However, the two statutes conflict because section 13 — 212(a) permits a two-year period of filing limitation, whereas section 8 — 101 allows a one-year limitation period. Therefore, as the plurality correctly observes, the linchpin determination in this matter is which of these two conflicting statutory provisions should control. The decision hinges upon which of the two provisions is more specifically applicable to the cause at bar. It is a long-established rule that “ ‘[wjhere there are two statutory provisions, one of which is general and designed to apply to cases generally, and the other is particular and relates to only one subject, the particular provision must prevail.’ ” Hernon v. E.W. Corrigan Construction Co., 149 Ill. 2d 190, 195 (1992), quoting Bowes v. City of Chicago, 3 Ill. 2d 175, 205 (1954). This is true “especially where the particular provision is later in time of enactment.” (Emphasis added.) Bowes, 3 Ill. 2d at 205; see also Jahn v. Troy Fire Protection District, 163 Ill. 2d 275, 282 (1994) (when choosing between two statutes in direct conflict, “the more recent enactment generally will prevail as the later expression of legislative intent”). Traditionally, in determining which of two statutes is more specifically applicable to a particular matter, most courts have looked primarily to the nature of the plaintiffs cause of action and the type of injury sustained by the plaintiff. For example, in Hernon v. E.W. Corrigan Construction Co., this court held that the limitations period for acts or omissions relating to construction (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, pars. 13 — 214(a), (b)) is more specific than the limitations period for personal injury actions (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 13 — 202) because the former concerns only construction-related activities. Hernon, 149 Ill. 2d at 196. Similarly, in Bertolis v. Community Unit School District No. 7, 283 Ill. App. 3d 874, 880 (1996), the appellate court determined that the limitations period for personal injury actions brought by minors that accrued during minority (735 ILCS 5/13— 211 (West 1994)) governed the plaintiffs claim because it more specifically addressed the plaintiff and the nature of the plaintiffs injury than section 8 — 101. Also, in Zimmer v. Village of Willowbrook, 242 Ill. App. 3d 437, 442 (1993), the court held that the limitations period for actions brought against a body politic relating to acts or omissions in construction (735 ILCS 5/13 — 214(a) (West 1994)) is more specific than section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act because the statutory action against a body politic is restricted to claims arising from construction activities. See also, e.g., Walsh v. Barry-Harlem Corp., 272 Ill. App. 3d 418, 426 (1995) (holding section 13— 212(a), the statute of limitation at issue in the case at bar, to be more specifically applicable than the limitations period contained in the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 1992)) because section 13 — 212(a) applies only to medical malpractice actions); Desai v. Chasnoff, 146 Ill. App. 3d 163, 167 (1986) (holding section 13 — 212(a) more specifically applicable than the limitations period in the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1 — 101 et seq. (West 1992)) because the former applies only to a particular type of claim and the latter applies to all breaches of contracts for sale). Applying this traditional, well-established analysis to the cause at bar, it is clear that section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is the statute which is more specifically applicable. Section 13 — 212(a) more narrowly defines the plaintiffs, their injuries, and the nature of their claims, specifying that the cause of action must involve damages for “injury or death *** arising out of patient care.” The provisions of section 13 — 212(a) stand in sharp contrast to the far broader and more generic language of section 8 — 101, which applies to a “civil action” for “any injury.” The conclusion that section 13 — 212(a) is more specifically applicable to the cause at bar is further supported by the fact that section 13 — 212 of the Code of Civil Procedure was enacted subsequent to- section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act. Section 13 — 212 was enacted in 1982 (735 ILCS Ann. 5/13 — 212, Historical & Statutory Notes, at 366 (Smith-Hurd 1992)), nearly two decades after section 8 — 101 was enacted in 1965 (745 ILCS Ann. 10/8 — 101, Historical & Statutory Notes, at 882 (Smith-Hurd 1993)).1 The fundamental rule of statutory construction is to give effect to the intent of the legislature. E.g., State v. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d 242, 247 (1990). It is well established that in seeking to ascertain legislative intent, “[i]t is presumed that the legislature, in enacting various statutes, acts rationally and with full knowledge of all previous enactments.” Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 247-48; see also, e.g., DeGrand v. Motors Insurance Co., 146 Ill. 2d 521, 526 (1992); Spina v. Toyota Motor Credit Corp., 301 Ill. App. 3d 364, 376 (1998); Chicago Osteopathic Medical Centers v. City of Chicago, 271 Ill. App. 3d 165, 171-72 (1995). Inasmuch as section 13 — 212 of the Code of Civil Procedure was enacted subsequent to section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act, we may, pursuant to well-settled rules of construction, presume that the legislature acted with full knowledge of the limitation period in section 8 — 101, and may further presume that the legislature chose, in enacting section 13 — 212, to enlarge the period in which a cause of action may be brought against the specified defendants engaged in providing health services. Applying these traditional rules of analysis, two panels of our appellate court, in Lanxon v. Magnus, 296 Ill. App. 3d 377 (1998), and Cleaver v. Marrese, 253 Ill. App. 3d 778 (1993), and one federal district court, in Murry v. Sheahan, 991 F. Supp. 1052 (N.D. Ill. 1998), have considered the precise issue presented in the matter at bar. All three courts found section 13 — 212(a) to be more specific than section 8 — 101, and held that section 13 — 212(a) provided the applicable statute of limitations in medical malpractice actions against governmental entities and/or their employees. Without explanation or citation to authority, the plurality departs from these long-established rules by shifting the focus of the specificity inquiry exclusively to the “nature of the defendants.” 188 Ill. 2d at 194. In so doing, the plurality obviates any assessment of the nature of the plaintiffs claim and the type of injury sustained by the plaintiff. Indeed, it is only by altering the focus of the analysis that the plurality can escape the conclusion that section 13 — 212(a) is the more specifically applicable statute to the matter at bar. It is significant that the plurality provides no citation to any authority supporting its proposition that the specificity of a particular statute must be determined solely upon examination of the category of the defendants. Those courts which have considered the relevancy of the category of defendants covered under a particular statute have done so as part of the court’s overall specificity analysis. For example, in Wheatley v. Chicago Transit Authority, 289 Ill. App. 3d 60, 65 (1997), the appellate court found section 41 of the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act (70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1994)) to be more specific than section 8 — 101 of the Tort Immunity Act because the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act is only applicable to personal injury claims and only applicable to claims against the CTA. See also Heneghan v. Sekula, 181 Ill. App. 3d 238, 242 (1989) (section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is more specifically applicable than the limitations period for contribution actions (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 13 — 204) because section 13 — 212(a) applies to a specific type of claim and to a specific category of defendant). The plurality’s sole focus upon the category of defendants in determining a statute’s specificity appears unprecedented. The plurality finds that section 8 — 101 controls because it “specifically applies to defendants which are local entities and the employees of those entities which are a more specific category of defendant within the broader group of any physician, dentist, registered nurse or hospital described in section 13 — 212(a).” 188 Ill. 2d at 195. Not only is the plurality’s analysis misdirected, but its logic is flawed. The critical inquiry is which of these two conflicting statutes is more specifically applicable to this particular cause of action, namely, plaintiffs’ medical malpractice claims. I submit that section 13 — 212(a) controls, because it narrows, or makes more specific, the class of defendants as those individuals and entities directly involved in patient care. In contrast, section 8 — 101 sets forth an extremely broad category of defendants, and encompasses all governmental entities and their employees. Contrary to the plurality’s conclusion, the health care providers and hospitals governed by section 13 — 212(a) constitute a subset within the broader, all-encompassing “local government entity” category identified in section 8 — 101. The plurality’s newly conceived approach in determining the specificity of conflicting statutory provisions needlessly upsets long-established principles and may result in uncertainty among members of the bench and bar regarding which analysis should be employed. Further, the plurality opinion leaves many questions unanswered: Is the category-of-defendants approach meant to completely replace the traditional rules of specificity analysis? The plurality decision appears to completely foreclose consideration of the nature of a plaintiffs claims and the type of injury sustained in determining the specificity of a statutory provision. If the plurality’s intention was only to supplement, rather than replace, the traditional modes of analysis, then when and under what circumstances is the defendant-category approach to be employed? The plurality opinion implies, but does not state, that this approach will be utilized when a provision of the Tort Immunity Act conflicts with another statute. If this is the intended rule, it would be beneficial to the bench and bar to make this clear. In light of the overwhelming authority supporting the conclusion that section 13 — 212(a) is more specifically applicable to the claims at bar, there is considerable cause to question the basis of the plurality’s contrary decision. Review of the content of the plurality opinion reveals that, at its essence, this is a policy-driven decision aimed at achieving a particular result. The plurality’s conclusion that the one-year limitation period contained in section 8 — 101 is more specifically applicable to the matter at bar is supported, almost entirely, by reliance upon the legislative purpose in enacting the Tort Immunity Act. The plurality correctly observes that the purpose of the Act is to protect local public entities and their employees from liability arising from the operation of government, and, to this end, affords them greater protection than nongovernmental entities and their employees. The plurality also correctly notes that the purpose of the shorter limitations period in section 8 — 101 was to encourage early investigation into claims and to lessen the financial exposure of local government. Saragusa v. City of Chicago, 63 Ill. 2d 288, 293 (1976). Important policy considerations may be attendant to decisions dealing with municipal liability under the Tort Immunity Act. However, in the matter at bar, the plurality misses the critical fact that applying the limitation period contained in section 13 — 212(a) to municipal hospitals and their employees would not adversely affect the public interests protected by the Act, especially by section 8 — 101. The plurality’s holding that section 8 — 101 more specifically applies does not serve to immunize local government defendants from medical malpractice liability, nor does the holding alter the standard of liability applicable to medical malpractice actions. The ruling serves only to limit the time within which any medical malpractice action for injuries against a municipal hospital or any of its employees may be brought. However, all statutes of limitation serve the primary purpose of preventing extended exposure to potential liability by encouraging early investigation into claims during a period when witnesses and other evidence are available and conditions have not materially changed. See Hayes v. Mercy Hospital & Medical Center, 136 Ill. 2d 450, 457-58 (1990). Therefore, the application of the two-year limitation period of section 13 — 212(a) to all medical malpractice actions would not undermine the intention of the legislature. In its well-reasoned opinion in Lanxon v. Magnus, the appellate court outlined compelling policy interests militating against imposing the shorter time limitation of section 8 — 101 to medical malpractice actions. First, the court noted that due to the very nature of a medical malpractice claim, it is often not readily apparent to the injured party that he or she has a cause of action. Lanxon, 296 Ill. App. 3d at 383. In addition, medical malpractice actions usually involve complex issues which require compliance with certain requirements prior to the filing of the claim. For example, plaintiffs must obtain an affidavit from a physician (735 ILCS 5/2 — 622 (West 1996)) certifying that the plaintiff’s claim is meritorious. Lanxon, 296 Ill. App. 3d at 383. Finally, the Lanxon court noted that the fact that a facility is a municipal hospital may not be immediately apparent or known to an individual injured in such a facility. Therefore, it may not be known to an injured party, until it is too late, that the claim would be governed by a shorter statute of limitation due to the status of the hospital as a public entity. In sum, the court in Lanxon concluded that “[bjased upon the unique nature and procedural requirements of claims arising out of patient care, we find no reason to hold municipal hospitals to a lesser standard than any other hospital.” Lanxon, 296 Ill. App. 3d at 383. The court held that the two-year statute of limitation in section 13 — 212(a) should apply. With some recognition of the fundamental flaws in the legal analysis employed in the plurality opinion, one of my colleagues, as a means of salvaging the result achieved in this case, has attempted to ameliorate the unfairness inherent in the decision. However, this also is of no avail. In his special concurrence, Justice Heiple acknowledges the plurality’s legal analysis is “unpersuasive *** to the extent that section 8 — 101 is more general than section 13 — 212(a).” Justice Heiple, citing to this court’s decision in Stone v. Department of Employment Security Board of Review, 151 Ill. 2d 257, 266 (1992), attempts to defend the plurality’s result on the basis that section 8 — 101 presents “one of those instances where ‘the legislature intended to make the general act controlling.’ ” 188 Ill. 2d at 199 (Heiple, J., specially concurring). However, scrutiny of the Stone case reveals that the conclusion that the legislature intended to make the general act controlling in this instance is also unsupportable. In Stone, this court addressed the issue of whether the plaintiff had to name the Director of Employment Security as a defendant in his complaint seeking judicial review of a decision finding him ineligible for unemployment benefits. Resolution of this issue required this court to interpret two different statutes: section 1100 of the Unemployment Insurance Act (the Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 48, par. 520) and section 3 — 107 of the Administrative Review Law (the Review Law) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 3 — 107). Section 1100 of the Act provided that any decision made by the Board of Review of the Department of Employment Security was reviewable only in accordance with the Review Law, and, further, that the Director shall be deemed to be a party to any action on judicial review. Section 3 — 107 of the Review Law provided that all persons who were parties of record to the proceedings before the administrative agency shall, for purposes of judicial review, be made defendants. In Stone, the plaintiff argued that because the Director was not a party to the proceedings before the administrative agency, plaintiff was not required to name the Director in his complaint for judicial review. We began our analysis in Stone by noting that, “[a]s a starting point, we look for the intent of the legislature in the language of the statute.” Stone, 151 Ill. 2d at 261. Having concluded that the two statutes conflicted, this court observed that “ ‘[generally, specific statutory provisions control over general provisions on the same subject.’ ” Stone, 151 Ill. 2d at 266, quoting Williams v. Illinois State Scholarship Comm’n, 139 Ill. 2d 24, 57 (1990). However, this court held that “the more specific statute does not control where ‘it appears that the legislature intended to make the general act controlling.’ ” Stone, 151 Ill. 2d at 266, quoting 2B N. Singer, Sutherland on Statutory Construction § 51.05, at 174 (5th ed. 1992). Examining the statutes at issue in that case, we observed that, pursuant to section 3 — 102 of the Review Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 3 — 102), the legislature specifically provided in the statute that the Review Law would take precedence over other statutory modes of review. Therefore, this court held that because the Review Law itself stated that when its provisions are expressly adopted no other statutory mode of review is to be employed, it was clear that the legislature did not intend that the Director be named in a complaint seeking judicial review of a Board decision. Stone, 151 Ill. 2d at 266-67. In the case at bar, unlike Stone, the legislature did not include explicit instructions within the statutory language of the Tort Immunity Act to determine precedence in the event of conflicting provisions. Also, the Sutherland treatise on statutory construction provides that where one statute deals with a subject in general terms, and another deals with the subject more specifically, the latter will prevail, unless it appears that the legislature intended to make the general act controlling. 2B N. Singer, Sutherland on Statutory Construction § 51.05, at 174 (5th ed. 1992). Again, this rule supports the conclusion that section 13 — 212(a) should govern the matter at bar. As stated, not only is section 13 — 212(a) more specific than section 8 — 101, there also is no indication that the legislature intended that section 8 — 101 trump the two-year limitation period provided for medical malpractice actions in section 13 — 212(a). In sum, I believe that section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is the more specifically applicable statute in the case before us. Contrary to the plurality, I believe, as does Justice Harrison, that Lanxon and Cleaver were correctly decided and should not be overruled. The judgment of the appellate court should be reversed in this matter. JUSTICE RATHJE joins in, this dissent.   Although both statutes have been amended in recent years, the amendments did not remedy the conflict between these statutes as they relate to the limitations provisions for medical malpractice claims brought against municipal hospitals and/or their employees.

=== CASE 2230142 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.923225+00 ===

94 N.Y.2d 43 (1999)
720 N.E.2d 892
698 N.Y.S.2d 615
PHYLLIS SMALL et al., Individually and on Behalf of All Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
LORILLARD TOBACCO COMPANY, INC., et al., Respondents, et al., Defendants.
CATHERINE ZITO et al., Individually and on Behalf of All Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY, INC., et al., Respondents, et al., Defendants.
SHARLENE HOBERMAN et al., Individually and on Behalf of All Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
BROWN & WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORPORATION et al., Respondents, et al., Defendants.
ROSE FROSINA et al., Individually and on Behalf of All Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., Respondents, et al., Defendants.
MARY A. HOSKINS, as Executrix of EDWIN P. HOSKINS, Deceased, Individually and on Behalf of All Others Similarly Situated, Appellant,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY et al., Respondents, et al., Defendants.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued September 14, 1999.
Decided October 26, 1999.
*44 *45 *46 Goodkind Labaton Rudoff & Sucharow, L. L. P., New York City (Martis Ann Brachtl and Louis Gottlieb of counsel), and Henry Monaghan for appellants.
*47 Shook, Hardy, Bacon, L. L. P. (Gary R. Long and John K. Sherk, III, of the Missouri Bar, admitted pro hac vice, of counsel), Greenberg Traurig, New York City (Alan Mansfield, Robert J. Kirshenberg and Stephen Saxl of counsel), Deichert Price & Rhoads; Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue (Harold K. Gordon of counsel) and Chadbourne & Parke, L. L. P., for Lorillard Tobacco Company and others, respondents.
*48 Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York City (Roy L. Reardon, Mary Elizabeth McGarry and Joseph M. McLaughlin of counsel), for B.A.T. Industries P. L. C., respondent.
*49 Debevoise & Plimpton, New York City (Harry Zirlin and Steven Klugman of counsel), for Council for Tobacco Research-U.S.A., Inc., respondent.
Seward & Kissel, L. L. P., New York City (Jack Yoskowitz and Anthony Mansfield of counsel), for Tobacco Institute, Inc., respondent.
*50 Eliot Spitzer, Attorney General, New York City (Deon J. Nossel and Preeta D. Bansal of counsel), pro se, amicus curiae.
Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, CIPARICK, BRACKEN,[6] CARDONA[6] and LAWTON[6] concur; Chief Judge KAYE and Judges LEVINE and ROSENBLATT taking no part.
OPINION OF THE COURT
WESLEY, J.
These consolidated appeals encompass five proposed class action suits. They are brought by plaintiffs alleging that defendants individually and collectively deceived them about the addictive properties of cigarettes and fraudulently induced them to purchase and continue to smoke cigarettes.
The trial court determined that class certification was a statutorily authorized method to adjudicate the multiplicity of claims. After the court found that plaintiffs pleaded valid causes of action against defendants and that their claims were not preempted by the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 USC § 1331 et seq.), it denied without prejudice defendant B.A.T. Industries' motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction.[1]
The Appellate Division decertified the classes. It also concluded that certain claims were preempted by the Federal Act, and dismissed the remaining causes of action. In granting *51 leave to appeal, the Appellate Division certified the usual question to us: "Was the order of this Court, which reversed the orders of the Supreme Court, properly made?" We answer yes, and affirm the Appellate Division order.
I.
Five class actions on behalf of New York consumers were filed against defendant tobacco companies and two other entities, the Council for Tobacco Research and the Tobacco Institute. In each of the suits, plaintiffs sought to represent a class of New York residents who, on or after June 19, 1980,[2] became or continued to be nicotine dependent as a result of buying and smoking cigarettes in New York that were manufactured by defendants.
Plaintiffs allege that defendants used deceptive commercial practices to sell their cigarettes to New Yorkers and that they would not have bought these cigarettes had they known that nicotine is an addictive drug; that the tobacco companies controlled the level of nicotine in their cigarettes to cause or maintain nicotine addiction; and, that the companies secretly used chemicals to enhance the addictive propensities of nicotine. Plaintiffs also assert that the companies suppressed research indicating that nicotine is addictive. They seek only the reimbursement of the purchase cost of cigarettes that they claim they would not have bought, but for defendants' fraudulent and deceptive practices.[3]
In each case, plaintiffs' lawyers moved to certify the class of addicted smokers alleged in the various complaints. In considering the requirements for class certification pursuant to CPLR 901 (a), the trial court determined that "a claim which turns on proof of actual addiction would involve far too many *52 subjective factors" (Small v Lorillard Tobacco Co., 175 Misc 2d 294, 300). The court concluded that issues regarding addiction are not part of the claims presented because "the central issue is whether plaintiffs and the class members can recoup the money they spent in a transaction that was purportedly riddled with fraudulent activities" (id., at 301). The court sua sponte eliminated the need to prove an individual's nicotine addiction; redefined the proposed class definition to include plaintiffs and potential class members who purchased defendants' cigarettes while the defendants were allegedly engaging in a pattern of fraudulent activities; and, as redefined, certified the classes. Plaintiffs have accepted the court-modified class definition for purposes of the litigation and their appeal to this Court.
In a separate order, the trial court also determined that plaintiffs pleaded fraud with sufficient particularity and that their claims were not preempted by the Federal Labeling Act (Small v Lorillard Tobacco Co., 176 Misc 2d 413). The court also denied without prejudice defendant B.A.T.'s motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction.
The Appellate Division reversed both orders on a composite appeal of the entire matter (Small v Lorillard Tobacco Co., 252 AD2d 1). After analyzing the requirements of CPLR 901 (a), the Court held that class certification was not justified under the statutory criteria. It also determined that plaintiffs' claims were preempted by the Federal statute, insofar as they allege fraudulent concealment and failure to warn of the dangers of nicotine. While it concluded that plaintiffs' claims alleging affirmative misrepresentation were not preempted by the Federal statute, the Court nonetheless dismissed those claims because they were not pleaded with the required specificity.[4]
II.
As a threshold matter, this Court must determine the breadth of its power to review the Appellate Division order decertifying the classes. Whether a lawsuit qualifies as a class action matter is a determination made upon a review of the statutory criteria as applied to the facts presented; it ordinarily rests within the sound discretion of the trial court (CPLR 901; see also, Brown v State of New York, 250 AD2d 314, 320). The Appellate Division, as a branch of Supreme Court, is vested *53 with the same discretionary power and may exercise that power, even when there has been no abuse of discretion as a matter of law by the nisi prius court (O'Connor v Papertsian, 309 NY 465, 471).
The Appellate Division stated in its order granting leave to appeal and in its order of reversal that its ruling was made on the law; in deciding the appeal, however, it also undertook an exercise of its discretion (see, e.g., Brown v City of New York, 60 NY2d 893, 894). Our approach to this case is to review whether the Appellate Division abused its discretion as a matter of law (see, Weinberg v Hertz Corp., 69 NY2d 979, 981, citing Herrick v Second Cuthouse, 64 NY2d 692, 693; Brady v Ottoway Newspapers, 63 NY2d 1031, 1032-1033).
CPLR 901 (a) sets forth the criteria a court must consider in deciding to certify a class action:
"1. the class is so numerous that joinder of all members, whether otherwise required or permitted, is impracticable;
"2. there are questions of law or fact common to the class which predominate over any questions affecting only individual members;
"3. the claims or defenses of the representative parties are typical of the claims or defenses of the class;
"4. the representative parties will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class; and
"5. a class action is superior to other available methods for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy."
In reviewing the number of potential claims, the Appellate Division agreed with the findings of the trial court that each of the five classes would contain at least one million members (CPLR 901 [a] [1]). It then turned its attention to CPLR 901 (a) (2) and determined that individual issues would predominate throughout the classes. Notwithstanding Supreme Court's removal of addiction as an element of plaintiffs' pleaded theory of their cases, the Appellate Division found that individual proof of addiction remains at the core of proving "injury," for a claim under General Business Law § 349. The Appellate Division also noted that the dangers of smoking had been well documented and were generally known to the public. According to *54 the Court, this widely available information foreclosed any presumption of reliance and required individualized inquiry into whether each class member was unaware of that information with regard to their causes of action for false advertising under section 350 of the General Business Law and common-law fraud.
The Appellate Division also concluded that the proposed class actions would be unmanageable because of the individual issues of damages with respect to each of the five million plaintiffs. Moreover, because the named plaintiffs' individual claims failed to establish the elements of reliance and causation, the Appellate Division determined that they were inadequate to represent a putative class of all persons who purchased and smoked cigarettes in New York. Thus, plaintiffs' claims were not "typical" of the class (CPLR 901 [a] [3]). We are persuaded that the Appellate Division did not abuse its review and adjudicative powers in these respects, nor did it commit legal error in this regard.
The Appellate Division next considered whether the named representative parties would fairly and adequately protect the interests of the classes (CPLR 901 [a] [4]). The Court concluded that plaintiffs had limited their claim for damages to the purchase price of cigarettes in order to shape a legally de minimis theory of the case:
"[Plaintiffs] limit[ed] their claims to losses incurred after 1980, even though defendants have allegedly been defrauding the public since the 1950's, for no other apparent reason than to make this a `negative value' suit where each member's damages are so small that only a class action would be worth the expense of litigation" (Small v Lorillard Tobacco Co., 252 AD2d 1, 11, supra).
Moreover, the Appellate Division recognized a tension between the claims selected by the named plaintiffs and those of absent class members. The Court reasoned that the injury (the purchase price of cigarettes that they would not have otherwise purchased) of the redefined classes and the limitation of claims to losses incurred after 1980 could in effect preclude all New York smokers from bringing other possibly substantial claims for personal injury and emotional distress based on nicotine addiction. Because the named plaintiffs limited their theory in these significant ways, the Court concluded that plaintiffs' claims inadequately represented a putative class of all persons *55 who purchased and smoked cigarettes in New York. The Appellate Division did not abuse its discretion nor did it commit an error of law in this regard.
Lastly, the Appellate Division examined the difficulties likely to be encountered in the management of the class actions (CPLR 901 [a] [5]). The Court considered how a trial on the merits would be conducted and determined that the proposed class actions would be unmanageable because of the individualized nature of many of the issues. The Court expressed concern over the potential litigation logjam that would render the actions unmanageable.
In sum, within the range of this Court's review powers, we are satisfied that the Appellate Division properly weighed the relevant statutory factors and correctly fulfilled its intermediate appellate court role and powers. No cogent basis has been presented upon which this Court should disturb that Court's decertification-of-classes ruling.
III.
Since plaintiffs cannot proceed as class representatives, this Court must next resolve whether they can move forward on the remaining individual causes of action.
Section 349 (a) of the General Business Law encompasses deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any business, trade or commerce or in the furnishing of any service in this State. Section 349 governs consumer-oriented conduct and, on its face, applies to virtually all economic activity (Karlin v IVF Am., 93 NY2d 282, 290). Generally, claims under the statute are available to an individual consumer who falls victim to misrepresentations made by a seller of consumer goods through false or misleading advertising (Genesco Entertainment v Koch, 593 F Supp 743, 751).
To state a claim under the statute, a plaintiff must allege that the defendant has engaged "in an act or practice that is deceptive or misleading in a material way and that plaintiff has been injured by reason thereof" (Oswego Laborers' Local 214 Pension Fund v Marine Midland Bank, 85 NY2d 20, 25, citing Varela v Investors Ins. Holding Corp., 81 NY2d 958, 961; Givens, Practice Commentaries, McKinney's Cons Laws of NY, Book 19, General Business Law § 349, at 565). Intent to defraud and justifiable reliance by the plaintiff are not elements of the statutory claim (Oswego Laborers' Local 214 Pension Fund v Marine Midland Bank, supra, at 26). However, *56 proof that "a material deceptive act or practice caused actual, although not necessarily pecuniary, harm" is required to impose compensatory damages (id. [emphasis added]).
Plaintiffs argue that the Appellate Division incorrectly held that they must prove that they were addicted to nicotine in order to allege a cognizable injury and harm, as contemplated and prescribed by the statute. According to plaintiffs, addiction is not the injury; rather, plaintiffs assert that defendants' deception prevented them from making free and informed choices as consumers. Plaintiffs add that had they known that nicotine was addictive, they never would have purchased cigarettes. They posit that consumers who buy a product that they would not have purchased, absent a manufacturer's deceptive commercial practices, have suffered an injury under General Business Law § 349. We disagree.
Plaintiffs' definition of injury is legally flawed. Their theory contains no manifestation of either pecuniary or "actual" harm; plaintiffs do not allege that the cost of cigarettes was affected by the alleged misrepresentation, nor do they seek recovery for injury to their health as a result of their ensuing addiction (General Business Law § 349 [h]; Oswego Laborers' Local 214 Pension Fund v Marine Midland Bank, supra, at 26). Indeed, they chose expressly to confine the relief sought solely to monetary recoupment of the purchase price of the cigarettes. Plaintiffs' cause of action under this statute, as redefined by the trial court and as embraced by them, thus sets forth deception as both act and injury.
In rejecting plaintiffs' flawed "deception as injury" theory, the Appellate Division correctly pinpointed that addiction is inescapably the cornerstone of plaintiffs' legal claims. Because plaintiffs abandoned the addiction component of the legal theory of their cases, they therefore fail to demonstrate that they were "actually harmed" or suffered pecuniary injury by reason of any alleged deception within the meaning of the statute. They cannot have it both ways. Without addiction as part of the injury claim, there is no connection between the misrepresentation and any harm from, or failure of, the product.[5]
*57 Plaintiffs' failure to present a legally cognizable injury also renders their common-law fraudulent concealment claims insufficient on their face. To make out a prima facie case of fraud, the complaint must contain allegations of a representation of material fact, falsity, scienter, reliance and injury (Vermeer Owners v Guterman, 78 NY2d 1114, 1116). The circumstances constituting the fraud must be stated in detail (CPLR 3016 [b]).
The flaw in plaintiffs' statutory claim foretells the inadequacy of the common-law claims: an act of deception, entirely independent or separate from any injury, is not sufficient to state a cause of action under a theory of fraudulent concealment. Thus, plaintiffs' common-law fraud claims also fail. As a result, there is no independent tort to provide a basis for liability under their concert of action, conspiracy, and aiding and abetting theories. These causes of action must fail as well (Rastelli v Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 79 NY2d 289, 295-297 [concert of action]; Alexander & Alexander v Fritzen, 68 NY2d 968, 969 [conspiracy]; Restatement [Second] of Torts § 876, comment d [aiding and abetting]).
We do not reach the remaining arguments in this case, as they are unnecessary to the full disposition of this appeal.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs, and the certified question answered in the affirmative.
Order affirmed, etc.
NOTES
[1]  B.A.T. is a British-based company with a subsidiary, Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation, operating in the United States.
[2]  Plaintiffs acknowledge that this date corresponds to the date that General Business Law § 349New York's consumer fraud statutewas amended to give individuals who are injured by reason of any violation of this section a private right of action to enjoin the unlawful act or practice and/or an action to recover damages or $50, whichever is greater (General Business Law § 349 [h]).
[3]  Plaintiffs' original five causes of action were: (1) fraud/fraudulent concealment; (2) violations of General Business Law § 349; (3) violations of General Business Law § 350; (4) civil conspiracy; and (5) concert of action/aiding and abetting. Plaintiffs are not appealing the dismissal of their claims brought under General Business Law § 350, for affirmative fraudulent misrepresentations and for injunctive relief. They therefore appeal only their claims of common-law fraudulent concealment, General Business Law § 349, civil conspiracy, and concert of action/aiding and abetting.
[4]  The Appellate Division also dismissed the complaint against B.A.T. based on the insufficiency of plaintiffs' complaint. Since we are affirming, there is no need to address or resolve B.A.T.'s jurisdictional issues.
[5]  The Attorney General, who appears as amicus curiae in support of appellants' position, likens this case to a situation where a distributor asserts that its bottled water is from a pure and pristine mountain stream while in reality, it was only tap water. The Attorney General may be right that a plaintiff might have a claim for the higher price the consumer paid for the product as a result of the misrepresentation in that circumstance. That is not this case. Plaintiffs do not contend that the deception here caused an inflated price.
[6]  Designated pursuant to NY Constitution, article VI, § 2.

=== CASE 2230143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.9613+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1108 (1999)
308 Ill. App.3d 546
242 Ill.Dec. 153
Aaron W. HENDERSON, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
ROADWAY EXPRESS, Defendant (Liberty Life Assurance Company of Boston and Keyport Life Insurance Company, Intervenors-Appellees).
No. 4-98-0928.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
Argued August 24, 1999.
Decided October 19, 1999.
*1109 John B. Simon, Robert S. Markin, Russ M. Strobel (argued), Jenner & Block, David Lincoln Ader, Brian P. Mack, Ancel, Glink, Diamond, Cope & Bush, P.C., Chicago, for Aaron Henderson.
William A. Chittenden, III (argued), Laura A. Smith, Peterson & Ross, Chicago, for Liberty Life Assurance Company of Boston.
Michael Resis, Glen E. Amundsen, O'Hagan, Smith & Amundsen, LLC, Chicago, for Amicus Curiae State Farm Life Insurance Company.
Lorilea Buerkett, Emmet A. Fairfield, Brown, Hay & Stephens, Springfield, for Amicus Curiae National Assn. of Settlement Purchasers.
Justice COOK delivered the opinion of the court:
In August 1997, Aaron Henderson settled a personal injury lawsuit against Roadway Express. Pursuant to the settlement agreement, Henderson agreed to accept a lump-sum payment of $137,500, 14 future annual periodic payments of $2,500 each, and a $25,000 payment due in 2012. Paragraph 3 of the settlement agreement contained an antiassignment provision that provided:
"3.0 Plaintiff's Rights to Payments
Plaintiff [Henderson] acknowledges that the Periodic Payments cannot be accelerated, deferred, increased or decreased by the Plaintiff; nor shall the Plaintiff have the power to sell, mortgage, encumber, or anticipate the Periodic Payments, or any part thereof, by assignment or otherwise." (Emphasis added.)
The settlement agreement did not prevent Roadway Express from assigning its liability. Paragraph 6 of the settlement agreement provided:
"6.0 Right to Purchase an Annuity.
Defendant itself [Roadway Express] or through its Assignee [may] reserve the right to fund the liability to make the Periodic Payments through the purchase of an annuity policy. * * * The Defendant or the assignee shall be the sole owner of the annuity policy and shall have all rights of ownership."
Soon after executing the settlement agreement, Roadway Express assigned its liability to Keyport Life Insurance Company (Keyport). The uniform qualified assignment also contained an antiassignment provision that provided "[n]one of the Periodic Payments may be accelerated, deferred, increased or decreased and may not be anticipated, sold, assigned or encumbered." (Emphasis added.) Keyport subsequently purchased an annuity from Liberty Life Assurance Company of Boston (Liberty) to fund its liability to make payments to Henderson. The annuity contract stated "the rights and privileges stated in this policy may be exercised only by the Owner [(Keyport)]."
Despite the antiassignment provisions, Henderson attempted to assign a portion of his future settlement payments in May 1998 to Singer Asset Finance Company (Singer) in exchange for an immediate, discounted lump-sum payment. Under the terms of the purchase agreement, Henderson would receive a lump-sum payment of $12,210 in exchange for his assignment to Singer of 12 annual payments of $2,500. Thereafter, Henderson filed a petition to allow assignment of annuity benefits with the circuit court of Vermilion County. Section 155.34 of the Illinois Insurance Code (Insurance Code) prohibits *1110 assignment of structured settlement benefits without court approval. 215 ILCS 5/155.34 (West 1998).
The circuit court refused to approve Henderson's assignment, holding the settlement agreement clearly and unambiguously prohibited the parties from assigning any of the periodic payments. Henderson appeals, attacking the circuit court's decision with a barrage of arguments. Henderson argues his assignment should have been upheld despite the antiassignment clause because the modern trend of authority disfavors contractual prohibitions on assignments, especially in his case, where the antiassignment provisions were ambiguous and failed to expressly make the assignment "void." Also, Henderson argues the assignment must be allowed where the only obligation is the payment of money, the antiassignment provisions are waived because they were for his sole benefit, and the assignment is consistent with section 155.31 of the Insurance Code. Henderson's final contention is that article 9 of the Uniform Commercial CodeSecured Transactions (Commercial Code) (810 ILCS 5/9-101 through 9-9902 (West 1998)) prohibits the enforcement of the restrictions on assignments.
The trial court's denial of Henderson's assignment was based on its interpretation of the settlement contract. Construing the language of a contract is a question of law, and we review a trial court's determination of a contract de novo. Reaver v. Rubloff-Sterling, L.P., 303 Ill.App.3d 578, 581, 236 Ill.Dec. 973, 708 N.E.2d 559, 561 (1999). When construing a contract, our duty is to effectuate the intent of the parties to the contract. Blackhawk Hotel Associates v. Kaufman, 85 Ill.2d 59, 64, 51 Ill.Dec. 658, 421 N.E.2d 166, 168 (1981). The intent of the parties must be determined from the plain and ordinary meaning of the language of the contract, unless the contract is ambiguous. Foxfield Realty, Inc. v. Kubala, 287 Ill. App.3d 519, 523, 223 Ill.Dec. 52, 678 N.E.2d 1060, 1063 (1997). A contract is ambiguous only if it is susceptible to more than one reasonable interpretation. Reaver, 303 Ill.App.3d at 581, 236 Ill.Dec. 973, 708 N.E.2d at 561.
Henderson claims the settlement agreement is ambiguous regarding the permissibility of assignments because paragraph 14 of the same agreement states:
"14.0 Entire Agreement and Successors in Interest
This Settlement Agreement contains the entire agreement between the Plaintiff and the Defendant with regard to the matters set forth in it and shall be binding upon and enure to the benefit of the executors, administrators, personal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns of each." (Emphasis added.)
Henderson argues that while paragraph 3 purports to bar assignments, paragraph 14 recognizes the validity of such assignments. Due to this conflict, Henderson argues the settlement agreement is confusing and ambiguous, and the antiassignment provisions must be construed as unenforceable.
We find the plain language of the settlement agreement clearly indicates the parties intended to forbid Henderson from assigning his periodic payments. Paragraph 3, entitled "Plaintiff's Rights to Payments," specifically states Henderson lacked the power to sell or anticipate his periodic payments, "by assignment or otherwise." Paragraph 14, appears to address an entirely different issue and does not render the contract ambiguous or conflicting. Paragraph 14, entitled "Entire Agreement and Successors in Interest," appears to be an integration clause that addresses the issue of who retains rights under the agreement upon the death or dissolution of a party. The two clauses are easily harmonized. Paragraph 3 specifically prevents Henderson from assigning periodic payments, but does not prevent either party from assigning other rights or obligations under the contract. *1111 The reference to "assigns" in paragraph 14 may reasonably be interpreted to refer to those assignments that are not expressly prohibited under the contract. When both a general and specific clause address the same subject, full effect should be given to the more specific clause, and the general clause should be given whatever modification the specific clause makes necessary. Grevas v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 152 Ill.2d 407, 411, 178 Ill.Dec. 419, 604 N.E.2d 942, 944 (1992). Also, when possible, courts should construe a contract so that different provisions are harmonized and not conflicting with one another. Snelten v. Schmidt Implement Co., 269 Ill.App.3d 988, 993, 207 Ill.Dec. 578, 647 N.E.2d 1071, 1074 (1995). Judging from the clear and logical meaning of the language of the whole contract, it appears the parties intended just what the contract said: Henderson lacked the power to assign the periodic payments. All parties were represented by counsel during the drafting of the settlement agreement and Henderson does not allege he suffered from an inferior bargaining position.
Nevertheless, Henderson contends we should set aside the antiassignment provision because the recent weight of authority disfavors such provisions and refuses to enforce them unless they explicitly state that any attempted assignment is "`void,' or `invalid,' or `otherwise ineffective.' "In support of this contention, Henderson cites various federal cases, cases from other jurisdictions, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 322 (1981), and leading commentators on the law of contracts.
Illinois case law has never addressed the specific issue of whether a court may disregard an antiassignment provision in a structured settlement agreement. Few Illinois decisions have addressed the issue of validity of antiassignment provisions at all. In cases involving real estate, such provisions are generally disfavored and narrowly construed. See Postal Telegraph Cable Co. v. Western Union Telegraph Co., 155 Ill. 335, 347-48, 40 N.E. 587, 590 (1895) ("[r]estrictions on the power of alienation have long been [dis]favored"); Wachta v. First Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n, 103 Ill.App.3d 174, 181, 58 Ill.Dec. 676, 430 N.E.2d 708, 715 (1981) (the policy of this State has always been to construe such restrictions with the utmost strictness). In State Street Furniture Co. v. Armour & Co., 345 Ill. 160, 177 N.E. 702 (1931), the Supreme Court of Illinois upheld the assignment of an employee's wages despite a provision disallowing assignments without the employer's consent. The court stated, "[w]hen one has incurred a debt * * * the debtor cannot restrain its alienation * * *. A debt is property, which may be sold or assigned * * *." State Street Furniture Co., 345 Ill. at 165, 177 N.E. at 704-05. The court was concerned the employer had not bargained for the antiassignment provision and had inserted the provision for his own benefit. State Street Furniture Co., 345 Ill. at 162-63, 177 N.E. at 703-04. In Lomas Mortgage U.S.A., Inc. v. W.E. O'Neil Construction Co., 812 F.Supp. 841, 844 (N.D.Ill. 1993), a federal district case applying Illinois law, an assignment was upheld despite an antiassignment provision where the terms of the contract did not specifically render void an attempted assignment, the contract only restricted the "right" and not the "power" to assign, and to void the assignment would be against the intent of the parties and would advance no useful policy.
Other jurisdictions have addressed the precise issue presented in this case, with varying results. In Johnson v. First Colony Life Insurance Co., 26 F.Supp.2d 1227 (C.D.Cal.1998), the court upheld an antiassignment clause, with language almost identical to the antiassignment clause in this case, where a plaintiff attempted to sell his periodic payments from a structured settlement to a factoring company in exchange for a lump-sum payment. The court found the language of the antiassignment *1112 clause mirrored the language of section 130 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (hereinafter Internal Revenue Code) (26 U.S.C. § 130 (1994)) relating to the tax treatment of the assignee of liability and therefore was bargained for and included for the benefit of the defendants. Johnson, 26 F.Supp.2d at 1229. The Johnson court also dismissed the plaintiff's argument that he could waive the provision, stating "it defies all logic that a party could have the right to waive a term that, by its unambiguous language, restricts that party's own behavior." Johnson, 26 F.Supp.2d at 1229.
In Grieve v. General American Life Insurance Co., 58 F.Supp.2d 319 (D.Vt.1999), the federal district court also upheld an antiassignment clause that contained the same language as the clauses in Johnson and the present case. The court found the antiassignment provision was clear and unambiguous and that the proposed assignment would materially increase the defendant's risk of adverse tax consequences. Grieve, 58 F.Supp.2d at 324. The court stated that "this court will not lend its approval to the voiding of unambiguous, bargained-for contract terms in order to enable Singer [proposed assignee] to profit, at an exorbitant rate of interest." Grieve, 58 F.Supp.2d at 324.
However, in Wonsey v. Life Insurance Co. of North America, 32 F.Supp.2d 939 (E.D.Mich.1998), the court upheld the assignment of structured settlement payments, finding a modern trend of upholding assignments in the face of contractual antiassignment clauses. The court found the clause was for the benefit of the plaintiff's assignor and distinguished Johnson on the "critical factual difference" that the language of the antiassignment provision in Wonsey did not suggest the clause was designed as a tax benefit for defendants like the provision in Johnson. Wonsey, 32 F.Supp.2d at 944.
Henderson argues the antiassignment provision was included for his sole benefit. He argues that such provisions in a structured settlement are intended solely to protect the vulnerable claimant from squandering his money and ensuring claimant a steady stream of tax-sheltered income over time. The defendants argue the antiassignment provisions protect all parties, not just Henderson. If Henderson is allowed to assign his periodic payments for a lump-sum payment, defendants argue adverse tax consequences may arise for Henderson, Liberty, and Keyport.
We find the antiassignment provision was a bargained for provision that was intended to benefit all parties and, therefore, is enforceable against Henderson. As the United States Treasury Department has recently explained:
"Congress enacted favorable tax rules intended to encourage the use of structured settlementsand conditioned such tax treatment on the injured person's inability to accelerate, defer, increase[,] or decrease the periodic paymentsbecause recipients of structured settlements are less likely than recipients of lump[-]sum awards to consume their awards too quickly and require public assistance." United States Treasury Department, General Explanations of the Administration's Revenue Proposals, at 20 (February 1998).
Structured settlements and the favorable tax treatment they enjoy also help guarantee predictability for insurers, which is important for transactions involving long-term liabilities. The current favorable tax treatment afforded to both annuity owners, annuity issuers, and claimants presupposes that (1) the structured settlement payments constitute tax-free injury compensation to the recipient, and (2) the structured settlement recipient can receive the settlement payments only when they are due and cannot accelerate the payments or otherwise derive present economic benefit from payments due in the future. United States Treasury Department, General Explanations of the Administration's Revenue Proposals, at 20 (February 1998). *1113 More important than whether or not these tax concerns are real or will actually arise is the fact that the parties implemented the antiassignment provisions with these concerns in mind. The language of the provisions tracks the qualified assignment language of section 130(c)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. 26 U.S.C. § 130(c)(2)(B) (1994). Clearly, the provisions were bargained for and cannot be simply discarded or waived.
Henderson also attempts to avoid the antiassignment provisions by arguing they are prohibited by article 9 of the Commercial Code. "A term in any contract between an account debtor and an assignor is ineffective if it prohibits assignment of an account or prohibits creation of a security interest in a general intangible for money due or to become due * * *." 810 ILCS 5/9-318(4) (West 1998). However, section 9-104(g) of the Commercial Code expressly excludes from article 9 "a transfer of an interest or claim in or under any policy of insurance, except as provided with respect to proceeds * * * and priorities in proceeds." 810 ILCS 5/9-104(g) (West 1998). An "annuity policy" is an "insurance policy providing for monthly or periodic payments to the insured." Black's Law Dictionary 89 (7th ed. 1999). Accordingly, article 9 does not apply to annuity policies, such as the one here. Wonsey, 32 F.Supp.2d at 942.
The antiassignment provision of the settlement agreement very clearly forbids Henderson from assigning his periodic payments. Henderson does not provide any persuasive authority or case law, certainly not Illinois case law, to justify why we should ignore the parties' clear intentions to incorporate this bargained-for provision. Under the circumstances of this case, any general policy of enabling persons to transfer property freely does not outweigh the parties' contractual intentions and the public policy of providing steady income and tax-favorable treatment to claimants of structured settlements, as evidenced by the recent passage of section 155.34 of the Insurance Code.
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Vermilion County.
Affirmed.
KNECHT, P.J., and McCULLOUGH, J., concur.

=== CASE 2230144 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:37.996064+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1250 (1999)
Norman R. COWPER, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Ray A. COLLIER and John D. Collier, Appellees-Petitioners.
No. 32A01-9812-CV-441.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 27, 1999.
*1251 Don A. Tabbert, Wm. D. Lalley, William W. Matthews, Tabbert Hahn Earnest & Weddle, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellant.
Gregory W. Black, Deckard & O'Brien, Danville, Indiana, Attorney For Appellees.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, Jon Laramore, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Amicus Curiae.
OPINION
BAILEY, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant Norman Cowper ("Cowper") appeals from the trial court's judgment, which reversed and vacated an order entered by the Indiana Natural Resource Commission ("NRC"). The NRC, acting under the Indiana Timber Buyer's Act ("TBA"), IND.CODE § 25-36.5-1-3.2, affirmed the decision of an administrative law judge ("ALJ") which concluded that there was no enforceable contract between Cowper and Ray and John Collier ("Tree Buyers") and that Tree Buyers were liable to Cowper. Tree Buyers petitioned the trial court for judicial review. After reviewing the findings promulgated by the NRC, hearing oral argument by the parties, and considering the parties' proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, the trial court determined that a contract existed between Cowper and Tree Buyers, and that the TBA did not extend jurisdiction to the NRC to interpret that written contract. We reverse the trial court in part and remand to the NRC to determine damages.
Issue
Cowper raises three issues on appeal which we consolidate and restate as follows:
Whether the NRC erred by granting relief to Cowper with respect to those trees acquired in excess of the number provided for by contract.
Facts and Procedural History
Cowper owns approximately 50 acres of land, much of it covered with timber. (R. 531). In 1993, a storm damaged numerous trees located on Cowper's land. (R. 531). Cowper wanted to sell the damaged timber. (R. 531). Cowper contacted several loggers and timber companies regarding the sale of the damaged timber. (R. 979-983, *1252 988, 992). From these contacts, Cowper learned that he would need to also sell undamaged trees to make the sale worthwhile for loggers. (R. 584).
On February 3, 1994, Cowper entered into a contract with Tree Buyers, which reads in pertinent part as follows: [italics indicate handwritten terms]
TIMBER CONTRACT
No. 025
Norman R. Cowper
of Morgan County
State of Ind[.], hereby sells to
JOHN COLLIER LOGGING, R.R. 1,
Box 413, Coatsville, IN 46121
for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($12,500.00) the receipt
of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($12,500.00) of which amount is
hereby acknowledged, the standing timber
described as follows:
18" and up on stump
the attached document shall be a part
of this contract the same as if printed
here
located upon the following described real
estate in Morgan County, State of Ind[.]
to-wit:
SE1/4, SE1/4 SEC. 36 T13 R1W (40A)
AND PART of NE1/4, NE1/4 SEC. 1
T12 R1W (12A MORE OR LESS)
JOHN COLLIER LOGGING, their
agents, subcontractors, and assigns shall
have the full and free rights of ingress
and egress with trucks, tractors, and
other logging equipment, to and from
and upon the land of the sellers, for the
purpose of cutting, felling and removing
said timber and unless otherwise stated
in this contract, is granted a period of 15
months from this date to remove same.
The seller and owner of said land on
which timber is located expressly warrants
title and right to sell the timber
herein referred to, and that there are no
liens or mortgages of any kind against
same.
In event original owner and seller desires
to sell above mentioned farm, and
the timber belonging to JOHN COLLIER
LOGGING, has not been removed,
he must reserve same in deed to
new owner, showing JOHN COLLIER
LOGGING as timber.
Witness One hand this 3 day of Feb[.],
1994
Witness:
Ray Collier [signature]
Norman R. Cowper [signature]
[page 1]
The handwritten document incorporated by reference in the first page of the contract reads as follows:
FEB. 3, 1994
MARTINSVILLE, IN 46151
TOTAL NUMBER OF TREES 18" IN
DIAMETER OR GREATER IS 175
PLUS 26 16" DIAMETER OR LARGER
THAT ARE STORM DAMAGED.
ADDITIONAL STORM DAMAGED
TREES NEAR THE RESIDENCE
WILL BE FELLED AS AGREED.
COLLIER TIMBER WILL FURNISH
AN INSTALL 36 LINEAL FEET OF
24" DIAMETER 16 GA. CORRUGATED
AND GALVANIZED STEEL CULVERT,
NECESSARY SITE PREPARATION,
AND AT LEAST 100 TON
OF # 1 CRUSHED STONE.... SAID
ROAD AND CULVERT IS FOR INGRESS
AND EGRESS DURING THE
LOGGING OPERATION AND IS TO
REMAIN FOR OWNERS USE AFTER
THIS CONTRACT EXPIRES.
THIS ROAD AND ALL OTHER
HAUL ROADS SHALL BE REPAIRED
AT THE END OF LOGGING
OPERATIONS.
. . . .
Ray Collier [signature]
Norman R. Cowper [signature]
*1253 [page 2]
(R. 26-27). Tree Buyer (Ray Collier) filled in the amount to be paid for the trees, the phrase "18" and up on stump," as well as the phrase "the attached document shall be a part of this contract as if printed here." (R. 603, 1454). The second page of the above contract, with exception of the number of trees to be logged, was handwritten and prepared by Cowper prior to the date of signing. (R. 606, 765). Cowper and Tree Buyer (Ray Collier) discussed the number of trees to be inserted in the blanks, the numbers "175" and "26" were then inserted, each page signed and stapled. (R. 766). Several counts of stumps, taken after Tree Buyers had completed the logging of Cowper's property, revealed that approximately 500 undamaged trees of 18 inches in diameter were taken. (R. 202). Cowper contends that the contract limited Tree Buyers to 175 undamaged trees of 18 inches and up, and 26 damaged trees of 16 inches and up. (R. 532). Tree Buyers contend that the contract did not limit the number of trees 18 inches and up on the stump. (R. 532).
Cowper filed a complaint with the NRC, alleging that the parties had contracted for the removal of no more than 175 trees 18 inches in diameter and sought treble damages for the approximately 325 trees which were taken without his permission. (R. 853). This matter was tried before the ALJ for the NRC. The ALJ ruled that between the parties no valid written contract existed. (R. 208).
The ALJ considered the following findings in assessing the fair market value of Cowper's timber:
42. Cowper had one prior experience in selling timber off his property in 1982, when he sold 350 trees for approximately $20,000, an average of $55-$60 per tree.
43. While it is true that the timber cutter in 1982 would have picked the best 350 trees he could find at that price, to find that Cowper intended to sell over 500 trees for approximately $15,000 in compensation, the trier of fact would have to conclude that Cowper was willing to sell his marketable trees for ½ that amount per tree.
44.... [T]here is no evidence in the record from which a conclusion can be drawn that Cowper would sell his trees for 50% of the per-tree price some 12 years later in an inflationary economy.
45. Conversely, the trees involved in the cutting were trees that were passed over 11 or 12 years before this cutting and with the exception of some quality oak trees, were not high grade timber.
....
The ALJ also considered the testimony of two consultant foresters, Hudson, who had walked Cowper's property and derived the value of the trees from the remaining stumps, and Stambaugh, who reviewed the methodology employed by Hudson. (R. 203-04). Additionally, the ALJ heard testimony from Kelly, a forester and timber buyer specializing in veneer quality timber. (R. 205).
83. Based on the stump size, species, and normal tapering, Hudson estimated the stumpage value at approximately $50,000.
....
89. Stambaugh agreed with the approach and methodology employed by Hudson.
....
93. Kelly looked at the timber while it was standing.
94. Kelly was not interested in submitting a bid because only white oak was of veneer quality and most of the white oaks had been taken during the first cutting 10 years ago.
95. Kelly told Cowper he might get $10,000....
....
99. The evidence presented by [Tree Buyers] and their bookkeeper indicated that the value received at mill was just under $50,000. *1254 (R. 204-05). The ALJ concluded that "a fair stumpage value would appear to be approximately $30,000." (R. 205). The ALJ also approached valuation on a per-tree basis. (R. 206).
116. Even adjusting for wind shake, some fire damage, and a lower percentage of veneer quality trees, the fair market value would be in excess of $60 per tree.
117. At $65 per tree plus $600 for the value of the storm damaged trees [undisputed by the parties], the stumpage value would be approximately $33,000.
(R. 206). The ALJ concluded that the fair market value of Cowper's cut timber was $32,000, and that Cowper had been underpaid by $16,000. (R. 207). The ALJ awarded Cowper treble damages in the amount of $48,000. (R. 208-09).
In ruling, the ALJ relied upon IND.CODE § 25-36.5-1-3.2, which provides in pertinent part as follows:
(b) The department [NRC] may under IC 4-21.5-3-8 commence a proceeding against a timber cutter or buyer if there is reason to believe that:
(1) the timber buyer or timber cutter has acquired timber from a timber grower under a written contract for the sale of the timber without payment having been made to the timber grower as specified in the contract; or
(2) if:
(A) there is no written contract for the sale of the timber; or
(B) there is a written contract for the sale of the timber but the contract does not set forth the contract price for the timber;
the timber buyer or timber cutter has cut timber or acquired timber from the timber grower without payment having been made to the timber grower equal to the value of the timber as determined under IC 26-1-2.
....
(f) The complaint served ... to commence a proceeding under this section may seek the following:
....
(2) Damages equal to three (3) times the stumpage value of any timber that is wrongfully cut or appropriated without payment.
The NRC affirmed the ALJ's findings and adopted his report as its final order. (R. 534). Tree Buyers petitioned the trial court for judicial review. (R. 534). The trial court held that a contract existed between Cowper and Tree Buyers, and therefore the NRC was not authorized to grant Cowper relief under the TBA. (R. 536). This appeal followed.
Discussion and Decision
Argument
Cowper contends that the trial court erred when it held that the NRC did not have authority to interpret the parties' contract. Specifically, Cowper argues two interwoven points which may be summarized as follows:
1. That IND.CODE § 25-36.5-1-3.2, specifically confers authority upon the NRC to afford the remedy provided; and
2. that the NRC's determination that there was no valid contract between the parties is a finding of fact supported by substantial evidence, and thereby not to be disturbed by the trial court.
We agree in part and disagree in part, addressing the above cited points in turn.
Standard of Review
The party asserting the invalidity of an administrative agency's action bears the burden of establishing its invalidity. Ad Craft, Inc. v. Board of Zoning Appeals of Evansville, 693 N.E.2d 110, 113 (Ind.Ct. App.1998). When reviewing administrative decisions, the Court of Appeals applies the same standard of review as the trial court. Coleman v. Indiana Family and Social Services Admin., 687 N.E.2d 366, 368 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). This standard of *1255 review is set forth in IND.CODE § 4-21.5-5-14, and states in pertinent part as follows:
(d) The court shall grant relief ... only if it determines that a person seeking judicial relief has been prejudiced by an agency action that is:
(1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law;
(2) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;
(3) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right;
(4) without observance of procedure required by law; or
(5) unsupported by substantial evidence.
IND.CODE § 4-21.5-5-14(d). However, the law is the province of the judiciary and the reviewing court is not bound by an agency's conclusions of law. Weatherbee v. Indiana Civil Rights Com'n, 665 N.E.2d 945, 947 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Moreover, the construction of an unambiguous written contract is generally a question of law for the court. Robinson v. Century Personnel, Inc., 678 N.E.2d 1268, 1270 (Ind.Ct. App.1997).
NRC's Authority to Act
INDIANA CODE § 25-36.5-1-3.2 provides in pertinent part as follows:
(b) The department [NRC] may ... commence a proceeding against a timber cutter or buyer if there is reason to believe that:
(1) the timber buyer or timber cutter has acquired timber from a timber grower under a written contract for the sale of the timber without payment having been made to the timber grower as specified in the contract; or
(2) if:
(A) there is no written contract for the sale of the timber; or
(B) there is a written contract for the sale of the timber but the contract does not set forth the contract price for the timber;
....
Therefore, the NRC may bring an action against a timber buyer if there is a contract between the buyer and grower and the contract is not paid according to the terms or the purchase price is not specified in the contract. Additionally, the NRC has the authority to act where no contract exists. Consequently, we turn our attention to the terms of the contract to determine the scope of the NRC's authority to act on behalf of Cowper.
Contract InterpretationGenerally
Our supreme court has consistently expressed its commitment to advancing the public policy in favor of enforcing contracts. See Fresh Cut, Inc. v. Fazli, 650 N.E.2d 1126, 1129 (Ind.1995). Moreover, Indiana courts recognize that it is in the best interest of the public not to unnecessarily restrict persons' freedom to contract. Id. Thus, as a general rule, the law allows persons of full age and competent understanding the utmost liberty in contracting; and their contracts, when entered into freely and voluntarily, will be enforced by the courts. Schoemer v. Hanes and Associates, 693 N.E.2d 1333, 1338 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). Accordingly, Indiana has long adhered to the rule that contracting parties may enter into any agreement they desire so long as it is not illegal or contrary to public policy. Id. It is only where a contract is ambiguous and its interpretation requires extrinsic evidence that the fact finder must determine the facts upon which the contract rests. Transcontinental Technical Services, Inc. v. Allen, 642 N.E.2d 981, 983 (Ind.Ct.App. 1994).
AnalysisContractual Relationship Between Cowper and Timber Buyers
This contract dispute focuses upon the interpretation of the following two lines within the two page contract; "18" and up on stump" and "TOTAL NUMBER OF TREES 18" IN DIAMETER OR GREATER IS 175...." When interpreting a contract, the court's paramount goal *1256 is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the parties as reasonably manifested by the language of the agreement. NationsCredit Commercial Corp. v. Grauel Enterprises, Inc., 703 N.E.2d 1072, 1075 (Ind. Ct.App.1998) trans. denied. A written contract is presumed to embody the parties' entire agreement and merge within it all prior negotiations. McCae Management Corp. v. Merchants National Bank and Trust Co. of Indianapolis, 553 N.E.2d 884, 887 (Ind.Ct.App.1990). Where the parties have agreed to a specific term, an apparently inconsistent general statement must yield to the more specific term. Fowler v. Campbell, 612 N.E.2d 596, 600-601 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
When appellate review of the disputed contract terms reveals no ambiguity we will not construe the contract or look to extrinsic evidence but will merely apply the contractual provisions. Kiltz v. Kiltz, 708 N.E.2d 600, 602 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) trans. denied. Moreover, the terms of a contract are not ambiguous merely because a controversy exists between the parties concerning the proper interpretation of the terms. Tanton v. Grochow, 707 N.E.2d 1010, 1013 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). The construction of an unambiguous written contract is generally a question of law for the court. Robinson, 678 N.E.2d at 1270. Here the parties' contract dispute was not a matter requiring the weighing of extrinsic evidence but rather was contained by its four corners, the interpretation and construction of which is a function for the court. See Tanton, 707 N.E.2d at 1013.
We find no ambiguity in the parties' contract, and construe the general statement of "18" and up on stump" as yielding to the specific limiting phrase of "TOTAL NUMBER OF TREES 18" IN DIAMETER OR GREATER IS 175..." Therefore, the trial court was correct in concluding that "there was a valid and legally enforceable two page written contract between the parties." (R. 536). However, this contract only covered 175 undamaged trees, and did not speak to the approximately 325 additional undamaged trees also acquired by Tree Buyers. Accordingly, we find that IND.CODE § 25-36.5-1-3.2(b)(2)(A) specifically confers authority upon the NRC to address Cowper's complaint regarding the timber acquired in excess of the number covered by the contract.
Conclusion
The trial court was correct to hold that the TBA did not cover the parties' contract pertaining to the 175 undamaged trees for which Cowper was compensated. However, this determination did not remove the authority of the NRC to grant relief under the TBA with respect to those undamaged trees acquired in excess of 175, for which the parties had no agreement. Accordingly, we find Tree Buyers liable for those 325 undamaged trees acquired in excess of the parties' contract and remand to the NRC to determine damages.[1]
Reversed in part and remanded to the NRC to determine damages.
SULLIVAN, J., and GARRARD, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The ALJ's original assessment of damages relied almost exclusively upon expert testimony to determine the fair market value of the undamaged trees acquired by Tree Buyers. (R. 203-07). In light of our decision that Cowper and Tree Buyers entered into a legally binding contract as to 175 undamaged trees, we remind the ALJ of the following pertinent findings:
64. The TBA contains a provision, IC 25-36.5-1-3.2, that covers the cutting of timber without a contract and requires that payment be made to the timber grower in accordance with IC 26-1-2.
65. IC XX-X-X-XXX discusses market price and ways of establishing market price.
66. The general definition of "market price" under the UCC involves a price determined between a willing buyer and willing seller, neither being under compulsion to buy or sell. See Potts v. Offutt, 481 N.E.2d 429 (Ind.App.1985).
(R. 203).

=== CASE 2230145 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.017599+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 436 (1999)
Roger EMBER, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Teresa EMBER, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 02A03-9904-CV-161.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 6, 1999.
*437 Donald D. Doxsee, Fort Wayne, Attorney, for Appellant.
Stephen P. Rothberg, Fort Wayne, Indiana, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge
Roger Ember ("Husband") appeals the trial court's judgment in favor of his former wife, Teresa (Ember) Abbett ("Wife"), on his request for declaratory judgment. The trial court held that Wife's claim against him for nonpayment of child support was not barred by the Indiana statute of limitations. Husband raises three issues which we consolidate and restate as:
1) whether the trial court erred when it found that Indiana's twenty-year statute of repose applied to this action instead of the ten-year statute of limitations; and
2) whether the trial court erred when it held that the statute of limitations was tolled while Husband was out of the state of Indiana.
We affirm.[1]
The relevant facts follow. In 1967, the parties were divorced pursuant to a decree of the Allen County Superior Court ("Indiana trial court"). Wife was granted custody of the parties' minor children, S.E. and M.E., and Husband was ordered to pay child support to Wife. At some point after the Indiana trial court issued its decree, Husband moved to Florida, where he currently resides. In 1981, Wife obtained a judgment in the Indiana trial court against Husband for unpaid child support in the amount of $15,000.00. In 1982, the Indiana trial court held that S.E. was emancipated and adjusted Husband's support obligations accordingly. On Oct. 17, 1985, the Indiana trial court entered an order amending the judgment for the unpaid child support by raising the amount to $16,500. It also noted that the parties' other child, M.E., would be emancipated as of November 25, 1985, when he was scheduled *438 to enter military service, and held that Husband's child support obligations would abate on that date.
In early 1997, Wife filed suit in Husband's county of residence in Florida to enforce the Indiana judgment against Husband for nonpayment of child support.[2] The Florida trial court assigned the case to a general master for review. The general master issued two separate reports with recommendations. First, following a hearing, the general master recommended that the Indiana judgment against Husband be "domesticated" for review by Florida courts "pursuant to the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the United States Constitution." Record, p. 47. The general master explicitly reserved judgment on the question of whether the judgment should actually be enforced in Florida. The Florida trial court subsequently adopted the general master's report and recommendation on May 6, 1997.
Following a hearing and the submission of memoranda of law on the issue of whether the judgment against Husband should be enforced, the general master issued his second report and recommendation. The general master noted that under the Full Faith and Credit for Child Support Orders Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1738B(h)(3) (hereinafter "Child Support Act"), the court was required to apply the statute of limitations of the forum state or state that originally issued the order, depending upon which statute of limitations was longer. Since proceedings to enforce child support orders in Florida are not bound by a statute of limitations, the general master recommended that Florida law apply to the case. The general master also recommended that the trial court find that Husband had waived the affirmative defenses of statutory laches and the Indiana statute of limitations by failing to plead them. As a result, the general master concluded that Wife's judgment against Husband must be enforced by Florida. The Florida trial court adopted the general master's report and recommendation on May 29, 1998. The Florida Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court's judgment without opinion on August 18, 1999.
On September 8, 1998, Husband filed a petition in the Indiana trial court asking it to declare that the Indiana statute of limitations barred Wife's action in Florida. Wife replied that Husband was estopped from challenging the Florida judgment, and therefore his declaratory action had to fail. Following the submission of memoranda of law and a hearing, the Indiana trial court denied Husband's petition to declare the judgment unenforceable and instead declared that Wife's judgment against Husband was still valid.
I. Standard of Review
Pursuant to the Uniform Declaratory Judgment Act, declaratory orders, judgments and decrees have the force and effect of final judgments and are reviewed as any other order, judgment or decree. Ind.Code § 34-14-1-1; see also Indiana Farmers Mut. Ins. Co. v. Ellison, 679 N.E.2d 1378, 1380 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied, 690 N.E.2d 1186. Here, the trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law on its own motion when it rendered the judgment. In reviewing the judgment, we first determine whether the evidence supports the findings, and then whether the findings support the judgment. Ellison, 679 N.E.2d at 1380. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous when the record lacks any evidence or reasonable inferences from the evidence to support them. Id. at 1381. The judgment will be reversed only when clearly erroneous, that is, when the judgment is unsupported by the findings of fact. Id. We consider only the evidence most favorable to the judgment and all reasonable inferences flowing therefrom. Id. We will not reweigh the evidence or assess the credibility of witnesses. Id. Where, as here, the trial court enters findings sua sponte, the specific findings control only as to the *439 issues they cover, while a general judgment standard applies to any issue upon which the court has not specifically made a finding. Id. We may affirm a general judgment on any theory supported by the evidence introduced at trial. Id. However, before affirming on a legal theory supported by the findings but not espoused by the trial court, the reviewing court should be confident that its affirmance is consistent with all of the trial court's findings of fact and inferences drawn from the findings. Mitchell v. Mitchell, 695 N.E.2d 920, 924 (Ind.1998).
II. Discussion
Husband seeks relief under the Uniform Declaratory Judgment Act, Ind.Code § 34-14-1-1 et seq. The Act provides that "[t]he purpose of this [Act] is to settle and to afford relief from uncertainty and insecurity with respect to rights, status, and other legal relations; and is to be liberally construed and administered." Ind.Code § 34-14-1-12. However, the act also provides that "[t]he court may refuse to render or enter a declaratory judgment or decree where the judgment or decree, if rendered or entered, would not terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding." Ind.Code § 34-14-1-6.
The propriety of declaratory relief must be judged in light of whether the issue at hand is more properly resolved in another forum. Madden v. Houck, 403 N.E.2d 1133, 1134-1135 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). The declaratory judgment statute was intended to furnish an adequate and complete remedy where none before had existed. Id. at 1135. It should not be used where there is no necessity for such a judgment. Id. The declaratory judgment statute was not intended to eliminate well-known causes of action nor to substitute an appellate court for a tribunal of original jurisdiction, where the issues are ripe for litigation through the usual processes. Volkswagenwerk v. Watson, 181 Ind.App. 155, 159, 390 N.E.2d 1082, 1085 (1979). The test to determine the propriety of declaratory relief is whether the issuance of a declaratory judgment will effectively solve the problem involved, whether it will serve a useful purpose, and whether or not another remedy is more effective or efficient. Boone County Area Plan Comm'n v. Kennedy, 560 N.E.2d 692, 696 (Ind.Ct. App.1990), trans. denied. The determinative factor of this test is whether the declaratory action will result in a just and more expeditious and economical determination of the entire controversy. Volkswagenwerk, 181 Ind.App. at 160, 390 N.E.2d at 1082.
In this case, after Wife filed her action in Florida to enforce the Indiana judgment against Husband, the Florida trial court was required to decide whether the Indiana or Florida statute of limitations would apply to the case pursuant to the Child Support Act. See 28 U.S.C. § 1738(B)(h)(3). Husband argued in a memorandum of law that the Indiana statute of limitations had run out on Wife's claim and should act as a bar to the claim in any state, not just Indiana. However, the Florida general master found that Husband waived that argument because he failed to raise it in his first responsive pleading. Moreover, the Florida court chose to apply Florida law, not Indiana law, to the case, thereby rendering the issue of the Indiana statute of limitations irrelevant. As a result, Husband has filed the current action in Indiana in order to determine whether or not he is liable for the judgment under Indiana law due to the statute of limitations.
We hold that the trial court properly rejected Husband's claim for declaratory relief. Husband had an adequate and complete opportunity to litigate the issues he raises in Florida. Since Husband could have obtained the relief he sought in Florida, it is unnecessary to address his claims in an action for declaratory relief. See Madden, 403 N.E.2d at 1135-1136 (holding that declaratory relief was improper because the plaintiff could have filed a quo *440 warranto action to receive the desired remedy instead of a declaratory judgment action).
Furthermore, we cannot say that the grant of declaratory relief would efficiently resolve the parties' dispute and serve a useful purpose. Husband concedes that if the Indiana trial court had granted the declaratory relief he sought, he would have taken the declaratory decree back to the Florida trial court so that it could "act on the Indiana ruling...." Record, p. 143. As the Indiana trial court correctly noted, Husband's petition "is in reality an attempt to reopen the Florida case utilizing this Court's interpretation of Indiana law." Record, p. 148. Therefore, a ruling in Husband's favor would not have terminated the controversy giving rise to Husband's petition or resulted in a more expeditious determination of the parties' long-running dispute. See Ind.Code § 34-14-1-6; Volkswagenwerk, 181 Ind.App. at 162, 390 N.E.2d at 1086 (holding that declaratory relief was inappropriate because the dispute would spawn "piecemeal litigation" if the relief was granted).
Husband argues that section 8 of the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act supports his claim for declaratory relief and his right to return to the Florida trial court to attack its judgment. That section provides, in relevant part: "[f]urther relief based upon a declaratory judgment or decree may be granted whenever necessary or proper." Ind.Code § 34-14-1-8. However, a plain reading of this section only demonstrates that a party receiving a declaratory decree may seek further relief in the proper circumstances. In this case, because the Indiana trial court properly denied Husband's request for declaratory relief, he is not in a position to seek further relief.
Because the Florida trial court provided Husband with a full and fair opportunity to litigate his claims, and granting his request for declaratory relief would merely prolong the dispute for no useful purpose, the Indiana trial court properly denied Husband's petition for declaratory relief.[3]See Volkswagenwerk, 181 Ind.App. at 162, 390 N.E.2d at 1086.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
Affirmed.
BAKER, J., and MATTINGLY, J. concur.
NOTES
[1]  Husband asserts that Wife has raised one issue on cross appeal, which is "[w]hether the Appellant's `Proceeding to Declare Judgment Unenforceable by Separate Action' presents an actual and justiciable controversy." Appellant's Reply Brief, p. 1. However, a review of Appellee's Brief demonstrates that Wife is not appealing or challenging any aspect of the judgment below, but is instead presenting an alternate ground for affirming the trial court's judgment. Therefore, we will not address her argument as a cross appeal.
[2]  Wife's complaint in the Florida trial court was not included in the record.
[3]  In light of our disposition of the issues with respect to the declaratory judgment, we deem it unnecessary to address Husband's claims that the trial court erred in applying the twenty-year statute of repose instead of the statute of limitations and that the trial court erred in holding that the statute of limitations was tolled while Husband was out of the state of Indiana.

=== CASE 2230148 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.107971+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1269 (1999)
Ralph R. ROBINSON, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 04A04-9903-CR-115.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 28, 1999.
*1270 Charles R. Deets, III, Heide Sandy Deets & Kennedy, Lafayette, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, James B. Martin, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
BAILEY, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant-Defendant Ralph Robinson ("Robinson") appeals his conviction by jury of Operating a Vehicle While Intoxicated, a class A Misdemeanor.[1] We affirm.
Issues
Robinson presents two issues for review:
I. Whether the trial court erred in admitting an audiotape of statements Robinson made during a breathalyzer test and booking.
II. Whether the trial court erred when it denied Robinson's Motion to Correct Errors alleging jury misconduct.
Facts/Procedural History
On January 18, 1998, Officer Troy Yeoman ("Officer Yeoman") of the Fowler Police Department was on routine patrol. (R. 224). As Officer Yeoman travelled south on Washington Avenue in Fowler, Indiana, he came upon Robinson, who was travelling north. (R. 225). As the two vehicles approached one another, Robinson crossed the center line and nearly struck Officer Yeoman's vehicle. (R. 225).
Officer Yeoman followed Robinson to a parking lot and parked behind Robinson. (R. 225). As Officer Yeoman approached Robinson's vehicle, Robinson opened his door. (R. 226). Robinson explained to Officer Yeoman that he had just come back from watching a college basketball game and indicated that Officer Yeoman "must not know who he [was]." (R. 227). Officer Yeoman smelled the strong odor of alcohol coming from the car and observed two open containers of Miller Lite beer in cup holders. (R. 226).
After asking for Robinson's license and registration, Officer Yeoman administered three field sobriety tests. (R. 228). Robinson failed each test. (R. 228-229). Officer Yeoman observed that Robinson's eyes were bloodshot and that he "kept swaying back and forth." (R. 229). Robinson's speech was somewhat slurred and slow. (R. 229). Robinson attempted to convince Officer Yeoman not to arrest him and made several references to the fact that he knew the county prosecutor, the deputy prosecutor, and the sheriff. (R. 227, 231). He requested Officer Yeoman to contact them and "clear this up." (R. 227).
Officer Yeoman asked Robinson to submit to a breathalyzer test and Robinson agreed. (R. 230). When Officer Yeoman administered the test, however, Robinson refused to blow the requisite amount of air into the testing device. (R. 237-238). Officer Yeoman audiotaped Robinson before, during, and after the test. (R. 240). Robinson continued to ask Officer Yeoman to contact the sheriff and stated that the incident was "gonna cost a lot of people a lot of favors." (R. 235).
Robinson was tried before a jury on December 18, 1998. (R. 140). Before the trial commenced, the court heard evidence on Robinson's Motion in Limine to exclude the audiotape. (R. 212). The trial court denied the motion. (R. 215).
After hearing the evidence, the jury found Robinson guilty of Operating a Vehicle While Intoxicated, a class A Misdemeanor. (R. 114a)[2]. The trial court issued a one year jail term, which it subsequently suspended. (R. 114b). *1271 The trial court then sentenced Robinson to one year of supervised probation, ordered Robinson to undergo alcohol treatment, and ordered Robinson to pay court costs, fees, and fines. (R. 114b).
On January 18, 1999, Robinson filed a Motion to Correct Errors. (R. 119). In his motion, Robinson contends the trial court erred when it admitted the audiotape into evidence. In addition, Robinson alleges jury misconduct during deliberations. Specifically, Robinson argues that the jury improperly considered the fact that he did not testify in reaching a verdict. (R. 120). The trial court denied Robinson's Motion to Correct Errors on February 4, 1999. (R. 130). Robinson now appeals. (R. 130).
I. Whether the trial court abused its discretion when it permitted the audiotape to be admitted into evidence.
A. Waiver.
Robinson first alleges the trial court erred when it denied his Motion in Limine and allowed the State to admit the audiotape made during administration of the breathalyzer test and during booking. In order to preserve error in the overruling of a pre-trial motion in limine, the appealing party must have objected to the admission of the evidence at the time it was offered. Heavrin v. State, 675 N.E.2d 1075 (Ind.1996). Although Robinson filed a Motion in Limine before trial, he failed to object to the admission of the audiotape at the time it was offered. In fact, Robinson explicitly stated that he did not object to admission of the audiotape when it was offered. (R. 239). Inasmuch as Robinson failed to object to admission of the audiotape at trial, his argument is now waived on appeal.
B. Waiver notwithstanding, the audiotape was properly admitted.
Waiver notwithstanding, the trial court properly allowed the audiotape into evidence. Robinson argues that, although portions of the audiotape were relevant, its probative value was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Therefore, Robinson argues, the audiotape should have been excluded pursuant to Ind. Evidence Rule 403.
i. Standard of review.
The trial court has broad discretion in ruling on the admissibility of evidence such as the audiotape at issue in the present case. Sharp v. State, 534 N.E.2d 708, 712 (Ind.1989). We will disturb the trial court's ruling only upon a showing of abuse of that discretion. Sevits v. State, 651 N.E.2d 278, 280 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). Although relevant evidence is generally admissible, relevance, standing alone, does not dictate admissibility. Lawson v. State, 664 N.E.2d 773, 778 (Ct.App.1996). Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Evid. R. 403. Relevant evidence is not inadmissible merely because it is prejudicial, however. Sevits, 651 N.E.2d at 280. In determining whether the prejudicial effect of relevant evidence substantially outweighs its probative value, the trial court must apply a balancing test. Lawson v. State, 664 N.E.2d at 778.
ii. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the tape.
In the case at hand, the State contends, and Robinson agrees, that the audiotape was relevant to prove that Robinson was intoxicated at the time of arrest. The State further argues that Robinson's statements that he knew the prosecutor, deputy prosecutor, and sheriff are relevant to show consciousness of guilt. Robinson argues, however, that the statements are irrelevant to the issue of intoxication and served only to inflame the prejudices of the jury against him.
"Relevant evidence" is "evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less *1272 probable than it would be without the evidence." Ind. Evidence Rule 401. Evidence of consciousness of guilt has historically been admissible as relevant evidence. See Serano v. State, 555 N.E.2d 487 (Ind. Ct.App.1990) (holding that false information Defendant provided to law enforcement was admissible to show consciousness of guilt); Washington v. State, 273 Ind. 156, 402 N.E.2d 1244 (1980) (holding that defendant's attempt to conceal incriminating evidence was admissible to show consciousness of guilt); McKinstry v. State, 660 N.E.2d 1052 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (holding that defendant's false alibi was admissible to show consciousness of guilt); Jorgensen v. State, 567 N.E.2d 113 (Ind. Ct.Ap.1990) (holding that defendant's escape from custody was admissible to show consciousness of guilt). Here, Robinson requested that several individuals, including the county prosecutor and the sheriff, be contacted so that the matter of his arrest could be `cleared up.' (R. 227). Robinson also stated several times that Officer Yeoman must not have known who he was. (R. 227). Robinson's attempts to intimidate Officer Yeoman with his purported status in the community could reasonably be interpreted by the jury as evidence of his consciousness of guilt. The evidence was therefore relevant. Thus, we reject Robinson's argument that the probative value of the evidence was outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Robinson's statements were not so inflammatory as to result in the substantial unfair prejudice required by Evid. R. 403. We conclude, therefore, that the trial court properly exercised its broad discretion when it permitted the audiotape to be admitted into evidence.
II. Whether the trial court erred when it denied Robinson's Motion to Correct Errors alleging jury misconduct.
After the trial court entered judgment, Robinson filed a Motion to Correct Errors. In his Motion to Correct Errors, Robinson alleged several instances of jury misconduct and supported his allegations with the affidavit of one of the jurors. On appeal, Robinson argues solely that the jury improperly considered his failure to testify in rendering its verdict.
A. Standard of Review.
Indiana Evid. Rule 606(b) states:
Upon an inquiry into the validity of a verdict or indictment, a juror may not testify as to any matter or statement occurring during the course of the jury's deliberations or to the effect of anything upon that or any other juror's mind or emotions as influencing the juror to assent to or to dissent from the verdict or indictment concerning the juror's mental processes in connection therewith, except that a juror may testify (1) to drug or alcohol use by any juror, (2) on the question of whether extraneous prejudicial information was improperly brought to the jury's attention or (3) whether any outside influence was improperly brought to bear upon any juror. A juror's affidavit or evidence of any statement by the juror concerning a matter about which the juror would be precluded from testifying may not be received for these purposes.
Indiana follows the common law that a verdict may not be impeached by evidence from the jurors who returned it. Johnson v. State, 700 N.E.2d 480 (Ind.Ct. App.1998). A trial court is prohibited from inquiring into the intention of the jurors during deliberations. Id. at 481 (citing Kailukiak v. State, 959 P.2d 771 (Alaska App.1998)). However, an exception existed at common law, as it does today, for evidence establishing that jurors were exposed to "improper, extrinsic materials during their deliberations." Id. at 480 (quoting Harrison v. State, 575 N.E.2d 642, 646 (Ind.Ct.App.1991)).
B. Jury misconduct.
Robinson relies upon the affidavit of juror Connie Brutus ("Brutus") to support his allegation that the jury inappropriately disregarded Final Instruction No. 15, which states in part, "The fact that the defendant did not testify raises no presumption of any kind against him. It shall *1273 not be commented upon, referred to, or in any manner considered by the jury in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant." (R. 100). Brutus's affidavit states that, contrary to these instructions, "The [j]ury improperly and unconstitutionally considered the fact that Defendant did not take the stand to defend himself as proof of guilt." (R. 122).
Indiana Evidence Rule 606(b) proscribes the use of a juror's affidavit to establish anything other than drug or alcohol use by a juror, the introduction of extraneous prejudicial information into the jury room, or the application of outside influences upon a juror. Brutus's affidavit fails to allege any of these factors. Rather, it invites us to step inside the "head" of each jury member and to second-guess the complex manner in which the jury weighed the evidence and the law to reach its verdict. The Indiana Rules of Evidence and Indiana caselaw prohibit us from considering the jury's deliberation process in this manner. Accordingly, reversal is not warranted.
Affirmed.
KIRSCH, J., and MATTINGLY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  IND.CODE § 9-30-5-2.
[2]  We note that three pages of the record are not numbered. These pages fall between pages 114 and 115. We shall refer to them as pages 114a, 114b, and 114c.

=== CASE 2230149 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.133778+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1171 (1999)
Dwight Douglas JELKS, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 45A03-9903-CR-96.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 13, 1999.
*1172 Nathaniel Ruff, Crown Point, Indiana, for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, Liisi Brien, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, for Appellee.
OPINION
KIRSCH, Judge.
After a jury trial, Dwight Douglas Jelks was convicted of auto theft,[1] a Class D felony and was adjudged to be a habitual offender.[2] He now appeals, presenting the following issues for review:
I. Whether the trial court erred when in the course of polling the jury it engaged in an extended colloquy regarding the elements of the charged crime, the State's burden of proof, and the role of a juror.
II. Whether sufficient evidence supports his conviction for auto theft.
We reverse and remand.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On October 9, 1997, Annie White reported her vehicle stolen. Six days later, Detective Brian J. Czerwinski of the Lake County Sheriff's Office received a tip about the location of a stolen car. He located White's vehicle parked on a street in Gary, Indiana and watched Jelks get into the vehicle. He then approached Jelks and arrested him. Jelks was charged with auto theft.
Jelks was tried by a jury. After the court read the jury's verdict, it polled the jury. When the trial court asked Juror Three if that was her verdict, she responded that it was not. The trial court further questioned the juror about her understanding of the case and then sent the jury *1173 back for further deliberations. At the conclusion of these deliberations, the jury returned a guilty verdict. The trial court entered a judgment of conviction on the jury's verdict. Jelks now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Jelks first argues that the trial court erred in engaging in colloquy during the polling of the jury. He contends that the trial court used the incorrect procedure in this situation where a juror expressed doubt about her verdict. The object of polling the jury is to give the parties an opportunity to ascertain with certainty that a unanimous verdict has been reached before the verdict is recorded and the jury is discharged. Brown v. State, 457 N.E.2d 179, 180 (Ind.1983). IC XX-XX-X-X provides the proper procedure for ensuring a unanimous verdict in a jury trial. This statute is made applicable to criminal proceedings by IC XX-XX-X-X. See id. It states:
"When the jury has agreed upon a verdict, the verdict must be reduced to writing and signed by the foreman. When returned into court, the foreman shall deliver the verdict, and either party may poll the jury. If a juror dissents from the verdict, the jury shall be sent out to deliberate."
The trial court has a duty to send the jury back to correct a defective verdict before that verdict is accepted and the jury discharged. Grimm v. State, 273 Ind. 21, 23, 401 N.E.2d 686, 687 (1980).
In this case, after the jury's verdict of guilty was read, Jelks asked the court to poll the jury. When the trial court asked Juror Three if the verdict he read was her verdict, she responded "no." Thus, the Record reflects that Juror Three expressed dissent from the jury's verdict. After defense counsel stated that he was not satisfied with the verdict, the following exchange took place:
"THE COURT: Now, juror number three, I want you to respond loudly enough so we can hear you here. At first, I indicated I am going to pole [sic] the panel and determine from each one of you individually whether or not the verdict of guilty that I read is, in fact, your verdict. And first you said no. And I want this clear now. Is thisdid you believe from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty of auto theft?
BY JUROR THREE: No, sir, I didn't.
THE COURT: Why did you vote guilty?
BY JUROR THREE: Because I was trying to makewe were trying to discuss the reasonable doubt of the situation.
THE COURT: Well, you were discussing reasonable doubt and did you come to a point where you believed beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty of the crime of auto theft? I am not quarreling with you, ma'am. We are simply trying to determine what occurred. We indicated the verdict must be a unanimous verdict.
BY JUROR THREE: Yes, I understood that. And we were discussing was he guilty of the auto theft. They said we have to agree did he know that the car was stolen when he got it.
THE COURT: Well, you had to believe beyond a reasonable doubt that he was operating a motor vehicle, exerting unauthorized control without the consent of the owner knowing the car was stolen. Is that what you folks all understood the issue to be?
...
BY JUROR THREE: Your Honor, sir, what happens if one person doesn't agree with what everybody else is saying?
THE COURT: Then if you cannot agree, then you cannot return a verdict. You are what we call a hung jury. And the Court would have to declare a mistrial. And the matter would have to be retried at another date. Now, I don't want anyone to thinkI thought this was pretty clear. That you are to maintain *1174 an open mind. And you are to hear the other people. But you're not to change. And I indicated, instructed you, you're not to change your verdict merely because you maybe [sic] in the minority or because you simply wanted to return a verdict. I am suggesting, Mr. Foreman, that you folks maybe go back in and continue to deliberate here and make sure we know what we are doing. You left me kind of uncertain and you seem to be equivocating. My question again to you, did you, not the other people, did you believe from the evidence presented to you during the trial and from the law that I gave to you, did you believe beyond a reasonable doubt that the State had met its burden of proving the defendant committed the crime of auto theft?
BY JUROR THREE: I had reasonable doubt.
THE COURT: You had reasonable doubt?
BY JUROR THREE: To me.
THE COURT: And you feel it would be productive to go back and continue talking?
BY JUROR THREE: No.
...
THE COURT: You understood [the State] didn't have to prove that he took the car from the owner? I think we talked about that. Their burden was to prove on the date he was apprehended in that car that he was exerting unauthorized control over a motor vehicle, did not belong to him, and that he knew it was stolen. He knowingly or intentionally was driving that car.
...
THE COURT: I am going to have you folks go back into the jury room, continue deliberating. I will give you the instructions back and whatever you returned to the bailiff, take back with you. They may take you down to lunch right now before you do anything else. We are going to have you to continue to deliberate."
Record at 184-192.
We agree with Jelks that the trial court erred in engaging in this colloquy during its polling of the jury. The statute clearly provides that the remedy for juror dissent that arises during the polling procedure is to return the jury for deliberations, not engage in an extended colloquy about the elements of the crime, the State's burden, or the role of a juror. By doing so, the trial court tainted further deliberations and placed the defendant in a position of grave peril. Jelks' conviction on this verdict must be reversed.
Jelks next argues that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for auto theft. When reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we neither reweigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses. Davis v. State, 685 N.E.2d 1095, 1099 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Instead, we look to the evidence most favorable to the verdict together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Id. If there exists substantial evidence of probative value to establish every material element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt, we will not disturb the verdict. Id.
IC XX-XX-X-X.5 provides that a person commits auto theft by knowingly or intentionally exerting unauthorized control over the motor vehicle of another person with intent to deprive the owner of the vehicle's value or use or a component part. The mere unexplained, exclusive possession of recently stolen property will sustain a conviction of theft. Gibson v. State, 533 N.E.2d 187, 188 (Ind.Ct.App.1989). Jelks acknowledges this principle, but contends that it does not apply here. Jelks argues that Annie White, the car's owner, could not say definitively when the car had been stolen. She first noticed that it was stolen on October 9, 1997. Jelks was apprehended with the car six days later. Therefore, he argues that because a substantial *1175 amount of time had passed between the theft of the car and the discovery of him in possession of it, the State was required to provide additional evidence of theft to secure Jelks' conviction.
The State provided such evidence in this case. White testified that she owned the car, that she did not know Jelks, and she had never given him permission to use the car. She also testified that the car's locks and ignition had been rekeyed so that her keys no longer worked when the car was returned to her. Detective Czerwinski testified that the license plate on the car did not match the vehicle's description. Further, the vehicle identification number on the dashboard had been visibly altered and did not match the information on the car's seat belt tag. Finally, he testified that Jelks was apprehended while driving the vehicle. Detective Peters testified that Jelks was unable to produce any proof that he owned the vehicle and that identifying stickers on the car's door had been removed. Detective Bilek testified that the serial numbers on various parts of the car did not match the vehicle identification number. Jelks' own statement was also admitted into evidence. In it, he stated that he had received the car from an individual that he knew to be a car thief. From this evidence, a trier of fact could reasonably infer that Jelks was guilty of auto theft. See Muse v. State, 419 N.E.2d 1302 (Ind.1981) (where defendant found with van stolen three weeks earlier, evidence of original registration and license plates inside the van and the fact that the defendant did not have proper registration for it was sufficient evidence to support conviction for auto theft); Gibson, 533 N.E.2d at 189 (where defendant found with car two days later, defendant's possession of a screwdriver, busted ignition, refusal to identify himself, and statement denying driving the car in spite of being apprehended leaving it were sufficient evidence to support defendant's conviction for auto theft); Doe v. State, 451 N.E.2d 1096 (Ind.Ct.App.1983) (where defendant found with stolen car in another state and steering column had been substantially damaged in order to operate the vehicle without the key, evidence was sufficient to support defendant's conviction); Shank v. State, 154 Ind.App. 147, 289 N.E.2d 315 (1972) (where defendant was found asleep in car twenty days after it had been stolen and defendant had been seen next to or in the car shortly before theft, evidence was sufficient to support conviction).
Jelks also contends that his possession of the car was not unexplained, as he offered an explanation. However, possession remains unexplained where the trier of fact rejects the explanation as being beyond a reasonable doubt. Gibson, 533 N.E.2d at 188. There was sufficient evidence supporting Jelks' conviction to allow retrial.
Reversed and remanded.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and RILEY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  See IC XX-XX-X-X.5.
[2]  See IC XX-XX-X-X.

=== CASE 9742176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:05.139423+00 ===

JUSTICE RATHJE delivered the opinion of the court: The primary issue in this case is whether defendants’ negligence was the proximate cause of May Phillippart’s fatal injuries. We hold that it was not. BACKGROUND The relevant facts are not in dispute. Howard C. Dob-son drove a tanker truck for ADM Trucking, Inc. (hereinafter, ADM). Around 3 p.m. on Tuesday, November 21, 1989, Dobson parked his truck on the north side of Lawrence Avenue, 41 feet from the intersection of English Street, in Springfield. Although Lawrence Avenue is a four-lane designated truck route on which parking is permitted at certain times of the day, parking is not permitted on the north side of Lawrence Avenue bétween the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Shortly after Dobson parked his truck, May Phillip-part, an 18-year-old foreign exchange student from France, began walking south on English Street. At the intersection of English and Lawrence, Phillippart did not cross Lawrence in the marked crosswalk. Instead, she turned right and headed west on Lawrence, walking 41 feet plus the full length of the truck before deciding to cross. When she reached the front of Dobson’s parked truck at mid-block, Phillippart entered Lawrence Avenue, walked to the front driver’s side of the truck, and waited for traffic to clear so that she could cross to the south side of the street. After taking V-k slow steps into the center westbound lane of Lawrence Avenue, Phillip-part began running at a 45-degree angle across the street. At about the center line of Lawrence Avenue, Phillippart was struck by the front passenger’s side of a car driven by Angela Galman. Section 80.04 of the City of Springfield Code provides that “[pledestrian crossings between intersections shall be prohibited in the interest of public safety, except where there may be a marked crosswalk.” Phillippart remained in a near comatose state until July 7, 1991, when she died from her injuries. Following Phillippart’s death, the National Health Service of France paid her estate $452,794.82 as compensation for Phillippart’s medical expenses. First Springfield Bank & Trust, acting on behalf of Phillippart’s estate, sued Galman, Dobson, and ADM for negligence. In addition, First Springfield sued Dobson and ADM for violating section 5 of the Public Nuisance Act, which makes it a public nuisance “[t]o obstruct or encroach upon public highways.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 100½, par. 26(5) (now 720 ILCS 5/47 — 5(5) (West 1998)). The jury entered a general verdict, finding that Phillip-part’s damages totaled $1 million and that Phillippart was 45% at fault. Accordingly, the jury awarded First Springfield $550,000. Pursuant to section 2 — 1205.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1205.1 (West 1998)), Dobson and ADM moved to reduce the jury award to reflect the amount paid to Phillippart’s estate by the National Health Service of France. Dobson and ADM also moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on all counts. The trial court denied the motions. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s judgment. 299 Ill. App. 3d 751. In dissent, Justice Steigmann concluded that Dobson and ADM are entitled to judgment notwithstanding the verdict because the illegally parked tanker truck was not the proximate cause of Phillippart’s injuries. Instead, the truck constituted merely a condition that allowed Phillippart’s injuries to occur. 299 Ill. App. 3d at 764 (Steigmann, J., dissenting). ADM and Dobson now appeal from the appellate court’s judgment, arguing that they are entitled to a judgment notwithstanding the verdict on (1) all claims because the illegally parked truck was not the proximate cause of Phillippart’s injuries; (2) the negligence claim because they owed no duty of care to Phillippart, who was illegally jaywalking when the accident occurred; and (3) the public nuisance claim because plaintiff failed to establish the existence of either a public nuisance or a private right of action under section 5 of the Public Nuisance Act. In the alternative, ADM and Dobson argue that they are entitled to a reduction in the jury award to reflect the amount paid to Phillippart’s estate by the National Health Service of France. First Springfield also appeals, arguing that the jury’s award should not have been reduced by 45% because, although comparative negligence is a defense to a negligence claim, it is not a defense to a public nuisance claim. This court granted leave to appeal, and jurisdiction exists under Supreme Court Rule 315 (177 Ill. 2d R. 315). ANALYSIS To recover damages based upon a defendant’s alleged negligence, a plaintiff must allege and prove that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, that defendant breached that duty, and that the breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiffs injuries. Thompson v. County of Cook, 154 Ill. 2d 374, 382 (1993). To recover damages based upon a defendant’s alleged statutory violation, a plaintiff must show that (1) she belongs to the class of persons that the statute was designed to protect; (2) her injury is of the type that the statute was designed to prevent; and (3) the violation proximately caused her injury. Kalata v. Anheuser-Busch Cos., 144 Ill. 2d 425, 434-35 (1991). Dobson and ADM argue that they are entitled to a judgment notwithstanding the verdict on all counts because the illegally parked tanker truck was not a proximate cause of plaintiffs injuries. Because proximate cause ordinarily is a question for the trier of fact, a judgment notwithstanding the verdict cannot be granted on that basis unless “all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand.” Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co., 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510 (1967). In arguing that the illegally parked tanker truck was not a proximate cause of Phillippart’s injuries, Dobson and ADM correctly observe that Illinois courts draw a distinction between a condition and a cause. Indeed, if the negligence charged does nothing more than furnish a condition by which the injury is made possible, and that condition causes an injury by the subsequent, independent act of a third person, the creation of the condition is not the proximate cause of the injury. Briske v. Village of Burnham, 379 Ill. 193, 199 (1942); Merlo v. Public Service Co., 381 Ill. 300, 316 (1942); see also Thompson, 154 Ill. 2d at 383. The test that should be applied in all proximate cause cases is whether the first wrongdoer reasonably might have anticipated the intervening efficient cause as a natural and probable result of the first party’s own negligence. Merlo, 381 Ill. at 317. According to Dobson and ADM, the illegally parked tanker truck constituted only a passive condition that provided an opportunity for the active causal agencies (i.e., Galman’s negligent driving and Phillippart’s negligent decision to jaywalk) to interact. First Springfield, by contrast, urges us to abandon the “condition vs. cause” dichotomy altogether and instead embrace the proximate cause standard articulated in Lee v. Chicago Transit Authority, 152 Ill. 2d 432, 455 (1992). In Lee, the court held that the term “proximate cause” describes two distinct requirements: cause in fact and legal cause. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 455. Cause in fact exists where there is a reasonable certainty that a defendant’s acts caused the injury or damage. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 455. A defendant’s conduct is a cause in fact of the plaintiffs injury only if'that conduct is a material element and a substantial factor in bringing about the injury. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 455. A defendant’s conduct is a material element and a substantial factor in bringing about an injury if, absent that conduct, the injury would not have occurred. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 455. “Legal cause,” by contrast, is essentially a question of foreseeability. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 456. The relevant inquiry here is whether the injury is of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 456. According to First Springfield, the illegally parked tanker truck was a cause in fact of Phillippart’s fatal injuries because “Angela Galman admitted that the presence of the truck prevented her from going to the right to avoid a collision with May Phillippart at the center line.” Moreover, First Springfield contends that the illegally parked tanker truck was the legal cause of Phillippart’s fatal injuries because “it was readily foreseeable that at school closing time school children might be crossing the street, and 16-year-old Angela Galman might need both lanes of traffic to avoid an accident.” In raising their respective arguments, the parties appear to be operating under the mistaken assumption that Briske, Merlo, and Thompson are distinct from and wholly incompatible with Lee. This is not the case. Although Briske, Merlo, and Thompson clearly employ a vocabulary different from that employed in Lee, all of these cases ask the same question: Was the defendant’s negligence a material and substantial element in bringing about the injury, and, if so, was the injury of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct? While Lee sets forth this principle in general terms, Briske, Merlo, and Thompson address a particular subset of cases, namely, those in which the plaintiff’s injury results not from the defendant’s negligence directly but from the subsequent, independent act of a third person.1 Thus, when Briske, Merlo, and Thompson ask whether the defendant’s conduct was a cause of the injury or simply furnished a condition by which the injury was made possible, they are in effect asking whether the defendant’s conduct was a material and substantial element in bringing about the injury. Similarly, when Briske, Merlo, and Thompson ask whether the defendant might have reasonably anticipated the intervening efficient cause as a natural and probable result of his or her own negligence, they are in effect asking whether the intervening efficient cause was of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct. Far from conflicting, Briske, Merlo, Thompson, and Lee uniformly embrace the traditional proximate cause test that has governed Illinois for the better part of this century. See, e.g., Hartnett v. Boston Store of Chicago, 265 Ill. 331, 334 (1914) (describing relationship between “condition vs. cause” standard and Lee standard). Turning to the facts of this case, we first must decide whether the illegally parked tanker truck was a cause in fact of Phillippart’s fatal injuries. We hold that it was, though not for the reason that First Springfield suggests. In arguing cause in fact, First Springfield relies exclusively upon Angela Galman’s testimony that, had the tanker truck not been parked illegally on Lawrence Avenue, she could have swerved to the right to avoid hitting Phillippart. The problem with this argument is that the portion of Galman’s testimony upon which First Springfield relies exclusively was admissible only in First Springfield’s case against Galman and was specifically excluded from evidence in their case against Dobson and ADM. Thus, although Galman’s testimony is undeniably relevant to the question of cause in fact, we simply cannot consider it. Nevertheless, the portions of the record that relate to Dobson and ADM provide a more than sufficient basis for concluding that the tanker truck was a cause in fact of Phillippart’s injuries. Again, in deciding whether a defendant’s conduct was a material and substantial element in bringing about an injury, we ask whether, absent the defendant’s conduct, that injury still would have occurred. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 455. In this case, had Dobson not parked his truck illegally on Lawrence Street, Phillippart’s injuries almost certainly would not have occurred. To be sure, Phillippart still may have chosen to cross Lawrence Avenue at mid-block and in clear violation of the law, but she would have had an unobstructed view of the roadway and presumably would have timed her crossing to avoid a collision with oncoming traffic. The question thus becomes whether the illegally parked tanker truck was the legal cause of Phillippart’s injuries. We hold that it was not. The relevant inquiry here is whether the injury is of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 456. We have no quarrel with First Springfield’s assertion that “it was readily .foreseeable that at school closing time school children might be crossing the street, and 16-year-old Angela Galman might need both lanes of traffic to avoid an accident.” That, however, is not the question. The question is whether it was reasonably foreseeable that violating a “no parking” sign at mid-block would likely result in a pedestrian’s ignoring a marked crosswalk at the corner, walking to mid-block, and attempting to cross a designated truck route blindly and in clear violation of the law. Clearly, it would not. May Phillippart’s decision to jaywalk, while undeniably tragic and regrettable, was entirely of her own making. Dobson and ADM neither caused Phillip-part to make that decision, nor reasonably could have anticipated that decision as a likely consequence of their conduct. One simply does not follow from the other. In reaching this decision, we note that the facts of this case differ significantly from those in Scerba v. City of Chicago, 284 Ill. App. 3d 435 (1996), a case upon which both the appellate court and First Springfield rely heavily. In Scerba, a Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) bus driver stopped his bus in the middle of the block’s designated crosswalk, blocking it completely. As a result, a 12-year-old boy walking home from school was forced to cross the street by walking in front of the bus and outside the crosswalk. His view obscured, the boy was struck by an approaching car. The trial court entered summary judgment in favor of the CTA, in part because the bus constituted a condition rather than a cause of the boy’s injures. In reversing that judgment, the appellate court properly concluded that a reasonable jury could have found that the boy’s decision to walk around the bus and outside the crosswalk was a foreseeable consequence of the bus driver’s decision to block the crosswalk. Scerba, 284 Ill. App. 3d at 439-41. We have no quarrel with the decision in Scerba, as the CTA driver in that case parked his bus in the one place on the block specifically designated for pedestrian crossing. Of course it was likely that, as a result, pedestrians would be forced to cross the street somewhere other than in the designated crosswalk. They had no other choice. In this case, by contrast, Dobson parked his tanker truck at mid-block, 41 feet from the nearest crosswalk and in a place that parking was specifically permitted at other times of the day. Nothing in Dobson’s conduct increased the likelihood that a pedestrian would forgo an open crosswalk in favor of an obstructed and unlawful mid-block crossing.2  CONCLUSION We agree with Dobson and ADM that the illegally parked tanker truck was not a proximate cause of May Phillippart’s injuries. We therefore reverse the judgment of the appellate court and that portion of the circuit court judgment denying Dobson and ADM’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and we enter judgment in favor of Dobson and ADM on all counts. Because this ruling is dispositive of all claims raised in this appeal, we need not address the remaining issues. Judgments reversed. JUSTICE BILANDIC took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.   Admittedly, unlike Briske and Merlo, Thompson does not explicitly mention the independent, intervening act of a third person when setting forth the “condition vs. cause” dichotomy. See Thompson, 154 Ill. 2d at 383. Nevertheless, the holding in Thompson makes clear that it was the intervening, independent negligence of a third person — namely, Gittings’ reckless and drunken driving — that caused the accident. Thompson, 154 Ill. 2d at 383.    Even if the jury believed the testimony of First Springfield’s expert that the tanker truck would have partially obstructed a pedestrian’s view of approaching traffic at the English-Lawrence crosswalk, it was in no way a reasonably foreseeable and likely consequence that such pedestrian would instead choose to cross in front of the tanker truck at mid-block, where her view of approaching traffic also was obstructed.

=== CASE 9742177 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:05.143745+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: May Phillippart is dead because ADM’s driver, Howard Dobson, made the supremely careless decision to leave his tanker truck in a no-parking zone on a busy street by Springfield’s most dangerous intersection near 10 schools, including Phillippart’s, just as classes were letting out. Dobson had no compelling reason for parking where he did. The location just happened to be near his home, and he wanted to take a shower and make some phone calls. There was no question as to the illegality of Dobson’s actions. He left his truck directly in front of a “No Parking” sign, which he admits that he saw and read. Nor was there any genuine issue as to the danger Dobson created. Expert testimony established that the vehicle presented a major obstruction to traffic and was a hazard to pedestrians who wanted to cross the street. This appraisal was supported by those present on the scene when Phillippart was fatally injured. For the motorists and pedestrians who were forced to maneuver past Dobson’s truck, the risks were readily apparent. From the materials before us, it appears that the only one oblivious to the danger was Dobson himself. My colleagues’ decision to defy the jury’s verdict and exonerate Dobson and ADM is indefensible. Although it is true that Phillippart was jaywalking at the time she was struck, jaywalking does not strip a pedestrian of the law’s protection. Contrary to ADM’s contention, every motorist has a duty of care to pedestrians, notwithstanding the rights and responsibilities that may be imposed under other provisions of the Vehicle Code. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 95½, par. 11 — 1003.1. Consistent with this provision, the courts in Illinois have long recognized that a pedestrian is not barred from recovery as a matter of law for failing to cross a thoroughfare in a marked crosswalk. See Newton v. Meissner, 76 Ill. App. 3d 479, 490 (1979); Moore v. Checker Taxi Co., 133 Ill. App. 2d 588, 591 (1971). Plaintiffs theory was that Phillippart was justified in crossing outside of the marked crosswalk because the location of Dobson’s truck obscured her view of traffic and made use of the crosswalk unsafe. Although my colleagues draw a different conclusion based on the evidence, they misconstrue the facts. Contrary to their characterization, Phillippart’s view of traffic was not entirely obstructed at the point of her attempted crossing. Phillippart could still assess westbound traffic by looking around the front of Dobson’s truck, and that location actually provided a better view of the eastbound lanes than she would have had at the crosswalk. Under these circumstances, crossing the street at the front of the truck rather than behind it at the crosswalk was, on balance, the safest course for Phillippart to have taken. That is what the evidence showed and that is what the jury found. To the extent that Phillippart should have maintained a closer lookout before stepping into the traffic lane, her lack of due care was reflected in the jury’s apportionment of comparative fault. It is not the province of this court to reweigh the evidence and substitute its judgment for the jury’s. Maple v. Gustafson, 151 Ill. 2d 445, 452 (1992). If the jurors who heard and decided this case ever read the majority’s disposition, I feel certain that they will be as surprised as I was by what my colleagues have made of the facts and the law. Seeing their findings and conclusions so readily disregarded, they are apt to wonder why they even bothered to report for service. I cannot blame them. Their work, their attention, their adherence to the law have all been rendered meaningless, and for no legitimate reason. ADM Trucking is a division of Archer-Daniels-Midland Company, an international agribusiness, the self-styled “supermarket to the world.” Phillippart was a high school student. In focusing on Phillippart’s conduct rather than on the carelessness of ADM’s driver and his flagrant violation of the law, what the majority is ultimately saying is that a teenager should be held to a higher standard of care than a multinational corporatian. This perverse conception of justice has been expressed before. See, e.g., Mt. Zion State Bank & Trust v. Consolidated Communications, Inc., 169 Ill. 2d 110 (1995). I still cannot accept it. The majority’s position stems, I think, from an antiquated and misguided deference to the demands of private industry. Unlike my colleagues, I do not believe that corporate enterprise must be given precedence over human welfare in order to flourish. If the success of Illinois commerce depends on enabling multinational corporations to maim and kill schoolchildren with impunity, we are lost. For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2230151 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.208074+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1257 (1999)
Kenya M. SWANIGAN, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 82A01-9904-CR-133.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 27, 1999.
Rehearing Denied February 22, 2000.
Timothy R. Dodd, Evansville, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, J.T. Whitehead, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge
Kenya Swanigan appeals her convictions for two counts of robbery, both class B felonies.[1] Swanigan raises one issue for our review, which we restate as whether the trial court erred in refusing to admit into evidence three letters under the statement against interest exception to the hearsay rule. We affirm.
The facts most favorable to the conviction follow. In the early morning hours of August 8, 1998, Tiffany Moorman and Toshieka Douglas, both of Owensboro, Kentucky, were on their way to the C.K. Newsome Center in Evansville, Indiana. Unsure of where they were, they stopped the vehicle and asked Swanigan and Antwan Henley, a couple walking across the street, for directions. Swanigan and Henley stated that they were also going to the *1258 C.K. Newsome Center also and that they would show them the way if Moorman and Douglas would let them in the vehicle. After being granted permission, Swanigan and Henley got into the back seat of the vehicle. Moorman looked into her rear view mirror almost immediately and saw that Henley was pointing a gun at her. While ordering Moorman to drive to various places, Swanigan and Henley demanded money from Moorman and Douglas, searched their purses, and took their jewelry. Then, Henley ordered Moorman and Douglas to strip and get into the trunk of the vehicle. After closing the lid on the trunk, Henley and Swanigan got back into the vehicle and Henley drove off. Some moments later, Henley stopped the vehicle, and he and Swanigan fled on foot in different directions. Shortly thereafter, the police apprehended Swanigan and Henley and escorted them back to the vehicle where the two victims were discovered in the trunk.
Swanigan was charged with two counts of kidnapping,[2] two counts of robbery,[3] and carjacking.[4] Following a jury trial, Swanigan was acquitted of the carjacking and kidnapping charges. However, she was found guilty of both robbery counts and was sentenced to twelve and a half years imprisonment for each count, to be served consecutively.
The sole issue for our review is whether the trial court erred in refusing to admit into evidence three letters under the statement against interest exception to the hearsay rule. See Ind. Evidence Rule 804(b)(3). We review claims of erroneous evidentiary rulings for an abuse of discretion and only reverse where the decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances. Ford v. State, 704 N.E.2d 457, 459 (Ind.1998), reh'g denied
In the instant case, Henley was charged with the identical offenses as Swanigan for his part in the crime. While incarcerated, but before his trial where he was convicted of said offenses, Henley wrote three letters which were addressed to either Swanigan or her attorney. These letters included such statements as, "allow me to apologize to you for committing that robbery while you was [sic] with me. I know I should have let you go when you ask [sic] me.... Now I have you incarcerated on charges you truly didn't have anything to do with," that Swanigan "stated serial [sic] times she didn't want anything to do with that robbry [sic]" and that Swanigan was "afraid and thought [he] would shoot [her]." In addition to statements such as these that were, to a greater or lesser extent, incriminatory towards Henley and exculpatory towards Swanigan, the letters also noted his mental illness, for which he receives a monthly disability check, and his addiction to drugs and alcohol. Moreover, one of the letters contained several inconsistencies regarding his culpability. For example, Henley wrote about feeling bad about his actions, that he was guilty of the crime, and that he had turned his life over to Jesus Christ. However, he also wrote that he was "never found anywhere at the actual crime spot" and that he "was not caught in the act by the police."
At Swanigan's trial, Henley was called as a witness. However, Henley was in the process of appealing his convictions for the same events for which Swanigan was now on trial, and therefore, any testimony that he gave could have been used against him in a subsequent proceeding if the appeal of his conviction was successful. Accordingly, Henley asserted his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and refused to testify. The trial court then declared Henley unavailable as a witness and Swanigan sought to have the three letters in question introduced into evidence under the statement against interest exception to the hearsay rule. See Evid. R. 804(b)(3). *1259 The trial court ruled that the letters were not within the exception to the hearsay rule described under Evidence Rule 804(b)(3). In making its ruling, the trial court stated:
"[R]eliability is the ultimate test of admission. Ah, one, one ah, aspect of whether the statement is reliable is, is it a clear and unequivocal statement of the declarant's guilt ah, the second and in this case, given the fact that we have a recantation of, of the prior statements and some equivocation ah, of his guilt in the Exhibits themselves, the Court does not find it a clear and unequivocal statement of declarant's guilt ah, the Court, the case is also ahm, talk about motive for the statement and whether there's a relationship between the declarant and the party that's pro ... ah, proffering the statement, there is of course a long term relationship here.... The Court did have an opportunity to observe Mr. Henley and Mr. Henley's demeanor yesterday on the witness stand. Court does not find that his credibility is high ah, he's not the kind of person that I think most people would describe as reasonable or ah, trustworthy...."
Record, pp. 667-668.
Hearsay is an out of court statement offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted and generally is not admissible into evidence. Ind. Evidence Rule 802. However, hearsay testimony is nevertheless admissible under the statement against interest exception if the declarant is unavailable as a witness and the statement, at the time it was made, was "so far contrary to the declarant's pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so far tended to subject the declarant to civil or criminal liability ... that a reasonable person in the declarant's position would not have made the statement unless believing it to be true." Ind. Evidence Rule 804(b)(3).
On appeal, Swanigan argues that Rule 804(b)(3) only requires proof that the declarant is unavailable and that the statement sought to be admitted is against the declarant's penal interest. Since Henley was indisputably unavailable, and the State concedes the issue of penal interest, Swanigan argues that the letters at issue met the rule's requirements and that the trial court erred in refusing to admit them into evidence. Specifically, Swanigan takes issue with the fact that the trial court found that the letters did not meet the criteria of Rule 804(b)(3) by "relying primarily on the inconsistencies within the statements themselves, the motive of the declarant Henley, and the Court's own personal belief as to his credibility." Appellant's Brief, p. 9. In support, Swanigan cites to the fact that Indiana Evidence Rule 804(b)(3), unlike its federal counterpart, does not impose the requirement that the statement is inadmissible "unless corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement." Fed. Evidence Rule 804(b)(3). Accordingly, Swanigan argues that the absence of this requirement from the Indiana rule means that "no corroboration is necessary for the admission into evidence of the out of court declaration of an unavailable Declarant that is incriminatory, even when offered as exculpatory evidence by a Co-Defendant." Appellant's Brief, p. 14.
Our supreme court initially adopted the federal version of Rule 804(b)(3), including the language regarding corroborating circumstances indicating trustworthiness, in Thomas v. State, 580 N.E.2d 224, 227 (Ind. 1991). The Thomas court noted that "[t]his rule serves to assure a defendant his due process right to present evidence in his favor while protecting the trial court's ability to exclude evidence that is irrelevant or insufficiently trustworthy." Id. at 226. However, the Indiana Rules of Evidence, which were adopted in 1994, omitted the language regarding corroborating circumstances indicating trustworthiness from its version of Rule 804(b)(3). Although this change "appear[s] to have eased the reliability requirement for admissions against penal interest," it is not "clear what, if any, indicia of trustworthiness *1260 is required for admission of a confession as a declaration against penal interest under the Indiana rule." Davis v. State, 635 N.E.2d 1117, 1121 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). See also Jervis v. State, 679 N.E.2d 875, 879 n. 5 (Ind.1997) (noting that the lack of a requirement in the Indiana rule regarding corroborating circumstances which indicate trustworthiness "renders unclear what indicia of trustworthiness, if any, must be found for the statement to be admitted").
In Jervis, our supreme court noted the difference in the federal and the Indiana rule regarding statements against interest, namely the lack of the requirement of corroborative evidence in Indiana. Jervis, 679 N.E.2d at 879. Immediately thereafter, the court stated, "for the same reasons courts in this state have historically viewed such declarations with suspicion, trial courts should be alert to evaluate the overall reliability of the proffered statement. Reliability is, after all, the ultimate justification for admission of statements against interest." Id. While we realize that the commentary in Jervis is dicta because Jervis was decided on grounds other than the existence or lack of corroborating circumstances, we nonetheless view Jervis as persuasive guidance in our resolution of this issue.
"Exceptions to the hearsay rule exist, because the manner in which certain out-of-court statements are made virtually guarantee their reliability." Arndt v. State, 642 N.E.2d 224, 227 (Ind.1994). While "[t]he law has long recognized the credibility inherent in a statement which at the time of its making so far tended to subject the declarant to criminal liability that a reasonable person in the declarant's position would not have made the statement unless he believed it to be true," such cannot necessarily be said of the letters in the instant case. Wilson v. State, 677 N.E.2d 586, 589 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). All of the letters written by Henley contain numerous references to his drug and alcohol addiction, two contain references to his mental illness, and one contains directly contradictory information regarding his culpability in the matter. This information, along with the trial court's observance of Henley himself, could have reasonably led the trial court to believe that the letters sought to be admitted were themselves not reliable, the cornerstone of admissibility. See Jervis, 679 N.E.2d at 879; Arndt, 642 N.E.2d at 227. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to admit the letters written by Henley due to their overall lack of reliability. See id.
We emphasize that we sustain the trial court's ruling on the basis of the reliability of the letters themselves alone, and leave for another day the question of the propriety of the trial court considering evidence of "corroborating circumstances" of trustworthiness, such as Henley's motive in writing the letters. Corroborating evidence is defined as "[e]vidence supplementary to that already given and tending to strengthen or confirm it [or] [a]dditional evidence of a different character to the same point." BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 344 (1990 ed.) (emphasis added). Letters deemed unreliable due to the information contained within them, indicative of the mental status of the author, are not the same thing as letters deemed inadmissible due to a lack of corroborating evidence of trustworthiness.
However, assuming arguendo that the trial court did err in excluding the letters from evidence, such error was harmless. The erroneous exclusion of evidence is deemed harmless when its probable impact on the jury, in light of all the evidence in the case, is sufficiently minor so as not to affect the substantial rights of the parties. Fleener v. State, 656 N.E.2d 1140, 1142 (Ind.1995).
Here, there was substantial independent evidence supporting Swanigan's conviction for robbery and disproving her claim that she was not a willing participant in the events of the evening in question. First, both victims identified Swanigan as one of *1261 the two assailants who robbed them. In fact, it was Swanigan, not Henley, who coaxed the reluctant Moorman into allowing them to get into the car in the first place. Furthermore, evidence was presented that Swanigan, after searching through the victims' purses, threatened them by telling them that she had their identification cards, knew where they lived, and that they had better cooperate if they wanted to live or to see their children live. Both victims testified that Swanigan, as well as Henley, took jewelry from them; Swanigan actually physically removed a necklace from one of the victim's necks. Moreover, the victims testified that at no time did Henley ever threaten Swanigan or aim a gun at her, but instead helped and assisted Henley in the commission of the crime. Therefore, in light of the aforementioned evidence of Swanigan's guilt, it is unlikely that the three letters written by a drug and alcohol addicted, mentally ill man with whom Swanigan had a long-time relationship would have, if admitted, resulted in the jury returning a verdict of "not guilty" of the robbery charges. Accordingly, even if the exclusion of the letters was erroneous, such error did not affect Swanigan's substantial rights given the substantial evidence of her guilt. See id. at 1142.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
RILEY, J., and KIRSCH, J. concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code § 35-42-5-1.
[2]  Ind.Code § 35-42-3-2.
[3]  I.C. § 35-42-5-1.
[4]  Ind.Code § 35-42-5-2.

=== CASE 2230152 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.246398+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 645 (1999)
308 Ill. App.3d 605
242 Ill.Dec. 24
In re MARRIAGE OF Terry R. ABMA, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Kimberly Anderle Abma, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 1-98-1381.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
November 1, 1999.
*647 Jerome Marvin Kaplan and Lesly F. Datlow, Chicago, for Appellant.
Howard A. London, Chicago, for Appellee.
Presiding Justice FROSSARD delivered the opinion of the court:
Kimberly Anderle Abma, respondent, appeals from a judgment dissolving her marriage to Terry Abma, petitioner, and dividing the marital property between the parties. Respondent raises two issues on appeal: (1) whether the trial court erroneously denied her motion for a substitution of judge; and (2) whether the trial court abused its discretion in dividing the marital estate. For the reasons that follow, we affirm.
Petitioner and respondent were married on July 27, 1987. At the time, petitioner and respondent both worked for the Darien police department, but respondent had plans to attend law school. The two decided that it would be best for respondent to complete her legal education in as short a time as possible, so respondent ended her employment with the police department shortly before the wedding. She had earned $22,000 a year from her employment as a police dispatcher.
Respondent then entered law school in January of 1988. Respondent did not work outside the home during her first year of school. Respondent's first year of law school was financed by obtaining student loans and using the funds from her Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, worth approximately $5,000. The parties used marital funds to pay for respondent's law school textbooks.
In addition to attending law school, respondent contributed to the marital estate by working part time as a research assistant during her second year of law school, and by obtaining a half scholarship for her *648 third and final year of school. Petitioner contributed to the estate by continuing to work full time as a police officer. After respondent graduated and obtained her law license, the parties agreed that she should open her own law practice. Respondent maintained her own practice from May of 1991 until January of 1995. Although she never drew a salary from the practice, she used monies from the business to make mortgage payments, repay student loans and purchase a home computer.
Petitioner owned his own home prior to the marriage, which he later contributed to the marital estate by placing it in joint tenancy with respondent. Before their marriage, the home had a value of approximately $74,000 and a mortgage balance of $11,856. The parties refinanced their home to help pay for respondent's education and law practice. They obtained loans in the amount of $38,000, $50,000, $89,200 and $8,000, using the home as collateral, ultimately reducing the equity in the home from $64,000 to $32,000.
The parties separated in January of 1995. Petitioner then filed a petition for dissolution of the marriage on October 5, 1995. On August 22, 1996, the court scheduled a pretrial conference to take place on October 21, 1996. On that date, the parties participated in a pretrial conference before the trial court. By December 1996 it became clear that a settlement regarding certain marital assets could not be agreed upon, so the court set the matter for trial on March 19, 1997. On February 21, 1997, four months after the pretrial conference, respondent petitioned the court for a substitution of judge, which the court denied. The matter went to trial in July of 1997.
At trial, petitioner testified that he had worked as a deputy police chief at the Darien police department for 25 years. Prior to the marriage he had a credit card debt of approximately $500. At the end of the marriage, he had incurred $9,000 of credit card debt, owned a 1990 automobile, and had savings of $1,211.
The parties stipulated to their earnings during the marriage. The stipulation detailed each spouse's income throughout the marital years. The stipulation provided that, in 1988, respondent drew no earnings while petitioner earned an annual salary of $43,123. In 1989, petitioner earned $41,919.23, while respondent earned $1,192.75. Petitioner continued to earn a steady annual income as a police chief, with his salary for the final year of the marriage increased to $54,152. Respondent's income, however, peaked in 1991 at $2,088 and declined steadily after 1991. For example, in the years 1992, 1993, and 1994, respondent's law practice cost the marriage $12,899, $24,441, $11,792, respectively.
At the conclusion of the trial, the court issued its findings and distributed the marital assets between the parties. At the time of trial, petitioner, age 50, remained employed as a police officer with the Darien police department at a salary of $67,000, while respondent, age 39, earned approximately $32,000 a year as an attorney with a legal aid clinic. The court further found that at the time petitioner entered into the marriage, his equity in the home amounted to approximately $64,000, but at the time of dissolution, the equity had been reduced to $32,000 as a result of the parties' repeated refinancing. Finally, the court took note of the fact that respondent's student loans cost the marriage $23,776.91, while her legal practice cost the marital estate a total of $42,743.57.
In distributing the marital assets, the court stated that it considered the duration of the marriage, the contribution of each party to the acquisition, preservation, increase or decrease in the property, and the opportunity for each spouse to acquire assets and income in the future. The court awarded to petitioner the complete equity in the marital residence, the furniture, his individual retirement account, the nonmarital portion of his pension plus one half of *649 the marital portion of the pension funds. Respondent received the remaining half of the marital portion of petitioner's pension, and respondent was required to pay her remaining law school debt of approximately $10,000. The court required petitioner to assume the remaining credit card debt from the marriage, in the amount of approximately $9,000. No children were born of the marriage, and the court barred both parties from seeking maintenance. Respondent now appeals.
ANALYSIS
I. Respondent's Motion for Substitution of Judge
Respondent initially contends that the trial court erred in denying her motion for a substitution of judge. She asserts that each party has an absolute right to a substitution of judge provided that no substantive rulings have yet been made in the case. Respondent claims that the court erroneously denied her motion based on the occurrence of a pretrial conference. Respondent does not deny taking part in a pretrial conference, but she claims that the court did not make any substantial rulings and therefore should have granted her motion. Petitioner disputes this contention, arguing that respondent's motion was untimely because it was filed after a pretrial conference during which respondent had an opportunity to gain insight as to the trial judge's attitude toward the case based on the settlement recommendation.
According to section 2-1001 of the Code of Civil Procedure, either party to a civil action may petition for a substitution of judge for several different reasons. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001 (West 1996). First, either party may petition for, or the court on its own motion may grant, a substitution of judge if the original judge presiding over the case has an interest in the proceedings. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001(a)(1) (West 1996). Second, either party may petition the court for a substitution of judge as of right, provided that the party timely exercises that right. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001(a)(2) (West 1996). Finally, either party may petition for a substitution of judge for cause. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001(a)(3) (West 1996).
We note that effective January 1993, the legislature amended section 2-1001 and added section 2-1001.5 to distinguish between "changes of venue" and "substitutions of judge." 735 ILCS 5/2-001, 2-1001.5 (West 1994). Case law published prior to January 1993 refers to motions for "change of venue" and motions for a "substitution of judge" interchangeably.
Here, respondent filed a motion requesting a substitution of judge as of right, pursuant to section 2-1001(a)(2). Section 2-1001(a)(2) explains that an application for such a substitution may only be granted if it is presented both before the trial or the hearing begins and before the original judge has ruled on any substantial issue in the case. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001(a)(2) (West 1996). The right to a change of venue is absolute where a motion is filed before trial or hearing or before the judge presiding in the case has made any substantial ruling. 735 ILCS 5/2-1001(a)(2); In re Dominique F., 145 Ill.2d 311, 164 Ill.Dec. 639, 583 N.E.2d 555 (1991). A petition may be considered untimely if filed to delay or avoid trial. Sahoury v. Moses, 308 Ill.App.3d 413, 414-15, 241 Ill. Dec. 754, 719 N.E.2d 1157 (1999). If timely made, the right to a change of venue is mandatory, so that the trial court has no discretion to deny a timely and properly filed petition for change of venue. Hartnett v. Stack, 241 Ill.App.3d 157, 180 Ill. Dec. 634, 607 N.E.2d 703 (1993).
The reasoning behind this principle is that one should not be compelled to plead his cause before a judge who is prejudiced, whether actually or only by suspicion. The corollary to this principle, however, is that a petition for a substitution of judge must be brought at the earliest practical moment in order to prohibit a litigant from seeking a change of judge *650 only after the litigant has formed an opinion that the judge may be unfavorably disposed toward his or her cause. In re Daniel R., 291 Ill.App.3d 1003, 225 Ill.Dec. 900, 684 N.E.2d 891 (1997).
Although it is fairly simple to determine whether a party's request for a substitution of judge is filed prior to the commencement of a trial or hearing, the issue of whether the court has ruled on a substantial issue requires a more involved inquiry. A ruling is considered "substantial" in nature when it is directly related to the merits of the case. Bonnie Owen Realty Inc. v. Cincinnati Ins. Co., 283 Ill.App.3d 812, 219 Ill.Dec. 294, 670 N.E.2d 1182 (1996). For example, a ruling on a preliminary injunction is considered a "substantial" ruling for purposes of the statute. Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center v. Berlin, 268 Ill.App.3d 184, 205 Ill.Dec. 325, 643 N.E.2d 276 (1994). Similarly, a ruling on a motion to strike and dismiss the opposing party's complaint has been deemed a substantial issue. Federal National Mortgage Ass'n v. Schildgen, 252 Ill.App.3d 984, 192 Ill.Dec. 267, 625 N.E.2d 227 (1993).
In the case at bar, petitioner filed his petition for dissolution of the marriage on October 5, 1995. The parties appeared in court to continue the matter on several occasions thereafter and, over one year later, on October 21, 1996, they participated in a pretrial conference with Judge Donegan. Four months later, on February 21, 1997, respondent filed her motion requesting a substitution of judge from Judge Donegan. Respondent's motion for substitution of judge alleged in conclusory fashion that there had been no substantive rulings in the case and that she was entitled to a substitution of judge as a matter of right pursuant to section 2-1001.
Petitioner moved to strike respondent's motion and urged the court to deny her request for a new judge as untimely. In his answer to respondent's motion, petitioner asserted that the matter had been before Judge Donegan for approximately seven months; a pretrial conference had occurred; the parties had at one point entered into a settlement; the matter was set for prove-up; and respondent was "judge shopping" because she did not like Judge Donegan's pretrial recommendations. Respondent did not file any reply to petitioner's answer. The court denied respondent's motion for substitution of judge, based on the fact that the parties had participated in a pretrial conference.
Respondent cites In re Marriage of Roach to support her claim that a request for a change of venue filed after the occurrence of a pretrial conference is not untimely. In re Marriage of Roach, 245 Ill.App.3d 742, 185 Ill.Dec. 735, 615 N.E.2d 30 (1993). However, as petitioner correctly observes, in Roach, the court also noted that even in the absence of a substantial ruling in the case, a motion for a change of venue may nonetheless be considered untimely if the parties have had an opportunity to discern the court's disposition toward the merits of the case. Roach, 245 Ill.App.3d at 746, 185 Ill.Dec. 735, 615 N.E.2d 30.
In addition, the Roach decision did not enunciate any specific policy regarding whether pretrial conferences should or should not preclude a party from seeking a substitution of judge. The court in Roach also noted that "[e]ven when the trial court has not ruled on a substantial issue, it appears the motion may be denied if the movant has had an opportunity to test the waters and form an opinion as to the court's reaction to his claim" (Roach, 245 Ill.App.3d at 746, 185 Ill.Dec. 735, 615 N.E.2d 30, citing In re Marriage of Kozloff, 101 Ill.2d 526, 531, 79 Ill.Dec. 165, 463 N.E.2d 719 (1984)).
In fact, this court has previously expressed reluctance to formulate a hard and fast rule regarding how a pretrial conference affects the timeliness of a motion for substitution for judge. In Becker v. R.E. Cooper Corp., 193 Ill.App.3d 459, 140 Ill. Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236 (1990), for example, *651 this court held that the filing of a request for a change of venue was timely, despite the fact that the parties had participated in an extensive, 1½-hour pretrial conference. Becker, 193 Ill.App.3d at 461, 140 Ill.Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236. After a review of the record, this court concluded that the trial court had neither made a substantial ruling nor expressed its opinion on the merits of the case during the conference. Becker, 193 Ill.App.3d at 461, 140 Ill.Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236. As a result, this court held that the trial court's denial of the defendant's motion was in error. Becker, 193 Ill.App.3d at 461, 140 Ill.Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236. The court hesitated to definitively conclude that a pretrial conference could never preclude a request for a substitution of judge. The court in Becker noted the potential for abuse in a rule that would allow litigants to test the disposition of a trial judge during a pretrial conference while retaining an absolute right to a substitution of judge. Becker, 193 Ill.App.3d at 464, 140 Ill.Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236.
This court later upheld the trial court's denial of a substitution of judge after a pretrial conference in Paschen Contractors, Inc. v. Illinois State Toll Highway Authority, 225 Ill.App.3d 930, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539 (1992). In Paschen, the defendant moved for a substitution of judge after its attorney attended two off-the-record pretrial conferences. The defendant claimed that its motion for substitution was timely, despite the occurrence of two pretrial conferences. The court denied the defendant's motion, focusing primarily on the circumstances surrounding the two pretrial conferences that the defendant's attorney had attended. Paschen, 225 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539. The court relied upon the trial court's recollection of those conferences as discussions of the merits of the case. Paschen, 225 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539. Ultimately, based on the trial court's recollection of the two pretrial conferences as substantive discussions, the court concluded that the pretrial conferences had rendered the defendant's subsequent motion untimely. Paschen, 225 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539. Again, this court refused to formulate a per se rule but, rather, conducted an individualized inquiry into the nature and extent of the parties' pretrial conference. Paschen, 225 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539.
In this case, the trial court denied respondent's motion for a substitution of judge based on the fact that the parties had participated in a pretrial conference. Respondent urges us to reverse the trial court's denial, asserting that no substantive ruling resulted from the conference. But, as demonstrated above, it is necessary not only to review the rulings that resulted from the parties' pretrial conference, but also to consider the circumstances surrounding the conference in order to determine whether, as the result of the conference, the parties had an opportunity to discern the court's disposition toward the merits of the case. Even in the absence of any substantial rulings, this court has confirmed the impropriety in allowing a party to "shop" for a new judge after discerning the original judge's disposition toward the case. See Fennema v. Joyce, 6 Ill.App.3d 108, 285 N.E.2d 156 (1972); Becker v. R.E. Cooper, 193 Ill. App.3d 459, 140 Ill.Dec. 600, 550 N.E.2d 236; Paschen Contractors, Inc. v. Illinois State Toll Highway Authority, 225 Ill. App.3d 930, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539.
During pretrial conferences it is not uncommon for a judge to express an opinion or make a recommendation as part of the pretrial process. A party may be able to discern a judge's disposition toward the case from a pretrial conference at which substantive issues are discussed but not decided. Therefore, a request for judge substitution may be untimely if it is made after a pretrial conference. Paschen, 225 *652 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539.
After the pretrial conference in this case the parties entered into settlement negotiations and the matter was set for prove-up. Moreover, the record indicates that petitioner asserted in answer to respondent's motion for substitution of judge the following: (1) the case had been before Judge Donegan for approximately seven months; (2) a pretrial conference had occurred; (3) the parties had entered into a settlement; (4) the matter was set for prove-up; and (5) respondent was "judge shopping because she did not like Judge Donegan's pretrial recommendation." We note that respondent did not file a reply or any other document disputing the fact that she participated in a pretrial conference at which Judge Donegan made a pretrial recommendation that she did not like. Petitioner's allegations are unrebutted by the record we have before us.
The pretrial conference occurred on October 21, 1996, at which time Judge Donegan was the assigned trial judge. On November 15, 1996, attorney for petitioner sent respondent's attorney a property settlement agreement based on the October 21 meeting. On November 21, 1996, while respondent's attorney was in possession of the property agreement, an agreed order was entered setting the matter for prove-up. Shortly before the prove-up, petitioner was advised there was no agreement and on the prove-up date of December 20, 1997, an agreed order was entered setting the matter for trial on March 19, 1997. Respondent did not file the motion for substitution of judge until two months later, on February 21, 1997. This motion was filed seven months after the case was assigned to Judge Donegan, four months after the pretrial conference occurred, two months after settlement negotiations failed and only four weeks before trial was scheduled to begin.
We note that it is the appellant's obligation to provide a complete record on appeal. Tekansky v. Pearson, 263 Ill. App.3d 759, 200 Ill.Dec. 266, 635 N.E.2d 605 (1994). The trial court held seven status hearings and a pretrial conference. Respondent, as appellant, has not provided a transcript of what occurred at any of these proceedings. Respondent has not provided a transcript or bystander's report as to what transpired as a result of respondent's motion for substitution of judge.
When the record supplied is insufficient to support a party's claim of error, the reviewing court must presume that the trial court's judgment conformed to the law and comported with the evidence. Jackson v. Naffah, 241 Ill.App.3d 1043, 182 Ill.Dec. 424, 609 N.E.2d 958 (1993). Moreover, we will not reverse a trial court based on unsupported assertions. Absent a complete record, a reviewing court must conclude that the trial court's decision rests on a sufficient factual basis, and any doubts arising from the incompleteness of the record will be resolved against the appellant. Foutch v. O'Bryant, 99 Ill.2d 389, 76 Ill.Dec. 823, 459 N.E.2d 958 (1984).
Based on the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that Judge Donegan properly denied respondent's motion for substitution of judge. Judge Donegan's pretrial recommendation gave respondent a "unique opportunity to determine the thinking of the trial judge." Paschen, 225 Ill.App.3d at 937, 168 Ill.Dec. 902, 590 N.E.2d 539. Under the facts of this case the respondent's request for substitution of judge was untimely because it was made after respondent had an opportunity to discern the court's disposition toward the case. As a result, we affirm the trial court's denial of respondent's motion for a substitution of judge.
II. Division of Marital Assets
Respondent next contends that the trial court erroneously divided the assets of the marital estate between the parties. Respondent asserts that the court's distribution allowed petitioner to gain a disproportionate award of the marital assets while *653 leaving her with "nothing but debt." She urges us to find that the trial court abused its discretion in making its allocation.
In a dissolution of marriage proceeding, the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act requires the trial court to divide the marital property in just and equitable proportions. 750 ILCS 5/503(d) (West 1996). The trial court must consider all relevant factors including the duration of the marriage, the economic circumstances of each spouse, and the amount and source of each spouse's income. In re Marriage of Thomas, 239 Ill.App.3d 992, 181 Ill.Dec. 512, 608 N.E.2d 585 (1993). In addition, the court should consider the employability of both parties, their ages, occupations and the reasonable opportunity of each spouse to acquire assets and income in the future. In re Marriage of Eidson, 235 Ill.App.3d 907, 175 Ill.Dec. 901, 601 N.E.2d 298 (1992). The court should also compensate each spouse for his or her contribution to the marriage. In re Marriage of Maczko, 263 Ill.App.3d 991, 201 Ill.Dec. 127, 636 N.E.2d 559 (1992).
On review, the trial court's distribution of marital assets will only be reversed if its decision is against the manifest weight of the evidence and therefore an abuse of discretion. In re Marriage of Charles, 284 Ill.App.3d 339, 219 Ill.Dec. 742, 672 N.E.2d 57 (1996). A judgment is against the manifest weight of the evidence only if a contrary conclusion is clearly evident. Usselmann v. Jansen, 257 Ill. App.3d 978, 195 Ill.Dec. 885, 629 N.E.2d 193 (1994).
The court awarded respondent one half of the marital portion of petitioner's pension, to be paid in monthly installments upon petitioner's retirement. The court also required respondent to repay her remaining law school debt of approximately $10,000. Petitioner received the complete equity in the marital residence, the furniture, his individual retirement account and the nonmarital portion of his pension plus one half of the marital portion. The court also required petitioner to assume the remaining credit card debt from the marriage, in the amount of approximately $9,000. In distributing the marital assets, the court stated that it considered the duration of the marriage, the contribution of each party to the acquisition, preservation, increase or decrease in the property, and the opportunity for each spouse to acquire assets and income in the future.
Respondent contends that the trial court erroneously awarded petitioner a larger share of the marital assets. Specifically, she contests the court's order allowing petitioner to retain the complete equity in the marital home. Petitioner counters by asserting that respondent actually received an overly generous award of one half of the marital portion of petitioner's pension fund, given that respondent did nothing to contribute to that fund's growth during the marriage.
We disagree with petitioner's characterization of respondent's award of one half of the pension benefits as "overly generous." Pension benefits are a form of deferred compensation earned by an employee for his service to an employer. In re Marriage of Roehn, 216 Ill.App.3d 891, 159 Ill.Dec. 891, 576 N.E.2d 560 (1991). As such, they are treated as earnings, and to the extent that a spouse earned those benefits during the marriage, they are considered marital property. In re Marriage of Clabault, 249 Ill.App.3d 641, 188 Ill.Dec. 799, 619 N.E.2d 163 (1993). Accordingly, they are subject to division upon dissolution, like any other marital property. In re Marriage of Pieper, 79 Ill.App.3d 835, 34 Ill.Dec. 877, 398 N.E.2d 868 (1979). The trial court appropriately considered the post-marriage contributions to petitioner's pension fund to be the property of the marital estate, rather than the property of petitioner alone. This is true, even though, as petitioner points out, those contributions resulted solely from petitioner's employment during the marriage and not *654 from any direct contribution on the part of respondent.
However, we also disagree with respondent's assertion that the court awarded petitioner a disproportionate share of the marital assets, leaving her with "nothing but debt." Pension rights, whether matured, vested or nonvested, are considered property under the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act. In re Marriage of Campise, 115 Ill.App.3d 610, 71 Ill.Dec. 454, 450 N.E.2d 1333 (1983). Pension benefits earned during the course of the marriage are considered marital property despite the fact that they may not actually be distributed until after the dissolution of the marriage. In re Marriage of Pieper, 79 Ill.App.3d 835, 34 Ill.Dec. 877, 398 N.E.2d 868 (1979). The court assigned respondent the remaining $10,000 of her law school debt but also awarded her one half of the marital portion of petitioner's pension fund, to be paid upon his retirement. The evidence simply does not support respondent's assertion that she received "nothing but debt." The pension benefits granted to respondent are no less valuable merely because she will receive them at a later date.
Respondent further complains that the court placed an economic value on her law degree, thereby transforming the degree into a marital asset. She argues that the court's placement of an economic value on her degree resulted in the court's erroneous award of the full equity in the marital residence to petitioner. Respondent asserts that this valuation was erroneous and contrary to existing law.
Respondent cites In re Marriage of Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d 234, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551 (1984), to support her claim of error. In Weinstein, the husband began studying for a master's degree prior to the marriage. After the marriage, he continued to study full time for four years, while his wife worked full time in the retail industry. The husband's parents paid for all of his educational expenses, while the couple relied upon the wife's earnings to pay for common living expenses. Eventually, the husband graduated, obtained his doctor of osteopathy license and entered the work force.
Upon dissolution of the marriage, the trial court refused to allow the wife to introduce evidence of the value of the husband's degree and license. Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 238, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551. On review, the wife claimed that the trial court should have admitted the evidence, arguing that the husband's degree and license constituted marital property subject to division upon dissolution. Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 238-39, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551. This court affirmed the trial court's ruling, holding that neither a degree nor a license constitutes marital property. Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 244, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551. However, the court also recognized that one spouse's financial efforts and support should be taken into consideration upon dissolution, particularly when that support ultimately enables the other spouse to earn a professional degree or license. Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 245, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551.
Unlike the situation presented by Weinstein, in this case, the parties relied upon the marital estate not only for common living expenses, but also to fund a substantial portion of respondent's legal education. In addition, at the conclusion of respondent's schooling, the parties continued to rely upon the marital funds to support respondent's legal practice, which operated at a loss for approximately three years. The trial court properly considered the fact that petitioner consistently made substantial monetary contributions to the estate, while respondent did not. In fact, respondent's law practice alone cost the marital estate in excess of $40,000.
Although respondent claims that the resulting award to petitioner of the complete equity in the home was an improper interpretation of the rule enunciated by Weinstein, we disagree. Weinstein clearly stated *655 that "the contributing spouse should be entitled to some form of compensation for the financial efforts and support provided to the student spouse in the expectation that the marital unit would prosper in the future ..." Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 241, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551.
The trial court did not classify respondent's law degree as a marital asset or place a fair market value on the degree. Rather, the court properly applied the holding in In re Marriage of Weinstein by ruling that petitioner was entitled to be compensated for the financial efforts and support provided to respondent. The trial court, following Weinstein, recognized that respondent's law degree, earned through the financial support of petitioner, was a relevant factor in arriving at a fair distribution of the couple's marital assets and liabilities. "Rather than being classified as marital assets, a spouse's professional degree or license, earned while married through the financial support of the other spouse, is a relevant factor in distribution of the couple's marital assets and liabilities." Weinstein, 128 Ill.App.3d at 245, 83 Ill.Dec. 425, 470 N.E.2d 551.
Finally, respondent argues that the court punished her for not earning a higher salary as an attorney. Respondent claims that observations made by the court regarding her earning potential demonstrate the court's decision to penalize her for not obtaining a higher-paying job. While the court's assertion that the average Illinois attorney makes "three or four times" the amount of respondent's salary is unsupported by any evidence in the record, we disagree that this demonstrates the court's opinion that respondent should be earning a higher salary. Taken in context, the court's observations demonstrate the court's appropriate consideration of the relevant statutory factors, such as the respective ages of the parties, their employability and the opportunity of each spouse to acquire assets in the future. 750 ILCS 5/503(d) (West 1996).
The court appropriately observed that respondent is eleven years younger than petitioner, has earned a graduate level degree and obtained a professional license. Petitioner on the other hand, does not have a higher level education, and is eleven years closer to retirement age than respondent. A fair and equitable distribution of assets does require the court to take the surrounding circumstances of the parties into account. In re Marriage of Nelson, 297 Ill.App.3d 651, 232 Ill.Dec. 654, 698 N.E.2d 1084 (1998). In addition, the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act requires the trial court to take note of these very considerations. 750 ILCS 5/503(d)(8), (d)(11) (West 1996).
For the foregoing reasons, we find the court properly denied respondent's motion for substitution of judge and the court did not abuse its discretion in distributing the marital assets. We therefore affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
Affirmed.
RAKOWSKI and GALLAGHER, JJ., concur.