=== CASE 9738282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:59.064974+00 ===

JUSTICE HUTCHINSON, dissenting: I would affirm defendant’s conviction and thus I respectfully dissent. I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the trial court abused its discretion in considering the testimony from the two dismissed cases as other-crimes evidence in the remaining case. In taking this action, the trial court did not become an advocate on behalf of the prosecution but instead simply commented upon the evidence before it and gave defendant the opportunity to present rebutting evidence, which he did. The evidence on the other charges was introduced as part of an agreed-upon single trial and was properly before the court to consider. The trial court was not precluded from considering the evidence in a different light simply because the prosecution did not request it to do so. See Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 646. Here, the trial court found that the evidence from the other two reckless driving cases was other-crimes evidence relevant to establish defendant’s intent and motive in the remaining case. As in Hicks and Walter, I do not believe that the trial court abandoned its role as judge in considering the evidence in this manner. Furthermore, unlike in Kuntz and R.S., the trial court’s actions in this case did not result in the introduction of evidence not already before it. The evidence presented regarding the October cases had already been introduced prior to the trial court’s ruling, as part of an agreed-upon single trial. Thus, the evidence of defendant’s conduct was already before the trial court to consider, and the trial court did not have to take the affirmative step of admitting the evidence sua sponte. Instead, the trial court in the present case merely commented upon the evidence that had already been introduced at trial, and it reminded defendant that he was entitled to present any rebutting evidence. I do not believe that such a comment reflected that the trial court abandoned its role as judge and became an advocate for the prosecution. Notably, defendant offers no support for his assertion in his appellate brief that, although the cases were tried together, “it was understood that each case would be considered separate and distinct from one another.” If the parties had, in fact, reached such an agreement, it is not contained within the record. Instead, the bystander’s report simply indicates that the parties agreed that the trial court “would hear all three cases together.” Therefore, based upon my review of the record, it is apparent that the trial court conducted a single trial of all three cases. See People v. Lopez, 367 Ill. App. 3d 817, 819 (2006) (noting that appellant has burden of providing sufficiently complete record to support claims of error and that any doubts that may arise from the incompleteness of the record will be resolved against appellant). By agreeing to a single trial on all of the cases, defendant cannot now complain that the trial court heard evidence of defendant’s conduct in the other cases. See People v. Gresham, 104 Ill. App. 3d 81, 87 (1982) (holding that defendant’s failure to file a motion to sever waives objection to single trial on multiple charges). Finally, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that we are presented with circumstances similar to those present in Lang. In addition to the obvious factual distinctions between this case and Lang, I do not believe that this case presents the same policy concerns that were addressed in Lang. Specifically, I do not believe that the trial court’s conduct “undermined the perceived fairness of the defendant’s trial.” 384 Ill. App. 3d at 261. In sua sponte considering the testimony from the two dismissed cases as other-crimes evidence, the trial court did not help the prosecution establish its case. Instead, the trial court’s sua sponte statements on how it intended to consider the evidence already before it were appropriate in fulfilling its role to see that justice was done. Accordingly, for all of these reasons, I do not believe that the trial court’s conduct constituted an abuse of discretion. Therefore, I would affirm defendant’s conviction.

=== CASE 2214748 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:52.243747+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 520 (1963)
MARY KATLEMAN, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF NEVADA, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 26582.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Jan. 30, 1963.
Leonard J. Meyberg for Plaintiff and Appellant. *521
Thelen, Marrin, Johnson & Bridges, James W. Baldwin and John G. Flett for Defendant and Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
The pleadings disclose the following background. Plaintiff and Jacob Katleman were divorced March 1, 1950, and a property settlement agreement was approved by the decree; Jacob remarried March 2, 1950. On June 15, 1950, he died intestate, a domiciliary of the State of Nevada. On July 6, 1950, defendant Liberty Katleman, his widow, and defendant First National Bank of Nevada were appointed coadministrators of his estate by the Nevada court. In the Nevada probate proceeding plaintiff, on September 18, 1950, filed a creditor's claim for "that share of community property of deceased and plaintiff herein as she may be entitled to" which may not have been disclosed or included in the property settlement agreement. On November 10, 1950, defendants approved certain items therein and rejected the balance of the claim. Thereafter, in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, on December 8, 1950, plaintiff filed the within action in accounting against defendants in their representative capacity as "Co-Administrators of the Estate of Jacob Katleman, also known as Jake Katleman, Deceased," to determine "plaintiff's rightful share to the undisclosed community property in California" and to establish the rejected portion of the claim she had previously filed in the Nevada proceedings. On March 6, 1951, defendants, in their representative capacity, filed an answer. Meanwhile, an ancillary administration of Jacob's California assets was commenced in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County; Liberty Katleman was appointed sole administratrix; respondent bank was not named. Plaintiff did not file her claim in the California proceeding and appeared therein only to object to final distribution of the estate to Liberty Katleman and her child. However, she finally agreed to a distribution of the California assets to Liberty Katleman and First National Bank of Nevada, as coadministrators of Jacob's estate in Nevada. Thus on May 2, 1957, an order of final distribution was entered in the California ancillary administration, and on April 29, 1958, Liberty Katleman was discharged as administratrix. At no time was defendant First National Bank of Nevada named an administrator of Jacob's estate in the California court, nor did it ever appear in the ancillary administration of the California estate. The only time defendant bank had any of Jacob's California assets in its possession was *522 during the period between May 2, 1957 (when they were distributed to it and Liberty Katleman as coadministrators), and February 27, 1961 (when the Nevada estate was closed and they were discharged); the only state in which defendant bank ever held these assets was in Nevada. The estate of Jacob Katleman was finally distributed and closed, and the Nevada court on February 27, 1961, finding they had fully discharged their duties, discharged Liberty Katleman and First National Bank of Nevada of all further duties, vacated their letters of administration and released them from further liability. Ten months later, on December 27, 1961, defendant First National Bank of Nevada, in the within action, noticed its motion to dismiss and for summary judgment. While the notice of appeal is not clear, we deem plaintiff's appeal to have been taken from the minute order granting the motion and from the judgment based thereon. The purported appeal from the minute order is dismissed.
[1] Liberty Katleman and First National Bank of Nevada were sued herein solely as "Co-Administrators of the Estate of Jacob Katleman, also known as Jake Katleman, Deceased," they answered in their representative capacity, and the pretrial conference order recites that the action is against defendants as coadministrators of the estate. Neither was sued as an individual; recovery was not sought against either in an individual capacity. After a substitution of attorneys for the bank, its new counsel filed on behalf of "First National Bank of Nevada" notice of motion to dismiss and for summary judgment; they failed to indicate in what capacity the bank was appearing, designating its appearance neither in an individual or corporate capacity nor as a representative of the estate. Based on the order granting the motion, the judgment simply named the bank as "First National Bank of Nevada." Assuming a highly technical interpretation of the wording of the notice and judgment, appellant argues that inasmuch as counsel failed to designate in what capacity the bank appeared therein, its appearance was only "in its individual capacity." She claims the lower court erred in granting the motion because only the bank, in its representative capacity, was sued, not the "First National Bank of Nevada," and that the latter never answered the complaint.
The record before us fails to justify such a narrow view of the pleadings; and, as a representative of the estate, the bank was properly dismissed from the action. We do not doubt that the failure to designate the bank in its appearance on the *523 motion, as coadministrator of Jacob's estate, was due to counsel's inadvertence, for it is obvious from the sense of all of the pleadings filed prior and subsequent to the notice of motion that the bank at no time intended to appear in other than its representative capacity, that plaintiff intended to deal with the bank in only that capacity, and that the court, in granting the motion, believed it was dealing with the bank only as an administrator of the estate. Plaintiff intended to, and did, sue the bank only as a coadministrator of the estate (complaint, plaintiff's pretrial statement), and the bank thereafter appeared only in its representative capacity (answer) until it substituted new counsel, who thereafter neglected to designate the capacity in which the bank appeared. If we were to accept appellant's technical view, the motion to dismiss and for summary judgment (made on the sole ground that the court lacked jurisdiction over the bank in its representative capacity and moreover it had been discharged as an administrator of the estate), the argument on the motion (which assumed the bank had moved in its representative capacity), the order granting the motion (specifically supported by citations to the effect that, having been discharged, the bank in its representative capacity was no longer subject to suit), and the judgment based thereon, would have no meaning. The above leads to only one conclusion--that the lower court intended by its judgment to release from the suit the bank as coadministrator for the estate, and in its individual or corporate capacity it was never before or in the contemplation of the court.
The real issue is whether the bank, having been discharged as coadministrator, is still subject to suit in its representative capacity; if it is not, the lower court's ruling was proper. No recovery is sought against the bank except as coadministrator of Jacob's estate, and if the claim be deemed valid, recovery is sought only out of the estate assets. Plaintiff prayed for an accounting of the California assets by the bank as coadministrator, to establish the rejected portion of the claim she had previously filed in the Nevada proceedings, and for an order requiring the bank, as coadministrator, to pay the claim out of the estate. (Complaint, joint pretrial statement, pretrial conference order.) However, not only has the bank never been an administrator of Jacob's estate in California, but it has not been since February 25, 1961, and is not now, an administrator of the estate in Nevada, it having on that date been discharged by the Nevada court; and Jacob's *524 estate having been distributed and closed, neither administration nor probate estate exists in any jurisdiction.
[2] It has long been established that when an estate has been distributed and the executor or administrator discharged, he is no longer subject to suit in his representative capacity for he no longer has under his control any assets of the estate; this is the rule even though the action be filed prior to his discharge. In Union Savings Bank v. De Laveaga, 150 Cal. 395 [89 P. 84], an action was brought against the executors of an estate before their discharge. A demurrer to the complaint was sustained on the ground that the claim upon which it was based had not been first presented to the executors. Pending appeal the administration of the estate was settled and closed and the executors discharged. The judgment was affirmed on the following ground: "The distribution of the estate and the discharge of the executors (the only persons sued in this action) is terminative of any right of action or right to a judgment by appellant in this case; there is no estate nor executors to represent it, and the further prosecution of the action cannot be of any avail or advantage to the appellant. (See the opinion in Childs v. De Laveaga, ante, p. 281 [89 P. 82].)"
"Upon the showing made of the futility of any further prosecution of this action by the appellant, we think this judgment should be affirmed, and it is so ordered." (P. 398.)
Against the same executor was the companion case of Childs v. De Laveaga, 150 Cal. 281 [89 P. 82]. Controlling is the following language: "It appears, therefore, that there is no executor of said decedent nor any administration of the estate pending, and that no relief asked for by appellants could be made applicable or be enforced." (P. 285.)
The De Laveaga case, supra, (150 Cal. 395), with others, was cited in Johnston v. Long, 30 Cal.2d 54 [181 P.2d 645]. The court, finding that a jury verdict against an executor sued in tort after his discharge, in both his individual and representative capacity, was against him only in his individual capacity, held that in any event, as a matter of law, he was not subject to suit in his representative capacity after his discharge as executor. The court stated at pages 64, 65: "In the present case, even if there were either a direct or derivative right against the executor in his representative capacity, defendant Long could not be held liable in that capacity, for he was no longer an executor and there was no estate for him to represent at the time of the suit. The purpose of such a suit is to reach the assets of the estate under the executor's *525 control. (Golden Gate Undertaking Co. v. Taylor, supra [168 Cal. 94 (141 P. 922, Ann. Cas. 1915D 742, 52 L.R.A. N.S. 1152)]; see Sterret v. Barker, 199 Cal. 492, 494 [51 P. 695].) Where the executor has been discharged and the estate distributed, the executor is therefore no longer subject to suit in his representative capacity. (Union Savings Bank v. De Laveaga, 150 Cal. 395, 398 [89 P. 84].) There would be no purpose in such a suit, for the executor has no assets of the estate under his control."
"Similarly, after an executor has been removed, his connection with the estate is severed and a judgment against him does not bind the estate. (More v. More, 127 Cal. 460, 462 [59 P. 823].)"
Inasmuch as we have concluded that respondent in its representative capacity is no longer subject to suit, we deem it unnecessary to consider any other points.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:01.604017+00 ===

KIRSCH, Judge,
concurring in result.
I fully concur with the decision of my colleagues holding the mediated settlement agreement was unambiguous and that, therefore, the trial court erred in admitting extrinsic evidence to prove the meaning of its terms. I also fully concur with the decision regarding attorney fees. I part ways with my colleagues, however, in regard to their discussion of mediation confidentiality.
This case turns upon long-established principles of contract interpretation. “Where the terms of a contract are clear *1099and unambiguous, the terms are conclusive and we will not construe the contract or look at extrinsic evidence, but will merely apply the contractual provisions.” Stenger v. LLC Corp., 819 N.E.2d 480, 484 (Ind.Ct. App.2004), tmns. denied (2005). From my perspective, the source of the extrinsic evidence is of no moment; whatever its source, it is inadmissible. Whether it is subject to claims of confidentiality or privilege is similarly not relevant.
I do not read Alternate Dispute Resolution Rule 2.11 as broadly as do my colleagues. The rule is specifically subject to Indiana Evidence Rule 408 that provides for exclusion of offers of compromise, but that also specifically provides: “This rule does not require exclusion when the evidence is offered for another purpose, such as providing bias or prejudice of a witness, negating a contention of undue delay, or proving an effort to obstruct a criminal investigation or prosecution.” Whether “another purpose” includes extrinsic proof of the intent of the parties to a mediated settlement is a question that I would hold for another day.

=== CASE 9738289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:05.811888+00 ===

OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Defendant-Appellant, Thomas E. Caraway (Caraway), appeals the trial court’s denial of his Motion to Suppress and Exclude All Evidence of Polygraph Examination.
We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
ISSUE
Caraway raises one issue on appeal, which we restate as: Whether the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress when Caraway was not advised of his right to counsel prior to signing an Agreement to Take Polygraph and Stipulation of Admissibility (stipulation agreement).
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On April 14, 2004, A.L. could not locate her three-year-old-son, B.B. When A.L. went to Caraway’s garage, which was located next door to her residence, she observed that B.B.’s pants were down and that Caraway had B.B.’s penis in his mouth. That same day, Detective Captain Robert Herr of the Bedford City Police Department (Detective Herr) was dispatched to investigate the allegations made by A.L. Detective Herr initially interviewed Caraway at the scene, and Caraway subsequently agreed to further conversation back at the police department. After Detective Herr took Caraway’s statement at the police station, Caraway told Detective Herr that “he has trouble reading,” and a dispatcher was summoned to witness Detective Herr read the statement back to Caraway before concluding the conversation. (Transcript pp. 70-71).
*124Nearly two months later, on June 5, 2004, Detective Herr returned to Caraway’s residence and spoke to him. The two went out to the rear of Detective Herr’s police cruiser and remained outside the vehicle while Detective Herr went through the stipulation agreement with Caraway, asking him to agree to take a polygraph examination. Because Caraway had difficulty reading, Detective Herr read the stipulation agreement to him, “down through the numbers [] as it appeared,” and further explained to him that “it is an agreement between you and the prosecutor’s office to allow the results of this test that we are getting ready to, for you to go and take, to [be] admitted in court.” (Tr. pp. 72-73). The stipulation agreement provided that the polygraph results could not be admitted at trial without this stipulation, and it included a waiver to any objection Caraway may have regarding the admission of the results at trial. It did not mention or include a Miranda warning or notice of his right to counsel. Caraway signed the stipulation agreement at the scene, and the State and Detective Herr subsequently signed it as well.
On June 26, 2004, Detective Herr transported Caraway to the Indiana State Police Post in Jasper where the polygraph was to be administered. Prior to the examination, Detective Herr observed Indiana State Trooper Dan Gress (Trooper Gress) read to Caraway his Miranda warnings from a form, which included a notice of the right to seek the assistance of counsel. Caraway signed the Miranda warning and waiver form and Trooper Gress administered the polygraph.
On September 20, 2004, the State filed an Information, charging Caraway with child molesting, as a Class B felony, Ind. Code § 35-42-4-3. On May 22, 2006, the State amended the charging Information to include Count I, child molesting, as a Class A felony, I.C. § 35-42-4-3(a); and Count II, child molesting, as a Class C felony, I.C. § 35-42-4-3(b). On June 21, 2007, Caraway filed a Motion to Suppress and Exclude All Evidence of Polygraph Examination. On July 17, 2007, the trial court conducted a hearing on Caraway’s motion. On July 31, 2007, the trial court denied the motion. On August 3, 2007, Caraway filed a Motion to Continue for Purpose of Filing Interlocutory Appeal and to Appoint Co-Counsel to File Appeal, which was granted by the trial court. On August 29, 2007, the trial court certified its order for interlocutory appeal. On November 19, 2007, we granted Caraway’s petition to accept jurisdiction of his interlocutory appeal.
Caraway now appeals. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Caraway argues the trial court improperly denied his motion to suppress. Our review of the denial of a motion to suppress is similar to other sufficiency matters. Gonser v. State, 843 N.E.2d 947, 949 (Ind.Ct.App.2006). The record must disclose substantial evidence of probative value that supports the trial court’s decision. Id. We do not reweigh the evidence, and we will consider conflicting evidence most favorable to the trial court’s ruling. Id. On appeal, we will affirm the trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress if it is sustainable on any legal theory supported by the record, even if the trial court did not use that theory. Id.
Disputing the trial court’s decision, Caraway specifically contends that the State never gave him notice of his right to counsel when he stipulated to the polygraph. Without his counsel’s signature on the stipulation agreement, or the opportunity to waive his right of counsel, he maintains that the agreement is invalid. The State *125replies that the stipulation is valid because even though Caraway was not informed of his right to counsel before signing the stipulation, he was informed of that right by Trooper Gress prior to the actual examination.
The courts of this state have repeatedly expressed severe reservations about the reliability of polygraph results. Willey v. State, 712 N.E.2d 434, 441 (Ind.1999); Madison v. State, 534 N.E.2d 702, 704 (Ind.1989) (“the value of polygraph examinations is highly questionable ... ”); Reid v. State, 267 Ind. 555, 372 N.E.2d 1149, 1152 (1978) (“in any given case, unreliable results may be produced in a polygraph test by influences that cannot be controlled or compensated for by a competent examiner”); McVey v. State, 863 N.E.2d 434, 440 (Ind.Ct.App.2007), reh’g denied, trans. denied. Because of its questionable reliability, we have adopted four prerequisites that must be met before the results of a polygraph examination can be admitted into evidence. In Owens v. State, 176 Ind. App. 1, 373 N.E.2d 913, 915 (1978) (citing Arizona v. Valdez, 91 Ariz. 274, 371 P.2d 894, 900 (1962)), we formulated these as follows:
(1) That the prosecutor, defendant, and defense counsel all sign a written stipulation providing for the defendant’s submission to the examination and for the subsequent admission at trial of the results.
(2) That notwithstanding the stipulation, the admissibility of the test results is at the trial court’s discretion regarding the examiner’s qualifications and the test conditions.
(3) That the opposing party shall have the right to cross-examine the polygraph examiner if his graphs and opinion are offered in evidence; and
(4) That the jury be instructed that, at most, the examiner’s testimony tends only to show whether the defendant was being truthful at the time of the examination, and that it is for the jury to determine the weight and effect to be given such testimony.
See also Sanchez v. State, 675 N.E.2d 306, 308 (Ind.1996). The first prerequisite is the only one at issue in this case.
Both parties focus this court’s attention on Kochersperger v. State, 725 N.E.2d 918 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Kochersperger, who was under investigation regarding allegations of child molestation, met with detectives at the police department. Id. at 921. Although Kochersperger was not placed under arrest, detectives did review with Kochersperger an advice of rights form containing Miranda warnings, including an advisement of his right to counsel. Id. Kochersperger read and signed the advice of rights form, and the meeting culminated in Kochersperger signing an agreement with the prosecutor to undergo a polygraph examination; the agreement stipulated that the results of the examination would be admissible in any subsequent trial. Id. On the day of trial, Kochersper-ger raised a motion to suppress the polygraph examination results, but the motion was denied. Id. The jury found him guilty. Id.
On appeal, Kochersperger raised two arguments with regard to the polygraph examination. Id. at 922. First, Kocher-sperger contested the validity of the stipulation, as his defense counsel did not sign it. Id. However, we found that Ko-chersperger was fully advised of his right to counsel and waived that right. Id. at 922-23. Second, Kochersperger argued that his right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment was violated when the polygraph examination and post-testing interrogation were conducted without the presence of defense counsel. Id. at 923. Specifically, he urged that such examina*126tions and interrogations are “critical stages” of a criminal proceeding that necessarily trigger a defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Id. However, the Kochersperger court stated that the commencement of prosecution is governed by I.C. § 35-34-1-1 in which the filing of an information or indictment begins the formal criminal process. Id. (citing Little v. State, 475 N.E.2d 677, 683 (Ind.1985)). Because Kochersperger had not been arrested, arraigned, or indicted during the polygraph examination or interrogation, the court held that these periods did not constitute critical stages of a criminal proceeding, and thus, Kocher-sperger’s right to counsel had not yet attached. Kochersperger, 725 N.E.2d at 924. In addition, the court clarified that an event occurring prior to the initiation of criminal proceedings may only be challenged on due process grounds, which is independent of any right to counsel claim. Id. (quoting Callis v. State, 684 N.E.2d 233, 238, n. 8 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied ).
We disagree with the result reached in Kochersperger that the right to counsel cannot attach earlier than at the initiation of criminal proceedings. The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees the right to counsel at any critical stage of prosecution where counsel’s absence may derogate from the accused’s right to a fair trial. U.S. v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 226, 228, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149 (1967); Williams v. State, 555 N.E.2d 133, 136 (Ind.1990); Hall v. State, 870 N.E.2d 449, 460 (Ind.Ct.App.2007), trans. denied. It is central to that principle that in addition to counsel’s presence at trial, the accused is guaranteed that he need not stand alone against the State at any stage of the prosecution, formal or informal, in court or out, where counsel’s absence might derogate from the accused’s right to a fair trial. Wade, 388 U.S. at 226, 87 S.Ct. 1926. In United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300, 313, 93 S.Ct. 2568, 37 L.Ed.2d 619 (1973), the Court examined the historical background and development of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, concluding: “This review of the history and expansion of the Sixth Amendment counsel guarantee demonstrates that the test utilized by the Court has called for examination of the event in order to determine whether the accused required aid in coping with legal problems or assistance in meeting his adversary.” The Supreme Court clarified in Wade that an accused’s right to counsel has been extended to certain “critical” stages in criminal proceedings, because today’s law enforcement machinery involves critical confrontations of the accused by the prosecution at pretrial proceedings where the results might well settle the accused’s fate and reduce the trial to a mere formality. See Wade, 388 U.S. at 224, 227, 87 S.Ct. 1926.
Under the Indiana Constitution, Article I, section 13, citizens are afforded even greater protection than by its federal counterpart. Section 13 states, in part:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall have the right to a public trial, by an impartial jury, in the county in which the offense shall have been committed; to be heard by himself and counsel; to demand the nature and cause of the accusation against him, and to have a copy thereof; to meet the witnesses face to face, and to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor.
Ind. Const. Art. I, § 13(a).
In Hall, we clearly stated that, as with the Sixth Amendment, Article I, Section 13 of the Indiana Constitution guarantees the right to counsel at any critical stage of the prosecution where counsel’s absence might derogate from the accused’s right to a fair *127trial; however, “the rights afforded under Section 13 also attach prior to the filings of formal charges against the defendant.” Hall, 870 N.E.2d at 460. Thus, precedents have often interpreted the Section 13 right expansively. Malinski v. State, 794 N.E.2d 1071, 1079 (Ind.2003) (quoting Bolkovac v. State, 229 Ind. 294, 98 N.E.2d 250 (Ind.1951) (recognizing an unqualified right to counsel in both felony and misdemeanor cases under section 13)).
In this case, the application of Kocher-sperger would derogate from the protections guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment and the Indiana Constitution. Here, the record reflects that Detective Herr came to Caraway’s home and advised him to sign the stipulation agreement. The agreement provided that any objection to the admission of the polygraph results, answers, questions, and examiner’s qualifications were waived. The agreement did not include Miranda warnings or any notice of right to counsel.
Although Caraway was not arrested, arraigned, or indicted at the time he stipulated to the polygraph, he waived any objection to the admission of an unreliable form of potentially incriminating evidence. This can be nothing less than a critical stage. In Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478, 487-488, 84 S.Ct. 1758, 12 L.Ed.2d 977 (1964), the United States Supreme Court stated:
The rule sought by the State here [] would make the trial no more than an appeal from the interrogation; and the right to use counsel at the formal trial would be a very hollow thing if, for all practical purposes, the conviction is already assured by pretrial examination. One can imagine a cynical prosecutor saying: Let them have the most illustrious counsel, now. They can’t escape the noose. There is nothing that counsel can do for them at the trial.
(Formatting altered). Thus, when a defendant finds himself in a critical stage, we cannot deny him his right to counsel simply because he has not been formally indicted yet.
In sum, we conclude that Caraway’s right to counsel attached immediately prior to Detective Herr’s request to sign the stipulation agreement. Caraway had to stand alone against the State, and make a decision that may damage his defense at trial. At that critical stage, the absence of Caraway’s right to an attorney derogated his right to a fair trial. Furthermore, as Caraway was never informed of his right to counsel prior to stipulating the results of a polygraph examination, he could not have waived it. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court improperly denied Caraway’s motion to suppress.
CONCLUSION
We conclude that the trial court improperly denied Caraway’s motion to suppress. Reversed and remanded.
BAKER, C.J., concurs.
ROBB, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9738290 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:05.816628+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
concurring in result.
I respectfully concur in result. As stated by the United States Supreme Court in McNeil v. Wisconsin, 501 U.S. 171, 111 S.Ct. 2204, 115 L.Ed.2d 158 (1991), the Sixth Amendment right to counsel “does not attach until a prosecution is commenced, that is, ‘at or after the initiation of adversary judicial criminal proceedings— whether by way of formal charge, preliminary hearing, indictment, information, or arraignment.’ ” Id. at 175, 111 S.Ct. 2204 (quoting Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 689, 92 S.Ct. 1877, 32 L.Ed.2d 411 (1972)).1 *128Indiana case law following Kochersperger continues to acknowledge that the right to counsel does not attach until the initiation of criminal proceedings. See Cox v. State, 854 N.E.2d 1187, 1195 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) (“It is well settled that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches only at or after the time that adversary judicial proceedings have been initiated against the defendant.”) (quoting Dullen v. State, 721 N.E.2d 241, 242 (Ind.1999), cett. denied, 531 U.S. 847, 121 S.Ct. 118, 148 L.Ed.2d 73 (2000)); Ackerman v. State, 774 N.E.2d 970, 977 n. 9 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (noting the “long recognized right of an accused in this state to have counsel at all critical stages following the point of arrest”); Badelle v. State, 754 N.E.2d 510, 537-38 (Ind.Ct.App. 2001) (noting that although an accused has a right to counsel under both the Sixth Amendment and Article I, section 13 of the Indiana Constitution at critical stages of the proceedings, “[w]e find no support for the assertion that the right to counsel can attach earlier than the initiation of criminal proceedings.”) (quoting Callis v. State, 684 N.E.2d 233, 238 (Ind.Ct.App.1997)).
As a concurring judge in Kochersperger, I continue to believe that the right to counsel does not attach until criminal proceedings are initiated by the filing of an information or indictment. 725 N.E.2d at 923-24. I therefore cannot agree with the majority’s conclusion that Caraway found himself at a critical stage when presented with the polygraph stipulation prior to any charges being filed against him. Nonetheless, Caraway should have been advised that he was entitled to the presence and advice of counsel for the Fifth Amendment purpose of avoiding self-incrimination during any custodial interrogation by police. Unlike the defendant in Kochersperger, Caraway was not so advised prior to signing the stipulation that he would take a polygraph examination and that the results could be used at trial. See Kochersperger, 725 N.E.2d at 922-23 (“Kochersperger was fully advised of his right to counsel prior to executing the stipulation ... and waived such right by signing the advice of rights form”) (emphasis added). The timing of the advice of rights is an important distinction between Kochersperger and this case. On the basis that Caraway was not advised of and did not waive his right to counsel before signing the stipulation, rather than on the basis of the Sixth Amendment, I agree that the trial court should have granted Caraway’s motion to suppress, and I therefore concur in result.
. As the Court in McNeil made clear, there is a difference between the Sixth Amendment *128right to counsel, which does not attach until “after the adverse positions of government and defendant have solidified,” id. at 177-78, 111 S.Ct. 2204 (quotation and citation omitted), and the Fifth Amendment interest guaranteed by Miranda, which “attaches whether or not the 'adversarial relationship' produced by a pending prosecution has yet arisen,” id. at 178, 111 S.Ct. 2204.

=== CASE 2215100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:57.179105+00 ===

223 Cal.App.2d 487 (1963)
WORKMON CONSTRUCTION CO. et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
JOE WEIRICK et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 243.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
Dec. 17, 1963.
Hyde & Olson and Floyd H. Hyde for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Barrett & Wagner and James F. Wagner for Defendants and Respondents.
STONE, J.
Plaintiffs appeal from an adverse judgment in a declaratory relief action to have a deed absolute on its face declared to be a mortgage. The sole question raised is whether the evidence supports the findings of the trial court. *489
Plaintiffs purchased 160 acres of unimproved real property in Fresno County from Bank of America, guardian of the estate of an incompetent person. The purchase price was $240,000. A down payment of $60,000 was made and 32 acres were deeded to plaintiffs. The balance of $180,000 was evidenced by a promissory note payable in four annual installments of $45,000 commencing in 1956, bearing interest at 5 per cent. A deed of trust covering the remaining 128 acres secured the indebtedness, and it provided for partial releases upon payment of the annual installments. One annual installment was paid and 32 acres were released, which left 96 acres still subject to the encumbrance.
Plaintiffs' subdivision plans went awry and they were unable to meet the 1957 and 1958 annual payments. In June 1958 the Bank of America commenced foreclosure proceedings. Plaintiffs obtained extensions of time and negotiated to refinance or sell the property, without success until February 1959, when plaintiff J. J. Nagel, an attorney, through the offices of a Mr. Butler, sought a loan from defendant Weirick. According to Butler, Weirick stated that he was not interested in making a loan, but that he would be interested in purchasing the property to insure a long-term capital gain. Butler suggested that Weirick purchase the property and give plaintiffs an option to repurchase. Nagel then consulted with Weirick, satisfied him of the value of the property, and suggested that Weirick consult his tax adviser, which he did. Nagel also called Weirick's accountant to explain the proposed sale and option transaction, and thereafter prepared and forwarded to the accountant the documents to be used.
Plaintiffs and defendants entered into a written escrow agreement with the Title Insurance & Trust Company, pursuant to which plaintiffs conveyed to defendants 130 acres (34 of the 64 acres that had been released were included in the sale) for $156,000 cash, which, in turn, was paid to Bank of America in full satisfaction of plaintiffs' obligation.
Defendants gave plaintiff Workmon Construction Co. an option to purchase the 130 acres for the sum of $208,000, which could not be exercised before the 15th day of September, 1959, nor after the 9th day of March, 1961. Fifteen days' written notice of intention to exercise the option was required. Among other things, optionee agreed to pay all taxes and assessments levied against the property and keep the two deep wells and pumps in repair, in return for the *490 right to all revenue from the property. The optionee also paid all charges in connection with the escrow.
In a separate written instrument, plaintiffs agreed among themselves that Cora Workmon and J. J. Nagel were the owners of the option in equal shares. Defendants were not parties to this side agreement.
Pursuant to the option, plaintiffs leased the property to third parties and from the rentals paid the taxes and upkeep. They also attempted to qualify the property to meet subdivision requirements and to have it annexed to the City of Fresno.
One week prior to the expiration of the two-year option period, plaintiffs gave notice to defendants of their intention to exercise the option to purchase the 130 acres. On receipt of the notice, defendants opened an escrow, but plaintiffs failed to pay the stipulated amount within the required 15 days. Rather, they filed this action in equity, praying that the deed and option agreement be declared a mortgage, and that the difference between the amount defendants paid for the property, $156,000, and the amount necessary to exercise the option, $208,000, be declared to be usurious interest.
[1a] It cannot be denied, as plaintiffs argue, that on its face the transaction has many of the earmarks of a security transaction. They point to the difference between the amount defendants paid for the property and the amount required to exercise the option; to the 34 acres of unencumbered land included in the deed and option; to the payment by them of the escrow costs in toto; to their retention of possession of the property and lease of it to third parties, and their payment of the taxes and the repairs for the pumps and wells from the rents. Plaintiffs also point out that they expended money for subdivision improvements in an attempt to have the property annexed to the City of Fresno.
The cases in California are numerous, commencing with Sears v. Dixon (1867) 33 Cal. 326, holding that a court of equity can declare a deed absolute on its face to be a mortgage executed as security for the payment of a debt, and that parol evidence is admissible to show the real nature of the transaction without regard to the mode or form in which the instruments in writing were executed. (Vance v. Anderson, 113 Cal. 532, 538 [45 P. 816]; Greene v. Colburn, 160 Cal.App.2d 355, 358 [325 P.2d 148]; Civ. Code,  1105, 2925.)
[2] On the other hand, in determining the character of a deed asserted to be a mortgage, the trial court was not free to *491 view in isolation the aspects of the transaction pointed out by plaintiffs as indicating a defeasible title in defendants. All facts and circumstances surrounding the transaction had to be viewed in their totality by the court in determining the nature of the conveyance. [3] A review of a determination thus made by the trial court is governed by the well established principles applicable to all questions of fact raised on appeal. In Beeler v. American Trust Co., 24 Cal.2d 1 [147 P.2d 583], a case relied upon by plaintiffs, the Supreme Court said, at page 7: "... whether or not the evidence offered to change the ostensible character of the instrument is clear and convincing is a question for the trial court to decide. [Citations.] In such case, as in others, the determination of that court in favor of either party upon conflicting or contradictory evidence is not open to review on appeal."
Hence our review is narrowed to whether the record before us reflects any evidence of a substantial nature that supports the finding of the trial court that the deed absolute on its face was intended by the parties to be just that.
Counsel for both sides have cited many authorities, but a review of them discloses that each turns upon the parol evidence peculiar to the particular case, so that a discussion of the facts of the numerous cases would add little here. It is significant, however, that in all of the cited cases, the animating principle is the intent of the parties. (California Land Security & Development (Cont. Ed. Bar)  4.19, p. 107.)
[1b] Quite obviously the trial court treated as a critical circumstance the fact that the negotiations for plaintiffs were carried on by one of their number who was an attorney, experienced and skilled in real estate transactions, particularly subdivision development, while defendants were not represented by counsel. The plaintiff attorney prepared the conveyance, which was a deed absolute on its face, and not only did he sign it himself but he had his fellow plaintiffs sign it. He also prepared the option to purchase, which made no mention of a loan and gave no indication that the transaction was one for security. He testified that he never used the term "loan" during the oral negotiations, nor did he use it in any document. In discussing the transaction with the attorney who handled the foreclosure action for the Bank of America, the plaintiff attorney stated that he and his co-owners had sold the property to defendants.
There is nothing in the record reflecting that any of the plaintiffs ever advised either of the defendants that the purchase *492 price paid for the property was intended to be a loan. This circumstance strongly supports the finding of the trial court upholding the validity of the deed. [4] The secret intention of one party that the deed was a mortgage and the option a note does not change the character of the transaction. (Mealy v. Sunland Refining Corp., 96 Cal.App.2d 700, 703 [216 P.2d 59]; Glasgow v. Andrews, 129 Cal.App.2d 660, 665 [277 P.2d 400].)
In the case of Wehle v. Price, 202 Cal. 394, the Supreme Court said, at page 397 [260 P. 878]: "It must appear to the court beyond all reasonable controversy that it was the intention of not only one but all of the parties that the deed should be a mortgage."
[1c, 5] Another very damaging bit of evidence so far as plaintiffs are concerned is an agreement prepared by the plaintiff attorney between himself and the other plaintiffs, which was not part of the transaction with defendants. This private agreement, among other things, provided that plaintiff J. J. Nagel and plaintiff Cora Workmon each owned an undivided 50 per cent interest in the option agreement and that "neither party shall hypothecate or use said option agreement as security." It would be unusual, to say the least, to hypothecate an indebtedness or to use it as security, while an option to purchase real property is frequently so used. The trial court could well have concluded that this document between plaintiffs, executed contemporaneously with the escrow transaction, expressed plaintiffs' belief at that time that they had executed a deed and an option, not a mortgage and a promissory note.
Additionally, if the consideration paid for the conveyance of the property was a loan, and the deed was a mortgage and the option was a promissory note, then necessarily the option must express an obligation to pay. But at no place in the record do we find a suggestion, even by plaintiffs, that the option was an obligation which defendants could enforce.
[6] In the early case of Henley v. Hotaling, 41 Cal. 22, the Supreme Court put a finger upon a critical and necessary factor in a case of this kind when it said, at page 28: "... something more than a reservation of the right to repurchase, or a convenant to reconvey, must be shown, in order to convert an absolute deed into a mortgage. There is one fact which is indispensable for this purpose. A mortgage is a security for the performance of an agreement, which is usually to pay a sum of money. Leaving out of view other agreements *493 than those for the payment of money, it is essential that there be an agreement, either express or implied, on the part of the mortgagor, or some one in whose behalf he executes the mortgage, to pay to the mortgagee a sum of money. If there is no debt there is no mortgage. We look in vain, in this case, to find any evidence of a promise on the part of Storms to repay the purchase money, or of the existence of a debt of any kind from him to Hotaling."
Pomeroy, in commenting upon the law applicable to a determination of whether a deed absolute was intended by the parties to be a mortgage, had this to say: "... the sure test and the essential requisite are the continued existence of a debt. If there is no indebtedness, the conveyance cannot be a mortgage; ..." (4 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence (5th ed.) p. 583.)
[7] It is fundamental that the character of an instrument of conveyance which purports on its face to be a deed absolute can be adjudged to be a mortgage only upon clear and convincing evidence. (Anderson v. Associated Inv. Co., 219 Cal.App.2d 206, 211 [32 Cal.Rptr. 921].) Whether the evidence is clear and convincing is for the trial court. (General Casualty Co. v. Soda, 184 Cal.App.2d 390, 393 [7 Cal.Rptr. 536]; Cavanaugh v. High, 182 Cal.App.2d 714, 718 [6 Cal.Rptr. 525].)
[1d] From the point of view of plaintiffs the evidence is, at best, conflicting, and conflicting evidence cannot be reevaluated by a reviewing court in the circumstances here presented. (Greene v. Colburn, supra; Cavanaugh v. High, supra.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Conley, P. J., and Brown (R.M.), J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738291 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:10.253584+00 ===

JUSTICE GARCIA delivered the opinion of the court. Connie Longnecker, individually and as special administrator of the estate of her husband Carl Longnecker, filed suit against Dr. Sirish Parvathaneni and Loyola Medical Center, after Mr. Longnecker died following an unsuccessful heart transplant. During the procedure, Mr. Longnecker received a diseased “hypertrophic heart.” He died four days later, never regaining consciousness. Dr. Parvathaneni acted as the “procuring” or “harvesting” surgeon during the transplant. At trial, the plaintiff presented two theories of liability: (1) Dr. Parvathaneni, as an agent of Loyola, committed professional negligence where he failed to properly test and visually inspect the donor heart and failed to diagnose it as having significant left ventricular hypertrophy and coronary artery disease; and (2) Loyola committed institutional negligence by failing to ensure that Dr. Parvathaneni understood his role as a procuring surgeon. The jury found in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni and Loyola on the professional negligence claim. The jury found against Loyola on the institutional negligence claim and awarded the plaintiff $2.7 million. Loyola filed a posttrial motion in which it argued it was entitled to judgment notwithstanding the verdict (judgment n.o.v.) or, in the alternative, a new trial, because (1) the plaintiff failed to plead institutional negligence, (2) the plaintiff failed to produce expert testimony to support institutional negligence, (3) the plaintiff failed to establish breach, (4) the plaintiff failed to establish causation, and (5) the verdicts were inconsistent. The circuit court found the verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni to be irreconcilable with the verdict against Loyola, reasoning if Dr. Parvathaneni had not been negligent, Loyola’s failure to ensure he understood his role could not have been the proximate cause of Mr. Longnecker’s death. Therefore, the court decided the verdicts were inconsistent. The court vacated the verdict against Loyola and entered judgment for Loyola. The plaintiff contends on appeal that the jury’s verdicts are not inconsistent. She alternatively argues that if the verdicts are inconsistent, the proper remedy is to order a new trial on both causes of action. Dr. Parvathaneni agrees the verdicts are not inconsistent. In his brief, he points to the “wholly separate theories of liability against Loyola as principal of Dr. Parvathaneni and [liability against] Loyola for institutional negligence,” to which two separate standards of care apply. Loyola’s brief intimates that we need not determine whether the verdicts are inconsistent if the circuit court’s grant of judgment n.o.v. is proper for other reasons. Loyola focuses on the circuit court’s finding that proximate cause was precluded based on the verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni to contend the judgment n.o.v. was proper. Loyola also argues the judgment n.o.v. was proper because the plaintiff failed to establish the element of breach and because the institutional negligence claim was barred by the statute of limitations. In the alternative, Loyola argues the circuit court correctly found the verdicts to be inconsistent. Loyola concedes that if the verdicts are inconsistent, the proper remedy is to order a new trial on both claims. For the reasons that follow, we hold the verdicts in this case are not inconsistent and that no other basis supports the grant of judgment n.o.v. We therefore reverse the decision of the circuit court of Cook County and remand for further proceedings. BACKGROUND Carl Longneeker suffered from numerous coronary ailments and, by age 58, had suffered three heart attacks. In 2000, Mr. Longneeker became a patient of Dr. George Mullen, a cardiologist at Loyola. Dr. Mullen told Mr. Longneeker he needed a heart transplant and placed his name on a donation waiting list. By 2001, Mr. Longnecker’s condition worsened. His “status” on the donation waiting list went from “2 class” to “IB class,” moving his name up the list. His chance of surviving one year without a transplant was 30%. On June 11, 2001, Mr. Longneeker was informed a potential donor heart had been located. He went to Loyola and was prepared for surgery. A. Loyola Heart Transplantation Procedures Loyola uses a team approach to heart transplantations. The Loyola transplant team consists of a nurse coordinator and three doctors: the transplant cardiologist, the procuring surgeon, and the transplant surgeon. The Regional Organ Bank of Illinois (ROBI) also plays a role in Loyola’s heart transplantations. When a potential donor is declared brain dead, ROBI gathers information about the donor, including gender, age, and weight, the cause of death, and whether the donor smoked, drank alcohol, or used narcotics. ROBI may also order diagnostic tests of the donor’s heart. ROBI then passes any relevant information to Loyola’s nurse coordinator, who briefs the transplant cardiologist. The transplant cardiologist first makes an evaluation, based on the donor’s history and the results of any tests, to preliminarily accept or decline the heart. If the heart is preliminarily accepted, the procuring surgeon goes to the donor hospital, where he or she opens the donor’s sternum and visually inspects the heart and feels it for defects. Next, the procuring surgeon makes the “final phone call” where he or she reports the findings to the transplant surgeon, who decides whether to accept or reject the heart. If the heart is accepted, the procuring surgeon “cross-clamps” the donor heart, cutting off the blood supply, and flushes it with a preservative solution. The heart is transported to Loyola, where the transplant surgeon, who has removed the patient’s “native” heart, transplants the donor heart. Time is of the essence in heart transplantations. A preserved heart can remain viable for approximately four hours after being removed from the donor’s body. Thus, the removal of the donor heart and its transport to the recipient hospital must be carefully coordinated with the removal of the recipient’s native heart. B. The Heart Transplantation in This Case In this case, the nurse coordinator was Penny Pearson. Dr. Mullen was the transplant cardiologist. The defendant, Dr. Parvathaneni, was the procuring surgeon, and Dr. Foy, the surgical director of the Loyola transplant team, was the transplant surgeon. The donor was a 46-year-old male who was declared brain dead at Good Samaritan Hospital. The donor’s family informed ROBI he smoked cigarettes and marijuana and drank alcohol regularly, and that he may have used cocaine. The family also revealed the donor was diagnosed with hypertension (high blood pressure) in September 2000. He was “noncompliant” with treatment, meaning he did not take medication regularly. Based on the donor’s history, ROBI ordered diagnostic tests, including an echocardiogram, the “gold standard” test for left ventricle hypertrophy (the enlargement of the heart wall), and an angiogram, the “gold standard” test for coronary artery disease (plaque in the arteries). The donor’s level of troponin, a substance that may be indicative of damaged heart muscle, was also measured. The echocardiogram revealed the donor’s left ventricle measured 1.2 centimeters, meaning he suffered from “mild” left ventricle hypertrophy. The angiogram revealed “mild” coronary artery disease. The donor’s troponin level was elevated. ROBI contacted Pearson with the above information. Pearson then contacted Dr. Mullen, who, after evaluating the echocardiogram and angiogram, and after discussing the matter with Dr. Foy, preliminarily accepted the heart. Dr. Parvathaneni then went to Good Samaritan in order to “visualize” the heart, that is, to inspect it for congenital abnormalities and to confirm the findings of the echocardiogram and angiogram. Dr. Parvathaneni did not have any concerns about plaque or hypertrophy in the heart. Dr. Parvathaneni called Dr. Foy and told him the heart “look[ed] good” and was “suitable for transplantation” from a surgical aspect. Dr. Foy accepted the heart. At 7:10 a.m., Dr. Parvathaneni cross-clamped the donor’s heart, and he removed it at 7:30 a.m. By 7:40 a.m., the heart was in route to Loyola, where it arrived at 8:10 a.m. At 7:48 a.m., while the donor heart was on its way to Loyola, Dr. Foy placed Mr. Longnecker on a bypass machine. At 8:28 a.m., Mr. Longnecker’s native heart was cross-clamped and removed. When Dr. Foy removed the donor heart from its container, he immediately saw and determined by touch that it suffered from left ventricular hypertrophy and coronary artery disease. Dr. Foy wrote “Hypertrophic heart!” in his operative note because the amount of hypertrophy was more than he expected based on the results of the echocardiogram. Nevertheless, Dr. Foy determined the heart was suitable for transplant and transplanted it. The heart, however, never functioned, and, on June 15, 2001, Mr. Longnecker died. Had Mr. Longnecker survived, his name would have been placed back on the heart donation waiting list. An autopsy revealed the donor heart weighed 492 grams, whereas a normal heart weighs 300 grams. The heart’s left ventricle measured two centimeters in thickness, indicating “severe” hypertrophy. The heart also exhibited “moderate to severe” coronary artery disease. The cause of death was determined to be acute myocardial infarction, with left ventricle hypertrophy being an indirect contributing cause. C. Litigation On June 24, 2002, the plaintiff filed a three-count complaint against Loyola and Dr. Parvathaneni, alleging medical negligence and wrongful death and seeking recovery under the Family Expense Act (750 ILCS 65/15 (West 2002)). The plaintiff alleged that Loyola, by and through its agent, Dr. Parvathaneni: “a. Failed to perform appropriate testing of the donor heart; b. Failed to perform appropriate visual inspections of the donor heart; c. Fail[ed] to diagnose significant left ventricle hypertrophy in the donor heart prior to transplantation; d. Fail[ed] to diagnose significant coronary artery disease in the donor heart prior to transplantation; [and] e. Otherwise deviated from the standard of care.” On June 10, 2003, the plaintiff filed an amended complaint in which she named as additional defendants others involved in the transplantation. Prior to trial, the additional defendants were either granted summary judgment or voluntarily dismissed from the case. The allegations against Loyola and Dr. Parvathaneni were the same in both complaints. Neither complaint expressly based Loyola’s liability on institutional negligence. On November 29, 2005, one day prior to trial, Loyola filed a motion in limine seeking to bar the plaintiff from presenting evidence of Loyola’s institutional negligence because (1) the plaintiff’s complaint did not allege institutional negligence, (2) any institutional negligence claim would be time-barred, and (3) the plaintiff’s expert, Dr. James Avery, lacked the appropriate foundation for his testimony regarding institutional negligence. The circuit court denied the motion. On November 30, 2005, the trial commenced. Dr. Foy testified that he trained Dr. Parvathaneni, who had been a cardiac fellow at Loyola, to procure hearts for transplantation. Dr. Foy was “quite satisfied” that Dr. Parvathaneni both knew and understood his responsibilities in terms of procuring hearts. Thus, Dr. Parvathaneni remained on Loyola’s staff after his fellowship completed. Because Loyola used a team approach to organ procurement, each team member was required to know his or her role and perform that role. According to Dr. Foy, in Loyola’s system, the procuring surgeon evaluates the donor heart and is involved in making decisions regarding its suitability for transplant; the procuring surgeon does more than simply remove the heart from the donor’s body. The procuring surgeon is responsible for (1) gathering and reviewing all of the available information about the donor, (2) reviewing any echocardiograms and angiograms, (3) visually inspecting the heart for trauma or abnormalities and confirming or denying any abnormalities noted on the echocardiogram or angiogram, and (4) feeling the heart. Dr. Foy did not specify whether the procuring surgeon is required to feel the heart prior to cross-clamp, or whether the examination need be performed after removal. Dr. Foy’s “final decision” to accept or reject the heart is based in large part on the procuring surgeon’s findings. In this case, by the time Dr. Foy removed the donor heart from its container, he had already removed Mr. Longnecker’s native heart. From the moment Dr. Foy held the donor heart, he knew it had “significant” hypertrophy. Dr. Foy, however, decided to proceed with the transplant. Although Dr. Foy’s deposition testimony indicated that “at the time *** the donor heart[ ] is brought on to the operative field the die is cast, you have no choice but to implant that heart,” he testified at trial that he had the option of using “a Jarvik type, total artificial heart.” Dr. Parvathaneni, who is triple board certified in general surgery, critical care, and cardiothoracic surgery, testified that when he arrived at Good Samaritan to procure the heart, he knew Drs. Foy and Mullen had already reviewed the results of the echocardiogram and angiogram and that Dr. Mullen had “evaluated [the] heart and cleared it for transplant.” Dr. Parvathaneni testified he also reviewed the echo-cardiogram and angiogram as part of his duties. Dr. Parvathaneni distinguished between two potential roles of a Loyola transplantation team member: evaluating a heart for transplant and examining a heart to be transplanted. He testified it was his duty as the procuring surgeon to examine a heart to be transplanted, not to evaluate a heart for transplant. He did not consider himself capable of evaluating a heart for transplant. According to Dr. Parvathaneni, Loyola’s standard practice required procuring surgeons to visually examine the heart and manually assess it for hypertrophy and coronary artery disease before removing the organ. Pursuant to this practice, Dr. Parvathaneni visually inspected the heart while it remained in the donor’s chest and felt it for plaque and hypertrophy. He could not recall whether he could feel more hypertrophy or plaque in the heart then indicated in the echocardiogram or angiogram when he placed it in its container. Dr. Parvathaneni acknowledged that hypertrophy can most easily be felt after the heart is removed. However, Dr. Parvathaneni testified he was not trained to manually inspect the heart after removal. Rather, he was trained “to bring the organ as fast as [he] could.” Dr. Parvathaneni explained, “Once we are told to take the heart, we take the heart, bag it up and send it. Time is of the essence, and they’re expecting the organ [at Loyola].” Dr. Mullen, the transplant cardiologist, testified he was aware the donor was 46 years old and had a history of uncontrolled hypertension. He was also aware the donor suffered from “mild” hypertrophy and “mild” coronary artery disease. In his opinion, it was proper to accept a heart with these conditions. Dr. Mullen took “full responsibility” for accepting the donor heart in this case. Dr. Avery, a cardiovascular surgeon from the California Pacific Medical Center, gave expert testimony on behalf of the plaintiff. Prior to testifying, Dr. Avery reviewed depositions from Drs. Foy, Mullen, and Parvathaneni, which served as the bases for his opinions. In Dr. Avery’s opinion, the standard of care required Dr. Parvathaneni to review the patient’s medical and social history, the echo-cardiogram and angiogram, to see and feel how the heart worked in the donor’s chest, and to come to a conclusion regarding whether to accept the heart. Dr. Parvathaneni’s deposition testimony, however, indicated he did not believe he was required to evaluate the heart at all; rather, he was sent to Good Samaritan “to get the heart and bring it back.” Dr. Parvathaneni’s deposition testimony was in conflict with deposition testimony given by Drs. Foy and Mullen that described Dr. Parvathaneni’s role as “enormous” in the evaluation of the heart. According to Dr. Avery, Dr. Parvathaneni deviated from the standard of care by being unaware of “significant historical items” related to the donor, including his history of uncontrolled hypertension, history of cigarette smoking, and potential cocaine use. Dr. Parvathaneni also deviated from the standard of care by failing to perform a physical examination of the donor heart after the heart was removed. If Dr. Parvathaneni had done so, he would have found what Dr. Foy later found: “a thick heart of significant hypertrophy and considerable plaque in the coronaries.” Dr. Avery additionally testified the standard of care required Dr. Parvathaneni to understand his role in the transplant as viewed by the other team members. However, Dr. Parvathaneni’s deposition testimony indicated he failed to understand his role, in deviation of the standard of care. Regarding Loyola, Dr. Avery testified: “Q. And in regards to the Loyola transplant team did the standard of care require that they — did they have any responsibility under the standard of care to make sure that Dr. Parvathaneni understood his role if they were going to send him to get a heart? A. Yes. Q. And did Loyola deviate from the standard of care in that regard? MR. PATTERSON [Counsel for Loyola]: Objection your Honor, motion in limine. THE COURT: Overruled. A. [Dr. Avery]: In this regard I believe they did. Q. In what manner? A. Well, basically everybody needs to be on the same page in terms of what each team member’s role is in the team.” In Dr. Avery’s opinion, had Dr. Parvathaneni fulfilled his responsibilities pursuant to the standard of care, and had Loyola fulfilled its responsibilities in ensuring Dr. Parvathaneni knew his role, the heart would not have been transplanted. Dr. Robert Higgins, the chairman of cardiovascular and thoracic surgery and the director of the Heart Transplant and Mechanical Assist Device Program at Rush University Medical Center, testified as an expert on behalf of Loyola. Dr. Higgins’s opinion, to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty, was that the donor heart was suitable for transplantation. The echocardiogram showed only mild hypertrophy, the angiogram showed only mild coronary artery disease, and the donor’s possible cocaine use was not a factor in the donor’s death. The heart was also visually suitable for transplantation. Dr. Higgins, however, testified he would not transplant a heart with two-centimeter hypertrophy and severe coronary artery disease. Dr. Alfred Carl Nicolosi testified as an expert on behalf of Dr. Parvathaneni. According to Dr. Nicolosi, Dr. Parvathaneni complied with the standard of care in his role as a procuring surgeon because he reviewed the echocardiogram and the angiogram and conducted a visual inspection and physical examination of the heart. According to Dr. Nicolosi, the donor heart was acceptable for transplant, and none of Dr. Parvathaneni’s actions caused Mr. Longnecker’s death. According to Dr. Nicolosi, the left ventricle of the donor heart measured two centimeters at the autopsy because of swelling, not because of hypertrophy. At the jury instruction conference, Loyola unsuccessfully objected to instructions on Loyola’s institutional negligence. The jury was instructed, in part: “The plaintiff claims that Carl Longnecker died and that defendants Dr. Parvathaneni and Loyola *** were negligent in one or more of the following respects: Failed to properly evaluate the donor heart; failed to perform an appropriate physical examination of the donor heart; failed to communicate significant problems with the donor heart after physical examination; and failed to reject the donor heart for transplantation. The plaintiff further claims that defendant Loyola *** was negligent in one or more of the following respects: Failed to ensure that Dr. Parvathaneni understood his role as a procuring surgeon. Negligence by a hospital is the failure to do something that a reasonably careful hospital would do or the doing of something that reasonably careful hospital would not do under the circumstances similar to those shown by the evidence. The law does not say how a reasonably careful hospital would act under the circumstances, that is for you to decide.” The jury was not instructed that it could return a verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni only if it also found in favor of Loyola. In fact, the jury instructions allowed the jury to find the way it did. After initially indicating it could not reach a verdict, the jury found for Dr. Parvathaneni and Loyola on the professional negligence claim and against Loyola on the institutional negligence claim. The jury assessed $2.7 million in damages. On Loyola’s motion for judgment n.o.v., the circuit court found the verdicts inconsistent and vacated the verdict against Loyola. The circuit court stated: “If the institutional negligence in this case is based specifically on the conduct of Dr. Parvathaneni in that he did not understand what his role was and was not — and that Loyola did not make sure he understood his role, well, if the jury found that he wasn’t negligent, then, you know, there was nothing wrong with what he did and whether he personally did not understand his role or whether Loyola didn’t see that he understood his role doesn’t matter. He didn’t do anything that caused harm to [Mr. Longnecker], If his actions were not a proximate cause of injury to Mr. Longnecker, even if he was negligent, then if anything that he did didn’t cause Mr. Longnecker’s death, then, you know, the failure by Loyola to see that he understood what he was doing or knew what he was doing doesn’t really matter. Nothing he did was the cause of the injury to Mr. Longnecker. So they really are inconsistent.” The court entered judgment in favor of both defendants. This timely appeal followed. ANALYSIS  In medical negligence cases, a hospital may face liability under two separate and distinct theories: (1) vicarious liability for the medical negligence of its agents or employees; and (2) liability for its own institutional negligence. Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital, 33 Ill. 2d 326, 211 N.E.2d 253 (1965), cert. denied, 383 U.S. 946, 16 L. Ed. 2d 209, 86 S. Ct. 1204 (1966). In a professional negligence case, the standard of care requires the defendant to act with “the same degree of knowledge, skill and ability as an ordinarily careful professional would exercise under similar circumstances.” Advincula v. United Blood Services, 176 Ill. 2d 1, 23, 678 N.E.2d 1009 (1996). Generally, “expert testimony is necessary in professional negligence cases to establish the standard of care.” Snelson v. Kamm, 204 Ill. 2d 1, 43-44, 787 N.E.2d 796 (2003). “[Ejxpert testimony is needed *** because jurors are not skilled in the practice of medicine and would find it difficult without the help of medical evidence to determine any lack of necessary scientific skill on the part of the physician.” Walski v. Tiesenga, 72 Ill. 2d 249, 256, 381 N.E.2d 279 (1978).  Institutional negligence involves an analogous standard of care; a defendant hospital is judged against what a reasonably careful hospital would do under the same circumstances. Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 105.03.01 (1995). See generally Jones v. Chicago HMO Ltd. of Illinois, 191 Ill. 2d 278, 294-99, 730 N.E.2d 1119 (2000). Under this theory of liability, however, “the standard of care *** may be shown by a wide variety of evidence, including, but not limited to, expert testimony, hospital bylaws, statutes, accreditation standards, custom and community practice.” Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 298. “[T]he institutional negligence of hospitals can also be determined without expert testimony in some cases.” Jones, 191 2d at 296. The concept of proximate cause is the same under professional and institutional negligence. However, consistent with the help lay jurors need “to determine any lack of necessary scientific skill on the part of the physician” (Walski, 72 Ill. 2d at 256), “[t]he proximate cause element of a medical malpractice case must be established by expert testimony to a reasonable degree of medical certainty.” (Emphasis added.) Krivanec v. Abramowitz, 366 Ill. App. 3d 350, 356-57, 851 N.E.2d 849 (2006). We are aware of no authority that imposes a similar rule that proximate cause be established to a reasonable degree of medical certainty in an institutional negligence case. However, an institutional negligence case may present where professional and institutional standards of care are so intertwined that proximate cause is required to be shown to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. The case before us is not such a case. Nor does Loyola contend otherwise. In this case, the jury rejected the plaintiff’s contention that Dr. Parvathaneni (and, vicariously, Loyola) was professionally negligent. The plaintiff does not challenge this finding on appeal. The jury accepted the plaintiff’s contention that Loyola was institutionally negligent. The circuit court, however, concluded the jury’s findings were inconsistent, granted Loyola’s motion for judgment n.o.v., and vacated the verdict. The plaintiff challenges this ruling. A motion for judgment n.o.v. should be entered “only in those cases in which all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand.” Pedrick v. Peona & Eastern R.R. Co., 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510, 229 N.E.2d 504 (1967). Our standard of review is de novo. York v. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center, 222 Ill. 2d 147, 178, 854 N.E.2d 635 (2006). I. Institutional Negligence In support of affirming the trial court’s decision, Loyola puts forth three arguments: (1) the jury should not have considered the institutional negligence claim because the claim was time-barred; (2) judgment n.o.v. was proper because the plaintiff failed to establish breach; and, (3) judgment n.o.v. was proper because the plaintiff failed to establish proximate cause.  Before addressing the merits of Loyola’s contentions, we address the plaintiff’s assertion that Loyola has waived the first two contentions, if not also the third, because it failed to obtain a conditional ruling in the circuit court in violation of section 2 — 1202(f) of the Code of Civil Procedure, which requires the circuit court to “rule conditionally on the other relief sought [in a posttrial motion].” 735 ILCS 5/2- — 1202(f) (West 2006). Loyola’s posttrial motion, which raised the issues of timeliness, breach, and proximate cause, did not seek other forms of relief. Rather, Loyola’s posttrial motion set forth alternative bases for the same relief — judgment n.o.v. Consequently, Loyola’s alternative bases for upholding the judgment n.o.v. are not waived. Varady v. Guardian Co., 153 Ill. App. 3d 1062, 1070, 506 N.E.2d 708 (1987); Ralston v. Plogger, 132 Ill. App. 3d 90, 97, 476 N.E.2d 1378 (1985). We address each in turn. A. Time-Barred  Loyola points out the plaintiff’s original and amended complaints did not specifically allege Loyola breached any independent duty of care and, in its view, only alleged Loyola was vicariously liable for Dr. Parvathaneni’s alleged malpractice. Loyola argues, “Even assuming that Plaintiff attempted to amend her complaint at [a later date], any claim of institutional negligence against Loyola would be time barred.” Loyola points out the statute of limitations for a medical malpractice claim is two years (735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 2004)), and argues any institutional negligence claim would not “relate back” to the original complaint under section 2 — 616(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004)). Section 2 — 616(b) provides: “The cause of action, cross claim or defense set up in any amended pleading shall not be barred by lapse of time under any statute *** prescribing or limiting the time within which an action may be brought or right asserted, if the time prescribed or limited had not expired when the original pleading was filed, and if it shall appear from the original and amended pleadings that the cause of action asserted, or the defense or cross claim interposed in the amended pleading grew out of the same transaction or occurrence set up in the original pleading ***.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004). Loyola mistakenly relies on section 2 — 616(b) and institutional negligence cases addressing the relation-back doctrine. See, e.g., Frigo v. Silver Cross Hospital & Medical Center, 377 Ill. App. 3d 43, 62, 876 N.E.2d 697 (2007) (plaintiff’s negligent credentialing claim related back to her original pleading specifically alleging the hospital committed negligence); Weidner v. Carle Foundation Hospital, 159 Ill. App. 3d 710, 713, 512 N.E.2d 824 (1987) (plaintiffs allegation that the hospital breached its institutional duty of care did not relate back to her original complaint alleging the hospital was vicariously hable for the doctor’s malpractice). The relation-back provision of section 2 — 616(b), by its very terms, applies only in cases where “cause[s] of action, cross claim[s] or defense[s]” are raised beyond the limitations period in “any amended pleading.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004); Porter v. Decatur Memorial Hospital, 227 Ill. 2d 343, 882 N.E.2d 583 (2008). In this case, the plaintiff did not raise any new claim against Loyola in an amended pleading. Rather, the plaintiff’s original and amended complaints, both filed within the two-year limitations period, contained the same allegations against Loyola, and no other amended pleadings were filed. Simply stated, the relation-back doctrine has no application in this case. What is relevant, however, is whether the plaintiffs timely filed amended complaint contained sufficient facts to put Loyola on notice that the plaintiff sought to hold it hable for institutional negligence. The plaintiffs amended complaint alleged Loyola and Dr. Parvathaneni failed to properly test, inspect, and diagnose the donor heart, and that both defendants “[o]therwise deviated from the standard of care.” Although the amended complaint did not expressly assert an institutional negligence claim against Loyola, Loyola was on notice of this theory of liability long before the commencement of trial. In her Supreme Court Rule 213 (210 Ill. 2d R. 213) response, the plaintiff disclosed Dr. Avery’s opinion on this very point. “9. Defendant Loyola University Medical Center, as an institution and through the physicians practicing within the heart transplant unit, had a duty to ensure that each physician and participant in the heart transplant team understood his or her role and what was expected of him or her in the assessment of the donor heart for transplant. This was a deviation from the standard of care on the part of Defendant Loyola University Medical Center.” Loyola’s motion in limine to bar Dr. Avery from testifying about institutional negligence confirms that Loyola understood that the plaintiff was proceeding under this separate theory of liability. We reject Loyola’s contention that the plaintiff’s institutional negligence claim was time-barred. B. Breach of Duty  In an institutional negligence case, “[a] hospital owes a duty to its patients to exercise reasonable care in light of apparent risk.” Andrews v. Northwestern Memorial Hospital, 184 Ill. App. 3d 486, 493, 540 N.E.2d 447 (1989), citing Ohligschlager v. Proctor Community Hospital, 55 Ill. 2d 411, 303 N.E.2d 392 (1973). Here, the “apparent risk” was that a donor heart with significant hypertrophy would be accepted for transplantation. In order to avoid this risk, the plaintiff asserts Loyola had a duty to ensure that each member of the heart transplant team was fully aware of his role in evaluating the donor heart for transplantation.1  According to the plaintiff, Dr. Parvathaneni should have been informed that his role, as part of the transplant team, included evaluating the heart for transplantation after harvesting, not simply examining the heart while in the donor. Had Dr. Parvathaneni evaluated the heart after harvesting, he likely would have made the same observation Dr. Foy made after first observing the donor heart, that it was a “Hypertrophic heart!” Dr. Avery, the plaintiffs expert, explained that had Dr. Parvathaneni evaluated the heart after it was removed he would have found: “a thick heart of significant hypertrophy and considerable plaque in the coronaries.” Dr. Parvathaneni testified that hypertrophy can most easily be felt after the heart is removed; he, however, was not trained to manually inspect the heart after removal. After removal, his role was “to bring the organ as fast as [he] could” to Loyola. According to Dr. Foy’s deposition testimony, he was “surprised” by Dr. Parvathaneni’s description of his role because Dr. Parvathaneni played a much greater role in evaluating the donor heart. In his deposition, Dr. Mullen characterized Dr. Parvathaneni’s role in evaluating the donor heart as “enormous.” As Dr. Avery testified, Loyola owed a duty of reasonable care to Mr. Longnecker to ensure that before his native heart was removed, the donor heart was evaluated as acceptable for transplantation by each member of the transplant team. Against this record, Loyola makes three arguments to challenge the jury’s finding of breach of duty. First, Loyola argues there is no evidence it knew or should have known about Dr. Parvathaneni’s noncompliance with transplant procedures. Loyola cites Pickle v. Curns, 106 Ill. App. 3d 734, 435 N.E.2d 877 (1982), Reynolds v. Mennonite Hospital, 168 Ill. App. 3d 575, 522 N.E.2d 827 (1988), and Rohe v. Shivde, 203 Ill. App. 3d 181, 560 N.E.2d 1113 (1990), as support. In Pickle, the plaintiff sued the doctor and the hospital, alleging he suffered injuries as a result of electroconvulsive therapy. The plaintiff specifically alleged the doctor administered the therapy in a manner that did not comply with the hospital’s policies, and the hospital allowed the procedure to be performed in violation of its policies. The circuit court dismissed the complaint and we affirmed. We held the complaint was properly dismissed because the plaintiff failed to allege the hospital knew or should have known the doctor would violate its policies. Our decision in Holton v. Resurrection Hospital, 88 Ill. App. 3d 655, 659, 410 N.E.2d 969 (1980), which held that a hospital has a duty to use reasonable care to discern the medical qualifications of those practicing within the hospital and that a hospital breaches that duty where it allows a doctor to practice where it knows or should know the doctor is unqualified, provided the authority for our holding. We refused to “recognize the existence of a duty on the part of the hospital’s administration to insure that each of its staff physicians will always perform his duty of due care,” because that would amount to requiring the hospital to act as an insurer of a patient’s safety. Pickle, 106 Ill. App. 3d at 739. Similar claims were raised in Reynolds and Rohe. Rohe, 203 Ill. App. 3d at 200 (alleging the defendant hospital allowed a pediatrician to practice where the pediatrician violated several hospital policies); Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 577 (alleging the defendant hospitals failed to review and supervise the doctors’ work where the doctors misdiagnosed the plaintiffs and performed unnecessary surgery). In both cases, we held the hospitals were entitled to summary judgment because the plaintiffs failed to allege the hospitals were aware of the doctors’ actions. Rohe, 203 Ill. App. 3d at 203; Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 578-79. Pickle, Reynolds, and Rohe do not control this case. Each of the three cases involved a “rogue” doctor practicing medicine in violation of the policies set forth by the hospital. Unaddressed in those cases is the issue here — whether the hospital adequately informed a doctor of his duties while working as a member of a team of doctors. The allegation against Loyola is not that Dr. Parvathaneni harvested hearts in violation of Loyola’s policies. Rather, the allegation is that Loyola never informed Dr. Parvathaneni that his duty as a harvesting surgeon encompassed “evaluating a heart for transplantation.” The plaintiff’s claim of reasonable care owed by Loyola was not to insure that each member of the heart transplant team will always perform his duty of reasonable care to his patient; rather, the plaintiff contends Loyola breached its duty to ensure Dr. Parvathaneni knew his role as part of the heart transplant team was not simply to examine but to evaluate the donor heart. Second, Loyola argues the plaintiff “failed to proffer any evidence that if Loyola had done something differently with respect to the training or supervision of Dr. Parvathaneni, his alleged noncompliance would have been discovered.” Loyola’s contention, by linking Loyola’s shortfall on “training or supervision of Dr. Parvathaneni” to the discovery of the alleged noncompliance, misses the point. As we have made clear above, it is not the discovery of Dr. Parvathaneni’s “alleged noncompliance” with a Loyola policy that is at issue; rather, at issue is Loyola’s alleged failure to ensure Dr. Parvathaneni was aware of its policy that the procuring surgeon had a role in evaluating the heart for transplantation. Finally, Loyola argues Dr. Avery’s testimony was conclusory. Dr. Avery testified Dr. Parvathaneni’s deposition testimony conflicted with that of Drs. Foy and Mullen regarding the role of the procuring surgeon. According to Dr. Avery, Loyola breached the standard of care because “everybody needs to be on the same page in terms of what each team member’s role is in the team.” According to Loyola, “To sustain Plaintiffs burden, Dr. Avery was required to explain specifically how Loyola allegedly breached the applicable standard of care — to identify what Loyola failed to do that a ‘reasonably careful’ hospital would have done under similar circumstances to ensure that individual members of the Transplant Team understood their respective roles.” Loyola again relies on Reynolds. As discussed above, Reynolds affirmed summary judgment in favor of the defendant hospitals because the plaintiffs failed to establish the defendant hospitals knew or had reason to know of the doctors’ alleged malpractice. The court also addressed whether testimony from the plaintiffs’ expert was sufficient to establish the hospitals’ knowledge. We held it was not. Although the expert opined that the hospitals should have known of the doctors’ improper diagnoses of thoracic outlet syndrome, the plaintiffs failed to allege any facts “to substantiate that opinion.” Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 579. Thus, in Reynolds, the expert asserted a conclusion without factual support that the hospital should have known of the doctors’ noncompliance through proper review. Here, the facts underlying Dr. Avery’s opinion go directly to the claimed breach by Loyola of its duty of reasonable care owed to Mr. Longnecker that each team member evaluate the heart for transplantation. Dr. Parvathaneni testified he was not trained to “evaluate” the donor heart for hypertrophy even though such an evaluation could be quickly made based on Dr. Foy’s immediate observation after removing the donor heart from the transport container that it was a “Hypertrophic heart!” Drs. Foy and Mullen each provided deposition testimony that Dr. Parvathaneni had an enormous role in evaluating the donor heart for transplantation. This enormous role Dr. Parvathaneni was expected to play in evaluating the donor heart for transplantation is confirmed by Dr. Foy’s decision to remove Mr. Longnecker’s heart before he personally viewed the donor heart. Dr. Avery’s opinion that Loyola breached the standard care by failing to ensure that each member of the transplant team evaluated the donor heart had sufficient factual support in the record to establish that Loyola breached its duty of care to Mr. Longnecker. C. Proximate Cause Loyola next argues the plaintiff failed to establish proximate cause. Loyola argues “there was no evidence that if Loyola had done something differently with respect to the training or supervision of Dr. Parvathaneni, then Dr. Parvathaneni and Dr. Foy would have rejected the donor heart for transplantation in Mr. Longnecker.” As authority for its “no proximate cause” contention, Loyola relies on Snelson v. Kamm, 204 Ill. 2d 1, 787 N.E.2d 796 (2003), a case not involving a claim of institutional negligence. In Snelson, under Dr. Kamm’s care, Snelson underwent a “radiological procedure known as an aortogram or aroteriogram, [performed by a radiologist practicing at the hospital,] to determine the location of arterial blockages.” Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 10. The procedure was terminated because of the difficulty in inserting “the guide wire.” Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 10. Dr. Kamm, a general surgeon, was informed that the test was not completed and that Snelson complained of back and abdominal pain following the unsuccessful procedure. Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 11. After ameliorative treatments over the course of a day and a half to address Mr. Snelson’s severe abdominal pain were exhausted, Dr. Kamm performed emergency exploratory surgery, which revealed portions of the small and large bowel loops were dead. At trial, the radiologist opined that the “unsuccessful *** aortogram caused the death of portions of Snelson’s intestine[s].” Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 15. The action against the hospital was based on Snelson’s claim that the attending nurses negligently failed to inform Dr. Kamm that they had inserted a catheter before Dr. Kamm ordered one and that Snelson was experiencing high levels of pain. This, Snelson contended, affected the treatment he received from Dr. Kamm. Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 13. After a verdict was returned against Dr. Kamm and the hospital, the circuit court entered a judgment n.o.v. for the hospital, finding no causal connection between the alleged failures of the nurses and the medical treatment rendered by Dr. Kamm. Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 13. The appellate court affirmed. The supreme court granted leave to appeal. The supreme court began its discussion of Snelson’s claim that the judgment n.o.v. was error with observations based on the record evidence. “Snelson acknowledges that he presented no expert testimony indicating that [the hospital’s] conduct was a proximate cause of his injury. He also acknowledges that Kamm testified that no act or omission of the nursing staff affected his course of treatment ***. Nevertheless, Snelson argues that a question of fact as to proximate cause was sufficiently established by the evidence.” Snelson, 204 Ill. 2d at 42. Here, Loyola does not assert, nor can it based on the record before us, that the plaintiff acknowledges similar shortfalls in the evidence. Snelson is thus factually distinguishable. We nonetheless address Loyola’s contention that under a Sne/son-type analysis, proximate cause was not shown here. According to Loyola, as to Dr. Foy’s decision to transplant the donor heart, the record evidence supports but one conclusion: “[E]ven though the donor heart had more hypertrophy than Dr. Foy expected based on the echocardiogram, Dr. Foy decided that the heart was acceptable for transplant in Mr. Longnecker.” Thus, Loyola argues, because the donor heart was found acceptable for transplantation by Dr. Foy, there was no causal connection between Dr. Parvathaneni’s failure to evaluate the heart after harvest and Dr. Foy’s decision to transplant the donor heart. It is true that Dr. Foy testified that he decided the heart was suitable for transplant and that he had the alternative option of using an artificial heart if he found the donor heart unacceptable. Loyola ignores, however, that the jury also had before it Dr. Foy’s deposition testimony that once he removed Mr. Longnecker’s native heart, “the die is cast, [there is] no choice but to implant [the donor] heart.” The discovery by Dr. Foy that the donor heart was hypertrophic was simply too late once the donor heart was on the “operative field.” The jury also heard the testimony of Dr. Higgins, an expert called on behalf of Loyola, that he would not transplant a heart with two-centimeter hypertrophy and severe coronary artery disease. At the autopsy, the donor heart measured two centimeters in thickness at the left ventricle and exhibited “moderate to severe” coronary artery disease. This conflict in the evidence made it a jury question whether the alleged breach of Loyola’s institutional standard of care proximately caused the death of Mr. Longnecker.  Our conclusion that proximate cause was a question of fact for the jury is supported by the conclusion reached by the supreme court in Jones on the issue of proximate cause in an institutional negligence case. In Jones, in response to Chicago HMO’s argument that there was no causal connection between Shawndale’s claim and the failure of Chicago HMO to schedule a needed appointment in which Shawn-dale’s illness would have been discovered, the court observed: “We can easily infer from this record that Dr. Jordan’s failure to see Shawndale resulted from an inability to serve an overloaded patient population. A lay juror can discern that a physician who has thousands more patients than he should will not have time to service them all in an appropriate manner.” Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 301. This reasonable inference, along with additional evidence in the record that Chicago HMO was soliciting more patients, the supreme court concluded, presented a material question of fact to overcome summary judgment “on Jones’ claim of institutional negligence for assigning too many patients to Dr. Jordan.” Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 304. Likewise here, the jury could have inferred that Dr. Foy removed Mr. Longnecker’s native heart, not because it was in worse condition than the hypertrophic heart of the donor but because he relied on Dr. Parvathaneni to have informed him if the donor heart were hypertrophic, that is, to a greater degree than indicated in the diagnostic tests of the donor. As the plaintiff claims, had Loyola properly conveyed to Dr. Parvathenani that as part of the transplant team his duties included evaluating the donor heart after harvest, thus leading to the discovery of the significant hypertrophy in the donor heart, “then Dr. Foy would have rejected the donor heart for transplantation in Mr. Longnecker.” That the severity of hypertrophy in the donor heart, detected by Dr. Foy immediately upon removing the heart from the transport container, was a shock to Dr. Foy is revealed by the exclamation notation of “Hypertrophic heart!” in his operating notes. The jury was not required to believe Dr. Foy’s testimony in court that he found the heart acceptable for transplantation over his deposition testimony that once he removed Mr. Longnecker’s native heart, he “had no choice but to implant [the donor] heart.” The jury was free to draw the inference from the evidence that Dr. Foy would not have “implant[ed] that heart” had he had a real choice, which a properly trained Dr. Parvathenani would have given him. Accordingly, there was a causal connection between Loyola’s failure to ensure that the entire transplant team was “on the same page” and Mr. Longnecker’s death, caused by the transplantation of a nonfunctioning heart. Finally, the circuit court’s conclusion that a verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni precluded a proximate cause showing as to the institutional negligence claim, in the context of this case, is, simply put, wrong. Our supreme court has expressly stated: “Liability is predicated on the hospital’s own [institutional] negligence, not the negligence of the physician.” Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 292. “[T]he tort of institutional negligence ‘does not encompass, whatsoever, a hospital’s responsibility for the conduct of its *** medical professionals.’ ” Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 298, quoting Advincula, 176 Ill. 2d at 31. To hold Dr. Parvathaneni liable, the jury would have had to conclude that he deviated from the professional standard of care to which a procuring surgeon is held. The standard of care for Loyola as to the institutional negligence claim required a showing of what a reasonably careful hospital would do under the circumstances of this case. If, in fact, as the circuit judge concluded, before institutional negligence can be found, professional negligence on the part of Dr. Parvathaneni must be found, the claims of professional negligence and institutional negligence would conflate into a single theory of vicarious liability. Dr. Parvathaneni’s commission of medical malpractice would impose vicarious liability on Loyola, as principal to Dr. Parvathaneni, and render the claim of institutional negligence against Loyola pointless. The two claims, however, are independent, as our supreme court has made clear. Because the jury found in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni, it does not follow that the jury was compelled to find in favor of Loyola on the institutional negligence claim. See Collins v. Roseland Community Hospital, 219 Ill. App. 3d 766, 775, 579 N.E.2d 1105 (1991) (verdicts not inconsistent because care provided at hospital involved health professionals “requiring differing degrees of care and subject to differing standards of care”). Under the facts of this case no such outcome was required. The jury was properly instructed that Loyola alone could be found liable under the institutional negligence theory and the jury so found. The circuit judge, in concluding the verdict in favor Dr. Parvathaneni and the verdict against Loyola could not stand, may have been thinking of a case like Frigo, where the plaintiff asserted a negligent credentialing claim in the context of institutional negligence, involving a podiatrist, a nonemployee of the hospital. Frigo, 377 Ill. App. 3d 43. If the plaintiff successfully established a deviation of the standard of care of the hospital resulting in wrongly extending credentials to the podiatrist, then to establish proximate cause for the injury inflicted on the plaintiff by the podiatrist on the independent institutional claim, the plaintiff would also have to establish that the podiatrist committed medical malpractice that gave rise to the plaintiffs injuries. Frigo, 377 Ill. App. 3d at 74-75. If the podiatrist did not commit medical negligence, there would be no causal connection between the hospital’s action in negligently giving surgical privileges to the podiatrist and the injuries the plaintiff suffered. Frigo, 377 Ill. App. 3d at 75. Frigo, is much like Reynolds, the case upon which the dissent so heavily relies. In each case, the plaintiff was required to prove malpractice by the offending doctors. In Frigo, the plaintiff had to prove the podiatrist committed malpractice in order to succeed on her institutional negligence claim against the hospital. In Reynolds, the plaintiffs were required to prove not only that the surgeons “were negligent in their diagnoses of these plaintiffs” but “that the hospitals should have known, through proper review procedures, that the surgeons were improperly diagnosing thoracic outlet syndrome.” Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 579. Here, the plaintiff’s institutional claim was based on Loyola’s deviation from the standard of care, not on any claimed deviation of the standard of care by Dr. Parvathaneni. In fact, the jury found Dr. Parvathaneni did not commit medical malpractice, a verdict supported by the evidence as the plaintiff concedes. The focus of the plaintiff’s institutional negligence claim against Loyola is entirely on Loyola’s training of Dr. Parvathaneni, as the harvesting surgeon of the heart transplant team. Even if “notice” under Reynolds were at the crux of the plaintiff’s claim, it is disingenuous for Loyola to suggest that it did not have “notice” that Dr. Parvathaneni was not trained to evaluate the donor heart after harvesting when Loyola itself trained Dr. Parvathaneni in his role as the harvesting surgeon of the transplant team. It is no more plausible that Loyola had no such notice than that Loyola was unaware heart transplants were taking place in its hospital. As we have made clear, the instant case is like neither Reynolds nor Frigo. The dissent intimates that Aguilera v. Mount Sinai Hospital Medical Center, 293 Ill. App. 3d 967, 691 N.E.2d 1 (1997), provides guidance on proximate cause in this case.2 We find no factual similarities between Aguilera and the case before us. There is a life and death difference between a claim based on a delay in ordering a CT scan that would have revealed a brain hemorrhage that might or might not be operable and a claim that Loyola removed a functioning heart (albeit, one that gave Mr. Longnecker a 30% chance of surviving one year) and replaced it with a nonfunctioning heart resulting in Mr. Longnecker’s death four days later. It was for the jury to determine whether there was sufficient evidence of the breach of duty by Loyola and whether there was a causal link between that breach and Mr. Longnecker’s death. Based on the record evidence and the reasonable inferences that may be drawn therefore, we cannot say “no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand.” Pedrick, 37 Ill. 2d at 510. Loyola was not entitled to judgment n.o.v. on proximate cause. II. Legally Inconsistent Verdicts Dr. Parvathaneni contends the verdicts are not inconsistent because different standards of care are involved in medical negligence and institutional negligence. Collins, 219 Ill. App. 3d at 775 (1991) (verdicts not inconsistent because care provided at hospital involved health professionals “requiring differing degrees of care and subject to differing standards of care”). The plaintiff contends the verdicts are not inconsistent because “ ‘the same element [was not] found to exist and not to exist.’ ” Redmond v. Socha, 216 Ill. 2d 622, 649, 837 N.E.2d 883 (2005), quoting Black’s Law Dictionary 1592 (8th ed. 2004). Loyola contends “[t]he verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni broke any possible causal link between Loyola’s conduct and Mr. Longnecker’s injuries.” Loyola’s argument is in effect the reasoning of the circuit judge that the verdicts were irreconcilable because the verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni precluded a showing of proximate cause in the claim against Loyola, which we have already rejected. Loyola presents no additional argument that we need address on its claim of inconsistent verdicts. We also note that a holding of legally inconsistent verdicts, under supreme court precedent, mandates that both verdicts be vacated and a new trial ordered against Loyola and Dr. Parvathaneni. Redmond, 216 Ill. 2d at 651 (“once a trial court determines that juiy verdicts are legally inconsistent, whether to grant a new trial is not up to the trial court’s discretion. It is mandatory”). The jury found the plaintiff failed to prove her case against Dr. Parvathaneni. The plaintiff does not contest this verdict but agrees with Dr. Parvathaneni’s contention that “there was evidence from which the jury could conclude that Parvathaneni was not negligent.” Vacating the jury’s verdict in favor of Dr. Parvathaneni and remanding for a new trial against him would be unjust in this case. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated above, the order of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed and the matter is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded. CAHILL, PJ., concurs.  Loyola makes no claim that the standard of care, itself, was not established by the evidence in light of Dr. Foy’s testimony that the procuring surgeon is charged with evaluating the donor heart for transplantation.   We find no legal significance to the dissent’s observations that “there is no expert testimony of how long the decedent could have lived; how long it would have taken to obtain a new donor; or if the decedent was placed on a Jarvik-type artificial heart, how long the decedent could have lived with the artificial heart.” 383 Ill. App. 3d at 899. Much like Dr. Foy’s decision to remove Mr. Longnecker’s heart before discovering the donor’s hypertrophic heart, the dissent’s unanswered questions focus the analysis too late in the sequence of events. The plaintiff’s claim is that Mr. Longnecker’s native heart should never have been removed in the first instance when all Loyola had to replace it with was a hypertrophic heart or other limited measures that would not have returned Mr. Longnecker to the position he was in before he was admitted to Loyola for a heart transplant.

=== CASE 9738292 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:10.261721+00 ===

JUSTICE ROBERT E. GORDON, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion where they find that plaintiff proved an institutional negligence case against Loyola University Medical Center (Loyola). I believe the trial judge’s decision should be affirmed; however, I agree that the verdicts were not inconsistent. Illinois has long recognized that hospitals may be held liable for their own negligence. In Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital, 33 Ill. 2d 326, 333 (1965), our Illinois Supreme Court acknowledged an independent duty of hospitals to assume responsibility for the care of their patients. “Ordinarily, this duty is administrative or managerial in character.” Jones v. Chicago HMO Ltd. of Illinois, 191 Ill. 2d 278, 291 (2000), citing Advincula v. United Blood Services, 176 Ill. 2d 1, 28 (1996). To fulfill its duty, a hospital must act as a “reasonably careful hospital” would under similar circumstances. Advincula, 176 Ill. 2d at 29. Liability is predicated on the hospital’s own negligence, not the negligence of the physician. Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 284. This independent negligence of the hospital is known as institutional negligence or direct corporate negligence. In a medical negligence case, a plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that: (1) the defendant owed a duty of care; (2) the defendant breached that duty; and (3) the plaintiff’s resulting injury or death was proximately caused by the breach. Hooper v. County of Cook, 366 Ill. App. 3d 1, 6 (2006). I find no evidence in the record of this case of either a breach of duty or causation. Plaintiff’s expert, Dr. Avery, testified that Loyola breached its duty because “basically everybody needs to be on the same page in terms of what each team member’s role is in the team.” Dr. Avery’s testimony concerning the “same page” was based on the fact that Drs. Foy and Mullen described the role of a procuring surgeon under the Loyola system differently than Dr. Parvathaneni did. Reynolds v. Mennonite Hospital, 168 Ill. App. 3d 575 (1988), is instructive as to whether the evidence in this case could support a verdict against Loyola for its claimed failure to instruct Dr. Parvathaneni about his role on the heart transplant team. In Reynolds, plaintiffs alleged that the hospital was institutionally negligent because it failed to implement or follow standards of review to ensure the competency of its surgeons to diagnose thoracic outlet syndrome. Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 578-79. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s entry of summary judgment for the hospital because there was no evidence that would have placed the hospital on notice of any malpractice by the surgeons. Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 580. In Reynolds, the plaintiff’s expert opined that the hospital should have known, through proper review procedure, that its surgeons were improperly diagnosing thoracic outlet syndrome; but the trial court concluded that the plaintiff’s expert’s testimony was insufficient because there were no facts to substantiate that opinion. Reynolds, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 579-80. See also Rohe v. Shivde, 203 Ill. App. 3d 181, 202 (1990) (plaintiff presented no evidence that the hospital failed to review the performance of the attending pediatrician as to her compliance with hospital policy in examining newborn infants). In the case at bar, there was no evidence that Loyola knew or should have known if Dr. Parvathaneni had ever deviated from Loyola’s institutional policies or did not understand his role on the heart transplant team. Plaintiff’s expert needed to identify what Loyola failed to do that a “reasonably careful” hospital would have done under similar circumstances. Advincula, 176 Ill. 2d at 29. However, even if plaintiff was able to show the second element, namely, a breach of the standard of care, there was no evidence of the third element, namely, a causal relationship between an alleged breach of duty and the death at issue. “ ‘[I]n order to sustain the burden of proof, a plaintiffs expert must demonstrate within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the defendant’s breach in the standard of care is more probably than not the cause of the injury’ ” Bergman v. Kelsey, 375 Ill. App. 3d 612, 625 (2007), quoting Knauerhaze v. Nelson, 361 Ill. App. 3d 538, 549 (2005). Even if Dr. Parvathaneni had been properly advised of his role to evaluate the donor’s heart for transplant purposes and advised Dr. Foy of his findings, there is no evidence that Dr. Foy would not have used the donor’s heart. Plaintiffs expert, Dr. Avery, testified that if Dr. Parvathaneni had evaluated, the donor heart after it was removed and before he made the “final phone call” to Dr. Foy, he would have found what Dr. Foy later found: “a thick heart of significant hypertrophy and considerable plaque in the coronaries.” Even though the donor heart had more hypertrophy than Dr. Foy expected based on the echo-cardiogram, Dr. Foy knew this and still decided that the heart was acceptable to transplant to the decedent. Dr. Foy rejected the option of using an artificial heart instead.3 Dr. Foy made his decision based on the decedent’s grave medical condition resulting from his failing heart. The evidence in the record further indicates that after the heart was removed, Dr. Parvathaneni found even more hypertrophy than he initially observed. The record contains no medical testimony concerning the effect of those observations or their medical significance for causation. After Dr. Parvathaneni removed the donor heart and made the telephone call to the hospital, Dr. Foy removed the decedent’s heart and placed the decedent on the heart machine. If the donor’s heart had not been used, there is no expert testimony of how long the decedent could have lived; how long it would have taken to obtain a new donor; or if the decedent was placed on a Jarvik-type artificial heart, how long the decedent could have lived with the artificial heart. This was a complex medical malpractice case that required a medical basis for the expert’s opinion that Loyola’s breach of duty was a cause of the decedent’s death, and it is not found in this record. Dr. Avery’s testimony concerning causation was limited to the following: “Q. Was Mr. Longnecker’s death caused as a result of the deviations from the standard of care that we talked about today? A. I believe they are.” There was no basis for that opinion, and as a result, the element of causation was lacking. “An expert’s opinion is only as valid as the basis and reasons for the opinion.” Wilson v. Bell Fuels, Inc., 214 Ill. App. 3d 868, 875 (1991), citing McCormick v. Maplehurst Winter Sports, Ltd., 166 Ill. App. 3d 93, 100 (1988). “A party must lay a foundation sufficient to establish the reliability of the bases for the expert’s opinion.” Petraski v. Thedos, 382 Ill. App. 3d 22, 28 (2008), citing Turner v. Williams, 326 Ill. App. 3d 541, 552-53 (2001). In Aguilera v. Mount Sinai Hospital Medical Center, 293 Ill. App. 3d 967, 968 (1997), the plaintiffs decedent was taken to the emergency room complaining of numbness on the right side of his body. About six or seven hours later, a CT scan was taken, revealing a brain hemorrhage. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 969. The patient died a few days later. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 969. Plaintiff presented two experts who testified that the emergency room physician’s delay in taking the CT scan caused the decedent’s death. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 969. It was the plaintiffs theory that a diagnosis of the condition would have triggered surgical intervention to prevent the decedent’s death. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 969-70. However, on cross-examination, plaintiffs experts admitted that they would defer to a neurosurgeon as to whether surgery should have even been performed; yet the only neurosurgeons testifying in the case stated that surgery would not have been appropriate. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 969-70. This court held that the opinions offered by the plaintiffs experts lacked a sufficient factual basis and were therefore based on conjecture. Aguilera, 293 Ill. App. 3d at 975. There just is not enough evidence in the record concerning breach of duty and causation for this court to reverse the decision of the trial court. I would affirm.  If Dr. Foy found that the donor’s heart was not suitable, he testified he could have placed the decedent on a Jarvik-type artificial heart.

=== CASE 2215103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:57.233092+00 ===

3 U.S. 320 (____)
3 Dall. 320
GRAYSON
versus
VIRGINIA.
Supreme Court of United States.
On the 12th of August, the CHIEF JUSTICE delivered the following opinion.
BY THE COURT:  After a particular examination of the powers vested in this Court, in causes of Equity, as well as in causes of Admiralty and Maritime jurisdiction, we collect a general rule for the government of our proceedings; with a discretionary authority, however, to deviate from that rule, where its application would be injurious or impracticable. The general rule prescribes to us an adoption of that practice, which is founded on the custom and usage of Courts of Admiralty and Equity, constituted on similar principles; but still, it is thought, that we are also authorised to make such deviations as are necessary to adapt the process and rules of the Court to the peculiar circumstances of this country, subject to the interposition, alteration, and controul, of the Legislature[*].
We have, therefore, agreed to make the following general Orders; and the Counsel, in the present case, will take his measures accordingly.
1. ORDERED, That when process at Common Law, or in Equity, shall issue against a State, the same shall be served upon the Governor, or Chief Executive Magistrate, and the Attorney-General, of such State.
*321 2. ORDERED, That process of subpna issuing out of this Court, in any suit in Equity, shall be served on the Defendant sixty days before the return day of the said process: and, further, that if the Defendant, on such service of the subpna, shall not appear at the return day contained therein, the complainant shall be at liberty to proceed ex parte.
Lewis then observed, that the subpna in this case, had been issued on the same principles; but as the orders could only operate in futuro, he thought it best to withdraw his motion for a distringas, and to pray that an alias subpna might be awarded; which was, accordingly, done.
NOTES
[*]  See the Judicial Act, s. 14. The Act to regulate Processes in the Federal Courts, s. 2.

=== CASE 2215120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:57.512804+00 ===

223 Cal.App.2d 187 (1963)
ARCTURUS MANUFACTURING CORPORATION, Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY, Respondent; ELWOOD C. RORK et al., Real Parties in Interest.
Civ. No. 27676.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Dec. 10, 1963.
Guy Richards Crump and Hill, Farrer & Burrill for Petitioner.
No appearance for Respondent.
Eugene M. Elson for Real Parties in Interest. *189
HERNDON, J.
Petitioner herein seeks a writ of prohibition to restrain respondent court from enforcing its order which (a) releases from petitioner's attachment certain personal property of Elwood and Jacquelyn Rork, the real parties in interest herein, and (b) provides that petitioner "may not subsequent to July 22, 1963, pursue the remedy of attachment against the personal property of said defendants Elwood C. Rork and Jacquelyn Rork heretofore attached on July 22, 1960, and on July 22, 1963, as above mentioned."
[1a] On July 22, 1960, petitioner filed an action seeking recovery of an alleged indebtedness of $120,000. With the filing of the complaint, petitioner also sought and obtained the issuance of a writ of attachment in like amount.  [fn. 1] The sheriff, in execution of said writ, levied upon an indebtedness of $12, 754.92 owed to the Rorks by the Precision Forge Company, and $5,051.03 owed to them by the Security-First National Bank of Los Angeles.  [fn. 2]
On July 22, 1963, the action not yet having been brought to trial, petitioner obtained the issuance of an alias writ of attachment pursuant to section 559 1/2 of the Code of Civil Procedure and caused a levy thereunder to be made upon the identical property above described.
The Rorks thereafter sought an order releasing this property on the ground that the three-year limitation period prescribed by section 542b of said code could not be extended in this fashion. They also sought an order prohibiting petitioner from pursuing further the remedy of attachment against the property thus released. By an order signed on August 20, 1963, the court ordered the garnishees to release the properties held by them by virtue of the original writ of attachment of July 22, 1960, and the alias writ of attachment of July 22, 1963. This order also provided that the petitioner "may not subsequent to July 22, 1963, pursue the remedy of attachment against the personal property of said [Rorks] heretofore attached on July 22, 1960, and on July 22, 1963, as above mentioned." We hold that this ruling was correct.
[2] "Attachment liens are solely creatures of statute. They can be created and can continue to exist only in the *190 cases and to the extent to which the legislature by statutory enactment has authorized their creation and continued existence." (Brun v. Evans, 197 Cal. 439, 443 [241 P. 86].) [3] "It has been said that attachment is a harsh remedy at best in that an alleged debtor loses control of his property before the claim against him has been adjudicated. This being so, the provisions relating thereto should be strictly construed." (Barceloux v. Dow, 174 Cal.App.2d 170, 174 [344 P.2d 41]; see also 5 Cal.Jur.2d, Attachment and Garnishment,  4, p. 598, and cases cited therein.)
Petitioners, of course, do not contend that there is any statutory provision, other than section 559 1/2, as interpreted by them, which would authorize the levy of a second or subsequent writ of attachment upon the same property theretofore subjected to a valid attachment for the periods prescribed in sections 542a and 542b. Section 537 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that: "The plaintiff, at the time of issuing the summons, or at any time afterward, may have the property of the defendant attached, as security for the satisfaction of any judgment that may be recovered, ..."
However, petitioners quite properly concede that this section may not reasonably be interpreted to mean that, by the use of successive affidavits and undertakings, a plaintiff, at any time after the issuance of the summons, may have the property of a defendant attached repeatedly and thereby create successive three-year liens. Manifestly, such an interpretation would render completely nugatory the limiting provisions of sections 542a and 542b.
[4] The right or remedy of attachment, of course, is unitary in nature, although the mechanical processes by which it is effectuated, i.e., writs of attachment, may be several. (Code Civ. Proc.  540.) [5] As stated in Martinovich v. Marsicano, 150 Cal. 597, 601 [89 P. 333, 119 Am.St.Rep. 254]: "All writs so demanded and issued constitute parts of one proceeding to have the property of the defendant in the state levied on as security for any judgment that may be obtained, and have for their basis the affidavit and undertaking given to secure the remedy of attachment."  [fn. 3] (Italics added.) *191
[6] However, as noted in Brun v. Evans, supra, the lien created by exercise of the remedy of attachment continues to exist only to the extent authorized by statutory enactment. Section 542a provides that, in the case of real property, the lien shall be for a period of three years "after the date of levy" unless otherwise extended as provided for therein. Section 542b provides that in the case of personal property the lien shall terminate "at the expiration of three years after the issuance of the writ of attachment under which said levy was made; ..." and no provision has been made for extension thereof. (Italics added.)
[7] Therefore, if section 537 be construed together with sections 540 and 542b only, it seems clear that although a plaintiff may, through the mechanics of successive writs, attach so much of a defendant's property, as and when it is discovered, as may be required to secure his anticipated judgment, no provision is made for second or subsequent rights of attachment, or for the issuance of second or subsequent "original" writs that may be levied upon property which already is subject to attachment in the action, or which previously has been subjected to attachment in the action for the full statutory period.
In O'Connell v. Rogers, 72 Cal.App. 539, 541 [237 P. 775], an attachment had been discharged in accordance with the provisions of sections 554 and 555, Code of Civil Procedure. More than three years later, the defendant failed to provide a new undertaking with sufficient sureties as directed by the court. The trial court, purporting to act under section 1057, ordered the original attachment "restored with all force and effect given to it by law." With regard to this order, the appellate court stated: "As the order was made more than three years after the attachment was issued, and the lien thereof had ceased [citation], there was no force or effect 'given to it by law' and the order was therefore ineffectual for any purpose." (P. 541.) (Italics added.)
[8] An attachment lien once terminated is totally ineffective (Shaffer v. Noziglia, 64 Cal.App. 93, 96 [220 P. 431]), and no court may revive it once it has ceased to exist. (Brun v. Evans, supra, 197 Cal. 439, 443.) [9] It is only a potential right or contingent lien that must be perfected by means *192 of a judgment within the statutory period. As stated in United States v. Security Trust & Sav., 340 U.S. 47, 50 [71 S.Ct. 111, 95 L.Ed. 53, 56]: "The Supreme Court of California has so described its attachment lien in the case of Puissegur v. Yarbrough, 29 Cal.2d 409, 412 [175 P.2d 830], by stating that, 'The attaching creditor obtains only a potential right or a contingent lien. ...' Examination of the California statute shows that the above is an apt description. The attachment lien gives the attachment creditor no right to proceed against the property unless he gets a judgment within three years or within such extension as the statute provides." (Italics added.)
[10] Petitioner herein acknowledges the correctness and applicability of these basic rules, but seeks to avoid their effect by the assertion that section 559 1/2, which authorizes the issuance of alias writs of attachment, permits a plaintiff to do ex parte what the court itself lacks the power to do, i.e., either to extend the three-year period during which the original lien is effective, or to create a new lien effective for an additional three years. Petitioner's arguments in this regard are not persuasive. A similar contention was made by the appellant in Kelly v. Ferbrache, 119 Cal.App. 529 [6 P.2d 987] (hearing denied) in regard to an alias summons. In disposing thereof the court stated at pages 532-533:
"Appellant makes the further point that the provisions of section 581a of the Code of Civil Procedure relate and apply only to the service of original summons and not to an alias summons. Her claim in this respect is that the issuance of an alias summons at a date some seven months later in point of time than the issuance of original summons had the effect of extending the three-year period prescribed by section 581a of the Code of Civil Procedure for a like period of time. We are constrained to hold this claim to be without merit. The duplication of previously issued process, whose issuance is provided for by section 408 of our Code of Civil Procedure, is to be had only in the event the original summons has been 'returned without being served on any or all of the defendants, or if it has been lost.' This form of mesne process is not to be held identical with the alias process or writ known to the common law. At common law, writs were returnable at the next or a specified term of court, and an alias writ was one sued out within the specified return period where the original *193 had not produced the required effect or was itself defective. It was so called from the words 'as we have formerly commanded you', being inserted after the usual commencement 'we command you'. [Citation.] The so-called alias summons for which provision is made in said section 408 of the Code of Civil Procedure, contains no such recital; it merely duplicates its original and is a mere substitute therefor." (Italics added.)
Manifestly, the same statement may be made regarding the alias process authorized in attachment proceedings. Section 559 1/2, like section 408, authorizes the issuance of alias process in only two instances, i.e., (1) when the original process has been returned without having been fully effective, or (2) when the original process has been lost. In each instance, the issuance of the new process is merely the mechanical means by which a new paper is issued to permit the performance of the unfulfilled function of the original.
Petitioner seeks to strengthen its contention by noting that section 559 1/2 was amended in 1941 to provide specifically that an alias writ might issue upon the original affidavit and undertaking "at any time before judgment." However, as pointed out in 15 Southern California Law Review, page 13, this amendment was designed merely to eliminate the hardship and unnecessary expense which had resulted in those counties where the county counsel had taken the position that the sixty-day time limit, provided in section 540 in regard to the issuance of several "original" writs upon the same affidavit and undertaking, also applied to the issuance of alias writs under section 559 1/2.
Finally, it seems manifest that, when the Legislature provided in detail in section 542a the method by which the life of an attachment on real property might be extended by the court, but failed to make any similar provision in section 542b relating to personal property (where the hardship suffered by the alleged debtor by reason of the attachment is vastly greater), it did not intend to authorize a plaintiff to extend or to recreate, a lien beyond the three-year period following the issuance of the original writ, or writs, under which the initial levy of attachment had been made.
The correctness of this construction is made even more apparent when it is considered that a contrary holding also would render largely ineffective the provisions of section *194 542a that extensions of attachment liens on real property may be had only under the aegis of the court in which the actions pending and upon motion made therefore "not less than five nor more than 60 days before the expiration of said period of three years, ..." Except in those instances where a plaintiff desires to benefit from the doctrine of "relation back", he could, with equal effectiveness, "extend" his lien an additional three years by obtaining, ex parte, from the clerk either an alias writ or a new writ of attachment based upon a new affidavit and undertaking, causing a levy thereon to be made upon the same real property shortly before or after the expiration of the original attachment.
We do not conceive it to have been the intent of the Legislature, in enacting sections 542a and 542b, merely to regulate the priority rights of third-party claimants to a defendant's property. Rather, it would seem more reasonable to conclude that the legislative purpose was to establish the maximum period for which it was deemed just and reasonable to subject a defendant to loss of the use of his property prior to a judicial determination of the merits of the plaintiff's claims.
The Legislature has set this period at three years, and a plaintiff must take such steps as are necessary to insure that a judicial determination of his claim is achieved within this period or suffer the loss of this right. It matters little whether plaintiff's attempted use of the alias writ be considered as effecting a three-year extension of his lien, or as creating a new and different three-year lien, because three years added to three years produces a total of six years as surely as three years extended by three years. In either instance, a defendant would be deprived of the use of his property for twice the period authorized by the Legislature.
[1b] It is not clear from the record why the court felt it necessary to enjoin petitioner from pursuing the remedy of attachment against the garnisheed property in the future, but, as previously stated, petitioner neither objects thereto nor argues that by some method other than the use of the alias writ as here attempted he can continue to deprive the Rorks of their property beyond the three-year maximum period provided by statute. Perhaps the court was concerned that petitioner, although apparently not threatening so to do, might obtain the automatic issuance by the clerk of a "new and different" writ of attachment simply by making an ex parte application therefor based upon a new affidavit and *195 undertaking. As we have heretofore pointed out, the practical ability to obtain repeated issuances of the mechanical processes of attachment cannot revive the right or remedy of attachment when it has expired by reason of its already having been exercised for the maximum statutory period.
Petitioner argues that, if it cannot in some fashion continue the effectiveness of its garnishment until the case is brought to trial, it will suffer irreparable hardship. However, as heretofore indicated, attachment is a harsh remedy in that it subjects the alleged debtor to a deprivation of his property prior to an adjudication on the merits. (Barceloux v. Dow, supra, 174 Cal.App.2d 170, 174. Cf. Byard v. National Automobile & Cas. Ins. Co., 218 Cal.App.2d 622, 626-627 [32 Cal.Rptr. 613].) [11] "The three-year period for attachments and garnishments was considered by the legislature as a reasonable time within which a litigant could subject attached property to any judgment which might be obtained. ..." (Jones v. Toland, 117 Cal.App. 481, 483 [4 P.2d 178] and it may not be extended either by the litigant or the court.
The petition for the peremptory writ is denied and the alternative writ heretofore issued is discharged.
Fox, P. J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. For a detailed statement of the facts herein see Arcturus Mfg. Corp. v. Rork, 198 Cal.App.2d 208 [17 Cal.Rptr. 758], wherein the Rorks appealed from the order denying their motion to dissolve the attachment.
[fn. 2]  2. Certain real property and safe deposit boxes were attached also, but these items are not involved herein.
[fn. 3]  3. In 1907, when the Martinovich decision was written, section 540 provided only that "Several writs may be issued at the same time to the sheriffs of different counties." The court, however, ruled that these several "original" writs might be issued upon the same affidavit so long as the request therefor was made within a reasonable time. Since the Martinovich decision the Legislature has amended section 540 to provide for issuance of several such "original" writs to various officers in "any county or counties" upon the same affidavit and undertaking "within 60 days after the filing of the affidavit and undertaking."

=== CASE 2215139 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:57.795544+00 ===

207 Cal.App.2d 581 (1962)
DONALD I. MILLER, JR., a Minor, etc., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
WESTERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 19659.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Sept. 11, 1962.
Leo Fried for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
John W. Martin, G. Blandin Colburn, Jr., Richard H. Bailin and Dunne, Dunne & Phelps for Defendant and Respondent.
MOLINARI, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment on a jury verdict for defendant and respondent, the Western Pacific Railroad Company, in an action arising out of a railroad crossing collision between respondent's freight train and an automobile operated by a 17-year-old driver and containing five teen-aged passengers. The action is for personal injuries to two of said passengers, appellants Donald I. Miller, Jr. (hereinafter referred to as Donald), and Jeannie Frances Miller Marchello (hereinafter referred to as Jeannie), and for the death of a third passenger, Linda Sue Whitsell, whose mother is the appellant Sadie Troxel. The driver of the automobile and the remaining two passengers are not parties to this action nor did they testify at the trial. The pertinent facts are as follows.
The accident occurred on October 28, 1957, shortly after 9 p.m., at the crossing of Lathrop Road and the respondent's Stockton to Oakland railroad line near Lathrop, San Joaquin County, California. The automobile was travelling from east *587 to west and the train was proceeding from north to south. The automobile was being driven by Raymond Tinnin. Jeannie, aged 16 years, was sitting in the front seat of said car between Tinnin and the decedent, Linda Sue Whitsell, aged 14 1/2 years. Donald, aged 15 years, was sitting in the back seat between the other two passengers. The train was operated by John G. Trow, acting as engineer, and Vernon C. Brain, in the capacity of fireman. The former was on the right side of the diesel locomotive consisting of three units which were pulling 38 cars. The latter, whose duty it was to act as observer, sat on the left side of the locomotive. This was the side from which the automobile was approaching the crossing. The train was operating on a regular run from Stockton to Oakland. There was no "wigwag" signal, nor any watchman, gate or lights at the crossing. There was, however, a railroad crossbar sign and painted white lines across the road at the crossing. On the right hand side of the road, 525 feet from the crossing and facing the approaching automobile, there was located an "advance reflector" railroad crossing sign. The occupants of the automobile had been to a Civil Air Patrol meeting, 9 miles from Lathrop, and were returning to their homes. Jeannie and Donald had been attending these meetings for at least a year, driving with Tinnin, and Linda Sue had been driving to these meetings with Tinnin for at least half a year.
Jeannie testified that she had driven over this crossing with Tinnin on numerous occasions. Jeannie testified on direct examination that the windows of the automobile were rolled up, but on cross-examination she stated she didn't remember whether the windows were up. She also testified: that she couldn't remember whether the car radio was playing or whether there was any conversation between the passengers; that it was a chilly night and "pitch black"; that she was looking straight ahead; that she did not see any moving lights, but saw the Sharpe General Depot lights some distance to the north; that she remembered the driver looking to the right; that she did not hear any whistle or bell; that she did not know the speed at which the automobile was being driven but that it was not going fast; that there was no slowing down or swerving of the automobile, and no screeching of brakes; that she saw the locomotive "[a]t the very split second of the impact" and that she didn't recall anything about the accident "except something hitting us."
Donald testified: that he didn't remember whether the windows were up, but that they probably were because it was *588 cold; that he didn't remember whether the radio was playing, but that he believed it had been turned off before the accident because of static; that he was talking to one of the passengers in the back seat; that he didn't hear any whistle or bell; that he didn't see the train or the crossing; that he didn't remember the accident, but recalled "coming to" at the hospital.
No evidence was presented as to the conduct or actions of the decedent, Linda Sue Whitsell, except that she was sitting in the front seat to the right of Jeannie.
Officer William E. Roche of the California Highway Patrol testified: that there were no skid marks at the crossing, but that there was a tire abrasion mark 2 feet east of the railroad track and 2 feet north of the center line of the highway; that it was a clear night; that the area of the crossing is an open and unobstructed area; that the automobile was travelling between 41 and 50 miles per hour; that the train was travelling approximately 25 miles per hour; that the " 'whistle was blown for the crossing, and it was also blowing specially for the vehicle that was coming down the road.' "
Brain testified: that at a distance of 1,400 feet from the crossing his visibility of the crossing was good; that he could then see 2,000 feet down the road; that at 1,300 feet from the crossing he could see the headlights of a car "a great distance" from the crossing; that the train had not travelled over 50 miles per hour; that he was slowing down for a Southern Pacific interlock beyond the crossing where the speed was restricted to 20 miles per hour; that he didn't pay any attention to the car from the time he first saw its headlights until "we were about four to five boxcar lengths from the crossing"; that a boxcar is about 50 feet long; that at this time the automobile was from 400 to 500 feet from the crossing; that he could only see the automobile's headlights; that there was nothing to indicate that it would not come to a stop; that its speed was not excessive or unusual; that the whistle was then blowing; that he assumed the driver of the car could hear and see; that he first told the engineer that there was an automobile "when we were four to five boxcar lengths from the crossing," when he told him to "hold the whistle"; that the automobile was then 200 to 300 feet from the crossing; that at this point an emergency application of the brakes would not have reduced the speed of the train to a measurable degree prior to its reaching the crossing; that he first determined that there was going to be an accident when he was about one boxcar length from the crossing, at which time the *589 automobile was about the same distance from the crossing; that he didn't tell the engineer to "plug the train" (i.e., emergency application of the brakes) until the actual moment of impact; that the engineer "plugged it" just about the time the automobile hit the engine; that the automobile collided with the left side of the engine about 4 to 5 feet from its front end with a "loud crash"; that the train was travelling at a speed of 25 miles per hour at the moment of the collision; that the front of the engine came to a stop about 800 feet beyond the crossing; and that at no time could he see the driver of the automobile.
Trow testified: that he was handling the whistle, brake lever and other controls; that at a point one mile from the Southern Pacific interlock crossing the train was going about 50 miles per hour; that at the "whistle board," 1,397 feet north of the crossing, he turned on the engine bell which continues to ring until it is turned off and that he blew the whistle; that he could not see the area on the left side of the train; that he never saw the automobile at any time; that Brain first told him that an automobile "was coming" when he was "about three car lengths from the crossing"; that he then had his hand on the whistle and kept the whistle blowing; that he was told to "plug" the train at the moment of impact when he went into full emergency; and that at the time of the accident the train was going about 25 miles per hour.
There was also testimony to the effect that the engine was illumined by a stationary headlight 16 inches in diameter situated in the front of the engine about 11 feet from the rail; that the headlight was on the "bright" position; and that there were other lights on the diesel units consisting of number lights on each side of the front end of the engine; a running light under each side of the cab; and the engine room lights "which shine out from the portholes." There was also testimony that the engine was equipped with an instrument which recorded the speed of the train on a tape. This tape was read at the trial by the respondent's assistant roadmaster. It indicated that the train decelerated from 50 miles, at a point four-tenths of a mile from the crossing to 25 miles per hour at the point of the collision.
The appellants assert three assignments of error on the part of the trial court: (1) That the trial court instructed the jury on contributory negligence when the record contained no evidence of any contributory negligence on the part of the appellant passengers; (2) that the trial court improperly refused *590 to give an instruction on the doctrine of last clear chance; and (3) that the trial court, during the trial, made improper remarks which constituted prejudicial misconduct.
The trial court gave several instructions which properly defined negligence and contributory negligence, and in addition gave the following particular instructions on contributory negligence, to wit:
"The passengers in the automobile were under a continuing duty to exercise reasonable care for their own safety at all times. There is nothing in any of the circumstances of this case which suspended that duty or relieved them from performing it or excused a violation of it, if any. The defendant owed to none of them any higher duty to look out for their safety than such persons owed to look out for their own safety, for the degree of care was the same, and each was under a duty to exercise reasonable care. If the passengers failed to perform this duty and exercise such care, they were guilty of negligence; and if that negligence proximately contributed to their injury or death, no recovery can be had on account of that injury or death."
"A railroad locomotive which is in plain view operating along a railroad track and toward a highway crossing at grade is itself a warning of danger without any other sign or signal or warning, and any person in an automobile approaching the crossing, whether driver or passenger, is under a duty to exercise reasonable care to observe and heed that warning, whether other warnings or signals are given or not."
Contributory Negligence
The appellants contend that "[t]here is not a shred of evidence that any of the plaintiffs in this case was guilty of even the slightest negligence" which contributed to or proximately caused the accident, and that accordingly the giving of contributory negligence instructions was prejudicial. [1] It is, of course, elementary that if there is no evidence at all to warrant the instruction it is error to give it. (Maynard v. Walker, 175 Cal.App.2d 145, 148 [345 P.2d 478]; Sheppard v. City of Los Angeles, 172 Cal.App.2d 338, 342 [342 P.2d 282].) On the other hand, if, upon a consideration of the testimony in a light most favorable to the respondent, the record reveals " 'slight or, at least, some evidence upon the issue' " the giving of the instruction is not erroneous. (Washington v. City & County of San Francisco, 123 Cal.App.2d 235, 238 [266 P.2d 828]; MacLean v. City & County of San Francisco, 151 Cal.App.2d 133, 138 [311 P.2d 158]; Maynard *591 v. Walker, supra, 175 Cal.App.2d 145.) We now must turn to the record to ascertain whether there is some evidence on the issue of contributory negligence to warrant the instruction. In doing so we must, in the first instance, ascertain the rights and duties of passengers in a vehicle approaching a railroad crossing.
[2] In Pobor v. Western Pac. R. R. Co., 55 Cal.2d 314 [11 Cal.Rptr. 106, 359 P.2d 474] the law is stated as follows: "Even when negligence of a driver may not be imputed to him, the passenger is bound to exercise ordinary care for his own safety. He may not shut his eyes to an obvious danger; he may not blindly rely on the driver in approaching a place of danger. He is normally bound to protest against actual negligence or recklessness of the driver, the extent of his duty in this regard depending upon the particular circumstances of each case and ordinarily being a question of fact for the jury. (Parker v. Southern Pac. Co., 204 Cal. 609, 615 [269 P. 622]; Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 166 Cal.App.2d 160, 170 [332 P.2d 746]; Thomas v. Irvin, 96 Cal.App.2d 816, 819 [216 P.2d 476]; Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 89 Cal.App.2d 400, 409 [201 P.2d 48].) [3] If the rider is aware that the driver is not looking for trains or is driving the vehicle in a negligent manner or is violating the law, or that an engine, car, or train is approaching on the tracks and is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard to those in the vehicle, he has the duty of doing whatever a person of ordinary prudence in the same situation would do to inform or warn the driver in an effort to prevent an accident. (Cf. Cate v. Fresno Traction Co., 213 Cal. 190, 201 [2 P.2d 364].) It is only when the passenger is unaware that the driver is carelessly rushing into danger that there is not at least a question of fact as to his duty to protest. (Thompson v. Los Angeles etc. Ry. Co., 165 Cal. 748, 753 [134 P. 709]; Gadbury v. Ray, 171 Cal.App.2d 150, 155 [340 P.2d 66].)" (P. 324.) (And see Coe v. Southern Pac. Co., 203 Cal.App.2d 509 [21 Cal.Rptr. 731].)
The questions presented here are as follows: Did the passengers shut their eyes to an obvious danger? Did they blindly rely on the driver in approaching a place of danger? Were the passengers aware that Tinnin was driving the vehicle in a negligent or reckless manner? (The appellants concede that Tinnin was negligent.) Unless we are compelled as a matter of law to answer all of these questions in the negative, the submission of the issue of contributory negligence to the jury *592 was proper. [4] Whenever there is room for an honest difference of opinion between men of average intelligence, the question of negligence or contributory negligence becomes a question of fact for the jury. (Hudson v. Rainville, 46 Cal.2d 474, 478 [297 P.2d 434]; Salomon v. Meyer, 1 Cal.2d 11, 15 [32 P.2d 631].) [5] In 35 California Jurisprudence Second the rule is stated as follows: "Theoretically, contributory negligence is a question of mixed fact and law, but it is ordinarily considered a question of fact. It becomes a question of law only where the court is justified in determining that but one inference can reasonably be drawn from the evidence or from the uncontradicted facts." ( 244, pp. 783-784; footnotes omitted.) [6] And in Phillips v. G. L. Truman Excavation Co., 55 Cal.2d 801 [13 Cal.Rptr. 401, 362 P.2d 33] the rule is stated thusly: "Where the evidence on the issue of contributory negligence is conflicting, and would support a finding either way, the question is one of fact and not of law, and must be decided by the trier of the facts [citations]." (P. 806.)
[7] A guest or passenger in an automobile is bound to use reasonable care for his own safety, and whether he has exercised such care is ordinarily a question for the determination of the jury dependent upon the circumstances of the particular case. (Miller v. Peters, 37 Cal.2d 89, 94 [230 P.2d 803]; Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 89 Cal.App.2d 400, 408 [201 P.2d 48]; Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 166 Cal.App.2d 160, 170 [332 P.2d 746].) [8] Accordingly, he may, under the particular circumstances of the case, be bound to remonstrate or protest against the actual negligence or recklessness of the driver. (Miller v. Peters, supra; Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra; Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra; Wagner v. Atchison etc. Ry. Co., 210 Cal. 526, 528 [292 P. 645]; Howard v. Alta Chevrolet Co., 111 Cal.App.2d 38, 44 [243 P.2d 804]; Marchetti v. Southern Pac. Co., 204 Cal. 679, 683 [269 P. 529]; Queirolo v. Pacific Gas & Electric Co., 114 Cal.App. 610, 615 [300 P. 487].)
[9] In Parker v. Southern Pac. Co., 204 Cal. 609 [269 P. 622], cited with approval by the Pobor case, the court said: "It is the settled law of this state that an approach to a railroad crossing is in itself a warning of danger of which the traveler is bound to take notice. [Citations.]" (P. 614.) (And see Thomas v. Irvin, 96 Cal.App.2d 816 [216 P.2d 476]; Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 166 Cal.App.2d 160; Gadbury v. Ray, 171 Cal.App.2d 150, 157 [340 P.2d 66].) *593
[10] In Young v. Southern Pac. Co., 189 Cal. 746 [210 P. 259] the court said: "The law presumes that a person possessing normal faculties of sight and hearing must have seen and heard that which was within the range of his sight and hearing." (P. 754.) While the "Looking and Not Seeing" instruction has been criticized in a number of cases as being argumentative and truismatic (see BAJI Instruction No. 140 and cases cited), the presumption declared by the Young case has not been repudiated by subsequent cases. (See Cate v. Fresno Traction Co., 213 Cal. 190 [2 P.2d 364]; Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 89 Cal.App.2d 400; Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co, supra, 166 Cal.App.2d 160.) [11] In Martindale and Miller we have a reiteration of the proposition that it was a question for the jury to determine whether the passengers should have seen or heard the train in time to have warned the driver.
[12] In Miller v. Peters, supra, 37 Cal.2d 89, the court determined that factors in the evidence relating to the speed of the automobile and the manner in which it was being driven immediately prior to the accident would justify submitting to the jury the matter of the passenger's personal contributory negligence although the passenger did not see the bus with which the automobile collided and although the passenger was not aware of the danger of a collision and had no time in which to make an effective protest.
In Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 89 Cal.App.2d 400, a railroad crossing case wherein the driver and a guest were killed and the other guest was injured, there was no direct evidence as to their conduct prior to the accident, yet the court (hearing denied by the Supreme Court) held that there were sufficient inferences of contributory negligence justifying the court in submitting that issue under proper instructions. The court there made reference to the presumption that a person possessing normal faculties of sight and hearing must have seen and heard that which was within the range of his sight and hearing, and accordingly held that it was for the jury to determine whether the passengers should have seen or heard the train in time to have warned the driver. The facts there were somewhat similar to those in the instant case. There were no lights at the crossing, no flasher signal, wigwag, bell or gate. The warnings for the crossing consisted of two standard railroad crossarms, a round reflectorized disc about 18 inches in diameter, with the letters " 'RR' " placed 9 feet east of the paved portion of the *594 street and 467 feet south of the crossing, a white sign painted on the pavement with a cross and an " 'R' " 362 feet south of the crossing, and two white lines painted on the pavement 6 feet on either side of the railroad track, each of which extended across the lanes of traffic. (P. 405.) The accident occurred on a clear but dark night, there being no moon. The engineer blew the whistle for the crossing and had the engine bell on the automatic ringer at the time of crossing the street. There was a bright headlight on the front of the engine and several other lights on the engine, tender and the caboose. The headlight was visible for a considerable distance before the locomotive passed over the crossing. The train consisted of a locomotive, tender and 75 cars moving at a speed variously estimated from 25 to 40 miles an hour. The automobile struck the 28th car counting from the locomotive. The three men involved in the accident had travelled to and from work along this crossing for some time previously. The surviving passenger had no recollection of the accident and knew nothing until he awakened at the hospital. There were no eyewitnesses to the accident.
In Miller v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 166 Cal.App.2d 160, another railroad crossing collision case with facts also much similar to those here, the court concluded that the question of the contributory negligence of the passengers should have been left to the jury under proper instructions. There the accident occurred at 10 p. m. on a clear, cold, dry and dark night. The intersection was formed by a right-angle crossing of a single track and an asphalt roadway approximately 82 feet wide at the crossing. While a residence obscured the vision of an automobile approaching the train, to some extent, the headlight of the train could be seen 200 to 250 feet from the road when the automobile was 70 to 80 feet from the tracks. There was no automatic signalling device, but a cross-buck type of railroad sign, which was reflectorized, was located at the crossing. There was also a railroad warning sign painted upon the pavement and a vertical warning sign planted within a block of the tracks. Two illuminated street lights were suspended over the crossing. The train consisted of 21 freight cars and was approaching the intersection at about 25 to 28 miles per hour. At a whistle post 1,400 feet from the crossing a whistle was sounded and the automatic bell was set and it continued to ring until after the accident. The whistle was thereafter blown on several occasions before reaching the crossing. The *595 four occupants, including the driver, were all young people. All of them, with the possible exception of one of the passengers, admitted familiarity with the crossing.
The applicability of contributory negligence instructions in a railroad crossing case in the light of the Pobor case was recently considered by Coe v. Southern Pac. Co., supra, 203 Cal.App.2d 509. The court there stated: "There was evidence from which the jury could have found plaintiff guilty of contributory negligence. Plaintiff was seated in the front seat of the car talking to the driver. She was a licensed automobile driver, had normal sight and hearing, was familiar with the crossing and its signals, driving over it three or four times a week. She necessarily knew that there were two tracks. She was sitting on the right side of the car, the side from which the engine with its headlight shining was approaching. She had a clear view up the track for approximately 400 feet; the wigwag was operating. There was evidence that the engine's whistle was blowing. There was ample time for her to have warned Mrs. Winther to stop anytime after the latter pulled out from behind the stopped cars until she had crossed the first track. All this, opposed to the presumption that she used due care, did not compel a finding of contributory negligence, but would have supported such a conclusion. Therefore, the court could not instruct as a matter of law that there was no evidence of contributory negligence. Hence the court did not err in refusing the proposed instruction that there was no evidence of contributory negligence. ... Assuming a similar showing at the retrial, instructions on contributory negligence should be given." (Pp. 520-521.)
[13] An analysis of the facts of the instant case in the light of the foregoing principles discloses the following: All of the three young people involved in this appeal lived in Lathrop, and while only Jeannie testified that she had driven over this crossing on numerous occasions, the jury could infer, not only that Jeannie had knowledge of the crossing, but that the other two had such knowledge from the fact that they had driven to and from the Civil Air Patrol meetings with Tinnin weekly for a considerable period of time. The occupants of the car had a clear and unobstructed view in the direction from which the train came during the last 2,000 feet of their approach to the crossing at least as far as 1,300 feet up the track. The engine was lit as hereinbefore described, which lights were in motion, and its whistle was blowing and its bell was sounding. At the crossing were the cross-bar and *596 painted lines, and 525 feet from the crossing was the reflector sign. Jeannie was looking straight ahead and did see the stationary depot lights to the right. These circumstances, we conclude, were sufficient to warrant the submission of the issue of contributory negligence to the jury. [14] We also have, however, the additional circumstances of the closed windows in the automobile and the playing of the radio. There was sufficient evidence from which the jury could infer that the windows were closed and that the radio was playing. These circumstances, when coupled with the knowledge of the passengers that they were approaching a railroad crossing where it would be incumbent upon the driver to look and listen for trains, present a question of fact concerning the conduct of the driver and the necessity to remonstrate with him to lower the window, at least on the driver's side, and to shut the radio off in order to facilitate the hearing of train noises. It is a matter of common knowledge that when the windows of an automobile are closed, with the motor running and a radio playing, noises from the outside are shut out and cut off. In Smith v. Cantlay & Tanzola, Inc., 83 Cal.App.2d 689, 692 [189 P.2d 542], the court held that the circumstance of the passenger-plaintiff riding in a car with the windows up on a very foggy morning, at a speed of 20 to 25 miles an hour, without "making any comment with respect to the weather conditions and the possibility of danger at the top of the pass, since plaintiff was familiar with the condition of the highway at that point," warranted the submission of the said plaintiff's claimed negligence as a question of fact for the jury.
The appellants rely on Marchetti v. Southern Pac. Co., supra, 204 Cal. 679; Lininger v. San Francisco etc. R.R. Co., 18 Cal.App. 411 [123 P. 235]; Cate v. Fresno Traction Co., supra, 213 Cal. 190; and Klein v. Southern Pac. Co., 203 Cal.App.2d 72 [21 Cal.Rptr. 233], in support of their contention that the issue of contributory negligence should not have been submitted to the jury. Their argument turns upon the assertion that none of the occupants of the car were in fact aware of the approaching train and that therefore the passengers were immune from a finding of contributory negligence. None of the cases cited by appellants are in conflict with the principles hereinbefore alluded to.
Actually Marchetti and Lininger both support the proposition that ordinarily contributory negligence is a question of fact. The essence of these cases is that it was error for the *597 trial court to have granted a nonsuit which was tantamount to declaring that the automobile passenger was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. In Marchetti the trial court held that the failure of the passenger, who was looking straight ahead, to look to his left for an approaching train constituted negligence as a matter of law. In Lininger it was held that the following circumstances negated negligence as a matter of law, to wit: The passenger was sitting on the back seat of the automobile; she knew nothing about the operation of automobiles; she knew nothing about the city in which the accident occurred, never having been there before; she did not remember seeing or hearing the defendant's electric car; that she said nothing to the driver about the manner of his driving the automobile; and that she could not recall the immediate circumstances surrounding the accident.
The Klein case quotes the following language from the Marchetti case, to wit: " 'A passenger in a motor vehicle approaching a railway crossing is under no legal obligation to warn the driver, either of the presence of the tracks or of an approaching train, the view being unobstructed and the driver reasonably competent and vigilant. ... The passenger has a right to suppose that the driver, on approaching a railroad crossing with which he is familiar, will exercise due care for the protection and safety of his passengers, and that even when so near the crossing as to be in apparent danger of collision with an oncoming train he will or may take some action which will avert an accident.' " (P. 79.) This is only a portion, however, of the entire statement made by Marchetti which went on to say: "Nevertheless, it has been said that the passenger must look out for himself, and may not, in a place of danger, as on approaching a railway crossing, rely blindly on the driver. But a passenger in a machine operated by another cannot be said as a matter of law to have been negligent in not calling the chauffeur's attention to a danger of a collision." (P. 683.) The statement in Marchetti was taken in its entirety from 3 California Jurisprudence. ( 84, pp. 853- 854 (citing cases).) It is interesting to note that said statement as there couched was not repeated in the second edition of California Jurisprudence. Nor was Marchetti mentioned or cited in Pobor. In any event, Marchetti, which turned primarily on the question of contributory negligence as a matter of law, is not entirely in conflict with Pobor but must be reconciled with it. A close reading of Klein, however, *598 discloses a recognition of the principles hereinabove mentioned and upon which we rely. The court says: "While it is true that under some circumstances a guest passenger may have an affirmative duty to alert the driver (see Tice v. Pacific Elec. Ry. Co., 36 Cal.App.2d 66 [96 P.2d 1022, 97 P.2d 844]; Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 89 Cal.App.2d 400 [201 P2d 48]) the mere fact that either of the appellants might have known that she was approaching a railroad track is not sufficient to require her 'to ascertain if a train was approaching.' " (P. 79.)
The crux of Klein is that it strikes down an instruction which contained the last quoted language and which told the jury in effect that if the appellants failed to ascertain if a train was approaching they were negligent. Klein relies upon Robinson v. Cable, 55 Cal.2d 425 [11 Cal.Rptr. 377, 359 P.2d 929], where the court stated: "In the absence of some fact brought to his attention which would cause a person of ordinary prudence to act otherwise, a person riding in an automobile is not charged with the responsibility of observing the condition of the traffic on the highway, and his mere failure to do so, without more, will not support a finding of contributory negligence." (Pp. 427-428; emphasis added.) In applying this rule, Klein said: "In the instant case, the only possible fact would be knowledge that the automobile was approaching the railroad track. The mere fact that an automobile is approaching a railroad track does not place a burden on a guest passenger to ascertain whether or not a train is approaching." (P. 79; emphasis added.)
Cate v. Fresno Traction Co., supra, 213 Cal. 190, likewise affirms the statement that contributory negligence is a question for the jury. Appellants cite this case as authority for the principle that one unaware of impending danger cannot be guilty of contributory negligence. There is no such language in Cate. What the court therein said was that the jury was justified in finding that the passenger was not guilty of contributory negligence in failing to warn the driver of the presence of the streetcar where the passenger testified that she was not aware of its presence until just before the automobile collided with it. Moreover, we find this language in Cate: "Deceased, therefore, had no reason to be apprehensive of her safety while riding with him or to take any unusual precaution against their running into danger. The most that can be said as to her responsibility in this regard is that if she observed anything which might tend to endanger *599 her safety, it was her duty to notify the driver of this danger in order that he might avoid it. Ordinary prudence for her own safety would require this. If she saw the street-car approaching the crossing in front of them, it was undoubtedly her duty to notify Bruce if she had reason to believe that he did not also see the car and might collide with it at the crossing at the rate of speed at which they were traveling." (P. 201.)
Pobor cites Cate with approval. Both cases hold in essence that the awareness of the passenger is a question of fact. [15] It is only when the jury finds that the passenger was in fact unaware that the driver is carelessly rushing into danger that there is not at least a question of fact as to his duty to protest. (Pobor v. Western Pac. R.R. Co., supra, 55 Cal.2d 314; Thompson v. Los Angeles etc. Ry. Co., 165 Cal. 748, 753 [134 P. 709].) (And see Gadbury v. Ray, supra, 171 Cal.App.2d 150, 157, where the court in discussing the subject of awareness took special cognizance of the factual situation which arises in railway crossings pertaining to notice of danger.) While it is true here that the testimony of the surviving passengers was to the effect that they were unaware of the approaching train and the collision until the moment of impact, and that there was no direct evidence that any of the passengers were so aware, such evidence is not conclusive. Whether they were in fact so aware or should have been aware under all of the circumstances hereinabove alluded to was a jury question.
The appellants invoke the statutory presumption that a person takes care of his own concerns (Code Civ. Proc.,  1963, subd. 4), and cite several cases wherein the presumption was applied, to wit: Wahrenbrock v. Los Angeles Transit Lines, 84 Cal.App.2d 236 [190 P.2d 272]; Dow v. Southern Pac. Co., 105 Cal.App. 378 [288 P. 89]; Smellie v. Southern Pac. Co., 212 Cal. 540 [299 P. 529]; Fairchild v. Detroit G. H. & M. Ry. Co., 250 Mich. 252 [230 N.W. 167].) [16] Assuming that the presumption is applicable here, these cases merely hold that the presumption precludes a finding that the party in whose favor the presumption is applied cannot be held to be negligent as a matter of law. But such a presumption is merely evidence in the case for the jury's consideration to be weighed and considered with other evidence in the case, and may be outweighed in convincing force by circumstantial evidence. (Coe v. Southern Pacific Co., supra, 203 Cal.App.2d 509; Laird v. T. W. Mather, Inc., 51 Cal.2d 210 [331 P.2d *600 617]; Scott v. Burke, 39 Cal.2d 388 [247 P.2d 313]; Estate of Miller, 143 Cal.App.2d 544 [299 P.2d 1005]; Shirk v. Southern Pac. Co., 103 Cal.App.2d 97 [229 P.2d 100].) When a presumption is controverted by other evidence, direct or indirect, an issue of fact is raised which it is the duty of the trier of fact to determine as in other cases, and in determining this issue the presumption must be weighed against the conflicting evidence. (Scott v. Burke, supra, 39 Cal.2d 388, 398; Gioldi v. Sartorio, 119 Cal.App.2d 198, 203 [259 P.2d 62].)
Having concluded that it was proper to instruct on contributory negligence in the instant case, we must now consider whether the two particular instructions hereinbefore quoted were themselves correct statements of the law. The first instruction merely states that the passengers were under a continuing duty to exercise reasonable care for their own safety at all times and that if they failed to do so they were guilty of negligence which, if it proximately contributed to their injury or death, precluded recovery therefor. This instruction was followed by: "Contributory negligence is such an act or omission on the part of the person injured or killed, amounting to want of ordinary care in the circumstances of the case as, concurring or cooperating with a negligent act of a defendant, was a proximate cause of the injury or death complained of." The court had previously defined negligence and ordinary care in the usual language.
All of these instructions when read together state the law as announced in the Pobor case and the other applicable authorities above cited. [17] The other instruction to the effect that a railroad locomotive which is in plain view is itself a warning of danger which warning the passenger must, in the exercise of reasonable care, observe and heed, is likewise consistent with the duty set forth in Pobor. While such an instruction was argumentative in form, and therefore should not have been given, it was not prejudicial error to give it. Such an instruction is analogous to the "look and not see" instruction which some of the cases have criticized as argumentative, but none of which have held it to be reversible error to give. (See discussion in BAJI, 1962 Pocket Parts, Instruction No. 140, and cases there cited.) While superficially such an instruction appears to take for granted the visibility of the locomotive, it is merely an unnecessary declaration of the obvious. It is a truism that if one sees a locomotive approaching a crossing over which he is about to pass *601 he is warned of impending danger. The language "which is in plain view" when read with the language following it to the effect that the passenger "is under a duty to exercise reasonable care to observe and heed that warning" can be interpreted only as meaning that which was in plain sight of a person looking in the direction of an object clearly visible. (Emphasis added.) (See Fabela v. Hargis, 147 Cal.App.2d 809, 816 [305 P.2d 901].) Whether that person actually saw the object or should have seen it in the exercise of ordinary care was left to the jury. Under the circumstances of the case, including the facts and the remainder of the instructions, and in the light of our duty to adopt the construction and effect of an instruction which will support and not defeat the judgment if it is reasonably susceptible of such an interpretation, we conclude that this instruction was not prejudicial. (Stout v. Southern Pac. R.R. Co., 127 Cal.App.2d 491, 497 [274 P.2d 194]; Pandell v. Hischier, 166 Cal.App.2d 693, 697 [333 P.2d 762].)
Last Clear Chance
The form of the proposed instruction (BAJI 205, revised) is not in question. The claimed error is the trial court's refusal to instruct on the doctrine of last clear chance. The refusal to give a requested instruction thereon is error if there is any substantial evidence, conflicting or otherwise, in support of each of the elements essential to the application of the doctrine. In the absence of such evidence, it is error to so instruct. The existence or nonexistence of such evidence is a question of law the determination of which issue is premised upon the rule that the evidence is viewed most favorably to the contention that the doctrine is applicable. (Doran v. City & County of San Francisco, 44 Cal.2d 477, 486-487 [283 P.2d 1]; Di Sandro v. Griffith, 188 Cal.App.2d 428, 431-432 [10 Cal.Rptr. 595].)
[18] The elements essential to the application of the doctrine are as follows: "(1) that the plaintiff was in a position of danger and, by his own negligence, became unable to escape from such position by the use of ordinary care, either because it became physically impossible for him to escape or because he was totally unaware of the danger; (2) that defendant knew that plaintiff was in a position of danger and further knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that plaintiff was unable to escape therefrom; and (3) that thereafter defendant had the last clear chance to *602 avoid the accident by the exercise of ordinary care but failed to exercise such last clear chance, and the accident occurred as a proximate result of such failure." (Brandelius v. City & County of San Francisco, 47 Cal.2d 729, 743 [306 P.2d 432]; Hildebrand v. Los Angeles Junction Ry. Co., 53 Cal.2d 826, 830 [3 Cal.Rptr. 313, 350 P.2d 65].)
[19] The doctrine is applied only in exceptional cases and ordinarily is not applied to intersection cases involving a collision between two moving vehicles and in cases involving collisions between moving vehicles and trains at railroad crossings. (Rodabaugh v. Tekus, 39 Cal.2d 290, 294 [246 P.2d 663]; Todd v. Southern Pac. Co., 184 Cal.App.2d 376, 378 [7 Cal.Rptr. 448]; Johnson v. Sacramento Northern Ry., 54 Cal.App.2d 528, 532 [129 P.2d 503].) The doctrine has been applied rarely in railroad crossing cases, and then ordinarily "in situations where a driver or pedestrian has placed himself, through his own negligence, in, or in very close proximity to, the path of an oncoming train ... and is thereafter discovered in such position of danger by the operator of the oncoming train ... in ample time for the latter to avoid the accident by the exercise of ordinary care." (Johnson v. Sacramento Northern Ry., supra, 54 Cal.App.2d 528, 532; emphasis added.) Thus the doctrine has been applied where an automobile was stalled on the tracks (Chappell v. San Diego etc. Ry. Co., 201 Cal. 560 [258 P. 73]); where a pedestrian was standing between the double tracks (Starck v. Pacific Electric Ry. Co., 172 Cal. 277 [156 P. 51, L.R.A. 1916E 58]); where deceased was engaged in a bicycle race and where spectators who lined the road and the railway tracks warned the motorman that the "racers were coming" (Harrington v. Los Angeles Ry. Co., 140 Cal. 514, 520 [74 P. 15, 98 Am.St.Rep. 85, 63 L.R.A. 238]).
[20] The rationale of the cases which have considered the application of the doctrine hinges upon the time element as the most important factor. In order to fasten the responsibility of the doctrine upon the defendant he must first have both actual knowledge of the injured person's position of danger and actual or constructive knowledge that the injured person cannot escape from such situation. It is then and at the time that the defendant is charged with such knowledge that he is called upon to exercise both a last chance and a clear chance to avoid the accident. (Brandelius v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, [47 Cal.2d 729; Todd v. Southern Pac. Co., supra, 184 Cal.App.2d 376.) [21] "That he should *603 have had the last chance implies that his chance to avoid the accident must have come later in point of time than any similar chance on the part of the injured person. That he should have had a clear chance implies that he must have had more than a bare possible chance to avoid an unexpected peril created practically simultaneously with the happening of the accident by the negligence of the injured party." (Poncino v. Reid-Murdock & Co., 136 Cal.App. 223, 227 [28 P.2d 932]; Doran v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, 44 Cal.2d 477, 488; Rodabaugh v. Tekus, supra, 39 Cal.2d 290, 294-296.)
We now turn to the record in this case to ascertain if there is any substantial evidence to support all of the elements of the doctrine. [22] The lack of evidence to support any one element is fatal to its application. (Warren v. Ubungen, 177 Cal.App.2d 605, 608 [2 Cal.Rptr. 411]; Di Sandro v. Griffith, supra, 188 Cal.App.2d 429, 437.) [23] In doing so we must bear in mind that the evidence to be relied upon is not just " 'any' " evidence but must actually be " 'substantial,' " i.e., it must be of ponderable legal significance, reasonable in nature, credible and of solid value. (Estate of Teed, 112 Cal.App.2d 638, 644 [247 P.2d 54]; Di Sandro v. Griffith, supra, 188 Cal.App.2d 428, 435.) Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the appellants it appears that there is substantial evidence to support the first element of the formula, i.e., that the passengers were in a position of danger because of their own negligence and that they were unable to escape from such position by the use of ordinary care either because it became physically impossible for them to escape or because they were totally unaware of the danger. The remaining elements, however, lack such support. [24] The law recognizes that railroad tracks are in themselves a sign of danger and that a driver intending to cross them must avail himself of every opportunity to look and listen for the approach of a train on the tracks and to yield the right of way to any such train so near as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Eastman v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 51 Cal.App.2d 653, 663 [125 P.2d 564]; Koster v. Southern Pac. Co., 207 Cal. 753, 764 [279 P 788].) The train crew in the present case had, therefore, the right to assume that the driver of the automobile possessed the normal faculties of sight and hearing, and that he could hear the signals and see the approaching train. (Martindale v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra, 89 Cal.App.2d 400.) Brain was the only member of the train crew who saw the automobile prior to the collision. When he was 1,400 feet from *604 the crossing he could see 2,000 feet down the road. He first saw the automobile's headlights when he was 1,300 feet from the crossing at which time the car was "a great distance" from the crossing. Brain had no reason to then believe that the driver would not stop safely at the crossing, or that he was inattentive and would not apprehend the danger by observing the reflector sign 525 feet from the crossing, the painted sign across the highway, the cross-bar, and the train itself, or that the driver would not hear the bell and whistle. Nor would he have reason to so believe when he next saw the automobile. It was then from 400 to 500 feet from the crossing and was not, as testified by Brain, travelling at an excessive or unusual rate of speed, a speed fixed by the highway patrol officer at from 41 to 50 miles per hour. At this point the train was from 200 to 250 feet from the crossing. There was no evidence adduced as to the distance within which an automobile could be stopped at the speed and under the road conditions at which the vehicle here involved was approaching the crossing. The burden of showing that the automobile could not stop within 500 feet at the speed at which it was travelling was upon the appellants. (See Young v. Southern Pac. Co., supra, 189 Cal. 746, 753.) In the absence of such a showing, it would be mere speculation to say that Brain then actually knew that the automobile was in a position of danger and that he no longer had the right to assume that Tinnin would obey the law and yield the right of way. In Rodabaugh v. Tekus, supra, 39 Cal.2d 290 the court said: "The fact that defendant saw that decedent was looking straight ahead while decedent was traveling approximately 500 feet in approaching the intersection does not establish that decedent was in a position of danger this entire distance. Decedent was not in a position of danger until he arrived at a point at which he could no longer stop or slow down in time to avoid a collision." (P. 294.) The evidence in this case is not sufficient to establish any inference of actual knowledge on the part of the train crew of the automobile's position of danger at any time prior to the train's reaching 150 feet from the crossing. The automobile was then 200 to 250 feet from the crossing. It was then that Brain told the engineer to "hold the whistle." While Brain did testify that he still believed that the automobile could stop at that time and that he "didn't realize" that there was going to be an accident until both the train and the car were about 50 feet from the crossing, actual knowledge of the danger of the automobile's position of danger and actual or constructive *605 knowledge that its occupants could not escape from such position on the part of the train crew could be inferred as of the time when the train was 150 feet and the automobile 200- 250 feet from the crossing. And while it might be inferred that the train crew had the last chance to avoid the accident because it could also be inferred that the occupants of the automobile were oblivious to the train's presence, there is a lack of substantial evidence to support a finding that in the exercise of ordinary care the train crew had a clear chance to avoid the accident. Here the train was travelling at 25 miles per hour at the time of the collision. At this speed it covered 36 2/3 feet per second. By simple mathematics we compute that it would cover the 150 feet to the point of impact in from four to five seconds. If the speed of the train was 30 miles per hour at a point 150 feet from the crossing, the time would be even less. Such an interval of time would not afford a last clear chance to avoid the accident. We not only have the additional factors of the reaction time of both Brain and the engineer, but the interval of time between the emergency application of the brakes and their taking hold, together with the weight and forward thrust of a 38-car freight train and a three unit diesel locomotive. Brain testified that an emergency application of the brakes at 150 feet from the crossing would not have reduced the speed of the train to a "measurable degree" prior to its reaching the crossing. The evidence discloses that the emergency brakes were applied at the very moment of impact and that the front of the engine thereafter came to a stop 800 feet from the crossing. [25] "The doctrine presupposes time for effective action" (Dalley v. Williams, 73 Cal.App.2d 427, 432 [166 P.2d 595]); and does not contemplate "split second" decisions. (Rodabaugh v. Tekus, supra, 39 Cal.2d 290, 297; Fambrini v. Stikkers, 183 Cal.App.2d 235, 244 [6 Cal.Rptr. 833]; Di Sandro v. Griffith, supra, 188 Cal.App.2d 428, 440.) The doctrine of last clear chance does not apply when the emergency arises suddenly and there are only a few seconds to avoid a collision, and where there is no substantial evidence that the defendant had the time to avoid the collision. (Hickambottom v. Cooper Transp. Co., 163 Cal.App.2d 489 [329 P.2d 609]; Fambrini v. Stikkers, supra, 183 Cal.App.2d 235, 244.)
In Hildebrand v. Los Angeles Junction Ry. Co., supra, 53 Cal.2d 826, the locomotive fireman testified he saw the motorcycle when it was 1,000 feet away and continued to watch it until the collision occurred. He did not tell the engineer that *606 the motorcycle was approaching until it was 75 or 100 feet away when he realized there would be an accident and called to the engineer to stop the train which was going five miles per hour. The brakes were applied at the time of the impact and the train travelled 37 feet before stopping. The fireman testified that the motorcycle was going from 70 to 75 miles per hour, although the plaintiff testified he was going 35 prior to the accident and 15 at the time of collision. The court there sustained the refusal to give the instruction on the doctrine of last clear chance and said: "It is obvious that the collision could not have been prevented by stopping the train after the crew knew plaintiff was in a position of danger. ..." (P. 830.)
We therefore conclude that the evidence in this case comes within the category of the cases involving collisions between moving vehicles and trains at railroad crossings to which the doctrine of last clear chance is ordinarily inapplicable, and that as a matter of law the record presented no substantial evidence to justify the giving of the requested instruction.
Conduct of Judge
The appellants complain that during the course of the trial the court made "uncalled for" and "gratuitous" statements which were prejudicial to the appellants, and that it "unnecessarily injected itself" in the case. They point to 11 separate instances in the record, each of which we have considered and do not find to be prejudicial. The record indicates that the appellants were accorded a fair and impartial trial and that the trial judge presided with courtesy and patience. The record is devoid of any indication that the appellants were not given a full opportunity to present their case. Each of the claimed instances of prejudicial error, when read in their proper context, disclose that they arose in conjunction with the court's discussion of the propriety of the admissibility of certain evidence, the validity of objections thereto, the reasons for its rulings, or the clarity of the language in which a question was framed. Appellants' counsel did not object to any of these statements at the time of the trial nor did he make any assignment of misconduct. Counsel for appellants alluded to the court's remarks in only one instance during the course of the trial. After a colloquy between the court and respective counsel as to the validity of an objection, appellants' counsel asked the court to "instruct the jury on the remarks that have just been made so as to clear the record." The court thereupon promptly instructed the jury as follows: "Yes. Any remarks that I made to the attorneys, ladies and gentlemen, has no *607 bearing on the issues here. You have to decide the facts. As to anything that I might have said at any time, please don't take any inference or any leaning one way or the other. We are just discussing rules of evidence. All right." (Emphasis added.) Thereupon appellants' counsel, apparently satisfied with the admonition, rejoined: "Which your Honor knows a good deal more than we do."
[26] It is, of course, the general rule that any exception to an improper remark made by a trial judge during the trial of an action is waived unless an assignment of such misconduct and request to the trial court to instruct the jury to disregard it is made at the time the remark was made or at some time thereafter before the close of the trial, in order to permit the court the opportunity to cure by proper instructions to the jury any injury occasioned by the remark. It is only where it is apparent that such an admonition would not remove the prejudicial effect of the judge's remarks or conduct that the injured party is relieved of his duty to assign such misconduct as error and to request the trial court to instruct the jury to disregard it. (Estate of Golden, 4 Cal.2d 300, 311 [48 P.2d 962]; Etzel v. Rosenbloom, 83 Cal.App.2d 758, 762 [189 P.2d 848].) None of the remarks in this case can even remotely be regarded as coming within this exception to the general rule. [27] In any event it should be noted that at the beginning of the trial the court admonished the jury that if it said "anything that indicates or seems to indicate to you that I have a leaning one way or the other in the case, or that I favor or have a feeling against either of the parties or either of the attorneys, please disregard that, because it will not be my intention to do that." Again on its own motion at the end of the trial, the trial court instructed the jury to disregard any statement it may have made in discussing with counsel any objection or motion, which statement it may have seemed to them to reflect upon counsel or to indicate that the court had some opinion on the merits of the case or upon some fact or issue involved in the case. Such instructions cured the errors complained of, if any. (Petersen v. Rieschel, 115 Cal.App.2d 758, 764 [252 P.2d 986]; Mercado v. Hoefler, 190 Cal.App.2d 12, 23 [11 Cal.Rptr. 787].)
[28] Complaint is also made by the appellants as to "the tone, emphasis, inflection or manner of the spoken words uttered by the trial judge." We, of course, have no way of appraising such tone or manner of speech from the record. Here again no objection was made in the court below nor is *608 there any reference thereto in the record. Suffice it to say, the objection now comes too late. (People v. Hambrick, 162 Cal.App.2d 239, 243-244 [327 P.2d 570]; People v. Sakelaris, 151 Cal.App.2d 758, 759 [312 P.2d 263].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2215155 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.01446+00 ===

207 Cal.App.2d 667 (1962)
BEN WHITE et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
FARMERS INSURANCE EXCHANGE, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 25882.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Sept. 17, 1962.
Early, Maslach, Foran & Williams and Harry Boyd for Defendant and Appellant.
Melvin Simon for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
WOOD, P. J.
In this action for declaratory relief, the plaintiffs sought a declaration that their policy of automobile insurance, issued by defendant Farmers Insurance Exchange, included uninsured-motorist coverage in the amounts of $10,000 for each person and $20,000 as a maximum for each accident. Defendants Farmers Insurance asserted that the policy included such coverage only in the amounts of $5,000 for each person and $10,000 as a maximum for each accident. Judgment was in favor of plaintiffs. Defendant Farmers Insurance appeals from the judgment.
In October 1948, the defendant Farmers Insurance issued its policy of insurance covering plaintiffs' Chevrolet automobile for a term of six months, and thereafter for additional terms of six months upon the payment of the required premium therefor. Under "Coverage A" of the policy, the insurance company agreed to pay an amount not to exceed $5,000 as damages for bodily injury to one person, or not to exceed $10,000 for bodily injuries in each accident, caused by accident and arising out of the ownership of the automobile. Semiannually after the issuance of that policy (i.e., in April and October of each year) to and including October 1959, the insurance policy was renewed by the payment of the premium required by the insurance company. (In September 1956, at the request of plaintiffs, the company issued an endorsement which was attached to the policy whereby another Chevrolet automobile was substituted as the insured automobile in place of the one originally described therein.) In January 1957 the insurance company, in consideration of the premium paid by the plaintiffs with reference to "Coverage A," issued an "Uninsured Motorists Endorsement," which was attached to the policy. The endorsement provided in substance that the insurance company would pay to plaintiffs any amounts which *669 plaintiffs were legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner of an uninsured automobile by reason of bodily injuries to plaintiffs, caused by collision between plaintiffs' automobile and the uninsured automobile--the amounts to be so paid were to be within the coverage required of an owner by the Financial Responsibility Law at the time of the collision.
At that time when the uninsured-motorist endorsement was issued (January 1957) the coverage so required was $5,000 for one person and $10,000 for each accident.
During the session of the Legislature in 1957 (which ended in June 1957), the Financial Responsibility Law was amended so that the coverage required by that law was $10,000 for each person and $20,000 for each accident. That amendment, however, was ambiguous as to whether it became effective on July 1, 1959, or September 11, 1957. (See footnote  [fn. 1] as to manner in which the ambiguity occurred.)
In August 1957 (prior to the first of the two purported effective dates of such amendment) the insurance company mailed to plaintiffs a document  [fn. 2] which consisted of two parts*670 --the upper part which is referred to in the briefs as a notice or explanation regarding the lower part; and the lower part which is an endorsement to be attached to the policy showing the increased coverage of $10,000 and $20,000 under the new law. There is a perforated line between the parts.
The upper part states, in substance, that changes, recently made in the California Financial Responsibility Law, affect the amounts of insurance plaintiffs will need if their car should be involved in an accident; that previously the amounts of $5,000 and $10,000 were sufficient, but when the new law becames effective they will need $10,000 and $20,000; that there is some uncertainty as to the effective date of the new law--the basic change will become effective July 1, 1959, but there appear to be circumstances under which the law will become effective September 11, 1957; that the coverage of *671 $5,000 and $10,000 is no longer adequate; that the insurance company is taking the liberty of automatically increasing plaintiffs' policy limits "by means of this notice"; that the increase will be effective as of the policy renewal date; that there is an increase in the rate, which is included in the renewal premium bill; that plaintiffs should be sure to keep the notice with their policy papers, as it actually increases their protection; that if plaintiffs do not wish to have their policy limits increased at this time they should call their insurance agent.
The lower part of the document, which is labeled "Endorsement Increasing Policy Limits," states that it should be attached to the policy, if applicable; that if the policy affords coverage under Coverage A, for bodily injury liability, then in consideration of the premium paid and the acceptance of the endorsement by the plaintiffs, it is agreed that the limit of liability under Coverage A shall be $10,000 for each person and $20,000 for each occurrence; that the endorsement will be effective at 12:01 a. m. on the first renewal date following September 20, 1957, of the policy issued to plaintiffs.
Plaintiffs accepted said endorsement for additional insurance, and thereafter paid the semiannual premium as required by the insurance company. The insurance contract as of that time consisted of (1) the original policy, (2) the endorsement substituting a different car, (3) the endorsement for uninsured-motorist coverage, and (4) the endorsement for additional insurance under Coverage A (for bodily injury)--increasing amounts to $10,000 and $20,000.
As hereinabove stated, the endorsement for uninsured-motorist coverage provided that the amount of insurance under that coverage was the same as the amount of insurance required of an owner under the Financial Responsibility Law (for bodily injury). Also, as above stated, the uninsured-motorist insurance was issued in consideration of the premium paid with reference to "Coverage A" (for bodily injury). After the insurance under Coverage A had been increased to $10,000 and $20,000, an additional charge was made (and paid) for the additional uninsured-motorist coverage, which charge was included in the premium for insurance under Coverage A.
On February 8, 1959, while the insurance policy was in effect, the insured automobile of the plaintiffs, which was being driven by plaintiff Ben White, was involved in a collision with an uninsured automobile which was being driven *672 by one Davison. At the time of the collision, plaintiff Willie White, the wife of Ben, was also riding in plaintiffs' automobile. Both plaintiffs sustained bodily injuries as a result of the collision. Within a year after the collision, an action for damages was filed by plaintiff against the uninsured Davison. It was stipulated by the parties to the present action that plaintiffs would be entitled to recover, under the uninsured-motorist endorsement, "up to the policy limits" (but there was no stipulation as to the amounts that were the limits).
The findings of fact were in substance the same as the statements of fact hereinabove set forth. In addition thereto, the court found that the 1957 amendment of section 415 of the Vehicle Code (increasing the amount of insurance required by the Financial Responsibility Law) became effective on July 1, 1959; that irrespective of the effective date of the new Financial Responsibility Law to be judicially determined, the limits of liability thereunder were increased to $10,000 for each person, with a maximum of $20,000 for any one accident, and the limits of liability under the uninsured-motorist endorsement were likewise increased to said amounts by reason of the insurance policy and the endorsement increasing the policy limits; that the limits of liability of the insurance company under the uninsured-motorist endorsement are $10,000 for each person, with a maximum of $20,000 for any one accident; that the limits of liability of the insurance company were increased under the uninsured-motorist endorsement to $10,000 and $20,000 at the same time the limits under "Coverage A" were increased, and that such increase was effective prior to February 8, 1959, the date of the collision.
The judgment stated that the insurance policy and the endorsements thereon provide coverage to the plaintiffs in this accident up to $10,000 per person with a maximum of $20,000 for any one accident for both liability and uninsured-motorist coverage.
Appellant (insurance company) contends that the court erred in determining that the increased amounts ($10,000 and $20,000) for uninsured- motorist coverage were applicable at the time of the collision. Its argument is to the effect that, according to the uninsured-motorist endorsement, the amount of uninsured-motorist coverage was dependent upon the requirements of the Financial Responsibility Law and that the amount of such insurance would be the same as the amount of insurance required of an owner, for bodily injury, under *673 the Financial Responsibility Law; that since the 1957 amendment of that law (increasing the amounts required of an owner for bodily injury) did not become effective until July 1, 1959, the new law was not applicable on February 8, 1959, when the collision occurred, and there was no increased uninsured-motorist coverage. Appellant argues further that the policy endorsement which was sent to plaintiffs in August 1957 (i.e., the lower part of the document sent in August) increased only the insurance for bodily injury under "Coverage A," and was unrelated in uninsured-motorist coverage. It argues further that that endorsement (the lower part of the document) was unambiguous and that the court should not have given any consideration to the upper part of the document in determining the amount of uninsured-motorist insurance; that the upper part of the document was merely an explanation for sending the lower part, was in effect preliminary or contemporaneous negotiations, and was not a part of the policy but was extrinsic evidence which tended to vary the terms of the agreement; and that the matter as to an increase in the amount of uninsured-motorist coverage was dependent solely on whether the change in the Financial Responsibility Law was effective when the collision occurred.
The upper part of the document (sent in August 1957) advised plaintiffs to the effect that there was a new Financial Responsibility Law and that when it became effective they would need $10,000 and $20,000 as insurance coverage for bodily injury (under Coverage A); that there was uncertainty as to when the new law would be effective, but the company would automatically increase plaintiffs' insurance by "this notice," unless plaintiffs notified the company to the contrary; that there would be an increase in the premium rate, which charge would be included in the premium bill; and that said notice should be kept with the policy papers, "as it actually increases your protection."
Of course, if the 1957 amendment of the Financial Responsibility Law became effective in September 1957, there would be no controversy here--it is conceded that the increased uninsured-motorist coverage would have been applicable at the time of the collision. The controversy as to the effective date has arisen because there were two legislative enactments in 1957 which were in substance the same (increasing required insurance to $10,000 and $20,000), except that one enactment stated expressly that the effective date was July 1, 1959, and the other enactment did not state an effective date. In an *674 opinion of the Attorney General (30 Ops. Cal. Atty. Gen. 102) it was stated that the effective date was July 1, 1959. That opinion, which covers details of the legislation and discusses ably the legal principles involved, appears to be correct. The trial judge was also of the opinion that the effective date was July 1, 1959. It is not necessary, however, to determine herein the effective date of the amendment.
[1] The trial judge found, as above indicated, that irrespective of the effective date of the new law, the limits of liability under the uninsured-motorist endorsement were increased to $10,000 and $20,000 by reason of the circumstances herein.
The judge stated in effect, in his memorandum opinion, that the conduct of the insurance company in automatically increasing the insurance for bodily injury under Coverage A simultaneously with an increase in the premium, unless advised by the plaintiffs not to do so, had the legal effect of an agreement; and that such agreement and the conduct of the parties thereunder had the legal effect of correspondingly increasing the insurance under the uninsured-motorist endorsement. He also said, in effect, therein that the policy limits prior to the agreement were the same in Coverage A as they were under the uninsured-motorist endorsement, the only difference being that under Coverage A the $5,000 and $10,000 limits were specifically spelled out, whereas in the uninsured-motorist endorsement the limits were defined as the minimum limits under the Financial Responsibility Law, which prior to its amendment were, of course, also $5,000 and $10,000; that the upper part of the document (Exhibit 4--document sent to plaintiffs in August) was patently an expression of the company's view as to the effective date of the legislative action increasing the requirements under the Financial Responsibility Law, and its probative value must be limited to the extent to which it defines the intention of the parties when the actual endorsement, the lower part of the document (Exhibit 4), was issued; that the significant part of the explanation is that by its terms it does not say categorically that the effective date of the increased requirements was September 1957; that it only says there is uncertainty in that regard and that, under certain circumstances, the effective date might be September 1957, and hence the limits of $5,000 and $10,000 were inadequate because the policy in that form did not meet the requirements of the Financial Responsibility Law; that the manifest purpose of *675 the increase of the monetary limits under Coverage A was to protect the plaintiffs in the event judicial or other interpretation fixed the effective date as September 1957; that the parties could fix the monetary limits of Coverage A or the uninsured-motorist endorsement in any amount they chose to fix; that it must be assumed that some portion of the increased premium, charged under Coverage A, was allocated to buttress the company against possible loss under the uninsured-motorist endorsement, with limits of $10,000 and $20,000, since the avowed basis of the increase was that lower limits were inadequate under the Financial Responsibility Law; [2] that, in the court's opinion, the only theory upon which the company's position can be sustained is that the parties intended that the coverage under one clause of its policy, namely, Coverage A, be increased regardless of the effective date of the amendment of the Financial Responsibility Law, but as to the other coverage afforded by the same policy (namely, uninsured-motorist) the increase was to take place only after the effective date of the amendment was determined; that it seems obvious that if this was the intent of the parties the obligation rested on the insurance carrier to say so by clear and unmistakable language; that the court holds that the monetary limits of the company's liability under the uninsured- motorist endorsement were increased at the same time the monetary limits under Coverage A were increased.
The above-mentioned portion of the trial judge's opinion is adopted as a part of this court's opinion.
[3] Appellant argues, as hereinabove stated, that the upper part of the document (Exhibit 4--sent to plaintiffs in August) should not have been considered by the trial court, for the reason that there was no ambiguity in the language of the policy, and the upper part of the document was extrinsic evidence that would tend to vary the terms of the policy. It is true that the upper part of the document was not a part of the body or agreement part of the endorsement increasing the amounts of insurance under Coverage A. That part, however, does state that the plaintiffs should "Be sure to keep this notice with your [their] policy papers as it actually increases your [their] protection." That statement indicates that the company regarded the notice or upper part of the document as an important recital or preamble in connection with the endorsement increasing the amounts of insurance under Coverage A. The upper part, recital, or preamble was admissible upon the issue as to the intention of the parties in *676 increasing the amounts of insurance. [4] Since the whole document was written by the company, any uncertainty therein is to be construed most strongly against the company. (See Taylor v. J. B. Hill Co., 31 Cal.2d 373 [189 P.2d 258].) The court did not err in considering the upper part of the document (Exhibit 4). It is apparent, from a consideration of that document and the conduct of the parties--especially the conduct of the company in charging and collecting an additional premium for the uninsured-motorist coverage, that the parties intended to agree that the increased coverage would include uninsured-motorist insurance.
The judgment is affirmed.
Lillie, J., concurred.
"Recently changes were made in the California Financial Responsibility Law. These changes affect the amounts of insurance you will need if your car is involved in an accident. Previously if you had minimum limits of $5,000 each person and $10,000 each accident, that was sufficient, but when the new provisions become effective, you will need $10,000 per person and $20,000 per accident."
"At the time this notice was printed, there was some uncertainty as to the effective date of this change. The basic change becomes effective July 1, 1959, but because of some other law changes, there appear to be circumstances under which the new requirements become effective September 11, 1957."
"Many of the Eastern states already require $10,000/$20,000 limits, so if you are planning to drive east, you should be sure you have enough coverage to avoid loss of your driving privilege if you have an accident."
"Under the circumstances, we are of the opinion that minimum limits policies of $5,000 per person and $10,000 per accident are no longer adequate. For that reason, if your policy is one of them, then as a matter of service to you, we are taking the liberty of automatically increasing your policy limits by means of this notice. The increase is effective as of your policy renewal date."
"There is, of course, a nominal increase in your rate, which is included in your current renewal premium bill. Be sure to keep this notice with your policy papers, as it actually increases your protection."
"If you have been carrying bodily injury liability for limits of $10,000 each person, $20,000 each occurrence, or more, you may disregard this notice."
"Note: If your policy does not afford liability coverage it does not comply with the Financial Responsibility Law."
"If you do not wish your policy limits increased at this time, or if further information is needed, call your Farmers agent, who is always anxious to give you the best in service."
......[perforated line]......
"Endorsement Increasing Policy Limits"
(Please attach to your policy if applicable)
"If this policy affords insurance under Coverage A, Bodily Injury Liability, then in consideration of the premium paid and the acceptance of this endorsement by the named insured, it is agreed that the limit of liability under Coverage A shall be:"
$10,000 each person
$20,000 each occurrence
unless higher limits are stated in the declarations, in which event such higher limits shall apply.
"Effective 12:01 A. M. on the first renewal date following September 30, 1957 of the policy issued to the California resident named on the enclosed premium notice, this endorsement becomes part of said policy and supersedes and controls anything in the policy contrary hereto, but is otherwise subject to the declarations, insuring agreements, exclusions and conditions thereof."
Farmers Insurance Exchange
Farmers Underwriters Association
Atty. in fact
By T. E. Leavey
President.""
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Section 415 of the Vehicle Code was the section relative to the amounts required by the Financial Responsibility Law. In 1957 the Legislature amended that section and several other sections by enacting chapter 1653 of Statutes of 1957--section 415 as amended in that chapter required coverage of $10,000 and $20,000 instead of the former $5,000 and $10,000. It was expressly provided in said chapter 1653 that the effective date thereof was July 1, 1959. Also in 1957 the Legislature amended said section 415 and another section (417) by enacting chapter 1654 of Statutes of 1957--that amendment of section 415 was in substance the same as the other amendment thereof in chapter 1653 (i.e., requiring increased coverage of $10,000 and $20,000), but there was no provision therein as to the effective date thereof. (Since there was no provision in chapter 1654 as to the effective date, the date ordinarily would be 90 days after the adjournment of the Legislature in June, or September 11, 1957.)
[fn. 2]  2. "Important Change Made in Calif. Financial Responsibility Law:

=== CASE 2215157 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.050148+00 ===

207 Cal.App.2d 381 (1962)
JOHN MAURO, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF MENTAL HYGIENE et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 20369.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Sept. 4, 1962.
Cominos & Shostak, Lawrence Shostak and Theodore H. Cominos for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Elizabeth Palmer, Deputy Attorney General, for Defendants and Respondents.
BRAY, P. J.
Petitioner appeals from an order vacating entry of order denying application for writ of prohibition and substituting judgment denying application for writ of mandamus and findings of fact and conclusions of law.
Question Presented
Do sections 160 and 161 of the Welfare and Institutions Code require, for state hospital care, the physical presence in this state of an incompetent claiming California residence?
Record
Petitioner, John Mauro, is the father of Robert J. Mauro. Both lived in Illinois since 1943. In 1943 Robert was committed *384 as a mentally ill person to Elgin State Hospital, an Illinois institution. He remained there until 1950 when he was transferred to the Chicago State Hospital. John Mauro came to California in 1958 and during a two weeks' stay here purchased a home in Salinas where he has relatives, with the intention, he testified, to take up residence in California. At that time he established a savings account with a Salinas bank, which account he has since continuously maintained. At the end of the two weeks John returned to Illinois to sell his Illinois business and home. He sold the business in October 1959 and the house in June 1960. He then returned to Salinas where he now resides. After the purchase of the Salinas house in 1958 it was vacant "for a couple of months" and then was rented until about March 1960.
On June 28, 1960, Robert was given a leave of absence from the Chicago State Hospital where he had remained since 1950, and on July 29, 1960, he was granted an absolute discharge therefrom. On July 1 his father brought him to California. Just 16 days after the date of his discharge from Chicago State Hospital, on August 15, 1960, Robert was committed to Agnews State Hospital. He was then 33 years of age.
Dr. Walter Rapaport, Medical Superintendent of Agnews State Hospital, testified that returning Robert to an Illinois institution would not be detrimental to his health.  [fn. 1] Dr. Rapaport also testified that the Department of Mental Hygiene has a reciprocal agreement with the State of Illinois for the interchange of mentally ill persons who do not have the one year residence required by both Illinois and California for hospitalization and who did have one year of residence in the "responding" state prior to going to the "sending" state.
Physical Presence in State Necessary
It is petitioner's contention that as Robert was a minor (19 or 20 years of age) at the time of his commitment to the Illinois state hospital his residence at all times during his confinement and until his discharge, was that of his father; that because of his mental incompetency his residence would continue to follow the residence of his father, even though he became of age during that period. Petitioner further contends that at the time of Robert's discharge from the Illinois institution, the father's residence was in California, and that *385 sections 160 and 161 do not require that either the father or Robert actually live in California for the period of one year in order that Robert might qualify for care at a California state hospital.
It is the respondents' contention (1) that the right to state hospital care does not depend alone upon residence in the technical sense, but in addition on the person seeking such care actually living within the state for the period of one year and that, therefore, the residence of Robert's father is immaterial, and (2) that in any event if John's residence is material his residence for state hospital purposes also required one year's physical presence in this state, and that John's residence did not commence here until his return to California on July 1, 1960.
Section 160 of the Welfare and Institutions Code requires the Department of Mental Hygiene to "investigate and examine all nonresident persons who are confined in, admitted, or committed to any state hospital," and when found such persons shall be returned to the state in which they have legal residence. To facilitate the prompt and humane return of such persons the department "may enter into reciprocal agreements with the proper boards, commissions or officers of other states ... for the mutual exchange or return of such persons confined in ... any state hospital in one state whose legal residence is in the other, and it may in such reciprocal agreements vary the period of residence as defined in this chapter to meet the requirements or laws of the other states."
Section 161 provides: "In determining residence for purposes of being entitled to hospitalization in this State and for purposes of returning patients to the states of their residence, a person who has lived continuously in this State for a period of one year and who has not acquired residence in another state by living continuously therein for at least one year subsequent to his residence in this State shall be deemed to be a resident of this State. Time spent in a public institution for the care of the mentally ill or mental defectives or on parole or leave of absence therefrom shall not be counted in determining the matter of residence in this or another state." (Emphasis added.) Then follows a provision that residence in this or another state shall not be lost by reason of military service, and that the residence of minor children during the military service period shall be determined in accordance with the residence of the children.
[1a] As pointed out in an opinion of the attorney general *386 (5 Ops. Cal. Atty. Gen., p. 162 (1945)), followed by the department thereafter in interpreting the statutes, the language in section 161, above italicized, "suggests, in addition to residence in the technical sense, which would only require a union of act and intent to acquire a residence, a coming to California with the intent to reside here and living continuously therein, that is, being physically present during all of the time, or practically all of the time. We cannot use such a technical interpretation of the term 'residence' as will permit a person to come to California, legally establish a residence, and thereafter depart to another State on a temporary basis, maintaining, as is permitted for certain purposes, a legal residence in California."
"It must also be borne in mind that no constructive residence is contemplated such as is permitted under the rule or statute which makes the residence of the husband and father the residence of the wife and minor children. (See Government Code Section 244.)"
[2] We agree with the above interpretation of section 161. To entitle one to state hospital care in California he must not only be a legal resident of the state but must have lived continuously in the state for the period of a year prior to his application for hospitalization here.
[3] That the terms "residence" and "resident" may have different meanings under different statutes is well stated in Smith v. Smith (1955) 45 Cal.2d 235, 239-240 [288 P.2d 497]: "They [the statutes] frequently use 'residence' and 'resident' in the legal meaning of 'domicile' and 'domiciliary,' and at other times in the meaning of factual residence or in still other shades of meaning. (Rest., Conflict of Laws,  9, com. e; 17 Am.Jur. 'Domicile,'  9, p. 593.) For example, in our codes 'residence' is used as synonymous with domicile in the following statutes: sections 243 and 244 of the Government Code, giving the basic rules generally regarded as applicable to domicile (Lowe v. Ruhlman, 67 Cal.App.2d 828, 833 [155 P.2d 671]); section 301 of the Probate Code, relating to jurisdiction for the administration of decedents' estates (Estate of Glassford, 114 Cal.App.2d 181, 186 [249 P.2d 908, 34 A.L.R.2d 1259]); and section 128 of the Civil Code, providing that a divorce must not be granted unless the plaintiff has been 'a resident' of the state for one year (Ungemach v. Ungemach, 61 Cal.App.2d 29, 36 [142 P.2d 99]). On the other hand, 'nonresident' has a more factual meaning in contemplating an actual, as distinguished from a *387 constructive or legal residence in the following statutes: section 537 of the Code of Civil Procedure, providing for attachment in a contract action of property of a defendant 'not residing in this State' (Hanson v. Graham, 82 Cal. 631, 633 [23 P. 56, 7 L.R.A. 127]); and section 404 of the Vehicle Code, providing for substitute service on 'a nonresident' in an action arising from the operation of an automobile in this state (Briggs v. Superior Court, 81 Cal.App.2d 240, 246 [183 P.2d 758]). [4] As stated in the Briggs case at page 245: 'Residence, as used in the law, is a most elusive and indefinite term. It has been variously defined. ... To determine its meaning, it is necessary to consider the purpose of the act.' (See Reese and Green, 'That Elusive Word, "Residence," ' 6 Vanderbilt L. Rev. 561; 1 Beale, Conflict of Laws, p. 109 et seq.)"
The administrative interpretation, both of the State of California and the State of Illinois, is that for hospitalization purposes there is added to the requirement of being a legal resident that of actual living in this state for a year. In the reciprocal agreement between the two states is the following: "For the purpose of this agreement, the term 'legal resident' shall mean any person who has lived continuously within the confines of one state for a period of one year and has not subsequently lived continuously within the confines of the other state for a period of one year or acquired residence which would qualify him for public hospitalization in a state other than the contracting states; provided that time spent in any state public hospitals or institutions for the mentally ill or mentally deficient or on parole or unauthorized absence therefrom shall not be counted in determining length of residence. The residence of a person in either state is to be determined by the actual physical presence of such person in either state and not by the intent of such person."
[5] The interpretation of a statute by the officials charged with its administration should be given great weight. (Nelson v. Dean (1946) 27 Cal.2d 873 [168 P.2d 16, 168 A.L.R. 467]; Adoption of Parker (1948) 31 Cal.2d 608 [191 P.2d 420].)
[1b] Since 1945 section 161 has been amended twice. Neither of the amendments has changed the wording upon which the Attorney General's opinion is based. This is an indication of legislative approval of the construction given the statute by the Attorney General and the department.
The history of section 161 supports the construction given it by the trial court. Political Code section 2191 was the predecessor *388 of section 161. In 1923 (Stats. 1923, ch. 85, p. 160) section 2191 was amended by adding a sentence to the portion defining "resident" providing that a minor inmate of the Whittier State School and other named correctional schools should be deemed a resident of California if either one or both parents were residents of California. In 1943 section 161 was amended (Stats. 1943, ch. 481) when jurisdiction of the correctional schools was transferred to the Youth Authority; the sentence determining residence of such a minor by the residence of a parent was deleted.
In 1957 (Stats. 1957, ch. 489) section 161 was amended to provide the paragraph containing the provision above mentioned to the effect that the residence for hospitalization purposes of a minor child of a parent in military service is determined by the residence either of the parent or that of the child, "residence" here being the place of abode of the child rather than its technical legal residence. Thus section 161 and its predecessor section 2191, Political Code, specifically eliminated as to minor inmates of correctional schools, and minor children of parents in military service, any requirement of length of residence of the children in California, but it at all times required that for purposes of hospitalization all other persons, minor or adult, must have the one year physical presence requirement. It was not until Robert came to California with his father that he was physically present here. Furthermore, Robert's residence did not continue to follow that of his father.
[6] Generally the rule is that when a minor becomes insane prior to the attainment of majority and continues under the control of the father, the son's domicile changes with that of his father. However, as stated in Restatement, Conflict of Laws, subdivision c, section 40, chapter 2: "c. Incompetent living with parent. [7] If a person before coming of age becomes mentally incompetent, so that he is unable to choose a home and he continues to live with his parent, he does not become emancipated upon arriving at majority. If no legal guardian is appointed and he continues to live with the parent, he has the same domicil as that of the parent so long as he remains insane. [8] If he does not continue to live with the parent, his domicil remains in the place in which he was domiciled at the time of his separation from his parent." (Emphasis added.) At the time Robert was separated from his parent, Robert's domicile was Illinois.
[9] Moreover, as we have hereinbefore pointed out, the *389 test under section 161 is not along the question of the incompetent's legal residence but one of whether he is "a person who has lived continuously in this State for a period of one year. ..."
An additional factor in support of the court's ruling is that the father, John, never gained residence for hospitalization in California until June 1960. [10] While residence in the legal sense depends largely upon the intention of the person concerned (see Murphy v. Travelers Ins. Co. (1949) 92 Cal.App.2d 582 [207 P.2d 595]), the trial court is not necessarily bound by the person's statement of his intention, particularly where his acts contradict his statement. [11] Thus, a reasonable inference from the evidence is that petitioner in the two weeks he spent in California, when he purchased a home and established a bank account, did not intend thereby to become a resident immediately, but that his intention was that as soon as he could sell his business and Illinois home he would then become a California resident. This might mean a question of a few days or an indefinite period. Actually it took approximately one and one-half years. Thus, it was not until June 1960 that his intention took effect and he became a citizen of California. [12] If we assume that Robert's residence during the time of his confinement in Illinois was that of his father, Robert's residence in California did not commence until both he and his father came to California. Then, he did not need his father's residence to determine his own. He was an adult and free for a few days from control of any state hospital. [13] In any event, Robert could not qualify under section 161 as he had not lived for one year in this state before being committed to the California state hospital.
[14a] Petitioner contends that sections 160 and 161 are vague and indefinite in not setting up a standard to determine residence under those sections, thereby granting to the department an invalid delegation of power and denying the persons concerned due process. It should be remembered in this behalf that we are not dealing with a matter of commitment but of transfer after commitment. [15] All mentally ill persons in California are subject to commitment to a state hospital, whether residents or not. It is only after commitment that sections 160 and 161 come into play. Moreover, no transfer to another state can occur unless the other state agrees to accept the patient. This is implied in the statute. (Howard v. Overholser, 130 F.2d 429, 432-433 [76 App.D.C. 166]; see *390 In re Petersen (1958) 51 Cal.2d 177, 185 [331 P.2d 24].) It is for this reason that section 160 authorizes reciprocal agreements.
[14b] Section 161 sets up a definite standard for determining residence for the purposes of it and section 160, namely, "a person who has lived continuously in this State for a period of one year and who has not acquired residence in another state by living continuously therein for at least one year subsequent to his residence in this State. ..." The standard is provided and the statute is not vague nor indefinite.
[16] Petitioner also contends that sections 160 and 161 are indefinite and vague because he claims that they do not set up standards for determining residence in another state but only for determining California residence. However, "residence" in a particular state depends upon the laws of that state. California could not prescribe what shall constitute "residence" in another state. In the very nature of the matter the term "residence" as applied to a person in another state imports "residence" as determined by the laws of that state. "Residence" in another state, thus has a definite meaning. It would be practically impossible for the California Legislature to set up any other standard than the word "residence" itself as otherwise it would have to set forth the requirements for "residence" in the 49 other states of the Union, from any one of which it is possible that an incompetent may come to California. Actually, if a state from which the incompetent has come refuses to recognize him as having "residence" in that state, California has no way of compelling that state to receive him, and the incompetent would continue to receive care in the California institution. After California has determined that the person seeking state hospital care has not been in this state a year, the real determination of whether his "residence" is in the state from which he came, is made by that state.
The order and judgment are affirmed.
Sullivan, J., and Molinari, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Section 6730 of the Welfare and Institutions Code provides that a patient from a state hospital can only be discharged if the medical superintendent thereof finds that his discharge "will not be detrimental to the public welfare, or injurious to the patient."

=== CASE 9738293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:23.19985+00 ===

FORD, J.
Charles B. Byrd and the appellant Rogers were accused by information of possession of heroin in violation of section 11500 of the Health and Safety Code and, in a second count, of possession of marijuana in violation of section 11530 of that code. In a trial by jury, in which both defendants were represented by the public defender, the appellant and his codefendant were found to be guilty as charged. The present appeal is from the judgment.
A summary of the evidence will be given. William H. Kaskey, a police officer of the City of Los Angeles assigned to the narcotics division, testified that on September 20, 1960, at approximately one o’clock in the morning, he participated in the arrest of the appellant Rogers and his codefendant *264Byrd in a residence located at 1332 Bast 142d Street in the County of Los Angeles. Officer Northrup was with him. The witness knocked on the door and it opened. He saw Byrd inside the house. The officer exhibited his badge to Byrd and stated, “We are police officers." Byrd said that he lived there. The officer then asked if they might enter and Byrd replied, “Yes, it’s all right with me; come on in." The officers entered. Rogers was sitting in a chair in the living room. Rogers wore no shirt except an undershirt. The witness, who had been engaged in narcotic law enforcement work since 1947, saw on both of Rogers’ arms numerous marks of the kind that are caused by the injection of a hypodermic needle. Some marks appeared to be of recent origin and one appeared to have been made “probably within an hour or two hours" of the time of the officer’s examination. The pupils of Rogers’ eyes were pin-pointed, a condition which characteristically follows the use of an opiate. The officer told Rogers that it appeared to him that Rogers was using quite a bit of heroin. Rogers replied, “No, I’m not using very much I just use occasionally. I am really not using a lot of stuff." The witness informed Rogers that he was under arrest for violation of the narcotics laws. Part of the officer’s testimony was as follows: “Q. After placing the defendant Rogers under arrest, what did you next do? A. I next asked the defendant Rogers where he lived. ‘Where is your room? Where do you stay, here? How long have you stayed here?’ He said, ‘Well, I have been living here about four months, and I live in that bedroom,’ indicating a bedroom situated off the living-room, and adjacent to the bath." The officer and Rogers went into the bedroom and the officer found ten brown-paper wrapped cigarettes in a sack which was in a closet. On the floor behind a dresser were found three eyedroppers, a syringe and a hypodermic needle. As to the cigarettes, Rogers said, “Well, you found them in my room, so I guess they’re mine." But he denied that he knew anything about the other articles.
When the officer and Rogers reentered the living room, the officer found five more brown wrapped cigarettes on the floor at a point about 10 feet in distance from the bedroom door. The officer then went alone to the garage; later another officer joined him. In the garage was found a container in which was a “brownish" powder. A similar powder was in a jar. In a bag was a green, leafy substance. The articles were found under some old clothing. Near these articles was currency con*265tained in a brown paper sack, which money, the officer believed, was in the amount of $185.
Officer Northrup also testified. After Rogers was placed under arrest, the officers asked Rogers if they could look around the bedroom occupied by him and Rogers said that they could. He and Sergeant Kasltey took Rogers into the bedroom. Rogers said that the clothing in the closet was his. He said that the cigarettes found in the living room did not belong to him. About the time the articles were found in the garage, Rogers said, “I Imew you were going to find the heroin out in the garage because that is where Charlie Byrd keeps it stashed, out in the garage.” When shown the items which were found there, Rogers said that they were not his. At the police station $337 was removed from Rogers’ pocket. When asked where he got the money, Rogers did not answer.
It was stipulated that it would be deemed that a forensic chemist had been called and had testified that he had examined the cigarettes and the sack containing green, leafy material and that, in his opinion, the articles contained marijuana, and that he had further testified that he had examined the powder in the jar and in the other container and that, in his opinion, it was heroin and that it was 17.2 grams in amount. The articles were received in evidence without any objection being made by the public defender on behalf of either defendant.
The defendant Byrd testified in his own behalf. He said that on the date of his arrest his place of residence was on 49th Street. He went to the premises on 142d Street about 6:30 or 7 o’clock in the evening. The tenants of the house were Mr. and Mrs. Burnett who had been there about three or four months. Byrd had previously lived there but moved away around July of 1960. Later in the evening Rogers was in the house. When the officers arrived, Byrd was not "quite drunk, ’ ’ but had been drinking “pretty heavy.” He did not tell the officers he lived there. He had not been in the garage for about a year and had stored nothing there. He kept his boat in the driveway on the 142d Street premises, where it was on the night of his arrest.
The defendant Rogers testified in his own behalf. He had known Byrd for eight or nine years. On the date of his arrest Rogers was living on 46th Street. Since about April, on a number of occasions he had “spent a night or two” in the house where he was arrested. During September he spent about three nights there. On September 19, he came to the house in the hour before midnight. He had some clothes there *266which he used when he went fishing; they were in a closet in the bedroom. When the officers arrived he was in the back bedroom. Officer Northrup told him to come into the living room and he did. Rogers wore no shirt. Officer Northrup examined his arms with the aid of a flashlight. He was arrested. Officer Northrup asked him if he would give him permission to search the house. He told the officer he would not because he did not live there and did not own the house. Officers Northrup and Kaskey then went into the bedroom and returned with some articles. It was not his bedroom. He told the officers the cigarettes were not his. He had never seen the cigarettes before. Aside from fishing tackle, Rogers kept nothing in the garage. He did not see what the officers said they had found in the garage until the preliminary hearing. He did not know what was in the containers. He had neither marijuana nor heroin in his possession on September 19 or September 20. The money in his pocket came from his savings and gambling.
In the consideration of the appellant’s contentions, this court cannot reweigh the evidence but must view it in the light most favorable to the respondent. (People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778].)
The officers had no search warrant and no warrant for the arrest of Byrd or Rogers. However, if someone with apparent authority consents to an entry into a residence, and the entry is made in good faith, it is not unlawful. (People v. Howard, 166 Cal.App.2d 638, 651 [334 P.2d 105].)  In the present case Officer Kaskey testified that Byrd said that he lived in the house and that the officers could come in. That evidence was sufficient to support a determination that the officers’ presence in the front room of the house was lawful.
In view of the appellant Rogers’ statement as to Ms use of heroin, the fresh needle marks on his person, and the appearance of his eyes, there was a valid ground for his immediate arrest. (People v. Rios, 46 Cal.2d 297, 298-299 [294 P.2d 39]; People v. Smith, 141 Cal.App.2d 399, 403 [296 P.2d 913].) The appellant made no objection in the trial court to the introduction in evidence of the articles found on the premises. (See People v. Richardson, 51 Cal.2d 445, 447 [334 P.2d 573].) But, in any event, his contention that the officers engaged in an unlawful search and seizure cannot be sustained.  The search of the bedroom which Rogers said he occupied was proper since it was incident to a lawful arrest. *267(People v. Elliott, 186 Cal.App.2d 178, 183 [8 Cal.Rptr. 795].) No consent to the search of the garage was given by anyone. The question presented is whether it was warranted on the ground that it was incident to a lawful arrest. Guidance in the resolution of that question is found in People v. Smith, 166 Cal.App.2d 302 [333 P.2d 208]. In that case the defendant conceded that his arrest was legal and that the search of his person and his living quarters was a search reasonably incident to his arrest. However, he contended that the search of a garage, wherein marijuana was found, was not reasonably incident to the arrest. In rejecting that contention the court said (166 Cal.App.2d, at pp. 305-306): “It should be emphasized that the sole question here presented is whether it was reasonable for the officers to search the garage after the search of the appellant’s person and living quarters had failed to uncover the narcotics for which they were searching. In the appellant’s room the officers had found cigarette papers, debris, and seeds which naturally would have tended to confirm the suspicions raised by the conversation they had overheard. It was entirely reasonable for the officers to infer that appellant probably had access to and might utilize the garage as a hiding place, since he owned an automobile and was a tenant in the building. The officers were not conducting an exploratory search for what might be uncovered (cf. People v. Mills, 148 Cal.App.2d 392 [306 P.2d 1005]; Harris v. United States, 331 U.S. 145 [67 S.Ct. 1098, 91 L.Ed. 1399]) but were searching for marijuana which they had good reason to believe was hidden somewhere on the premises, in the appellant’s room or in an outbuilding to which he had access. (Cf. Sayer v. United States, 2 F.2d 146.)
“In People v. Wasco, 153 Cal.App.2d 485, 487 [314 P.2d 558], the officers arrested the defendant in his rented room. Thereafter, the officers searched for and discovered contraband in a washroom at the end of the hallway on which the defendant’s room faced, and such a search was held reasonably incident to a lawful arrest. In the instant ease, as in Wasco, supra, the reasonableness of the search of an area beyond the immediate living quarters of the defendant rests on the fair inference that his control and activities extended to areas to which, as a tenant, he had the rights of access and use.”
In the present case the statement made by the appellant prior to his arrest as to his use of narcotics, the marks on his arms, the appearance of his eyes, together with the *268finding of the eyedroppers, syringe and hypodermic needle in his bedroom, furnished a reasonable basis for a belief on the part of the officers that heroin was probably present somewhere on the premises. In view of the apparently unrestricted use of those premises by the appellant, it was reasonable for the officers to infer that he had access to the garage and might make use of it as a hiding place. Consequently, under the circumstances of the case the search thereof was reasonably incident to the valid arrest.  Even though the officers might have procured a search warrant, the relevant test is not whether it was reasonable to procure a search warrant, but whether the search was reasonable. (People v. Montano, 184 Cal.App.2d 199, 205 [7 Cal.Rptr. 307].)
In a prosecution for the unlawful possession of narcotics, it is necessary to prove that the accused had actual or constructive possession of the contraband and knowledge of its presence and narcotic nature. But these essential facts may be established by circumstantial evidence. (People v. Stanford, 176 Cal.App.2d 388, 390 [1 Cal.Rptr. 425].)  The finding of marijuana in the appellant’s bedroom under the circumstances disclosed in the record gave sufficient support to the conviction under the second count of the information. (People v. Elliott, supra, 186 Cal.App.2d 178, 185; People v. Van Valkenburg, 111 Cal.App.2d 337, 340 [244 P.2d 750].)  With respect to the heroin found in the garage, reference has already been made to the evidence pointing to the use of that narcotic by the appellant. Access to the garage was shown by his testimony that he kept fishing tackle there. His knowledge of the presence of heroin in the garage was indicated by his statement to Officer Northrup that he knew they were going to find heroin there because that was "where Charlie Byrd keeps it stashed.”  The governing law is set forth in People v. Hurst, 183 Cal.App.2d 379 [6 Cal.Rptr. 483], at page 387, as follows: "The narcotics need not be found on the person of the defendant; it is sufficient if they are deposited in a place under the possession and control of the accused. Exclusive possession of the premises is not necessary nor is physical possession of the drug of the essence. (People v. Robarge, 151 Cal.App.2d 660, 668 [312 P.2d 70].)  Evidence of physical possession by the defendant’s agent or by any other person when the defendant has an immediate right to exercise dominion and control over the narcotic has been held sufficient to sustain a conviction under section 11500 of the Health and Safety Code, (People v. *269MacArthur, 126 Cal.App.2d 232, 236-237 [271 P.2d 914].)”  The evidence in the present case reasonably warranted the inference that the narcotics found in the garage were in the appellant’s possession, although that possession may have been a joint possession with Byrd, and that the presence and character of the narcotics were known to the appellant. (Cf. People v. Dominguez, 191 Cal.App.2d 704, 706-707 [12 Cal.Rptr. 910].)
In the brief filed on behalf of the appellant it is stated: “The instructions given in the instant case appear to be defective and presented prejudicial error against the defendant Rogers, and the jury was not properly instructed with respect to the question of knowledge and possession to thoroughly give the defendant Rogers the benefit of any reasonable doubt if any could be found.” Reference is not made to any specific instruction.  The record, as augmented by this court on its own motion, shows that the jury was instructed in the language of CALJIC instruction 703 as follows: “Within the meaning of the law, a person is in possession of a narcotic when he knowingly has the narcotic under his dominion and control, and, to his knowledge, it either is carried on his person or is in his presence and custody, or, if not on his person or in his presence, the possession thereof is immediate, accessible, and exclusive to him, provided, however, that two or more persons may have joint possession of a narcotic if jointly and knowingly they have the dominion, control and exclusive possession I have described.” No error has been shown. (See People v. Anders, 167 Cal.App.2d 65, 68-69 [333 P.2d 854].)
The final matter to be considered is the appellant’s contention which is expressed as follows: “In this matter the defendant Rogers and the defendant Byrd were separate defendants with separate legal rights involved, both charged with similar offenses, yet where such a conflict of interests may arise, one individual counsel could not properly and effectively present a defense as to both of these defendants, more particularly where the question of possession of narcotics is involved. ...” But the only portion of the record which shows any dissatisfaction of the appellant with the representation afforded him by the public defender relates to what occurred after the last witness had testified. In the absence of the jury, the public defender stated to the court that the appellant Rogers wanted Officer Northrup recalled as a witness *270for further questioning, apparently on the issue of search and seizure. It was the judgment of the public defender that there was no basis for further inquiry as to that matter. The appellant also believed that his rights had been infringed by the failure to produce an informer, but the public defender believed that there was no "necessity for either naming or producing the informer.” The trial court advised the appellant that he should follow the advice of his attorney. The record discloses no effort at any time on the part of the appellant to obtain the appointment of separate counsel. He was ably represented throughout the trial and was not prejudiced by reason of the fact that the public defender also appeared for Byrd. There is no merit in the contention. In deciding a similar question presented in People v. Sprinkle, 201 Cal.App.2d 277 [19 Cal.Rptr. 804], the court stated at pages 281-282: “The main argument of both appellants is that they were denied the effective aid of counsel assured by section 13 or article I of the State Constitution and the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. They argue that they were deprived of their right to the undivided assistance of counsel of their own choice, as they were both represented by the same public defender and that because of the conflict of interest between them, the court should have either appointed separate counsel to defend each of them or should have ordered a severance of their joint trial. While the record does not indicate any diversity of interest in the sense of any factual inconsistency, we agree that this is not the sole or necessarily controlling consideration, as the additional burden of representing another party may impair counsel’s effectiveness (Glasser v. United States (1942) 315 U.S. 60 [62 S.Ct. 457, 86 L.Ed. 680]). This is not a case in which a trial court has appointed joint counsel over objection on the ground of diversity of interest (People v. Lanigan, 22 Cal.2d 569 [140 P.2d 24, 148 A.L.R. 176]) nor was counsel forced on a non-consenting defendant (People v. Robinson, 42 Cal.2d 741 [269 P.2d 6]). No conflict of interest was brought to the attention of the trial court or motion for a severance nor request for a continuance to obtain counsel made before or during the trial. Under similar circumstances, our Supreme Court has indicated that such failure amounts to a free and intelligent waiver of the right to representation (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 417 [348 P.2d 577]). . . . The record shows that each of the appellants was ably represented by *271counsel. There is, therefore, no merit in the appellants’ first contention."
The judgment is affirmed.
Shinn, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738295 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:29.919345+00 ===

MICHAEL J.GABLEMAN,J.
¶ 1. This is a review of a published decision of the court of appeals1 reversing an order granting summary judgment to Jackson County.2 In 1977, Carl Nemitz purchased an easement from the County granting him sand removal and water flowage rights to County land adjacent to his property. The water flowage rights were granted to "CARL NEMITZ, his heirs, and assigns" while the sand removal rights were granted to "the Grantee," who is described in the deed as "CARL NEMITZ." Nemitz later transfered his land, along with his sand removal rights and water flowage rights, to Julius and Darlene Borek (the "Boreks"), who then transfered them to Borek Cranberry Marsh, Inc. ("BCM").
¶ 2. When BCM attempted to exercise the sand removal rights (now almost 30 years after the original conveyance to Nemitz), the County objected on the grounds that the sand removal rights were nontransferable. BCM brought suit, and the circuit court agreed with the County that the sand removal rights were non-transferable because they had been granted to Nemitz alone, and not "Nemitz, his heirs, and assigns" as the water flowage rights had been granted. The court of appeals reversed, holding that Wis. Stat. *617§ 706.10(3) (1977-78),3 which makes words of inheritance unnecessary and creates a presumption in favor of transferability, required the court to interpret the deed as conveying transferable sand removal rights.
¶ 3. Thus, the question before us is whether the 1977 easement granted Nemitz a transferable right to remove sand from County land. We hold that it did. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.10(3) provides that every conveyance of an interest in land conveys full title to that interest unless the language of the conveyance indicates otherwise by express language or necessary implication. We conclude that the easement does not contain an express statement or necessary implication that only a limited, non-transferable right to remove sand was conveyed. We therefore affirm the decision of the court of appeals and remand for the circuit court to enter an order granting BCM's motion for summary judgment.
I. BACKGROUND
¶ 4. In 1977, Carl Nemitz, who owned marsh land adjacent to forest land owned by Jackson County, purchased an easement from the County for $500.00. That easement granted Nemitz water flowage rights and sand removal rights to the neighboring County land for the purpose of cranberry cultivation on Nemitz's marsh.4
*618¶ 5. The deed granting Nemitz water flowage and sand removal rights is entitled "Easement for Flowage Rights" ("1977 deed").5 It contains the following relevant language:
THIS EASEMENT, made this 12th day of May, 1978, between JACKSON COUNTY, a Municipal Corporation, Grantor, and CARL NEMITZ, of RFD 1, Warrens, Wisconsin, Grantee.
WITNESSETH, That for and in consideration of the sum of Five Hundred ($500.00) dollars, paid by the Grantee to the Grantor,.. . the Grantor does hereby grant and convey to CARL NEMITZ, his heirs, and assigns, an easement for flowage with full right and privilege to flow with water the following described lands situated in the Town of Knapp, Jackson County, Wisconsin....
THAT THIS EASEMENT, shall be perpetual providing that the flowage rights hereby granted are being used for the purpose of cranberry culture.
AND, the Grantor does hereby grant and convey to the Grantee the further right and privilege to remove *619sand from the above described lands to be used for the purpose of cranberry culture upon the Grantee's adjacent lands.
(Emphasis added.)
¶ 6. In 1978, Nemitz sold the cranberry marsh to the Boreks. Besides transfering the land itself, the deed transfering the marsh from Nemitz to the Boreks ("1978 deed") also transfered the flowage and sand removal rights that Nemitz purchased from the County in 1977.6 The Boreks later transfered the land and their interest in the flowage and sand removal rights to BCM.7
¶ 7. For decades, BCM used sand from its own land to supply its cranberry cultivation needs. At some point prior to the commencement of this suit, BCM informed the County that it intended to start removing sand from County land pursuant to the 1977 deed. The County disputed BCM's right to remove sand, arguing that the sand removal rights sold to Nemitz were personal to Nemitz and therefore not transferable to the Boreks or BCM.
¶ 8. On April 13, 2007, BCM filed suit in Jackson County Circuit Court, John A. Damon, Judge, seeking (1) a declaratory judgment that BCM is the legal owner of the sand removal rights; (2) compensatory damages in the form of lost profits; and (3) reimbursement of *620expenses arising as a result of the controversy. On cross-motions for summary judgment, the circuit court granted summary judgment to the County and dismissed BCM's claims. The court concluded that the necessary implication of the inclusion of "heirs and assigns" in the flowage grant and the omission of that language in the sand removal grant, is that the parties intended for the former to be transferable and the latter be personal to Nemitz (and thus not transferable to or enforceable by BCM).
¶ 9. BCM appealed. In a published opinion, the court of appeals reversed the circuit court, finding that the right to remove sand was not personal to Nemitz and was thus transferable to the Boreks and thence to BCM. Borek Cranberry Marsh, Inc. v. Jackson County, 2009 WI App 129, ¶ 14, 321 Wis. 2d 437, 773 N.W.2d 522. More specifically, the court held that the presumption of transferability of interests in Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) applied because there was no express language to the contrary, and the omission of "heirs and assigns" in the sand removal grant did not create a necessary implication that the parties intended that right to be non-transferable. Id., ¶¶ 12-14. It further held that the instruction in Brody v. Long8 that deeds should be construed in favor of municipalities does not apply here because this case is not a close call. Id., ¶ 16.
¶ 10. The County then petitioned this court for review, which we granted.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 11. This case comes before us on summary judgment. We review the grant of a motion for summary *621judgment de novo, and apply the methodology specified in Wis. Stat. § 802.08. Apple Valley Gardens Ass'n, Inc. v. MacHutta, 2009 WI 28, ¶ 12, 316 Wis. 2d 85, 763 N.W.2d 126. That is, we determine whether there is any genuine issue as to any material fact, and if not, which party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id.
¶ 12. The present case requires us to determine the meaning and scope of an easement. Easements are created by deeds, and we construe deeds according to the intentions of the parties to the deed. Konneker v. Romano, 2010 WI 65, 26, 326 Wis. 2d 268, 785 N.W.2d 432. The proper construction of an easement is a question of law that we review de novo. Hunter v. Keys, 229 Wis. 2d 710, 715, 600 N.W.2d 269 (Ct. App. 1999).
III. DISCUSSION
¶ 13. The question before us is whether the sand removal rights conveyed in the easement between the County and Nemitz were personal to Nemitz, or whether they were fully transferable.
¶ 14. An easement is an interest in land possessed by another. Gojmerac v. Mahn, 2002 WI App 22, ¶ 18, 250 Wis. 2d 1, 640 N.W.2d 178. "An easement creates a nonpossessory right to enter and use land in the possession of another and obligates the possessor not to interfere with the uses authorized by the easement." Restatement (Third) of Prop.: Servitudes § 1.2 (1) (2000). Easements may be either appurtenant easements or easements in gross. Gojmerac, 250 Wis. 2d 1, ¶ 18. An easement appurtenant ties the rights or obligations of a servitude to ownership or occupancy of the land, and thus it is transfered with the land. Id. An easement in gross does not tie the benefits or burdens of *622a servitude to the land, and may be personal or transferable. Id., ¶ 18 & n.5.
¶ 15. At common law, the sand removal rights at issue here would be classified as a profit á prendre. Like an easement, a profit á prendre, now generally known simply as a "profit" (see Restatement (Third) of Prop.: Servitudes § 1.2 cmt. f), is also an interest in land that involves the additional power to acquire or remove things from the land. Van Camp v. Menominee Enters., Inc., 68 Wis. 2d 332, 343, 228 N.W.2d 664 (1975). Rights often associated with a profit include hunting and fishing rights, mineral and timber rights, and, as in the case at bar, sand removal rights. Id.; Figliuzzi v. Carcajou Shooting Club, 184 Wis. 2d 572, 581, 516 N.W.2d 410 (1994); Gray v. Handy, 208 N.E.2d 829, 831-32 (Mass. 1965). Both an easement and a profit were distinguished in the common law from a mere license, which did not qualify as an interest in real property and was revocable by its very nature. Van Camp, 68 Wis. 2d at 344. In 1994, this court held that there is no meaningful legal distinction between an easement and a profit. Figliuzzi, 184 Wis. 2d at 583. The Restatement in fact defines a profit as an easement with additional rights. Restatement (Third) of Prop.: Servitudes § 1.2(2) & cmt. e (2000).
¶ 16. It is clear that the water flowage rights and the sand removal rights in the deed between Nemitz and the County each constitutes an interest in the land. Both parties concede that the interpretive instructions in Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) play a role in the proper interpretation of conveyances of land and interests in land. The dissent, however, challenges whether the statute applies to interests in land at all. See dissent, ¶¶ 57-63.
¶ 17. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.10(3) has existed in some form since 1874. The first iteration of the statute *623abrogated the common law rule by providing: "In all conveyances of land hereafter made in this state, words of inheritance shall not be necessary in order to create or convey a fee ...§ 1, ch. 316, Laws of 1874.
¶ 18. The legislature amended the statute in 1878 to provide:
In conveyances of lands, words of inheritance shall not he necessary to create or convey a fee, and every grant of lands or any interest therein shall pass all the estate or interest of the grantor, unless the intent to pass a less estate or interest shall appear hy express terms or be necessarily implied in the terms of such grant.
Wis. Stat. § 2206 (1878). The annotated version of the next published edition of the statutes (in 1889) states that this new statute was composed of the 1874 version, "with addition of words from the New York statute to give it full effect."
¶ 19. The New York statute upon which ours was based stated:
The term "heirs" or other words of inheritance, shall not be requisite to create or convey an estate in fee; and every grant or devise of real estate, or any interest therein, hereafter to be executed, shall pass all the estate or interest of the grantor or testator, unless the intent to pass a less estate or interest shall appear by express terms, or be necessarily implied in the terms of such grant.
1 N.Y. Rev. Stat. pt. 2, ch. 1, tit. 5, § 1 (1835) (quoted in Whitney v. Richardson, 13 N.Y.S. 861, 862 (N.Y. Gen. Term 1891)). Faced with the question of whether that statute applied to easements, the Supreme Court of New York concluded that it did, holding that an easement was an "estate in fee" under the statute. Whitney, 13 N.Y.S. at 862 (interpreting Nellis v. Munson, 15 N.E. *624739, 741 (N.Y. 1888)); see also N.Y. Jur. 2d Easements, § 30 (1997) ("The statute providing that the term 'heirs' or other words of inheritance are not necessary to convey an estate in fee simple also applies to the creation of an easement. . . .").9
¶ 20. In 1969, the Wisconsin legislature revised and renumbered our statute. It now reads:
In conveyances of lands words of inheritance shall not be necessary to create or convey a fee, and every conveyance shall pass all the estate or interest of the grantor unless a different intent shall appear expressly or by necessary implication in the terms of such conveyance.
Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). We were unable to find any evidence, textual or extra-textual, that these revisions reflected a legislative intent to change the meaning of the statute. Rather, the changes appear merely stylistic. For example, the legislature changed the phrase, "every grant of lands or any interest therein," to simply "conveyance." A "conveyance" is defined as a written instrument evidencing a transaction governed by Chapter 706, which would include both a grant of land and the conveyance of an interest in land. See § 706.01(3).
¶ 21. Unlike the dissent, we find the statute to be sufficiently clear that it applies to easements. See Dissent, ¶¶ 57-63. We see clues in the second clause of the statute, which states, "every conveyance shall pass all *625the estate or interest of the grantor." The conjunctive "or" means that some conveyances contemplated by the statute will include an estate, while some may include only interests in the land. The pre-1969 version of the statute further makes clear that the current statute's use of "conveyance" is meant to be shorthand for "every grant of lands or any interest therein." And if there were any doubt, courts in other states with similar statutes, including the New York statute upon which ours was based, have construed this language to apply to easements as well as conveyances of land. See supra ¶ 19 & note 9.
¶ 22. Thus, though a cursory reading of § 706.10(3) might suggest that its provisions do not govern easements, the textual clues, statutory history, and the interpretation of its sister statutes make clear that the interpretive instructions in this subsection apply to conveyances of interests in land like the deed here.10
¶ 23. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.10(3), then, provides that every transfer of an interest in land conveys full title to that interest, including the right to transfer the *626interest, unless the conveyance evinces a different intent "expressly or by necessary implication."
¶ 24. The County argues that the language of the 1977 deed does make clear that the sand removal rights were non-transferable. It maintains that the omission of "heirs and assigns" in the sand removal grant — in contrast to the inclusion of that language in the water flowage grant — constitutes express language or at least necessarily implies that the original parties intended the water flowage rights to be transferable and the sand removal rights to be personal to Nemitz. The County further argues that under Brody v. Long, a deed transfering rights away from a government entity must be construed in favor of the government entity. 13 Wis. 2d 288, 297, 108 N.W.2d 662 (1961).
¶ 25. BCM argues that because property interests are fully transferable even in the absence of words of inheritance like "heirs and assigns," the absence of "heirs and assigns" in the 1977 deed's grant of the sand removal rights was immaterial, and thus those rights are fully transferable.
¶ 26. The County's assertions notwithstanding, the deed simply does not provide any express language stating that the sand removal rights were not fully transferable. An express limitation on transferability would be manifest in language affirmatively limiting the sand removal rights to Carl Nemitz. If, as the County argues, the difference in granting language indicates an intent to make one grant transferable and the other non-transferable, such a conclusion is implied, not express.
¶ 27. Thus, the question is whether the non-transferability of the sand removal rights is a "necessary implication" of the terms of the easement. In addition to this statute, the Wisconsin Statutes use the *627phrase "necessary implication" three other times. Wis. Stat. § 62.09(8)(c) (relating to mayoral veto power); Wis. Stat. § 702.03(2) (relating to powers of appointment); Wis. Stat. § 704.09(3) (relating to the transfer of an interest owned by a tenant or landlord).11 Each usage occurs in the phrase "expressly or by necessary implication." The legislature's intent for a "necessary implication," then, is closely tied to the concept of an "express" statement. It is fair to say that a necessary implication is one that is so clear as to be express; it is a required implication. Said another way, where the terms of a conveyance contain a necessary implication, an interpretation otherwise would constitute a perverse misconstruction of the language.
¶ 28. The County maintains that the difference in language between the grant of water flowage rights and the grant of sand removal rights creates a necessary implication that the sand removal rights are nontransferable. The water flowage rights were granted to "CARL NEMITZ, his heirs, and assigns," while the sand removal rights were granted to "the Grantee," who is defined in the deed as "CARL NEMITZ." The County argues that the omission of the "heirs and assigns" language from the sand removal grant evinces a necessary implication that the rights were non-transferable. To read it otherwise, the County asserts, would render the "heirs and assigns" language mere surplusage. See Goebel v. First Fed. Savings & Loan Ass'n of Racine, 83 Wis. 2d 668, 680, 266 N.W.2d 352 (1978) ("[C]ourts must avoid a construction which renders portions of a contract meaningless, inexplicable or mere surplusage.").
*628¶ 29. The County's interpretation of the 1977 deed is certainly a reasonable one. Indeed, we generally interpret the use of differing language in similar or related sections as intending a different meaning. Cf. Responsible Use of Rural & Agric. Land (RURAL) v. Public Service Commission, 2000 WI 129, ¶ 39, 239 Wis. 2d 660, 619 N.W.2d 888 (holding that when words are used in one subsection of a statute but not another subsection, a different meaning is intended). But this interpretation of the easement is not a required or necessary one.
¶ 30. We find BCM's interpretation to be at least as reasonable as the County's reading. As BCM explains, according to the statute's interpretive instructions, the words "heirs and assigns" (or any similar language) are unnecessary to indicate a transferable interest. Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) ("[W]ords of inheritance shall not be necessary to create or convey a fee . .. ."). As a matter of law, "Grantee" therefore has the exact same meaning as "Grantee and his heirs and assigns" unless another meaning is expressly stated or implied. Both indicate the grant of a fully transferable interest. Therefore, we need not construe that phrase as having any legal effect. See Weber v. Nedin, 210 Wis. 39, 46, 246 N.W. 307 (1933) (determining that language in a deed conveying property to one's "assigns" was "without legal effect" and therefore superfluous). Under the directive of § 706.10(3), then, the grant of water flowage rights to "CARL NEMITZ, his heirs, and assigns" and the grant of sand removal rights to "the Grantee" (who is identified in the deed as Nemitz) are identical, and each conveys a freely transferable interest.
¶ 31. The reasonableness of BMC's reading is supported by the easement's reference to itself as a single easement. The 1977 deed is entitled "Easement for *629Flowage Rights." The document also speaks of "this easement" when giving the date and naming the parties ("THIS EASEMENT, made this 12th day of May, 1978, between JACKSON COUNTY... and CARL NEMITZ"), and when explaining that this is a corrected deed (see supra note 5) ("This easement is given for the purpose of correcting an erroneous description ...."). An additional internal reference states that "THIS EASEMENT, shall be perpetual providing that the flowage rights hereby granted are being used for the purpose of cranberry culture" (emphasis added). The County argues that the reference to "this easement" refers only to the water flowage rights because this statement immediately follows the grant of water flowage. While this may be a reasonable reading, another reasonable reading is that "this easement" refers, as it does in its other iterations, to the document as a whole, and therefore characterizes the sand removal rights as perpetual as well.
¶ 32. We find additional support for BCM's reading in the fact that the easement contains two express limitations. First, the County "expressly reserved the right of the public for access to the [County] land for the purposes of hunting and fishing." Second, the sand removed and water flowage rights were conditioned on their being "used for the purpose of cranberry culture." It is reasonable to conclude that had the deed been intended to limit the transferability of either the flow-age or sand removal rights, it would have said so expressly. See FAS, LLC v. Bass Lake, 2007 WI 73, ¶ 27, 301 Wis. 2d 321, 733 N.W.2d 287 (" '[T]he express mention of one matter excludes other similar matters that are not mentioned.'") (quoting Perra v. Menomonee Mut. Ins. Co., 2000 WI App 215,.¶ 12, 239 Wis. 2d 26, 619 N.W.2d 123).
*630¶ 33. Thus, both BCM and the County offer reasonable interpretations of the easement. We simply do not agree with the County that its reading — that the sand removal rights were intended to be personal to Nemitz and non-transferable — is expressly stated in or a necessary implication of the terms of the easement. Accordingly, under Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), the easement conveyed a fully transferable interest in both the water flowage and sand removal rights.
¶ 34. The County's final argument12 rests on a single sentence in Brody v. Long stating that "a grant of land by a public body is to be construed most strongly against the grantee." 13 Wis. 2d at 297 (citing 6 Thompson, Real Property (perm, ed.) 571, § 3365). The County argues that this brief statement in Brody creates a top-level rule of broad application.
¶ 35. We disagree. The Brody court discussed this rule only after having applied ordinary rules of construction. See id. at 293-96. Furthermore, the Brody court did not even rely on the rule in its decision, but added it only as an additional independent basis for its decision. See id. at 298. We also note that no published opinion in this state has cited to or relied on this statement in Brody since it was made almost 50 years ago.
*631¶ 36. To the extent Brody is an accurate statement of the law (an issue we need not address here), it would be applied only as a rule of last resort after employing the normal methods of interpretation, particularly those specified by the legislature in Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). We fail to see how the rule of construction in Brody can trump the legislative mandate in Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3).
IV CONCLUSION
¶ 37. In summary, we hold that the 1977 easement granted Nemitz a transferable right to remove sand from County land. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.10(3) provides that every conveyance of an interest in land conveys full title to that interest unless the language of the conveyance indicates otherwise by express language or necessary implication. We conclude that the easement does not contain an express statement or necessary implication that only a limited, non-transferable right to remove sand was conveyed. We therefore affirm the decision of the court of appeals and remand for the circuit court to enter an order granting BCM's motion for summary judgment.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed and the cause remanded with directions.
Borek Cranberry Marsh, Inc. v. Jackson County, 2009 WI App 129, 321 Wis. 2d 437, 773 N.W.2d 522.
The judge originally assigned to the case, Judge Gerald W. Laabs, recused himself because he drafted the easement at issue in this case. Judge John A. Damon presided in Judge Laabs' stead.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1977-78 version unless otherwise indicated.
Flowage refers to allowing water to flow on and off of the adjoining land. Flowage rights can be very important to cranberry cultivation because cranberries are grown in water, and at certain points in the process, the water in the bogs has to be drained off. Sand is also important to cranberry cultivation. When the cranberry marsh freezes over in winter, the ice on top *618of the bog is sanded — that is, covered with a layer of sand — so that when the ice melts, the sand settles, filling in under the cranberry plants so that the plants remain at an appropriate harvestable height, thereby optimizing production. Thus, both water flowage and sand are important in the cranberry industry.
The "Easement for Flowage Rights" in the record before us is actually dated May 12,1978. That document indicates that it was "given for the purpose of correcting an erroneous description as recorded in Volume 226 of Records, on page 751 and as Document #212830." The original deed is not in the record. However, the parties agree that the original deed was executed sometime in 1977, and that the deed in the record is identical to the 1977 document in all regards relevant to this case.
The 1978 deed stated in relevant part as follows: "The grantors further convey to the grantees, their heirs and assigns, all of their rights in and to an easement executed in favor of them by Jackson County concerning flowage rights and sand rights."
The deed transfering the land and the flowage and sand removal rights from the Boreks to BCM is not in the record. Nevertheless, the parties agree that the transaction took place.
13 Wis. 2d 288, 108 N.W.2d 662 (1961).
Other states with nearly identical language have similarly interpreted their statutes to include easements as well as conveyances of land. See, e.g., Presbyterian Church of Osceola, Clarke County v. Harken, 158 N.W 692 (Iowa 1916); Karmuller v. Krotz, 18 Iowa 352 (1865); Brown v. Redfern, 541 S.W.2d 725 (Mo. Ct. App. 1976).
The County argues that the statute is merely a drafting guide and not a substantive tool for interpretation. It further argues that the statute is an extrinsic aid only to be considered after a deed is first deemed ambiguous.
The statute rebuts this, however. It tells us how deeds "shall" be construed, and thus provides an interpretive aid for all deeds, not just ambiguous ones. Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). Moreover, § 706.01(1) states that Chapter 706 "shall govern every transaction by which any interest in land is created, aliened, mortgaged, assigned or may be otherwise affected in law or in equity." The transfer of interests from the County to Nemitz is no exception.
Before the court of appeals decision in this case, it does not appear that any published decision interprets the phrase "necessary implication" as used in § 706.10(3).
The County also makes a brief and undeveloped argument that "[u]nder the County Forest program, sand and gravel extraction by private entities such as B[CM] is forbidden." That sentence, found in the County's Statement of Facts in its main brief, is the extent of its argument on the issue, and we need not consider it. Clean Wis., Inc. v. Public Service Commission, 2005 WI 93, ¶ 180 n.40, 282 Wis. 2d 250, 700 N.W.2d 768 ("We will not address undeveloped arguments.").

=== CASE 9738296 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:29.926224+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, C.J.
¶ 38. (dissenting). The majority chooses not to resolve this case by a determination of the intent of the parties from the text of the document. This approach is puzzling, to say the least.1
*632¶ 39. Instead, the majority resolves this case using Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). In doing so, the majority construes the 1977 document to an end that effectively disregards the otherwise apparent intent of the parties as evinced by the written text.
¶ 40. Because I conclude that the easement, here a deed and referred to hereafter as the document, created a nontransferable right to sand removal, personal to Nemitz as the original holder, and because I reach this conclusion regardless of whether I apply traditional rules for interpreting an easement instrument or apply a correct interpretation of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), I dissent.
I
¶ 41. I begin by interpreting the document and acknowledging the rules of interpretation. When the text of a document is plain and unambiguous, the document must be interpreted to effectuate the parties' intent.2 Case law also establishes that the primary source of the intent of the parties is "what is written *633within the four corners of the deed . . . ."3 Furthermore, as the majority notes, "we generally interpret the use of different language in similar or related sections as intending a different meaning."4
¶ 42. I therefore begin with the text of the document. Applying the rules of interpretation identified above, I conclude that the 1977 document granted rights relating to the water flowage different from those relating to sand removal. Whereas the former (water flowage) is transferable by each grantee, the latter (sand removal) is personal to the original grantee and thus is not transferable by the original grantee.
¶ 43. Regarding the water flowage rights, I conclude that the following aspects of the text support the conclusion that the 1977 document conveyed an easement for flowage rights and that the easement for flowage rights was transferable: (1) the title is "Easement for Flowage Rights," phrased in the singular (an "easement") and specifically referring to flowage rights; (2) the phrase "easement. .. with full right and privilege" is used; (3) the grant of flowage rights is to "Carl Nemitz, his heirs, and assigns," the latter words ordinarily used to indicate transferability; (4) the easement is "perpetual providing that the flowage rights hereby granted are being used for the purpose of cranberry culture." The only reasonable interpretation of this text is that the water flowage provision is a grant of a transferable right. Majority op., ¶¶ 29-30.
¶ 44. In contrast, the grant of sand removal rights presents a different text, on its face supporting a *634different conclusion. The sand removal provision must be interpreted according to its text and in comparison with the language used to create the transferable water flowage easement. Thus the language that is used in the grant of sand removal, as well as language that is used in the grant of water flowage but conspicuously omitted from the grant of sand removal, are both significant. Analyzed in this way, the text of the sand removal provision contains numerous indicia that the parties intended the two rights to be different and discrete from one another.
¶ 45. The document is structured in a way that makes the sand removal rights both structurally and linguistically separate from the water flowage rights.
¶ 46. With regard to structure, the provisions relating to the water flowage rights are listed first and constitute the bulk of the document. The document further enumerates that the conveyance is supported by consideration, witnessed by the parties, and perpetual. In contrast, the sand removal rights are addressed last, constituting a separate almost ancillary paragraph, of one single sentence.
¶ 47. With regard to language, the text of the sand removal provision, both in the words used as well as those omitted, distinguishes the grant of sand removal rights from the immediately preceding grant of water flowage rights. The sand removal provision does not use the word "easement;" instead, it uses only the words "right and privilege." The words "heirs and assigns," used in the grant of water flowage, are omitted from the sand removal provision; sand removal is granted only to "the Grantee [Carl Nemitz]." While the statement that the sand removal right is limited to the use for the purpose of cranberry cultivation, the word "perpetual" is not used. Finally, the document's title is an "Ease*635ment for Flowage Rights." The title makes no mention of sand removal and the grant related to sand removal, which is instead set forth as a "further right and privilege."5
¶ 48. Thus, the explicit and repeated terms of the document's sand removal provision distinguish it from the transferable water flowage rights. The sand removal provision is a separate ("further") grant, and it is a grant made personally to Nemitz.
¶ 49. I agree with the County that the cumulative effect of these structural and linguistic distinctions is to communicate the parties' intent that the grant of the right of sand removal be personal to Nemitz and not transferable.6 If this intent is not flatly unambiguous, it is certainly the most reasonable interpretation of the intent of the parties, based on the primary source for determining that intent — what is written within the "four corners" of the document itself.
*636¶ 50. Surprisingly then, the majority ultimately concludes that this reasonable interpretation of the document cannot be controlling because an equally reasonable interpretation is gleaned from the majority's (erroneous) application of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3).
II
¶ 51. I turn to Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), which the majority concludes is determinative, although the statute plays a relatively minor role in the parties' briefs.
¶ 52. I began by interpreting the text of the document, and I shall now proceed to the text of the statute. The majority places the statutory history before statutory text. The majority begins its discussion not with the text of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) but with a recitation of statutory history and authority from other jurisdictions. See majority op., ¶¶ 15-20. I follow the more usual method, beginning with the statutory text and then addressing the statutory history and other sources of legislative intent.
A
¶ 53. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.10(3) has two clauses, each complete by itself and each capable of standing as a separate sentence. The text of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), when properly parsed, reads as follows:
[1] In conveyances of lands words of inheritance shall not be necessary to create or convey a fee, and
[2] every conveyance shall pass all the estate or interest of the grantor unless a different intent shall appear expressly or by necessary implication in the terms of such conveyance (formatting and emphasis added.)
*637¶ 54. I conclude that Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) does not help us in interpreting the intent of the parties expressed in the document. However, were I to apply the statute to the present facts, I would nonetheless conclude that the County prevails.
¶ 55. As written, the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) provides that in conveyances of lands, words of inheritance (that is, words like "heirs" and "assigns") are not necessary to create or convey a fee.
¶ 56. The second clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) provides that every conveyance shall pass all of the estate or interest of the grantor unless a different implication appears expressly or by necessary implication in the terms of such conveyance.
¶ 57. The first clause governs "conveyances of lands." It does not apply to the document at issue in the present case because in Wisconsin an easement is not a conveyance of land, and the present case does not involve creation or conveyance of a fee.
¶ 58. At least in Wisconsin, an easement is only an interest in land, not the land itself. Accordingly, a conveyance of a right-of-way, for example, is not a conveyance of the strip of land itself.7 This court has repeatedly affirmed that an easement "does not create an estate in land," but rather "a right to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property in the owner."8 Thus it is abundantly *638clear that the granting of an easement does not convey title to the land to an easement holder but only a right or privilege.9
¶ 59. Therefore, as an easement, the 1997 document (titled "Easement for Flowage Rights") is not a conveyance of land. By the statute's own terms, this document is therefore not affected by the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3).
¶ 60. Based on the text of the statute, I therefore conclude that the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) applies only to a subset of conveyances, "conveyances of lands" that "create or convey a fee." The conveyance of the easement for water flowage and the conveyance of sand removal rights in the instant case are not conveyances of land creating a fee within the scope of the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3).
¶ 61. Furthermore, the phrase "unless a different intent shall appear expressly or by necessary implication," contained within the second clause of § 706.10(3), does not modify or affect the first clause of the sentence, which applies to conveyances of lands and creation of fee interests.
¶ 62. A final important point. The fact that the words of inheritance are not necessary in a conveyance of land creating a fee to convey a transferable estate or interest does not mean that words of inheritance are meaningless if they are used. A drafter may use words like "heirs" and "assigns" to manifest the intent of the parties, even if their use is not required to convey a transferable interest in land. Indeed the statutory form warranty deeds set forth in the 1874 Laws,10 in the *6391878 Statutes11 and in the 1967 statutes12 provide for conveyance to the "grantee, his heirs and assigns," even when the statutes provide that words of inheritance are not necessary.
¶ 63. I turn now to the second clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). It covers "conveyances." The use of the word "conveyances" can he interpreted as referencing, and thus as controlled by, the first clause to address only a conveyance of land that creates or conveys a fee. If so, the second clause of the statute is not applicable here for the same reasons that the first clause of the statute is not applicable.
¶ 64. The majority interprets the word "conveyance" in the second clause of the statute more broadly to include a conveyance of any interest of land, thus including the conveyance in the instant case. This interpretation is supported by Wis. Stat. § 706.01(4), which states that for purposes of chapter 706, the word "conveyance" means "a written instrument evidencing a transaction governed by this chapter, that satisfies the requirements of s. 706.02, subject to s. 706.25."
¶ 65. Applying this interpretation of "conveyance," a conveyance of an interest in land, that is, a conveyance of an easement or right or privilege, shall, under the second clause, pass all the estate or interest of the grantor to the grantee unless a different intent shall appear expressly or by necessary implication.
¶ 66. The words "estate" and "interest" are not defined in this second clause. The court has already declared that an easement does not create an estate;13 a *640right or privilege is not an estate. The grantor of an easement is not passing an estate.
¶ 67. The grantor of an easement may convey his or her "interest" in the easement, however. Thus if an easement holder conveys the easement, the entire interest the grantor holds in the easement is transferred, unless there is a different expressed intent or necessary implication. If, however, the holder of the easement owns less than a full interest — let us say she owns a one-half interest in the dominant estate and thus a one-half interest in the easement — she then conveys all of her one-half interest unless a different intent shall appear expressly or by necessary implication.
¶ 68. The majority bypasses the precise language and structure of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) and breezily paraphrases the two clauses, claiming that the statute "provides that every transfer of an interest in land conveys full title to that interest... unless the conveyance evinces a different intent 'expressly or by necessary implication.'" Majority op., ¶ 23. This improper expansion of the statutory language results in an erroneous application of the statute to the present case.
¶ 69. The majority substitutes "full title" for the words "estate" and "interest." The majority does not explain why the words "estate" and "interest" can be transformed into the words "full title" and does not explain the significance of the words "full title."
¶ 70. Stated another way, the majority mixes and matches words from the two clauses of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) to conclude (1) that words of inheritance shall not be necessary in any conveyance of lands, of an estate, or of an interest in land; (2) that every conveyance of an interest in land automatically implies words of inheritance (that is, that every conveyance of an interest in land includes the right of the grantee to *641transfer the same interest in the future); and (3) that a different intent, such as the intent that the conveyed interest in land be nontransferable, must appear expressly or by necessary implication in the terms of the conveyance.
¶ 71. This interpretation contravenes the plain text of the statute. Grammatically, the text is severable so that each clause may stand alone. Neither clause of the statute refers to the other, and each clause covers different circumstances. Yet the majority uses words from each clause to modify the other. The majority's construction seems to use the words of the first clause addressing words of inheritance to modify the second clause. At the same time the majority takes the words "unless a different intent shall appear," which appear only in the second clause, and construes them to modify the first clause.
¶ 72. In addition to these textual problems, the majority fails to give effect to the legislature's explicit instruction on how to interpret chapter 706. If a statute within chapter 706 of the statutes ("Conveyances of Real Property; Recording; Titles") is viewed as ambiguous or there is a conflict, the legislature has provided a rule of interpretation: interpret chapter 706 liberally so as to effectuate the intentions of the parties who have acted in good faith. Wisconsin Stat. § 706.001(1) and (3) provide in relevant part as follows:
(1) [T]his chapter shall govern every transaction by which any interest in land is created, aliened, mortgaged, assigned or may be otherwise affected in law or in equity....
*642(3) This chapter shall be liberally construed, in cases of conflict or ambiguity, so as to effectuate the intentions of parties who have acted in good faith.
¶ 73. In my view, the majority's application of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) violates this specific rule of construction by defeating the intent of the parties as manifest in the terms of the document itself.
B
¶ 74. Contrary to the majority's brief treatment, my review of the statutory history confirms that the two clauses of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) should be read independently, each given an effect of its own. As the majority explains at ¶ 17, Wisconsin enacted its first form of today's § 706.10(3) in 1874. Section 1, Chapter 316 of the Laws of Wisconsin 1874 read as follows:
In all conveyances of land hereafter made in this state, words of inheritance shall not be necessary in order to create or convey a fee.
This is the near-verbatim equivalent of the first clause of the present § 706.10(3).
¶ 75. In 1878, the legislature then amended the statute. It added additional language that would become the forerunner of the second clause of the present version of § 706.10(3).14 The legislative history thus *643confirms that § 706.10(3) is composed of two distinct clauses with distinct origins and independent operation.
¶ 76. The majority's statutory history and its use of authority from other states do not contravene that the statute has two distinct clauses or provide a persuasive reason why words from each should be read into the other.
¶ 77. The majority notes that the 1878 amendment added the second clause from a New York statute. The majority cites the New York statute, 1 Rev. St. 748 § 1 (quoted in Whitney v. Richardson, 13 N.Y.S. 861, 862 (N.Y. 1891). The Whitney case does not interpret the statute.
¶ 78. The majority argues that New York case law from the same period applied the New York statute to easements. I agree that the second clause can he applied to easements.
¶ 79. Nellis v. Munson, 108 N.Y. 453, 457 (1888), on which the majority relies, does not, however, interpret the New York statute, 1 Rev. St. 748 § 1, the provision relied on by the Wisconsin legislature. Rather, Nellis interprets a different provision, New York 3 Rev. St. 137, dealing with execution and delivery of documents relating to easements.15
*644¶ 80. Nothing in the majority opinion suggests, much less conclusively establishes, that the New York statute (which Wisconsin adopted as the second clause) should not be read as providing two separate standards affecting separate subject matters within conveyances at large. The cumulative effect is that the majority's reliance on the New York statute, 1 Rev. St. 748 § 1, provides no basis for importing the substance and effect of the first clause of § 706.10(3) into the context of the second clause or importing the substance and effect of the second clause into the context of the first clause.
C
¶ 81. Were I to apply a proper interpretation of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), assuming the statute should be applied at all, the County prevails.
¶ 82. The County was transferring not land but an interest in land, so the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) does not apply. This is the only clause of the statute that addresses words of inheritance. In any event, as I stated previously, the fact that the words of inheritance are not necessary to convey a transferable estate or interest does not mean that words of inheritance are meaningless when they are used, especially when they are used selectively. A drafter may use such words to manifest the intent of the parties, even if their use is not required to convey a transferable interest in *645land. In my view, the drafter of the document at issue deliberately used different words to express different intents.
¶ 83. The second clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3) applies. The second clause is silent about the effect of words of inheritance on conveyances of an estate or an interest less than a conveyance of the land itself. The second clause simply indicates that whatever estate or interest is held by the grantor, "all the estate or interest" shall be passed by the conveyance. From the words of the document, I conclude that the right to sand removal was nontransferable and passed only to the grantee.
¶ 84. The "right and privilege to remove sand" was subject to two limitations that are apparent from the language of the document. First, it is conditioned on its use "for the purpose of cranberry culture upon the Grantee's adjacent lands." Second, the transfer is made to the "Grantee," without words of inheritance. In juxtaposition with the Easement for Water Flowage, the necessary implication is that the sand removal right is only to the "Grantee" and not to the Grantee's "heirs and assigns." The fact that words of inheritance are not necessary to convey a fee interest in a conveyance of land (covered by the first clause of Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3)), does not make them irrelevant when the parties specifically and selectively choose to use or omit such words in a conveyance of an interest in land.
¶ 85. In summary, I conclude that the conveyance of the sand removal to Nemitz was a conveyance of a personal, non-transferable right or privilege. I do not see the bearing of the statute upon which the majority relies, and I would resolve the matter following the usual rule of seeking the intent of the parties by interpreting the language contained in the instrument *646itself. Even if I were to apply Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3), I cannot agree with the majority's interpretation and application of that statute. Following what I believe to be the proper interpretation of the statute, I would conclude that the County prevails under Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3).
¶ 86. For the reasons set forth, I dissent.
¶ 87. I am authorized to state that Justice ANN WALSH BRADLEY joins this opinion.
See, e.g., Konneker v. Romano, 2010 WI 65, ¶ 26, 326 Wis. 2d 268, 785 N.W.2d 432 ("Because the easement in question is created by deed, the court must look to that instrument in *632construing the relative rights of the landowners. Deeds are construed as are other instruments; accordingly, the purpose of the court is to ascertain the intention of the parties. The primary source of the parties' intent is what is written within the four corners of the deed." (internal quotations and citations omitted)).
Atkinson v. Mentzel, 211 Wis. 2d 628, 638, 566 N.W.2d 158 (Ct. App. 1997) ("Construction of the deed to determine the grant's terms and purposes is a question of law unless there is an ambiguity requiring resort to extrinsic evidence. Whether an ambiguity exists is a question of law ...."); Hemmis v. Consol. Water Power & Paper Co., 173 Wis. 518, 521, 181 N.W. 743 (1921) ("... in construing deeds every word and clause is to be taken into consideration").
Rikkers v. Ryan, 76 Wis. 2d 185, 188, 251 N.W.2d 25 (1977). The interpretation of the document is ordinarily a question of law without resort to extrinsic evidence.
Majority op., ¶ 29.
Contrary to the majority's assertion, reading the document as creating an easement only in water flowage rights does not disrupt the document's syntax. The sand removal rights may be reasonably read as a license rather than as an easement. It is well-established that licenses and easements may involve the same type or quantity of use. Furthermore, licenses may also be conveyed in written documents between the original parties and using language such as "grant." When coupled with a writing conveying an interest in land, such as the easement for flowage rights here, a written license may become an irrevocable license. This reasonably accounts for the parties' inclusion of the license in the 1977 document that also grants the easement in flowage rights. Thus, only a single easement is created — one easement, one license — which explains the title's reference to a singular "Easement for Flowage Rights."
Schwartz v. Evangelical Deaconess Soc'y of Wis., 46 Wis. 2d 432, 438, 175 N.W.2d 225 (1970).
Hunter v. McDonald, 78 Wis. 2d 338, 344, 254 N.W.2d 282 (1977).
"An easement is a permanent interest in another's land, with a right to enjoy it fully and without obstruction." Id. at 343 (quoted source omitted).
Hunter v. McDonald, 78 Wis. 2d 338, 344, 254 N.W.2d 282 (1977).
Polebitski v. John Week Lumber Co., 157 Wis. 377, 381, 147 N.W. 703 (1914).
Laws of 1874, ch. 316, § 1.
Wis. Stat. 1878, § 2208.
1967 Wis. Stat. § 235.06.
See supra notes 8-10 and accompanying text.
Wisconsin Statutes Annotated of 1878 provides:
Section 2206. In conveyances of lands, words of inheritance shall not be necessary to create or convey a fee and every grant of lands or any interest therein shall pass all the estate or interest of the grantor, unless the intent to pass a less estate or interest shall appear by express terms or be necessarily implied in the terms of such grant.
The majority's reference to case law from other jurisdictions is inapposite. The statutes are not the same as Wis. Stat. § 706.10(3). The cases revolve around the words "heirs" or "assigns." The cases stand for the proposition that these words need not be used and that the intent of the parties controls. See, e.g., Karmuller v. Krotz, 18 Iowa 352 (1865) (holding that the use of the term "heirs" is not essential to make the right of way transferable; examine intent of parties); Brown v. Redfern, 541 S.W.2d 725 (Mo. 1976) (words "heirs" or "assigns" not required; examine intent of the parties as controlling to determine that *644an express easement was created where the deed required that the easement be appurtenant); Presbyterian Church of Osceola, Clarke County v. Harken, 158 N.W. 692 (Iowa 1916) (citing Karmuller v. Krotz to show that intent of the parties determines transferability of an interest in land; holding that the reservation at issue was an easement appurtenant where intended to benefit the remaining land, not the grantor personally).

=== CASE 9738297 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:30.738439+00 ===

Case Summary
Buchanan, P.J.
This is an appeal by defendants-appellants, Walter Carter and Vernon Cole (Carter and Cole), who were charged by Indictment with Robbery By Putting In Fear and convicted of the lesser included offense of Theft From The Person of James E. Martin (Martin), both being sentenced for one to ten years terms. We affirm.
FACTS—On the evening of June 5, 1971, Martin accompanied Carter and Cole and an unidentified third party to various Indianapolis bars. After having several drinks, Carter and *12Cole asked Martin if he would like to go to an after-hours place, to which Martin consented. During trial, Martin described the subsequent events:
“Q. Where did you go?
A. We went west on New York Street and there they said, ‘Well, we have to’—said, ‘Up this alley is a shortcut’, and we went up the alley and three quarters of the way through the alley I was robbed.
Q. Now, . . .
THE COURT: What happened?
A. I was robbed, beaten and robbed.
Q. Who went up the alley, when you say we ?
A. The two defendants [Carter and Cole], and their buddy, and myself.
Q. All right, and what happened in the alley?
A. I was beaten and robbed.
Q. And, can you tell us who did that?
A. Well, all three of them did, primarily, but the one that they didn’t catch was the one that really done me in.
Q. All right, now, as to Mr. Carter and Mr. Cole, what did they do ?
A. Well, they both struck me, and as a result of the injuries, I had to spend some time in the hospital.”
Martin further testified that the three men robbed him of approximately $65.00.
Soon after these events transpired, two officers of the Indianapolis Police Department travelling west on Michigan Street from Meridian saw Martin, bleeding from the face and holding his stomach, coming out of the alley east of Illinois Street. The officers stopped, and after Martin explained he had just been beaten and robbed by three men who were still in the alley, the police car, with Martin in the rear seat, entered the alley. There they observed three men standing who fled as the police car approached. Carter and Cole were apprehended and identified by Martin. The third man escaped. While one officer was handcuffing Cole, he stated that “It *13was not my idea to rob that fellow. It was the other.” The officers recovered $23.00 from Carter and $20.00 from Cole.
Carter and Cole were charged by a Grand Jury Indictment with the crime of Robbery By Putting In Fear (Robbery herein ). The indictment reads:
“The Grand Jury for the County of Marion in the State of Indiana, upon their oath do present that WALTER CARTER and VARNON [sic] COLE on or about the 5th day of JUNE, A. D. 1971, at and in the County of Marion and in the State of Indiana, did then and there unlawfully, feloniously, forcibly by violence and putting JAMES E. MARTIN in fear, take from the person and possession of the said JAMES E. MARTIN, money, then and there of the value of Sixty-five and 00/100 Dollars ($65.00), in lawful money, which property the said JAMES E. MARTIN then and there lawfully held in his possession, then and there being contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided, and against the peace and dignity of the State of Indiana.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Trial was to the court on October 26, 1971. Both men were found guilty of Theft From The Person (Theft herein) as a lesser included offense of the crime of Robbery.
ISSUES
ISSUE ONE. Is the Indictment charging Carter and Cole with Robbery, under which they were convicted of the lesser included offense of Theft, fatally defective in that it failed to allege intent on their part to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of property (money), which is an essential element of the lesser included offense of Theft?
ISSUE TWO. Was there sufficient evidence as to every element of the crime of Theft to sustain a conviction ?
Carter and Cole allege that in order to convict a defendant of the crime of Theft, the Indictment must specifically charge *14all of the elements of the Offenses Against Property Act and that one element, to-wit, that the defendant intended to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the owner’s property, is missing.
The State replies that the crime of Theft is a necessarily lesser included offense in the crime of Robbery. The law does not require an indictment to charge every element of the offense in the exact words of the statute and a conviction may be sustained as the evidence demonstrates beyond a reasonable doubt that Carter and Cole did take money from Martin, thus depriving him of the use and benefit of his property.
Carter and Cole assert the evidence is insufficient because the State failed to prove there was any property in the possession of Carter and Cole which was taken as a result of the Robbery and that the amount alleged to have been taken is sheer speculation.
DECISION
ISSUE ONE—The Indictment charging Carter and Cole with Robbery under which they were convicted of the lesser included offense of Theft is not fatally defective for failing to specify the element of intent to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of property (money), which is an essential element of Theft.
The statute defining the crime of Theft (From The Person) is Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3030 (Burns Supp. 1972) :
“10-3030. THEFT IN GENERAL.—A person commits theft when he (1) knowingly:
(a) obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
* * *
(e) obtains by threat control over property of the owner * * * ; or
* * *
(g) * * * ; and
(2) either:
*15(a) intends to deprive the oivner of the use or benefit of the property; or
♦ * *
(c) uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as knowingly to deprive the owner of such use or benefit;or
(d) uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner of such use or benefit.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The Indiana statute concerned with lesser included offenses is Ind. Ann. Stat. §9-1817 (Burns 1956). “The beginning point is the statute * * Hitch v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 1, 284 N.E.2d 783. It provides:
“9-1817. ONE OFFENSE INCLUDED IN ANOTHER. In all other cases, the defendant may be found guilty of any offense, the commission of which is necessarily included in that with which he is charged in the indictment or affidavit. [Acts 1905, ch. 169, §272, p. 584.]” (Emphasis supplied.)
(Herein §1817).
Note the words “necessarily included.”
The purpose of § 1817 is to authorize conviction of a necessarily lesser included offense where the indictment or affidavit specifically charges a greater offense. Burnett v. State (1954), 233 Ind. 651, 122 N.E.2d 468; Hobbs v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 195, 252 N.E.2d 498; Watford v. State (1957), 237 Ind. 10, 143 N.E.2d 405; West v. State (1950), 228 Ind. 431, 92 N.E.2d 852. The necessarily lesser included offense need not be charged as such in the indictment or affidavit in order to authorize a conviction. Where the evidence presented is sufficient to establish a necessarily lesser included crime, 9-1817 authorizes conviction of the necessarily lesser included offense. Watford v. State, supra; Burnett v. State, supra; West v. State, supra; Kleopfer v. State (1928), 200 Ind. 287, 163 N.E. 93.
*16*15The defendant may be found guilty of any necessarily lesser included offense in the greater crime charged without such *16lesser offense being stated in a separate count in the indictment or affidavit. Watford v. State, supra; Burnett v. State, supra; West v. State, supra; Kleopfer v. State, supra. Moreover, the lesser offense must be such that it is impossible to commit the greater offense as charged in the indictment or affidavit, without first having committed the lesser offense. Hatfield v. State (1961), 241 Ind. 225, 171 N.E.2d 259; Young v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 286, 231 N.E.2d 797; Hobbs v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 195, 252 N.E.2d 498; Thomas v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 600, 261 N.E.2d 588.
The recognized test has been that to constitute a lesser included offense, all the elements of the lesser offense must be contained in the greater offense charged in the indictment or affidavit which, in addition, contains other elements not a part of the lesser offense. Watford v. State, supra; Hobbs v. State, supra; Hatfield v. State, supra; Young v. State, supra; Thomas v. State, supra.
However, our Supreme Court in Hash v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 692, 284 N.E.2d 770, seems to have qualified the above tests by saying:
“The foregoing test [as stated in Hobbs, supra], however, must not be administered merely by applying the elements of the respective crimes as defined by the statutes; but rather, it is also necessary to look to the charging affidavit or indictment to see if a lesser offense is necessarily included in the greater one, as charged. * * * In addition to the statutes, then, we must also look to the wording of the offense charged in each case to determine what lesser offenses, if any, are included.” (Emphasis supplied.)
We do not interpret the underscored language used by Justice Prentice as overruling by implication the cases cited above which have interpreted § 1817 to mean that an accused may be convicted of a necessarily included lesser offense of a greater offense charged provided the lesser offense includes some but not all identical elements of the greater one and if it is impossible to commit the greater offense without having committed the lesser one.
*17Looking “to the wording of the offense charged” in the indictment or affidavit does not create the need for the same specificity if only the lesser offense had been charged. While Hash requires that the language of the statute be looked to, we find no implication that each and every element of the lesser crime be spelled out as though it were the sale offense charged. Supporting this interpretation is Hitch v. State, supra, decided the day after Hash was handed down, which used language in the Affidavit almost identical to the Indictment before us. To adopt any other interpretation is to sound the death knell of an already anemic statute (§ 1817) and to overrule most of the decided cases cited above spelling out the doctrine of necessarily included lesser offenses.
In Hitch the defendant was indicted for Robbery By Putting-in Fear and subsequently convicted of the lesser included offense of Theft From The Person. The language of the Affidavit in Hitch, as in the Indictment we are considering, failed to allege specifically that the defendant intended to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the property. The Supreme Court upheld the conviction of the necessarily lesser included offense of Theft From The Person, saying:
“* * * it is immediately apparent that it would be impossible to commit the offense of robbery by putting in fear without having committed a theft from the person. Robbery by putting in fear requires a taking from the person of another an article of value by putting such person in fear. A theft from the person is committed when one obtains unauthorized control over property of the owner with intent to deprive the owner of the use or benefit thereof. If the offense is accomplished without putting in fear the person from whom control of the property is obtained, it is a theft from the person, but if the element of putting such person in fear is added, then the offense is robbery by putting in fear. The taking of something from the person of another by putting him in fear of necessity is an obtaining of unauthorized control of such property.” (Emphasis supplied.)
We think that the language that Carter and Cole did “feloni-ously ... by violence . . . take from the person” of Martin *18is sufficient to specify the element of theft that the accused “obtains by threat control over property of the owner” and “intends to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the property.” Hitch v. State, supra.
We recognize the fundamental principle of criminal procedure which requires sufficient specificity in the language of an indictment to give the defendant notice of the crime or crimes with which he is charged. Even so, the language of the Indictment was sufficient notice to Carter and Cole that they could be convicted of Theft in lieu of Robbery. It is a necessarily included lesser offense—not merely a lesser possible offense.
§ 1817 operates to lessen the need for specificity in the affidavit or indictment if, and only if, the conviction is of a necessarily included lesser offense as those words have been consistently interpreted by the cases cited above. Such an interpretation plus an examination of the evidence (infra) seems to afford ample protection to an accused.
We are aided in this conclusion not only by Hitch, but by the recognized principle that the exact language of the statute violated need not be set out in the indictment; rather, words which import the same meaning used in lieu of statutory language will be sufficient. Sullivan v. State (1957), 236 Ind. 446, 139 N.E.2d 893; Hazlett v. State (1951), 229 Ind. 577, 99 N.E.2d 743; Chandler v. State (1895), 141 Ind. 106, 39 N.E. 444.
Carter and Cole cite Miller v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 338, 236 N.E.2d 173, as authority for the proposition that Theft cannot be covered in their Indictment because there is no specific allegation that they intended to deprive the owner of the use and benefit of the property. For the reasons recited above there need be no such specificity. In addition, Miller is distinguishable in that all it decided was that there was insufficient evidence to support the conviction of the crime of *19Theft of Stolen Property and that the indictment did not include an essential element of the offense charged. Reiterated by Justice Hunter there, is the well recognized general rule that an affidavit or indictment must include averment of each essential element of the crime charged—a proposition with which there can be no quarrel. Note that Miller was charged with and convicted of the same crime, i.e., Theft of Stolen Property, and no question of a lesser included offense was in any way involved in this decision.
ISSUE TWO—There was sufficient evidence of the crime of Theft to sustain the conviction.
The law of lesser included offenses as now enunciated by our Supreme Court requires that in order to make a determination whether a conviction of a lesser included offense is proper, “it is necessary to look to the statutes, the charging affidavit or indictment and to the evidence of the particular case.” Hitch v. State, supra; Hash v. State, supra; Crump v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 358, 287 N.E.2d 342.
This involves no expanded scope of inquiry as to the validity of a conviction of a necessarily lesser included offense insofar as looking to the evidence is concerned because taking such a look can be considered but another application of the familiar principle that any conviction must be supported by substantial evidence of probative value of each element of the offense for which an accused is convicted.
Our look at the evidence before the trial court reveals there was clear and uncontroverted evidence supporting each element of the crime of Theft. In addition to positive identification by the victim, Cole at the time of his arrest acknowledged that he and Carter had participated in the beating and theft from Martin by stating to one of the officers: “It was not my idea to rob the fellow. It was the other.”
The conviction is therefore affirmed.
Sullivan and White, JJ., concur with opinions.

=== CASE 9738298 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:30.742765+00 ===

*20Concurring Opinion
White, J.
If the indictment alleged merely the words of the robbery statute one might well question whether it includes a charge of theft. Insofar as here pertinent, the statute declares that “[w]hoever takes from the person of another any article of value by violence or putting in fear, is guilty of robbery. . . ,”1 For some unexplained reason (heretofore apparently unnoticed by courts and textbook writers) the adverbs “forcibly and feloniously,” which had previously characterized the verb “takes,” were deleted from the robbery statute when it was re-enacted in 1941.2 However, it appears that the forms of indictment, affidavit, and jury instruction in common use have continued to define robbery in the traditional language.
So we find that the indictment at bar alleges that defendants “did . . . feloniously, forcibly by violence and putting . . . in fear, . . . [etc.].” (Our emphasis.) As was said of a jury instruction in Brown v. State (1959), 241 Ind. 14, 19, 158 N.E.2d 290, 292, “ ‘it is well settled that the word “felonious,” when used in defining the crime of robbery or larceny, implies an intent to steal.’ ”3
In Robinson v. State (1888), 113 Ind. 510, 512, 16 N.E. 184, 185, it was held:
“The taking and carrying away are felonious or not, depending on whether the taker intended at the time permanently to deprive the owner of his property without his consent, or whether he merely intended temporarily to use it wrongfully, mischievously or wantonly, it may be, and *21then return or abandon it to the owner without substantial injury. Taking, though wrongful, for a mere temporary purpose, is not larceny.”
As against the objection that the indictment fails to charge the crime of theft because it fails expressly to allege that the taking was with intent to deprive the owner of the use and benefit of the property, the indictment is good. Miller v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 338, 346, 236 N.E.2d 173, 176, is readily distinguishable in that its affidavit attempted to charge theft by receipt of stolen property in the words of the Offenses Against Property Act4 and failed expressly to allege the requisite intent. Here the charge was not alleged in the words of the O.A.P. Act, but in the words of the robbery act, plus “feloni-ously,” which clearly alleged a taking from the person with intent to deprive the owner of the use and benefit of his property. Miller involved no question of whether the stealing which is included in robbery can be alleged in the traditional language of larceny as well as in the newer language of theft. Since the elements of theft from the person5 are identical to larceny,6 with the added element of “from the person,”7 they are all included in this traditionally alleged charge of robbery.
. Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-4101, IC 1971, 35-13-4-6, Ind. Acts 1941, Ch. 148, § 6.
. Ind. Acts 1941, Ch. 148, § 13, repealed Acts 1905, Ch. 169, § 357, as last amended by Acts 1921, Ch. 59, § 1.
. Quoting State v. Fordham. (1904), 13 N. D. 494, 500, 101 N. W. 888, 889. The instruction had told the jury that if it believed, etc., “that the defendant . . . did forcibly and feloniously take from the person of Tylene Morris any . . . money ... by violence or putting her in fear, then you would be warranted in finding the defendant guilty of robbery. . . .” The objection was that it “omits . . . elements of the crime.”
. Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3028 et seq. (Burns 1972 Supp.), IC 1971, 35-17-5-1, Ind. Acts 1963, Ch. 10, as amended.
. The elements of “Theft” are set forth in Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3030 (Burns 1972 Supp.), IC 1971, 35-17-5-3, Ind. Acts 1963, Ch. 10, § 3.
. See Ind. Ann. Stat. §§ 10-3001, 10-3002 (Burns 1956 Repl.), Ind. Acts 1941, Ch. 148, § 9, and Ind. Acts 1929, Ch. 156, § 2, both repealed by O.A.P.A.
. The penalties for the various types of theft and other crimes defined in O.A.P.A. are specified in Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3039 (Burns 1972 Supp.), IC 1971, 35-17-5-12, Ind. Acts 1963, Ch. 10, § 12, as last amended by 1971 P. L. 458 § 2. Paragraph (5) provides (regardless of the value of the stolen property) a fine up to $5,000.00 and/or imprisonment of 1-10 years and disfranchisement if “(e) the theft was from the person”.

=== CASE 9738299 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:30.746193+00 ===

Concurring Opinion
Sullivan, J.
I concur in the decision and opinion of Presiding Judge Buchanan with a single exception.
*22I am unable to rationalize a point of distinction made by Presiding Judge Buchanan with respect to Miller v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 338, 236 N.E.2d 173. The primary opinion states:
“Note that Miller was charged with and convicted of the same crime, i.e., Theft of Stolen Property, and no question of a lesser included offense was in any way involved in this decision.”
The foregoing language takes cognizance of the following holding in the Miller case:
“To commit theft, § 10-3030, supra, requires either intent to deprive the owner permanently of the use and benefit of the property, or using, concealing or abandoning the property in such manner as knowingly to deprive the owner, or in such manner as will probably deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. This element of intent is not charged in the affidavit in this case and therefore, no crime is charged.” 250 Ind. 338, 346.
I am unable to harmonize that language with the clear implication of Hitch v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 1, 284 N.E.2d 783, which upheld a conviction of Theft from the Person pursuant to an affidavit charging Robbery. The affidavit did not allege “intent to deprive the owner of the use or benefit” of the property taken, an essential element of the offense, other than as such allegation may be implicit in an allegation that the defendant did “feloniously . . . take . .
It is the fact that the charge involved in the appeal before us includes the word “feloniously” which in my view, provides the only basis for distinction from Miller v. State, supra, and which by virtue of Hitch permits affirmance of the conviction below notwithstanding the failure of the indictments here to specifically allege an intent to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the property.
I note that the charging affidavit in Miller v. State alleged that the act was “unlawfully” committed rather than “felon-iously”. Such linguistic variation is fragile underpinning for *23distinguishing that case from Hitch and from the case before us. Mann v. State (1933), 205 Ind. 491 at 494, 186 N.E. 283 at 284.
It is my belief that the Hitch decision impliedly overruled Miller v. State, supra to the extent hereinbefore discussed. To reason otherwise is to uphold convictions of an offense, e.g., Theft, necessarily included in a greater offense charged, e.g., Robbery, notwithstanding the failure of the charge to specifically include an essential element of the lesser offense (e.g., intent to deprive use or benefit), yet on the other hand, strike down convictions of the same crime (i.e., Theft) upon the reasoning that the affidavit or indictment failed to include an essential element (i.e., intent to deprive) solely because the crime charged and the crime of which the defendant is convicted is the same crime. Such an interpretation of Ind. Ann. Stat. § 9-1817 is not only legally inconsistent and illogical but is fundamentally unfair and of questionable constitutionality.

=== CASE 2215202 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.676594+00 ===

785 N.W.2d 791 (2010)
Mirab Y. BAKKEN, f/k/a Mirab Y. Helgeson, Appellant,
v.
Olaf HELGESON, et al., Defendants,
Estate of Olaf Helgeson, et al. Respondents,
Linda L. Winkler, Respondent,
Spruce Shadows, Inc., et al., Respondents.
No. A09-1591.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 20, 2010.
*793 Richard C. Mollin, Jr., Fosston, MN, for appellant.
Ryan P. Winkler, Nazca Solutions, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, for respondents Estate of Olaf Helgeson, Carol J. Lindgren, Myrna O. Warwick, and Mary A. Hickerson.
I. Jenny Winkler, Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, MN, for respondent Linda L. Winkler.
Ryan K. Kieson, Drahos Kieson & Christopher, PA, Bemidji, MN, for respondents Spruce Shadows, Inc. and Erich Schissel.
Considered and decided by STONEBURNER, Presiding Judge; TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge; and CONNOLLY, Judge.
OPINION
TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge.
Appellant Mirab Y. Bakken, f/k/a Mirab Y. Helgeson, challenges the district court's dismissal of her lien-foreclosure action on statute-of-limitations grounds. Because we conclude that the district court did not apply the correct statute of limitations, we reverse and remand.
FACTS
Appellant and her former husband, Olaf Helgeson, now deceased, owned as tenants in common with Walter Holcomb their homestead on Rural Route 1, Pinewood, Minnesota (the property). A June 15, 1983 judgment dissolved the marriage. It provided in relevant part that appellant would "relinquish her interest in" the property and "have no right, title, interest or equity" in it but gave her "a lien against [the property] in the amount of Five thousand and 00/100 ($5,000.00) payable when the premises are sold." On May 2, 1984, appellant released her lien on the west half of the property. On June 16, 1983, the judgment containing the lien was recorded by the county recorder.
Various portions of the east half of the property were conveyed numerous times. In 1987, Helgeson and Holcomb exchanged deeds conveying the northeast quarter of the property to Helgeson alone and the southeast quarter of the property to Holcomb alone for "One Dollar and other Good and Valuable Consideration" and stating that the "total consideration of this transaction is less than $500.00."
In 1993, Helgeson conveyed the northeast quarter to respondents Carol J. Lindgren, Myrna O. Warwick, Mary A. Hickerson, and Linda L. Winkler; he reserved a life estate for himself. The deed stated that the "total consideration for this transfer is less than $500.00."
In October 1994, Helgeson, Lindgren, Warwick, Hickerson, and Winkler conveyed the south 60 feet of the east 330 feet of the northeast quarter to Holcomb. The deed stated that the "total consideration for this transfer is less than $500.00."
On December 21, 1994, Holcomb conveyed a life estate in the north 60 feet of the west 330 feet of the southeast quarter to Helgeson, with a remainder to Lindgren, Warwick, Hickerson, and Winkler. The deed stated that the "total consideration for this transfer is less than $500.00." Holcomb also conveyed the remaining portion of the southeast quarter, as well as the south 60 feet of the east 330 feet of the northeast quarter, to Wayne H. Yoemans *794 via a contract for deed for $9,750.00. The contract for deed stated that the parcel was not subject to any liens.
Helgeson died in 2007, extinguishing his life estate. On November 30, 2007, Lindgren, Warwick, Hickerson, and Winkler conveyed to respondent Spruce Shadows, Inc. their entire interest in the property, i.e., (1) the northeast quarter, less the south 60 feet of the east 330 feet, and (2) the north 60 feet of the west 330 feet of the southeast quarter.
On April 14, 2008, Spruce Shadows conveyed the same portion of the property to respondent Erich Schissel, via a contract for deed for $45,995.00. This contract for deed also warranted to Schissel that the parcel was not subject to any liens.
On September 4 and 5, 2008, appellant commenced this action seeking to foreclose her lien by personally serving summonses and the complaint on respondent Estate of Olaf Helgeson, Hickerson, Schissel, Spruce Shadows, Winkler, Wayne Yoemans, Catherine Yoemans, and First National Bank, Bagley, Fosston. Appellant served Holcomb, Warwick, and Lindgren by publication. The Helgeson estate, Lindgren, Warwick, Hickerson, Winkler, Spruce Shadows, and Schissel answered the complaint. Holcomb, the Yoemans, and the bank have not appeared in this action.
Respondents moved for summary judgment, arguing that appellant's claim was barred by the 10-year statute of limitations for enforcing a judgment or judgment lien contained in Minn.Stat. §§ 548.09 and 550.01 (2008). The district court granted summary judgment on this basis and dismissed appellant's claim.
ISSUE
Is appellant's claim barred by the 10-year statute of limitations for enforcing a judgment or judgment lien contained in Minn.Stat. §§ 548.09 and 550.01 (2008)?
ANALYSIS
"The construction and applicability of statutes of limitations are questions of law that this court reviews de novo." Noske v. Friedberg, 670 N.W.2d 740, 742 (Minn.2003) (quotation omitted). Summary judgment must be reversed if the district court erred in its application of the law. State by Cooper v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2, 4 (Minn.1990).
The district court concluded that, because appellant's lien is a judgment lien, she was required to foreclose or otherwise collect on the lien within ten years of entry of the dissolution judgment, i.e., by June 16, 1993. See Minn.Stat. § 548.09, subd. 1 (providing that, from time of docketing, any judgment requiring payment of money "is a lien, in the amount unpaid, upon all real property in the county then or thereafter owned by the judgment debtor. . . . The judgment survives, and the lien continues, for ten years after its entry."); see also Minn.Stat. § 550.01 (providing that judgment must be enforced within ten years of its entry).
But marital liens, such as appellant's, are not judgment liens; they are a method of distributing property in a dissolution proceeding.[1] "A lien on a homestead is a division of property." Charlson v. Charlson, 374 N.W.2d 473, 476 (Minn. *795 App.1985). A lien is "an encumbrance on property as security for the payment of debt." Minn.Stat. § 514.99, subd. 1(b) (2008). A marital lien is personal property, though it is not an estate or an interest in the parcel of real property itself. Granse & Assocs. v. Kimm, 529 N.W.2d 6, 8 (Minn.App.1995), review denied (Minn. Apr. 27, 1995). A district court's use of a marital lien to divide property must have "an acceptable basis in fact and principle." Rohling v. Rohling, 379 N.W.2d 519, 522-23 (Minn.1986) (approving marital lien that did not mature for 15 years).
A marital lien may be foreclosed as a mortgage under Minn.Stat. §§ 581.01.12 (2008) when the original judgment does not expressly provide a different means for enforcement. Erickson v. Erickson, 452 N.W.2d 253, 256 (Minn.App.1990). The statute of limitations for mortgage foreclosure is "15 years from the maturity of the whole of the debt secured by the mortgage." Minn.Stat. § 541.03, subd. 1. Here, the judgment did not expressly provide a means for enforcement. Therefore, appellant's lien may be foreclosed as a mortgage, for which the statute of limitations is 15 years. See Minn.Stat. § 541.03, subd. 1. Because the debt secured by appellant's marital lien was $5,000.00 "payable when the premises are sold," appellant's foreclosure action is not time-barred until 15 years from the date the property was sold.[2]
We remand for further proceedings, including a determination of if and when various portions of the property were sold. Whether a transaction constitutes a "sale" for the purposes of triggering a duty to pay in a dissolution judgment is a question of fact. See Redmond v. Redmond, 594 N.W.2d 272, 276 (Minn.App. 1999) (reviewing decision that transaction was sale as finding of fact subject to reversal only if clearly erroneous). In making this determination, the district court should look to the intention of the parties at the time of the transaction. See Ministers Life Cas. Union v. Franklin Park Towers Corp., 307 Minn. 134, 137-38, 239 N.W.2d 207, 210 (1976) (discussing factual distinction between sale and equitable mortgage). "Intention is to be ascertained by the written memorials of the transaction and the attendant facts and circumstances." Id. at 138, 239 N.W.2d at 210.
Finally, to decrease the likelihood of such disputes, we suggest that courts using marital liens include in their orders: (1) the value of the debt to be secured by the lien, in terms of either an absolute dollar amount or a percentage of the equity or ultimate sale price of the property; (2) the applicable interest rate, if any, which should be justified in the accounting of the court's division of the marital assets, see Thomas v. Thomas, 407 N.W.2d 124, 127 (Minn.App.1987) (requiring specific findings to explain decision not to require payment of interest); (3) an ascertainable date of maturity; (4) a specific mechanism for enforcement; and (5) an explanation of whether the lien is in the nature of child support or purely a division of property, see Holmberg v. Holmberg, 578 N.W.2d 817, 825 & n.8 (Minn.App.1998) (noting *796 that lien in nature of child support is subject to modification, while divisions of property are final), aff'd, 588 N.W.2d 720 (Minn.1999).
DECISION
Summary judgment was improperly granted on the basis that appellant's foreclosure action was time-barred under the 10-year statute of limitations for enforcement of a judgment. Because no more specific enforcement mechanism was provided in the original dissolution judgment, appellant's lien may be foreclosed as a mortgage to which the 15-year statute of limitations contained in Minn.Stat. § 541.03, subd. 1, applies.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  These liens are also referred to as equitable liens, homestead liens, or spousal liens. See, e.g., Rohling v. Rohling, 379 N.W.2d 519, 523 (Minn. 1986) (using "equitable lien"); Holmberg v. Holmberg, 578 N.W.2d 817, 819 (Minn. App.1998) (using "homestead lien"), aff'd, 588 N.W.2d 720 (Minn. 1999); Granse & Assocs. v. Kimm, 529 N.W.2d 6, 8 (Minn.App. 1995) (using "marital lien"), review denied (Minn. Apr. 27, 1995); Erickson v. Erickson, 452 N.W.2d 253, 256 (Minn.App. 1990) (using "spousal lien").
[2]  We distinguish this case from the recent decision of Dahlin v. Kroening, in which this court held that a judgment for spousal-maintenance arrearages may be continuously renewed by bringing an action within ten years of entry of the previous judgment. 784 N.W.2d 406, 413 (Minn.App.2010) (discussing Minn.Stat. §§ 541.04, 548.09, subd. 1, 548.091 (2008)). We emphasize that the lien in this case does not arise out of a money judgment that expired after 10 yearsit was directly awarded by the court as a method of property division. See Charlson, 374 N.W.2d at 476 (stating that marital lien is method of distributing property in dissolution proceeding).

=== CASE 9738300 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:32.011989+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE CRAVEN delivered the opinion of the court: The circuit court of Vermilion County, in a citation proceeding, held that a certain certificate of deposit issued by the Rankin State Bank was the property of the Estate of Amos Baxter, deceased, the depositor. Frank and Carrie Brewer, listed as joint tenants on the account, appeal. We affirm. The subject certificate of deposit was issued in July of 1967 and recited that Baxter and the Brewers had deposited $13,500 in the bank. The certificate was payable after maturity to Baxter or Frank Brewer or Carrie Brewer, as joint tenants with right of survivorship. The trial court concluded that the certificate of deposit was a "deposit” and that in the absence of an agreement in writing, signed by the prospective joint tenants, no joint tenancy was created. The thorough memorandum of the trial court makes it clear that in the opinion of that court the transaction is controlled by paragraph 2(a) of ch. 76, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, as interpreted in Doubler v. Doubler, 412 Ill. 597, 107 N.E.2d 789, and Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill.2d 62, 185 N.E.2d 850. We agree with that determination. Paragraph 2(b) of the cited statute relates to stocks, bonds, or other evidence of indebtedness issued or registered by any corporation, association or other entity, in the name of two or more persons as joint tenants. An agreement signed by all joint tenants is not a condition precedent to the creation of a joint tenancy in such instruments. By the language of sub-section (a), relating to deposits in any bank or trust company, such a signed agreement is required.  A certificate of deposit of a bank perhaps has some incidental relationship to the instruments referred to in sub-section (b), particularly “evidence of indebtedness”. Essentially, however, it is a bank deposit and we agree with the determination of our colleagues in the Fifth District that certificates of deposit should be treated as any other bank deposit, checking account, savings account or any variable of the same. See In re Estate of White, 4 Ill.App.3d 505, 282 N.E.2d 235, Petition for Leave to Appeal allwd. Sept. 28, 1972, S.Ct. Gen. No. 45174. Thus, we hold that a certificate of deposit is a “deposit” within the contemplation of sub-paragraph (a) of the cited statute and a signed agreement by all prospective joint tenants is necessary in order to create rights of survivorship in the deposit.  The respondents assert that the citation, proceeding was limited to discovery, or at least that it failed to allege sufficient facts to apprise them of the nature of the proceeding. The petition for citation alleged that the Brewers had in their possession certain assets of the estate of the decedent, specifically listing the certificate of deposit. The petition sought discovery and such further order of the court as may be requisite. This case proceeded to trial before the court upon the issue of the right to the property — not merely discovery. (Cf. In re Conservatorship of Baker, 79 Ill.App.2d 234, 223 N.E.2d 744.) Indeed, counsel for the respondents in his opening statement indicated that the discovery aspect of the case was past and that now the court was to determine whether the property was that of the decedent or that of the respondents. In this context there could hardly be surprise or prejudice to the respondents when the issue was, in fact, expanded beyond discovery to the question of title to the property. The issue of title may be determined in a citation proceeding. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 3, par. 185; In re Estate of Garrett, 81 Ill.App.2d 141, 224 N.E.2d 654.  Since no joint tenancy was created there is no presumption of donative intent. (Murgic v. Granite City Trust & Savings Bank, 31 Ill.2d 587, 202 N.E.2d 470.) This record cannot be said to establish by the requisite evidence that there was a completed gift. The judgment of the circuit court of Vermilion County was correct and that judgment is affirmed. Judgment affirmed. SIMKINS, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738301 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:32.016244+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE TRAPP dissenting: I must dissent from the principal opinion for the reason that it does not take into account the particular characteristics of the instrument, but considers that it “should be treated as other bank deposits, checking accounts or savings accounts”, upon the authority of In re Estate of White, 4 IE.App.3d 505, 282 N.E.2d 235. The instrument involved was in words and figures as follows: “CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT Rankin State Bank No. 01717 70-2221 Rankin, IEinois 7-3-67 —Amos Baxter or Frank Brewer or Carrie Brewer — has deposited in this bank as joint tenants with right of survivorship Rankin State Bank 13,500 Dols 00 cts Dollars $13,500.00 Payable to the order of — Amos Baxter or Frank. Brewer or Carrie Brewer in current funds as joint tenants with right of survivorship on return of this certificate properly endorsed Twelve (12) months after date with interest at the rate of 4½ per cent from date of maturity. This certificate cannot be paid before maturity No interest paid after maturity MARGARET HENDRICKS Cashier Not Subject to Check” The trial court treated the certificate of deposit as an ordinary bank deposit and held that, in the absence of an agreement in writing by the prospective joint tenants, no joint tenancy with right of survivorship was created and accordingly the certificate was an asset of the estate. The instrument in its particular form clearly falls within the language of Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 76, par. 2(b): “When shares of stock, bond or other evidences of indebtedness or of interest are or have been issued or registered by any corporation, association or other entity in the names of two or more persons as joint tenants with the right of survivorship, such corporation, association or other entity and their respective transfer agents may, upon the death of any one of such registered owners, transfer said shares of stock, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness or interest to or upon the order of the survivors of such registered owners, without inquiry into the existence, validity or effect of any such will or other instrument in writing or the right of the survivor or survivors to receive the property, and without liability to any other person whomsoever who might claim an interest in or a right to receive all or a portion of the property so transferred; * * *.” (Emphasis supplied.) It likewise comes within the justification given in Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill.2d 62, 185 N.E.2d 854, which differentiates corporate stock from ordinary bank deposits. The court there said: “The registration of stock ownership upon the books of the corporation in appropriate statutory language is sufficient to vest title, subject to divestment if the circumstances surrounding the transaction warrant it. This may seem at odds with our approval of the holding in the Doubler case that an agreement must be signed by the parties to effectuate survivorship rights in a bank account. Aside from the differences in the several statutory provisions, we think there is ample justification in the very nature of the property. Corporate stock is issued in fixed units of ownership (shares of stock) and remain fixed, whereas a bank account is a fluctuating res, subject to daily change in amount by any of the joint owners. Joint tenancy in such an unstable atmosphere as a shifting bank account should be created by contract of the parties detailing their rights and duties under existing statutory authority. Bank accounts are in this respect similar to saving and loan capital accounts, and a joint account in the latter is not recognized by the Illinois Savings and Loan Act unless there is an agreement in writing. Promissory notes when drawn in appropriate language, are instruments in writing within the meaning of section 2 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, ch. 76, par. 2) and constitute exceptions to the provision, abolishing joint tenancy in personal property.” The certificate of deposit in this case fits the definition of a negotiable instrument under Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 26, par. 3—104(1) and 2(c). The certificate of deposit in this case is a fixed sum. It is specifically not subject to withdrawal or payment prior to maturity. It bears interest only until maturity, and it requires presentation of the instrument properly endorsed for payment at a fixed date. The instrument has all the differences from a regular withdrawable bank deposit that are noted in reference to corporate stock by the court in Frye v. Wubbena, 26 Ill.2d 62, 185 N.E.2d 854. It also has all the characteristics of a promissory note which is stated to be an exception to section 2(a) by the same court. It should be further noted that in Frey v. Wuhhena, supra at p. 75, the court awarded a certificate of deposit to a survivor because it was “in apt language”. No mention was made of a separate agreement signed by the parties. Upon such premise it seems proper to determine that the joint tenancy did not fail for want of a separate signed agreement.

=== CASE 2215207 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.756179+00 ===

362 Mass. 738 (1973)
291 N.E.2d 629
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
FRANKLIN D. HORNE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 6, 1972.
January 4, 1973.
Present: TAURO, C.J., REARDON, QUIRICO, KAPLAN, & WILKINS, JJ.
Robert V. Greco for the defendant.
John P. Connor, Jr., Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
TAURO, C.J.
The defendant appeals under G.L.c. 278, §§ 33A-33G, from convictions upon indictments charging breaking and entering in the nighttime with intent *739 to commit larceny (Indictment No. 42632), kidnapping (Indictment No. 42633), armed robbery (Indictment No. 42634), assault and battery by means of a dangerous weapon (Indictment Nos. 42635 and 42636) and escape (Indictment No. 42637). The indictments were returned June 9, 1967, in the Superior Court in Norfolk County. The actual trial on these indictments did not begin until June, 1971. The only error assigned and argued was the denial of the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictments. The defendant contends that the failure of the Commonwealth to try the defendant between June 9, 1967, and October 13, 1970, deprived him of his constitutional right to a speedy trial guaranteed by art. 11 of our Declaration of Rights and the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, applicable to the States under the Fourteenth Amendment. Commonwealth v. Hanley, 337 Mass. 384, cert. den. sub nom. Hanley v. Massachusetts, 358 U.S. 850. Commonwealth v. Chase, 348 Mass. 100. Klopfer v. North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213. Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514.
The following pertinent facts appear from the record before us. The defendant escaped from the Correctional Institution at Walpole on May 21, 1967. All the charges for which he was later indicted arose from activities following his escape. On May 29, 1967, the defendant was arrested on unrelated charges in West Virginia and transferred to Kentucky. The district attorney of Norfolk County (district attorney) learned on June 6, 1967, that the defendant was in Kentucky being held for grand jury action by Federal and Kentucky authorities. On June 9, the defendant was indicted in Norfolk County on the charges stemming from his escape. The defendant was transferred from Kentucky to Tennessee where he was indicted on an unrelated kidnapping charge October 3, 1967. On October 4, 1967, at the first criminal session after the Massachusetts indictments were returned, a default was entered and a capias issued against the defendant. On March 1, 1968, the Norfolk County *740 indictments were filed pending the defendant's apprehension. On March 5, 1968, the district attorney wrote a letter to the Tennessee authorities which enclosed a capias and requested information as to when the defendant would be released and on the disposition of charges against him. The defendant was thereafter tried and convicted in Tennessee on May 9, 1968. In July of 1968, the defendant began serving a thirty-six and one-half years Federal sentence in Atlanta. After learning on July 30, 1968, that the defendant was beginning to serve his sentence, the district attorney lodged a capias against him in August, 1968. On December 12, 1968, the defendant filed a motion moving for a speedy trial. In accord with G.L.c. 277, § 72A, the defendant was brought promptly before the court on February 19, 1969, as which time the case was continued for trial. On March 13, 1969, the defendant appeared in Norfolk Superior Court at which time the indictments were filed without a change of plea with the defendant's consent. The Commonwealth agreed to the allowance of defence counsel's request that the indictments be filed because the defendant, age thirty-five, was then serving a thirty-six and one-half year sentence. However, the district attorney removed the indictments from the file and had a capias lodged against the defendant on June 9, 1969, after learning that the defendant's Federal conviction had been reversed and a new trial granted. On October 7, 1969, after a second trial on the Federal charges, the defendant was acquitted on grounds of insanity. The Commonwealth then commenced rendition proceedings which the defendant opposed until August 23, 1970, at which time the defendant was returned to this Commonwealth. On October 13, 1970, the defendant filed a motion to dismiss the indictments based on his claim that the delay between June 9, 1967, and October 13, 1970, violated his constitutional right to a speedy trial. After a full hearing on the motion the Superior Court judge denied the defendant's motion to dismiss on May 25, 1971. The delay between October, 1970, and May, *741 1971, was for the most part due to the defendant's temporary transfer to a Federal institution in Georgia. This was upon his motion for purposes of prosecuting civil actions brought by him in that jurisdiction, and he stipulated that the delay so caused was not material in the instant case.
Before reaching the merits of the defendant's claim, we must first decide whether he has waived his right to a speedy trial by his failure to seek action on his motion for a speedy trial and his acquiescence in his counsel's motion that the indictments be filed. Our decisions in Commonwealth v. Marsh, 354 Mass. 713, 718, and Commonwealth v. Lauria, 359 Mass. 168, lend strong support to the Commonwealth's argument that "[i]n order to be effective and negate an implication of waiver, the demand for trial should be made to the court and not merely the district attorney or the clerk's office." We established a strict demand-waiver rule in the Marsh case, supra, which, if followed, would warrant a finding that Horne waived his right to a speedy trial by his failure to present his motion for a speedy trial to a judge. As stated in the Marsh case, "Defendants who are interested only in laying the groundwork for dismissal in the event of delay should not prevail merely because a motion had previously been filed. Where counsel files motions for trial, but does not seek action on them, it is a reasonable inference that the defendant prefers no trial.... Waiver of the right to a speedy trial is implicit in such inaction," supra, at 718. In the Lauria case, supra, we noted that "[t]o negative the implication of waiver, Lauria's motion for a speedy trial should have been promptly presented to a judge." (P. 480.)
However, the United States Supreme Court rejected this automatic demand-waiver rule in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 528. The Supreme Court noted, "The nature of the speedy trial right does make it impossible to pinpoint a precise time in the process when the right must be asserted or waived, but that fact does not argue for placing the burden of protecting the right solely on *742 defendants. A defendant has no duty to bring himself to trial; the State has that duty as well as the duty of insuring that the trial is consistent with due process." (P. 527.) Therefore, the court rejected "the rule that a defendant who fails to demand a speedy trial forever waives his right. This does not mean, however, that the defendant has no responsibility to assert his right. We think the better rule is that the defendant's assertion of or failure to assert his right to a speedy trial is one of the factors to be considered in an inquiry into the deprivation of the right." (P. 528.) The Supreme Court reasoned that such a formulation avoids the rigidities of the demand-waiver rule and the resulting possible unfairness in its application. The court concluded in the Barker case that every speedy trial case must be considered on an "ad hoc" basis where factors such as "Length of delay, the reason for the delay, the defendant's assertion of his right, and prejudice to the defendant" (P. 530) should be considered in determining whether a particular defendant has been deprived of his right. (P. 530.)
Thus, Barker v. Wingo, supra, creates a balancing test which treats the defendant's failure to assert his speedy trial right as one of the many factors to be considered in the "difficult and sensitive balancing process." (P. 533.) The rationale in the Barker case compels us to deviate from the strict demand-waiver rule we adopted in Commonwealth v. Marsh, supra, where we held that the defendant waived his speedy trial right despite his motion demanding one because of his failure to bring his motion to the trial court's attention. As we understand the Barker case, its holding precludes a finding of waiver even in those cases where the defendant fails to make a motion for a speedy trial, unless the prosecution can "show that the claimed waiver was knowingly and voluntarily made."[1] (P. 529.)
*743 The facts of this case present a close question as to whether Horne's failure to press his motion for a speedy trial and his acquiescence in the filing of the indictments constituted a knowing and voluntary waiver of his right to a speedy trial. However, even if we assume that the prosecution did not satisfy its burden of showing that Horne intentionally relinquished a known right, see Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464, our consideration of the reason for the delay between indictment and trial and the claim of prejudice involved lead us to conclude that the defendant's constitutional right to a speedy trial was not denied.
LENGTH AND REASON FOR DELAY.
The three year four month delay between indictment and the defendant's motion to dismiss is sufficient to "trigger" a careful examination of the reasons for the delay. The mere fact that the defendant was in custody in another jurisdiction after his escape from the Correctional Institute at Walpole does not affect his right to a speedy trial on the charges stemming from the escape. The key issue presented by the facts of the instant case is whether the Commonwealth took "reasonable action to prevent undue delay in bringing a defendant to trial." Commonwealth v. McGrath, 348 Mass. 748, 752.
The reasonableness of the Commonwealth's actions must of necessity be determined on consideration of the special circumstances of each case. In the McGrath case, the defendant was merely serving out a sentence in a Federal prison. However, most of the delays in the instant case came from the fact that there were contemporaneous Federal proceedings against the defendant which made it impractical for the Commonwealth to obtain the defendant's presence in Massachusetts without disrupting these concurrent Federal proceedings. Our review of the facts leads us to conclude that the Superior Court judge was warranted in finding that "[n]o evidence appeared before me that it was practical *744 or even possible during this period for the Massachusetts authorities to obtain the custody of the defendant for a sufficient number of weeks or months to accomplish the trial of the Massachusetts indictments." As soon as the district attorney learned that the defendant's Federal trial had ended and the defendant had started to serve a thirty-six and one-half year sentence, he lodged a capias against him (August, 1968). When the defendant demanded a speedy trial on these indictments, he was promptly brought before the court. Even if the defendant's acquiescence in the filing of the indictments did not constitute a total waiver, the defendant must have realized that filing would cause further delay before he was actually brought to trial. The evidence supports the judge's finding "from the entire proceedings including the fact that competent counsel had explained to the defendant (before March 13, 1969) the meaning of filing with a change of plea to guilty ... that the defendant, in moving by his own counsel to have the indictments filed while representing to the court that the defendant was serving a 361/2 year federal sentence, appreciated that the trial of the indictments ... [was] being indefinitely deferred in recognition only of the long federal sentence then existing." Thus, the defendant was responsible for this three month delay caused by the filing of the indictments.
As soon as the district attorney learned that the defendant's conviction had been reversed and a new trial had been ordered on the Federal charges, he removed the indictments from the file and a capias was lodged against the defendant at the Federal penitentiary (June, 1969). Once again a four month delay was caused by the necessity of waiting until the defendant's new Federal trial had been completed. The district attorney's deference to Federal proceedings was justified. A trial under the Massachusetts indictments would not have been likely if the second Federal trial had resulted in a guilty verdict for the defendant and he had received a sentence similar in length to the first Federal sentence *745 of thirty-six and one-half years. This sentence led to the original agreement to file the Massachusetts indictments. After the defendant's acquittal in the second Federal trial, the district attorney moved promptly to bring the defendant to trial.
A further lengthy delay (November, 1969-August, 1970) was caused by the defendant's opposition to rendition proceedings instituted by Massachusetts. The trial judge found that "[t]he district attorney brought the defendant before the court and moved for trial at the first criminal session of the court after the defendant's return to Massachusetts was finally procured."
Thus, we conclude that the delay in the defendant's trial (approximately two years and four months) caused by the Commonwealth[2] between indictment and trial was justified by the Commonwealth's decision to defer trial of the defendant until two contemporaneous Federal trials on unrelated Federal indictments had been completed. Such deference to another jurisdiction appears to be reasonable where different jurisdictions have indicted the same individual for different crimes. In this case, the Commonwealth's decision to defer to the jurisdiction that had immediate custody of the defendant was reasonable and does not constitute an unreasonable denial of a speedy trial. See Commonwealth v. Domanski, 332 Mass. 66, at 72-73.
PREJUDICE.
The defendant contended that he was prejudiced by the delay because it impaired his ability to present his insanity defence. An examination of the defendant's argument reveals that it is entirely without merit and not deserving of serious discussion. In effect, this claim *746 rests on a letter written by Dr. Rosenwald to the court. Dr. Rosenwald noted, "[I]t is my opinion that any opinion on my part as to the defendant's psychiatric condition on May 21, 1967, would have to be based largely on the previous psychiatric examinations and their consistency with the findings of a current examination.... [T]he closer to ... [May 21, 1967] that the examination occurred the more certainty it would have, but after a period of five to six months it is most unlikely that further delay would make any difference." Since the defence did present an expert witness, Dr. Dearman, who testified that the defendant was a psychopath on May 21, 1967, the prejudice caused by delay was the loss of possible corroborating psychiatric testimony. His claim of prejudice is based on the speculation that if psychiatrists had examined him within six months of his escape, they might have assisted in his defence. This type of speculative evidence is totally insufficient to show that the delay actually impaired the defendant's defence; especially where the potential harm was not the product of an unreasonable delay by the Commonwealth in bringing the defendant to trial.
In the absence of any unreasonable delay or serious prejudice to the defendant's defence, we find that the defendant's right to a speedy trial was not denied.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  However, the policy considerations noted in the Marsh case concerning defendants "interested only in laying the groundwork for dismissal in the event of delay," supra, at 718, still may be considered in the delicate balancing test we must make in determining whether the defendant's speedy trial right has been denied.
[2]  We need not consider the other delays caused by the filing of the indictments (three months) and the defendant's opposition to rendition proceedings (nine months). As we noted in Commonwealth v. Loftis, 361 Mass. 545, 549-550, "it would be unconscionable to permit the defendant to take advantage of a situation where a substantial part of the delay in the disposition of the cases was obviously caused by him."

=== CASE 2215219 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.94428+00 ===

362 Mass. 803 (1973)
291 N.E.2d 600
ESTHER OLOFSON & another
vs.
MARTIN KILGALLON & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
November 10, 1972.
January 12, 1973.
Present: TAURO, C.J., REARDON, HENNESSEY, KAPLAN, & WILKINS, JJ.
Edward D. McCarthy for the plaintiffs.
David W. Woods, for the defendants, submitted a brief.
HENNESSEY, J.
This is a tort action in which the plaintiffs seek to recover for personal injuries sustained as a result of a collision between a taxicab in which they were passengers and a vehicle allegedly owned by the defendant *804 Martin Kilgallon, and allegedly operated by the defendant Robert Donohue. The case was tried in the District Court, and the judge entered findings for the plaintiffs against both defendants. On report to the Appellate Division the findings were vacated and judgments were ordered for the defendants. The plaintiffs appeal.
The issue presented arises out of the trial judge's denial of the defendants' request for a ruling that the evidence did not warrant a finding that the defendant Donohue was negligent. The Appellate Division decided that this was error and that the ruling should have been granted. If the findings against Donohue were warranted, so also were the findings against Kilgallon.
There was evidence showing that about 9 P.M. on March 11, 1969, the plaintiffs entered a taxicab in front of the Cambridge Savings Bank in Harvard Square, Cambridge. The taxicab then pulled out and came to a stop at a red light. After a few seconds the taxicab was "hit from the back." The other car was described by the plaintiffs as a dark colored car, possibly a Chevrolet, with a registration number of 166-070. Donohue denied that he was involved in the accident, but both plaintiffs identified him as the operator of the car. Martin Kilgallon admitted that he owned a 1964 Chevrolet with a registration number of 166-070 and that he lent it to Donohue on March 11, 1969, for business purposes. There was evidence that the plaintiffs were injured as a result of the collision, lost time from their employment and incurred medical expenses.
1. The plaintiffs argue that the Appellate Division was in error by excluding from consideration some of the evidence in the report of the trial judge. An examination of the report in this case reveals that it did not comply in all respects with Rule 28 of the Rules of the District Courts (1965) and the model report included within the rules. The model report requires both (1) a summary of the essential evidence and (2) the judge's findings of facts. A difficulty arises in this case because, although the judge listed most of the evidence in a separate section *805 in his report, some of the evidence was included with his findings of facts. The evidence included with the findings stated that the taxicab stopped for a few seconds and that the plaintiffs sustained injuries as a result of the impact, causing them to be absent from their employment and causing them to incur medical expenses. The Appellate Division, deciding that these findings were not supported by any evidence in the report, concluded that the judge's finding of negligence, therefore, was not supported by his summary of the evidence. Compare Buckley v. Railway Exp. Agency, Inc. 323 Mass. 448, 451.
While the model report requires a listing of the evidence and the findings of facts separately, in this case it is clear that these disputed findings were themselves evidence, since the judge specifically preceded this information with "There was evidence that...." From a reading of the entire report it is clear that the judge intended that those elements excluded by the Appellate Division should be treated as both a summary of evidence and as findings of facts, and we treat those elements accordingly.
2. The plaintiffs further argue that the trial judge was correct when he denied the defendants' request for a ruling that the evidence did not warrant a finding that the defendant Donohue was negligent.
The mere happening of an accident does not establish negligence on the part of the defendant, even in a case where the defendant's vehicle strikes the plaintiff's vehicle in the rear. Reardon v. Boston Elev. Ry. 247 Mass. 124, 126. Hendler v. Coffey, 278 Mass. 339, 340. However, a finding of negligence in such a case may be warranted on slight evidence of the circumstances. Hendler v. Coffey, supra, at 340. Jennings v. Bragdon, 289 Mass. 595, 597. Budd v. Foley, 302 Mass. 411, 413. Lech v. Escobar, 318 Mass. 711, 712. Mazukna v. Powers, 333 Mass. 331, 333.
In the Hendler case, supra, the fact that a taxicab was stopped by a policeman at a crossing for one minute and that the defendant did not see it before he struck the taxicab *806 in the rear warranted a finding that the defendant was negligent. In the Jennings case, supra, a finding of negligence was warranted where the circumstances revealed that the plaintiffs had been stopped by another collision only a few seconds before the defendant's automobile struck the rear of the plaintiff's car. In the Lech case, supra, an inference of negligence was permitted where the circumstances were such that while the plaintiff's car was stopped at an intersection, the defendant drove into it with considerable force. Where, however, the defendant cannot be charged with foreseeing the intervening act of a third person, such as in some chain collisions, or where the plaintiff's car is stopped on an open highway, recovery has been denied. Frazier v. Cordialino, 356 Mass. 465. Varisco v. Malovin, 356 Mass. 712.
In the instant case, the taxicab in which the plaintiffs were passengers was stopped for a few seconds at a red light in a very congested area of Cambridge. The taxicab was not stopped on a busy highway, nor was it shown that the defendants' automobile was struck from the rear, causing it to strike the taxicab. Although there was no direct evidence of Donohue's conduct, the judge could find that Donohue should have seen the taxicab and that he ought to have anticipated standing automobiles at a red light. From the evidence, the judge could infer that Donohue was negligent, "either in failing to observe or in failing to stop or in driving too fast or too near" the taxicab. Jennings v. Bragdon, supra, at 598. Evidence that Donohue left the scene of the accident without identifying himself could properly be considered as some further proof of his liability (Hall v. Shain, 291 Mass. 506, 512-513, and cases cited) although such evidence alone would not establish liability against Donohue. Parsons v. Ryan, 340 Mass. 245, 249-250. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence of negligence to warrant a finding for the plaintiffs.
3. The order of the Appellate Division vacating the findings for the plaintiffs and ordering judgments to be *807 entered for the defendants is reversed. Judgments are to be entered for the plaintiffs.
So ordered.

=== CASE 2215223 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:58.992307+00 ===

53 Ill.2d 325 (1972)
291 N.E.2d 641
SLATIN'S PROPERTIES, INC., Appellee,
v.
ROSE HASSLER et al.  (Frank W. Tomenga et al., Appellants.)
No. 44653.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 30, 1972.
Rehearing denied January 26, 1973.
*326 PAUL S. SCHMID, of Wheaton, for appellants.
LYLE H. ROSSITER, of Glen Ellyn, for appellee.
Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.
MR. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI delivered the opinion of the court:
An action to quiet title to several vacant city lots was commenced in the circuit court of Du Page County. Defendants filed a counterclaim alleging that they were the owners of the contested properties. The trial court sustained the counterclaim, finding that defendants were *327 the owners, but the appellate court reversed (Slatin's Properties, Inc. v. Hassler, 132 Ill. App.2d 882, 271 N.E.2d 665), and we granted leave to appeal.
This cause involves two parcels of vacant and unoccupied property described as Lot 24 and Lot 11 of Block 6 located in the Glen Park Subdivision in Du Page County. The chronological sequence surrounding this cause was stipulated by the parties.
Plaintiff claims ownership of both lots from a chain of title originating from J. Duncan Barry's conveyances to the Chicago Title and Trust Co., as trustee, in April, 1928. Both deeds were promptly recorded. After a series of conveyances, plaintiff obtained title by quitclaim deed on December 6, 1956. Several months before instituting this action in 1965 plaintiff enclosed both lots with a wire fence. It is basically plaintiff's position that it possesses paramount title under the Conveyances Act which provides that deeds and other instruments shall take effect from and after the time they are filed of record. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1965, ch. 30, par. 29.
Defendant Frank Tomenga asserts ownership to Lot 11 through a chain of title originating from the purchase of the property by Anton Vanha under warranty deed from J. Duncan Barry (the common grantor) executed in October, 1927. However, this deed was not recorded until August 28, 1929. After a series of conveyances, Tomenga acquired the property in 1952 from the executor of Vanha's estate.
Co-defendant Frances Arne, as devisee of her husband's estate, claims ownership of Lot 24 based upon a contract to purchase this property entered between her husband and the Du Page Building and Development Organization on August 30, 1927. This contract was not recorded.
The record further indicates that each defendant and their predecessors have paid all general real-estate taxes and special assessments for sanitary disposal, sidewalks and *328 weed removal since 1928 until 1967 and during oral argument defense counsel has informed this court that defendants have continued to pay taxes until the present time.
Conversely, plaintiff and its predecessors in title have never paid any general real-estate taxes or special assessments levied upon the lots for approximately 40 years. Based upon these facts defendants contend that plaintiff, as holder of the paramount title (the record title), is barred from maintaining this action by section 7 of the Limitations Act which provides: "Whenever a person having color of title, made in good faith, to vacant and unoccupied land, shall pay all taxes legally assessed thereon for seven successive years, he or she shall be deemed and adjudged to be the legal owner of said vacant and unoccupied land, to the extent and according to the purport of his or her paper title. * * *" Ill. Rev. Stat. 1965, ch. 83, par. 7.
This section was originally enacted in 1839 (Laws of 1839, section 2, pp. 266-267, approved March 2, 1839) and has remained virtually unchanged. Numerous decisions of this court have construed section 7 as requiring that the person having color of title made in good faith and thereafter paying the legally assessed taxes for seven successive years must also take possession of the property. E.g., Failoni v. Chicago and North Western Ry. Co., 30 Ill.2d 258, 261; Chicago Title and Trust Co. v. Drobnick, 20 Ill.2d 374, 379; White v. Harris, 206 Ill. 584, 589; Gage v. Smith, 142 Ill. 191, 195; Paullin v. Hale, 40 Ill. 274, 277; Stearns v. Gittings, 23 Ill. 332, 337.
It is not seriously questioned that each defendant holds color of title which was received in good faith and has paid taxes for over seven years. They contend, moreover, that in light of the character of the property involved in this proceeding they have exercised sufficient acts of "possession" necessary to assert the bar imposed by section 7. These are described as payment of real estate taxes and special assessment levies for sewerage, sidewalks *329 and weed removal. However, they are unable to cite any authority to support their position that these acts constitute sufficient possession under that section.
Possession within the meaning of section 7 has been defined as the appropriation of land "to the individual use in such a manner as to apprise the community or neighborhood that it is in the exclusive use and enjoyment of the person so appropriating it. The character of the possession must be such as to arrest attention, and put others claiming title upon inquiry." (Chicago Title and Trust Co. v. Drobnick, 20 Ill.2d 374, 379; see also Robertson v. Bachmann, 352 Ill. 291, 296; Wylie v. Fisher, 337 Ill. 488, 490; Towle v. Quante, 246 Ill. 568, 574.) We do not believe that defendants' mere payments of taxes and special assessments constitute sufficient acts of "possession."
Alternatively, defendants argue that this court has misconstrued the requirements of the section in necessitating the element of possession to effectuate the bar. We do not agree. The requirement of possession has become a well-settled rule of property in this jurisdiction and defendants have advanced no compelling argument necessitating reconsideration of these decisions.
Defendants further argue that plaintiff is precluded from instituting this suit because it is barred by laches. The appellate court held that the issue was properly before it, and we agree. (132 Ill. App.2d 882, 887, 271 N.E.2d 665, 669.) The appellate court rejected defendants' contention, having concluded that plaintiff's title would be transferred merely because it had failed to pay taxes and this result could only occur under section 7 of the Limitations Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1965, ch. 83, par. 7) or the pertinent sections of the Revenue Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1965, ch. 120, par. 697 et seq.).
We find that the appellate court, however, was unduly restrictive in adversely ruling upon defendants' contention. The defense of laches, which is dependent upon the facts *330 of each case, has been defined as "such neglect or omission to assert a right, taken in conjunction with a lapse of time of more or less duration and other circumstances causing prejudice to an adverse party, as will operate to bar relief in equity." (Pyle v. Ferrell, 12 Ill.2d 547, 552.) When the facts indicate that it would be inequitable to allow a party to assert title, laches will bar this right even within the statutory period of limitation. McCleary v. Lewis, 397 Ill. 76, 83.
In Pyle the court considered four factors in determining the applicability of this equitable defense: "(1) Conduct on the part of the defendant giving rise to the situation of which complaint is made and for which the complainant seeks a remedy; (2) delay in asserting the complainant's rights, the complainant having had notice or knowledge of defendant's conduct and the opportunity to institute a suit; (3) lack of knowledge or notice on the part of the defendant that the complainant would assert the right on which he bases his suit, and (4) injury or prejudice to the defendant in the event relief is accorded to the complainant or the suit is held not to be barred." 12 Ill.2d at 553.
Under the circumstances of this case we believe that the aforementioned requirements were met, thereby establishing the defense of laches which bars plaintiff's action in the present case. Defendants who apparently do not reside within this jurisdiction have claimed ownership of the property in question and, if plaintiff is allowed to succeed in this suit, they will be prejudiced inasmuch as they will lose any right to the property for which they and their predecessors have assumed the increasing tax burden for 40 years.
The only remaining factor to be considered is whether plaintiff had notice or knowledge of defendants' claims, yet unreasonably delayed in asserting its rights. In announcing his decision the trial judge, after examining plaintiff's chain of title, commented that plaintiff and its *331 predecessors were "not neophyte[s] or amateur[s] in real estate or title matters." Moreover, defendants' payment of taxes for nearly nine years after plaintiff acquired title to these lots was a matter of public record and it appears that defendants did not commit any deceptive act which would prevent plaintiff from discovering their possible claim. At the time plaintiff acquired the property, its principal office was located in Du Page County in proximity to the necessary records. Under these particular facts, we conclude that plaintiff failed to exercise the required vigilance by which it could have ascertained defendants' claims and promptly instituted the necessary action. See Pyle v. Ferrell, 12 Ill.2d 547, 554.
In this action to quiet title, both plaintiff and defendants seek affirmative relief. All necessary persons are made parties to the suit. We believe that ownership of the properties involved should be permanently determined under these circumstances. As previously noted, possession necessary to effectuate the bar of section 7 of the Limitations Act must be of such nature as to place others claiming title upon inquiry and to apprise the community or neighborhood that it is in the exclusive use and enjoyment of the person or persons so appropriating it.
We have heretofore concluded that, by virtue of the payment of taxes for approximately 40 years by the defendants, the plaintiff should have been put on inquiry as to defendants' adverse claims and is now barred by laches from asserting any claims to the premises in question.
For these reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County is affirmed.
Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9738302 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:39.387382+00 ===

PATIENCE DRAKE ROGGENSACK, J.
¶ 1. We review a decision of the court of appeals1 reversing the circuit court's decision,2 which granted summary judgment in favor of Nuvell Credit Corporation (Nuvell) and dismissed plaintiff Denice Brunton's (Brunton) action. The dispositive issue in this case is whether under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) (2007-08)3 Nuvell "appeared] and waive[d] the improper venue" such that dismissal of the action, which arose out of a consumer credit transaction, was not required. We conclude that appearance and waiver under § 421.401(2) require two actions: (1) an appearance established by conduct recognized under the law as appearance and (2) waiver established by the defendant's knowledge of the proper venue and the intentional relinquishment of the right to proper venue. Nuvell appeared by responsive pleading, court appearances and litigating its defenses. However, neither Nuvell's failure to raise the improper venue in its answer nor its other appearances in this action constituted an intentional relinquishment of the right to proper venue. Because Nuvell did not both appear and waive the improper venue, the circuit court *141was required to dismiss the action when Nuvell raised the venue defect. See § 421.401(2)(b). Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the court of appeals.
I. BACKGROUND
¶ 2. On June 13, 2003, Brunton, a resident of Rock County, Wisconsin, bought a new car from Hesser Oldsmobile, Inc. (Hesser) a Rock County dealership. On June 26, 2003, Brunton and Hesser entered into a 72-month installment sale contract. Nuvell subsequently purchased Brunton's installment sale contract from Hesser.
¶ 3. Brunton failed to make payments on the installment sale contract in August, September, October and November 2005. Nuvell initiated debt collection activities against Brunton in November 2005.
¶ 4. On December 16, 2005, Brunton filed suit against Nuvell in Dane County Circuit Court, alleging that Nuvell violated the Wisconsin Consumer Act by engaging in debt collection practices prohibited by Wis. Stat. § 427.104. It is undisputed that this action arose out of a "consumer credit transaction" as defined in Wis. Stat. § 421.301(10).4 On February 2, 2006, Nuvell first appeared in the action and filed its answer, denying the *142allegations in Brunton's complaint. Over the next 14 months, the parties litigated the case in Dane County.5
¶ 5. On May 23, 2006, in the midst of litigating the prohibited debt collection practices suit, Nuvell commenced a replevin action against Brunton in Rock County Circuit Court. Although the parties dispute the exact words that were exchanged, it is undisputed that at an August 9, 2006 scheduling conference in the Rock County action, Brunton's lawyer recognized that filing Brunton's action in Dane County instead of Rock County was problematic under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2)(b) and raised this issue to Nuvell's counsel. Brunton requested that Nuvell stipulate to transferring venue to Rock County, rather than her dismissing the Dane County action and re-filing in Rock County. Nuvell refused to so stipulate, and Brunton did not take any further action regarding venue.
¶ 6. On February 27, 2007, Nuvell moved for summary judgment dismissing Brunton's suit because Brunton's action arose out of a consumer credit transaction, which required venue in Rock County not in Dane County. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2)(b), Nuvell argued that Brunton's action must be dismissed *143due to improper venue. Brunton contended that the action should not be dismissed because Nuvell appeared and waived the improper Dane County venue.
¶ 7. The circuit court granted Nuvell's motion for summary judgment. It concluded, relying on Kett v. Cnty. Credit Plan, Inc., 228 Wis. 2d 1, 596 N.W.2d 786 (1999), and Village of Trempealeau v. Mikrut, 2004 WI 79, 273 Wis. 2d 76, 681 N.W.2d 190, that improper venue is a "jurisdictional" defect that cannot be waived and therefore whether Nuvell timely objected to the improper venue was irrelevant.
¶ 8. The court of appeals reversed the circuit court's judgment and remanded for further proceedings, holding that by actively defending against Brunton's action for more than one year prior to moving to dismiss based on improper venue, Nuvell "appear[ed] and waive[d] the improper venue" within the meaning of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2).
¶ 9. We granted review and now reverse.
II. DISCUSSION
A. Standard of Review
¶ 10. We review summary judgment decisions independently, employing the same methodology as the circuit court. Blunt v. Medtronic, Inc., 2009 WI 16, ¶ 13, 315 Wis. 2d 612, 760 N.W.2d 396 (citing Acuity v. Bagadia, 2008 WI 62, ¶ 12, 310 Wis. 2d 197, 750 N.W.2d 817). Resolution of the question presented herein requires us to interpret and apply Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). " 'The interpretation and application of a statute to an undisputed set of facts are questions of law that we review independently.'" Estate of Genrich v. *144OHIC Ins. Co., 2009 WI 67, ¶ 10, 318 Wis. 2d 553, 769 N.W.2d 481 (quoting McNeil v. Hansen, 2007 WI 56, ¶ 7, 300 Wis. 2d 358, 731 N.W.2d 273).
B. The Parties' Positions
¶ 11. The parties offer competing interpretations of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). Before examining the language of the statute, it is instructive to summarize each party's arguments.
1. Brunton's position
¶ 12. Brunton argues that Wis. Stat. §§ 801.50 and 801.51, the general venue statutes, apply here instead of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). Section 801.51 permits any party to challenge venue on the grounds of noncompliance with § 801.50 "or any other statute designating proper venue." Brunton contends that this language incorporates § 421.401, the Wisconsin Consumer Act's venue statute. Section 801.51(1) requires a party to file a motion for a change of venue "[a]t or before the time the party serves his or her first motion or responsive pleading in the action." Accordingly, Brunton argues that Nuvell waived its challenge to venue because Nuvell's answer — its first responsive pleading — failed to raise the issue of improper venue.
¶ 13. Alternatively, Brunton argues that even if Wis. Stat. § 801.51 does not apply, Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) permits waiver of the improper venue. She contends we must construe waiver under § 421.401(2) as an implied waiver. Under Brunton's implied waiver argument, the improper venue is waived unless a defendant raises an objection to improper venue at the outset of litigation (i.e., in a party's first motion or *145responsive pleading). Because Nuvell failed to timely raise an objection to improper venue, Brunton argues Nuvell waived the improper venue.6
2. Nuvell's position
¶ 14. Relying on Kett, Nuvell argues that it did not appear and waive the improper venue because Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) requires an express waiver, and it did not expressly waive improper venue. Nuvell contends that requiring an express waiver properly puts the onus on plaintiffs to file in the proper county instead of requiring defendants to cure improper venue by raising an objection at the outset of litigation.
¶ 15. Nuvell further argues that an implied waiver is insufficient to constitute waiver under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) in light of the Wisconsin Consumer Act's purpose, which is to protect consumers. Nuvell notes that consumers will ordinarily be defendants in actions arising from consumer credit transactions. Accordingly, an express waiver is necessary to protect consumer defendants from inadvertently waiving improper venue by failing to object to improper venue in the first responsive pleading.
C. General Principles of Statutory Interpretation
¶ 16. Interpretation of a statute requires us to determine what the statute means. State ex rel. Kalal v. Circuit Court for Dane Cnty., 2004 WI 58, ¶ 44, 271 *146Wis. 2d 633, 681 N.W.2d 110. "[Statutory interpretation 'begins with the language of the statute. If the meaning of the statute is plain, we ordinarily stop the inquiry.'" Id., ¶ 45 (quoting Seider v. O'Connell, 2000 WI 76, ¶ 43, 236 Wis. 2d 211, 612 N.W.2d 659). Statutory language is read to give effect to every word, to avoid surplusage and to avoid absurd results. Id., ¶ 46. Further, statutory language is given its "common, ordinary, and accepted meaning, except that technical or specially-defined words or phrases are given their technical or special definitional meaning." Id., ¶ 45. Plain meaning may be ascertained not only from the words employed in the statute, but also from the context in which the words are used. Id., ¶ 46.
¶ 17. In construing a statute, we favor a construction that fulfills the purpose of the statute over one that undermines the purpose. Cnty. of Dane v. LIRC, 2009 WI 9, ¶ 34, 315 Wis. 2d 293, 759 N.W.2d 571. "[A] plain-meaning interpretation cannot contravene a textually or contextually manifest statutory purpose." Kalal, 271 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 49. While extrinsic sources are usually not consulted if the statutory meaning is plain, legislative history may be consulted "to confirm or verify a plain-meaning interpretation." Id., ¶ 51.
D. Wisconsin Stat. §§ 801.50 and 801.51
¶ 18. Brunton urges us to apply Wis. Stat. §§ 801.50 and 801.51, the general venue statutes, because she contends they apply to all venue challenges. We disagree. Section 801.50 establishes venue generally in civil actions "[e]xcept as otherwise provided by statute." § 801.50(2). Section 801.51 provides that challenges to improper venue "on the grounds of noncom*147pliance with s. 801.50 or any other statute" be made "[a]t or before the time the party serves his or her first motion or responsive pleading in the action."
¶ 19. We have previously decided that Wis. Stat. § 421.401 is a "legislatively crafted exception to the general venue provision." Kett, 228 Wis. 2d 1, ¶ 20. That § 421.401 is a legislative exception to the more general venue provisions is confirmed by § 801.50(5m), which provides:
Venue of an action arising from a consumer credit transaction, as defined in s. 421.301(10), shall be in any county specified in s. 421.401(1).
¶ 20. Furthermore, a "canon of statutory construction provide [s] that where a general statute and a specific statute apply to the same subject, the specific statute controls." Rouse v. Theda Clark Med. Ctr., Inc., 2007 WI 87, ¶ 37, 302 Wis. 2d 358, 735 N.W.2d 30. Wisconsin Stat. §§ 801.50, 801.51 and 421.401 all apply to the same subject — venue. Sections 801.50 and 801.51 generally govern venue and challenges to improper venue in civil actions. In contrast, § 421.401 establishes venue for only two types of civil actions: consumer transactions and consumer credit transactions. § 421.401(1). Accordingly, § 421.401 is the more specific statute governing venue, and we conclude that it controls here.
¶ 21. We further conclude that applying Wis. Stat. §§ 801.50 and 801.51 to venue challenges in actions arising from consumer transactions would produce absurd results. Under § 801.51, a timely motion for change of venue results in a transfer of venue to an appropriate county. In contrast, under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2)(b), an improperly venued action arising *148from a consumer credit transaction must be dismissed, unless the defendant appears and waives the objection. If § 801.51 applies to actions arising from consumer credit transactions, as Brunton contends, we fail to see when § 421.401(2)(b), mandating dismissal of an improperly venued action, would ever apply. Interpreting a statute so that portions of it have no application is an absurd result.
¶ 22. We conclude that Wis. Stat. §§ 801.50 and 801.51, the general venue statutes, do not apply to actions arising from consumer credit transactions. Rather, the venue provision in Wis. Stat. § 421.401 applies.
E. Wisconsin Consumer Act Transactions
¶ 23. Proper venues for a claim arising out of a consumer credit transaction are: (1) the county where the customer resides or is personally served; (2) the county where collateral securing a consumer credit transaction is located; or (3) the county where the customer acquired the property that is the subject of the transaction or signed the document evidencing his or her obligation under the terms of the transaction. Wis. Stat. § 421.401(1) (a)-(c).
¶ 24. Brunton commenced this action in Dane County. However, proper venue is Rock County because that is where Brunton resides, where Brunton acquired the car, where the car is located and where Brunton signed the installment sale contract. See Wis. Stat. § 421.401(1)(a)-(c). Accordingly, the action was improperly venued in Dane County; the parties agree that Brunton should have filed this action in Rock County.
*149¶ 25. Wisconsin Stat. § 421.401(2) addresses actions arising under the Wisconsin Consumer Act that are improperly venued. Section 421.401(2) states in relevant part:
When it appears ... that the county in which the action is pending under sub. (1) is not a proper place of trial for such action, unless the defendant appears and waives the improper venue, the court shall act as follows:
(a) Except as provided in par. (b), if it appears that another county would be a proper place of trial, the court shall transfer the action to that county.
(b) If the action arises out of a consumer credit transaction, the court shall dismiss the action for lack of jurisdiction.
(Emphasis added.) Accordingly, because Brunton's action arises out of a consumer credit transaction and was improperly venued, the circuit court was required to dismiss her action unless we conclude Nuvell "appeared] and waive[d] the improper venue."7
1. Purpose
¶ 26. When the legislature states the purpose that underlies a statute, we are to interpret the statute in light of that purpose. Kalal, 271 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 49. Wisconsin Stat. § 421.102 identifies the legislative purpose that drives consumer transaction statutes, i.e., Wis. Stat. chs. 421-27. Section 421.102 provides in relevant part:
*150Purposes; rules of construction. (1) Chapters 421 to 427 shall be liberally construed and applied to promote their underlying purposes and policies.
(2) The underlying purposes and policies of chs. 421 to 427 are:
(a) To simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing consumer transactions;
(b) To protect customers against unfair, deceptive, false, misleading and unconscionable practices by merchants;
(c) To permit and encourage the development of fair and economically sound consumer practices in consumer transactions; and
(d) To coordinate the regulation of consumer credit transactions with the policies of the federal consumer credit protection act.
At the heart of each of the underlying purposes and policies of the Wisconsin Consumer Act is the protection of customers. Accordingly, we interpret Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) in light of the stated legislative purpose of protecting customers. See Kalal, 271 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 49. In this regard, paras. (2)(b), (2)(c) and (2)(d) are relevant to our interpretation of § 421.401(2), in accordance with the legislature's stated purpose of protecting customers.
2. Wisconsin Stat. § 421.401(2)
¶ 27. The prefatory language of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2), when combined with para. (2)(b) states that an improperly venued consumer credit action must be dismissed unless the defendant appears and waives the improper venue. There is authority for the conclusion that appearing in an action is a distinct requirement. See Dauphin v. Landrigan, 187 Wis. 633, 636, *151205 N.W. 557 (1925). In Dauphin, we explained that "[a]ppearance in the action and pleading in the action are distinct acts. While the filing of an answer may operate as an appearance, appearing and pleading nevertheless remain two distinct things." Id.
¶ 28. For the reasons set out below, we also conclude that appearing in an action arising from a consumer credit transaction and waiving an improper venue are two distinct statutory requirements. Both statutory requirements must be fulfilled before an improper venue will be permitted to stand. We so conclude because Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) joins the terms, "appears" and "waives" with the conjunction "and," thereby establishing two distinct requirements. Further, separating "appears" from "waives" will best protect customers against unfair practices by merchants; will encourage merchants to develop fair consumer practices; and will promote the protection of unsophisticated consumers, which is a policy underlying the federal consumer credit protection act. See Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(b)-(d). We discuss "appears" and "waives" in turn.
i. Appears
¶ 29. "The term 'appearance' is generally used to signify the overt act by which one against whom a suit has been commenced submits himself to the court's jurisdiction and constitutes the first act of a defendant in court." McLaughlin v. Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific Ry. Co., 23 Wis. 2d 592, 594, 127 N.W.2d 813 (1964) (citing Dauphin, 187 Wis. at 636; 4 Am. Jur. 2d Appearance § 1 (2009)). "All persons who are parties to an action have a right to appear, either by attorney or in *152their own person." 2 Wis. Pl. & Pr. Forms § 16:8 (5th ed. 2009) (citing Wis. Const, art. I, § 21(2); SCR 11.02(1)).
¶ 30. There are a number of actions by which one may appear. "A party 'appears' in an action either formally, by serving and filing a notice of appearance or an answer or by making a motion that serves to extend the time to answer, or informally, by actively litigating the merits of an issue without raising any jurisdictional objection." 4 Am. Jur. 2d Appearance § 1 (2009). In City of Fond du Lac v. Kaehne, the court of appeals concluded that a party proceeding pro se in a civil action who sent a letter to the circuit court "appeared" in the action. 229 Wis. 2d 323, 326, 599 N.W.2d 870 (Ct. App. 1999); see also L.R.E. v. R.E.J., 168 Wis. 2d 209, 216, 483 N.W.2d 588 (Ct. App. 1992) (concluding that pleading to the court, albeit by mail, constituted an appearance).
¶ 31. Because it is relevant to the issue of appearance, we take this opportunity to discuss our decision in Kett. First, we note that some of the principles established in Kett Eire applicable here, but we conclude that Kett's ultimate holding is distinguishable. In Kett, Community Credit Plan improperly venued its replevin actions in Milwaukee County and obtained default judgments against the defendants. Kett, 228 Wis. 2d 1, ¶ 3. Applying Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2), we held that the default judgments were invalid from the time of entry because the actions were commenced in Milwaukee County in violation of § 421.401(1). Id., ¶ 11. Kett's holding is distinguishable because it was not interpreting § 421.401(2) to determine the meaning of "appears and waives the improper venue" as we are here. Instead, in Kett, we interpreted the phrase "the court shall dismiss the action for lack of jurisdiction," § 421.401(2) (b), which we explained could mean "personal jurisdiction, subject matter jurisdiction or the competence of a court," Kett, *153228 Wis. 2d 1, ¶ 21 n.12. Further, Kett is not dispositive here because Kett involved default judgments. Id., ¶ 12. A default judgment may be entered when a party fails to plead or otherwise appear in an action. See Wis. Stat. § 806.02(3). Accordingly, such a defendant necessarily could not have fulfilled the appearance requirement of § 421.401(2). However, a default judgment is not at issue here.
¶ 32. To appear and to waive cannot be found in a single act and also provide the customer protection that the legislature sought to achieve. See Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2). For example, if a merchant files an action arising from a consumer credit transaction in an improper venue far from the home of the customer, the customer may write a letter to the judge before whom the action is pending, asking what will occur next. The customer may do so without realizing that venue is improper, without realizing where the action should have been venued and without knowing that he has the right to have the action dismissed due to the improper venue. Were that letter to constitute both an appearance and a waiver, a customer could lose the right to proper venue, together with the right to dismissal of the action, before the customer was aware of those rights.
ii. Waives
¶ 33. The term, waives or waiver, functions differently in different circumstances.8 For example, under Wisconsin's rules of civil procedure, certain affirmative defenses are waived unless raised in the first responsive *154pleading or raised by motion made prior to answering. See Wis. Stat. § 802.06(2).9 This is a statutorily defined waiver. Although we are interpreting a statute, Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2), the legislature has not defined what acts constitute waiver under § 421.401(2).
¶ 34. Waiver has been interpreted under common law in a number of circumstances that have required various showings depending on the context in which the claimed waivers arose. For example, the waiver of a fundamental constitutional right requires a knowing, intelligent and voluntary waiver. See State v. Klessig, 211 Wis. 2d 194, 204, 564 N.W.2d 716 (1997) (requiring a knowing, intentional and voluntary waiver of the right to counsel). The Klessig standard is a high standard that involves an inquiry by the court before which the potential waiver is occurring to determine whether the parameters of waiver are met. State v. Weed, 2003 WI 85, ¶ 39, 263 Wis. 2d 434, 666 N.W.2d 485.
¶ 35. We recently discussed common law waiver in State v. Ndina, 2009 WI 21, 315 Wis. 2d 653, 761 N.W.2d 612. There we examined whether Ndina had *155waived his Sixth Amendment right to a public trial. Id., ¶ 2. In so doing, we explained the distinction between forfeiture and waiver. We noted that "cases sometimes use the words 'forfeiture' and 'waiver' interchangeably!; however,] the two words embody very different legal concepts." Id., ¶ 29." Whereas forfeiture is the failure to make the timely assertion of a right, waiver is the intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right.'" Id. (quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993) (internal quotations and citations omitted)); see also Rao v. WMA Sec., Inc., 2008 WI 73, 102, 310 Wis. 2d 623, 752 N.W.2d 220 (Prosser, J., dissenting) (explaining that 'waiver' is the intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right and forfeiture is a failure to timely assert a right); State v. Kelty, 2006 WI 101, ¶¶ 62-63, 294 Wis. 2d 62, 716 N.W.2d 886 (Abrahamson, C.J., concurring) (acknowledging the distinction between forfeiture and waiver); State v. Huebner, 2000 WI 59,11 n.2, 235 Wis. 2d 486, 611 N.W.2d 727 (same).10
*156¶ 36. Establishing that a party knew of the right at issue is essential to establishing waiver.
[I]t must be shown by the party claiming a waiver that the person against whom the waiver is asserted had at the time knowledge... of the existence of his rights. ... Ignorance of a material fact negatives a waiver. Waiver cannot be established by a consent given under a mistake of fact.
Davies v. J.D. Wilson Co., 1 Wis. 2d 443, 467, 85 N.W.2d 459 (1957) (quoting 56 Am. Jur. Waiver § 14). Stated differently, a valid waiver that intentionally relinquishes a right must be done with actual knowledge of the right being waived.
¶ 37. We conclude that waiver under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) requires the intentional relinquishment of a known right.11 The right being waived here is a *157defendant's right to proper venue, coupled with the right of dismissal if the case is not properly venued. See Wis. Stat. § 421.401(1)(a)-(c); § 421.401(2)(b). Accordingly, to establish a valid waiver, it must be proved by the party claiming waiver that the defendant knew the place of proper venue and knew that he had the right to dismissal of the case when it was not properly venued.
¶ 38. In addition to knowledge of the place of proper venue and the right to dismissal of an improperly venued action, a plaintiff must also prove that the rights to proper venue and dismissal of an improperly venued action were intentionally relinquished. Intentional relinquishment may be demonstrated by an express statement or by conduct. Fraser v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., 114 Wis. 510, 523-24, 90 N.W. 476 (1902); see also Estate of Ross v. Ross, 181 Wis. 125, 134, 194 N.W. *158151 (1923). Intentional relinquishment by conduct occurs when a party's conduct is "so inconsistent with a purpose to stand upon one's rights as to leave no room for a reasonable inference to the contrary." Fraser, 114 Wis. at 523-24. Stated differently, a party intentionally relinquishes a known right by affirmative acts unambiguously demonstrating that his conduct is intentionally undertaken and meant to give up the right to proper venue.
¶ 39. Applying these principles here, we conclude that a defendant may waive the improper venue by filing a written stipulation with the court or by oral stipulation made in open court and entered in the record, which demonstrates that the defendant is aware of his right to proper venue and that he intends to relinquish this right rather than having the action dismissed. This establishes waiver by express statement. We further conclude that a defendant may waive the right to proper venue by affirmative acts that unambiguously demonstrate that he knows the place of proper venue, as well as the right to dismissal of the improperly venued action against him, and that he nonetheless intends to relinquish such rights. This establishes waiver by conduct.
¶ 40. Our interpretation of "waives" is supported by the plain meaning of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2), which sets no time limitation for objections to venue. That is, unlike Wis. Stat. § 801.51, which limits the time during which a defendant may challenge venue thereunder, the Wisconsin Consumer Act's venue provision does not contain a time limit. Moreover, § 421.401(2) states, "[w]hen it appears from the return of service of the summons or otherwise" that the venue is improper in an action arising from a consumer credit transaction, the court must dismiss the action unless the defendant *159appears and waives the defect in venue. (Emphasis added.) This language establishes that the issue of improper venue is to be addressed whenever it is raised by a defendant, not only when it is raised at the outset of litigation. Accordingly, our interpretation correctly places the onus on plaintiffs, typically creditors, to properly venue an action or risk dismissal when the defendant brings the improper venue to the circuit court's attention.
¶ 41. Although the plain meaning of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) of the Wisconsin Consumer Act supports our interpretation, we observe that the legislative history of the venue provision governing consumer credit transactions also supports our conclusion that objections to venue need not be made at the initial stage of the litigation. See Kalal, 271 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 51. The legislative history confirms that we properly rejected Brunton's assertion that improper venue is waived if not challenged in a defendant's answer or first responsive pleading. In 1983, the legislature created the specialized venue provisions for actions arising from consumer credit transactions. 1983 Wis. Act 389; see Wis. Stat. § 425.501(2) (1983-84). The language of § 425.501(2) explicitly required such venue challenges to be brought at the outset of litigation. It stated:
When, in any action under this chapter, it appears from the return of service of the summons or otherwise that the county in which the action is pending is not a proper place of trial of such action under this section, the court shall, on motion of a party or on its own motion, on the return day of the summons or prior to taking any other action on the case, determine the correctness of the venue. If venue is correct the case shall continue. If venue is not correct, the court shall dismiss the action unless the defendant appears and *160waives the improper venue. If the defendant does not appear and waive the improper venue, the court shall lack jurisdiction other than to dismiss the action.
§ 425.501(2) (1983-84) (emphasis added).
¶ 42. Then, in 1987, the legislature consolidated the venue provisions for actions arising from consumer credit transactions and consumer transactions in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). See 1987 Wis. Act 208. In 1987 Wis. Act 208, the legislature removed a portion of the venue provision; specifically, it removed the language requiring the court to determine whether venue was proper at the outset of the litigation. We note that there have not been any changes to the language of § 421.401(2) since 1987. We conclude that it is reasonable to infer that with removal of the directive to consider venue at the outset of the litigation, the legislature intended that the issue of improper venue in actions arising from consumer credit transactions be considered whenever it is raised.
¶ 43. Additionally, our conclusion that waiver under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) may be established by demonstrating a defendant's knowledge of the proper place of venue and the statutory right to dismissal of an action improperly venued and that he unambiguously intends to relinquish those rights furthers the purposes underlying the Wisconsin Consumer Act. See Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(b)-(c). For example, were we not to require the intentional relinquishment of a known right to proper venue, a merchant could file an action in a locale far distant from a customer's residence, thereby making defense of the action very difficult. The merchant could then ask the customer to agree to the venue by convincing the customer that it is customary to do so, or for some other reason that does not acknowledge the *161statutory right to dismissal of an improperly venued action. If a customer did not know the place of proper venue or that he or she could demand dismissal of the action, the customer may sign such an agreement waiving the improper venue to his or her detriment.
¶ 44. Our construction of the term "waives," requiring the intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue, coupled with the right to dismissal of the case when venue is improper, will discourage sharp practices by merchants and protect customers, thereby comporting with the legislature's specific instructions. Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(b)-(c).
¶ 45. Our construction is also in accordance with the policies underlying a federal consumer credit protection act, policies with which we are instructed to coordinate our interpretations of the Wisconsin Consumer Act. Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2) (d). The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA)12 is a federal consumer protection act contained in 15 U.S.C. § 1692 et seq. (2006).13 Federal courts have interpreted claims of *162unfair debt collection practices "through the lens of the 'least sophisticated debtor' or 'least sophisticated consumer' standard.'" Gammon v. GC Servs. Ltd. P'ship, 27 F.3d 1254, 1257 (7th Cir. 1994) (internal quotations omitted). "The basic purpose of the least-sophisticated-consumer standard is to ensure that the FDCPA protects all consumers, the gullible as well as the shrewd." Clomon v. Jackson, 988 F.2d 1314, 1318 (2d Cir. 1993). In regard to various levels of sophistication, the United States Supreme Court has opined:
The fact that a false statement may be obviously false to those who are trained and experienced does not change its character, nor take away its power to deceive others less experienced. There is no duty resting upon a citizen to suspect the honesty of those with whom he transacts business. Laws are made to protect the trusting as well as the suspicious.
Fed. Trade Comm'n v. Standard Educ. Soc'y, 302 U.S. 112, 116 (1937) (quoted in Clomon, 988 F.2d at 1318).
¶ 46. In Gammon, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit modified the "least sophisticated consumer" standard to the "unsophisticated consumer" to describe "the hypothetical consumer whose reasonable perceptions will be used to determine if collection messages are deceptive or misleading." Gammon, 27 F.3d at 1257. It did so in order to continue to protect unsophisticated consumers while accounting for "unrealistic or peculiar interpretations of collection letters." Id. In applying the unsophisticated consumer standard, the Seventh Circuit concluded, "[t]he lañ*163guage in the collection letter [under review] appears to be cleverly drafted in order to insinuate what obviously cannot be stated directly." Id. at 1258. In so doing, it focused on the unfairness that was present and was to be eliminated under federal law. Id. Our interpretation of the waiver described in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) as requiring the intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue coupled with the statutory right to dismissal of the case when venue is improper, is consistent with federal policy. This is so because our interpretation will protect unsophisticated consumers by preventing them from inadvertently waiving the right to proper venue and dismissal of an action that is improperly venued.
3. Application of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2)
¶ 47. We have concluded that Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) requires both appearance and waiver, demonstrating intent to relinquish the known right to proper venue, coupled with the known right to dismissal of the improperly venued action. Accordingly, we apply that standard to Nuvell to determine whether Nuvell appeared and waived the improper venue prior to its motion for summary judgment of dismissal.
¶ 48. There is no dispute that Nuvell appeared in this case. Nuvell first appeared in the action on February 2, 2006, when it filed a notice of appearance and its answer.
¶ 49. We conclude that Nuvell did not expressly waive the improper venue. This is so because there was no written stipulation filed with the court or oral stipulation made in open court on the record stating *164that Nuvell intended to waive its right to proper venue. As such, any waiver could have occurred only by conduct.
¶ 50. Brunton contends that Nuvell's continued litigation of this action for over a year constitutes waiver. We disagree. Continued litigation of an action does not unambiguously demonstrate an intention to relinquish the right to proper venue. This is so because such conduct may also reasonably be interpreted as Nuvell defending itself against Brunton's lawsuit.14 See Kalal, 271 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 47 (explaining that to be unambiguous requires being susceptible to only one reasonable interpretation).
¶ 51. Brunton argues that Nuvell had the burden to challenge the improper venue once Nuvell knew of it.15 We are unpersuaded. There is no dispute that both *165parties knew that the action had been improperly filed in Dane County because on August 9, 2006, Brunton's lawyer raised the issue of improper venue with Nuvell at a scheduling conference in the Rock County action. We conclude that it was Brunton who had the responsibility to properly venue her action. Therefore, Nuvell's continued litigation may reasonably be interpreted as defending against the claims asserted in Brunton's lawsuit.
¶ 52. When Nuvell refused to stipulate to Brunton's transfer of the action to Rock County so Brunton could avoid dismissal of the action, it was Brunton who chose to continue to disregard the venue defect of her own making and to risk dismissal of her lawsuit.16 Nuvell's refusal to stipulate to transferring venue to Rock County does not demonstrate its intention to waive the improper venue; rather, it may reasonably be interpreted as demonstrating Nuvell's intent to stand on its right to proper venue, including the right to have an improperly venued action against it dismissed.
¶ 53. There is nothing in the record that establishes that Nuvell intentionally, by affirmative actions, relinquished its right to proper venue or its statutory *166right to dismissal of the improperly venued action. Accordingly, we conclude Nuvell's conduct did not unambiguously demonstrate waiver of the improper venue, and, therefore, the circuit court properly dismissed this action.
III. CONCLUSION
¶ 54. The dispositive issue in this case is whether under Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) Nuvell "appeared] and waive [d] the improper venue" such that dismissal of the action, which arose out of a consumer credit transaction, was not required. We conclude that appearance and waiver under § 421.401(2) requires two actions: (1) an appearance established by conduct recognized under the law as appearance and (2) waiver established by the defendant's knowledge of the proper venue and the intentional relinquishment of the right to proper venue. Nuvell appeared by responsive pleading, court appearances and litigating its defenses. However, neither Nuvell's failure to raise the improper venue in its answer nor its other appearances in this action constituted an intentional relinquishment of the right to proper venue. Because Nuvell did not both appear and waive the improper venue, the circuit court was required to dismiss the action when Nuvell raised the venue defect. See § 421.401(2)(b). Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the court of appeals.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed and the action is remanded to the circuit court for dismissal.
Brunton v. Nuvell Credit Corp., 2009 WI App 3, 316 Wis. 2d 313, 762 N.W.2d 685.
The Honorable Stuart A. Schwartz of Dane County presided.
All further references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version unless otherwise indicated.
Wisconsin Stat. § 421.301(10) states:
"Consumer credit transaction" means a consumer transaction between a merchant and a customer in which real or personal property, services or money is acquired on credit and the customer's obligation is payable in installments or for which credit a finance charge is or may be imposed, whether such transaction is pursuant to an openend credit plan or is a transaction involving other than openend credit. The term includes consumer credit sales, consumer loans, consumer leases and transactions pursuant to openend credit plans.
The litigation proceeded as follows: February 21, 2006, Nuvell deposed Brunton and responded to Brunton's first discovery request. April 25, 2006, Brunton deposed Nuvell's corporate designee. May 9, 2006, Brunton deposed Nuvell employee, Joe Willis. July 13, 2006, both parties appeared for a scheduling conference at the Dane County Circuit Court. October 9, 2006, both parties appeared for a second scheduling conference. October 11, 2006, the circuit court issued an order setting a date for trial. November 3, 2006, Brunton named its expert witnesses. November 20, 2006, Nuvell moved to modify the pretrial order. February 8, 2007, Brunton served Nuvell with a second discovery request. February 14, 2007, Nuvell served Brunton with its first discovery request.
Brunton also raises an argument that Nuvell is equitably estopped from asserting its venue challenge. "Because the argument is undeveloped and [Brunton] fails to cite to any authority in support of [her] position, we decline to address this argument." See McEvoy v. Grp. Health Coop. of Eau Claire, 213 Wis. 2d 507, 530 n.8, 570 N.W.2d 397 (1997).
Brunton does not dispute that if Nuvell did not waive its objection to improper venue, the circuit court was required to dismiss her action.
There are 776 Wisconsin statutes that contain some form of the word "waive." Our holding in this case is not intended to define waiver in every such statute as requiring the intentional relinquishment of a known right. *1562010) ("While the parties and relevant case law use the word 'waiver,' we use the word 'forfeiture' consistent with the terminology adopted by Ndina, 315 Wis. 2d 653, 29."); Obriecht v. Law Offices of Lettenberger Glasbrenner, S.C., No. 2008AP3092, unpublished slip op., ¶ 18 n.7 (Wis. Ct. App. July 30, 2009) (noting that relevant precedent used the term waiver but relying on Ndina concluded forfeiture was the correct term); State v. Kaczmarski, 2009 WI App 117, ¶ 7 n.3, 320 Wis. 2d 811, 772 N.W.2d 702 (noting that the parties' briefs used the terms forfeit and waive interchangeably, but following Ndina, the court concluded that forfeit was the more appropriate term); State v. Miller, 2009 WI App 111, ¶ 22 n.8, 320 Wis. 2d 724, 772 N.W.2d 188 (noting that the parties use the term waiver to describe the failure to timely raise a defense, but, citing Ndina, concluded that forfeiture was the more appropriate term).
Wisconsin Stat. § 801.06 is a rule of civil procedure that has language similar to that found in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). Section 801.06 states in relevant part:
A court of this state having jurisdiction of the subject matter may, without a summons having been served upon a person, exercise jurisdiction in an action.. . over any person who appears in the action and waives the defense of lack of jurisdiction over his or her person as provided in s. 802.06(8).
(Emphasis added.) What constitutes an appearance and waiver under § 801.06, however, is not instructive here because § 801.06 specifically references Wis. Stat. § 802.06(8), which establishes the acts that constitute waiver. The Wisconsin Consumer Act provides no specifics in regard to what constitutes waiver under § 421.401(2).
Accord Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 458 n.13 (2004) (Although jurists often use the words interchangeably, forfeiture is the failure to make the timely assertion of a right!;] waiver is the intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right.) (internal quotations and citation omitted); Freytag v. Comm'r of Internal Revenue, 501 U.S. 868, 894 n.2 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring) (acknowledging the distinction between waiver and forfeiture); United States v. Park Place Assocs., Ltd., 563 F.3d 907, 921 n.10 (9th Cir. 2009) (same); United States v. Clark, 535 F.3d 571, 577 (7th Cir. 2008) (same); Barnett v. Roper, 541 F.3d 804, 807 n.2 (8th Cir. 2008) (same); United States v. Carrasco-Salazar, 494 F.3d 1270, 1272 (10th Cir. 2007) (same).
Many other Wisconsin cases, which have persuasive value, have followed the forfeiture/waiver distinction drawn in Ndina. See, e.g., Tower Auto. Milwaukee, LLC v. Samphere, No. 2009AP1043, unpublished slip op., ¶ 25 n.7, (Wis. Ct. App. Feb. 9,
Our case law has consistently maintained this definition of waiver. See Rao v. WMA Sec., Inc., 2008 WI 73, ¶ 102, 310 *157Wis. 2d 623, 752 N.W.2d 220 (Prosser, J., dissenting) (explaining that the technical definition of waiver "is the intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right"); Milas v. Labor Ass'n of Wis., 214 Wis. 2d 1, 9-10, 571 N.W.2d 656 (1997) (noting that "[t]his court has defined waiver as the 'voluntary and intentional relinquishment of a known right'") (quoting Von Uhl v. Trempealeau Cnty. Mut. Ins. Co., 33 Wis. 2d 32, 37, 146 N.W.2d 516 (1966)); Gonzalez v. City of Franklin, 137 Wis. 2d 109, 128, 403 N.W.2d 747 (1987) (defining waiver as the " 'intentional relinquishment of a known right'") (quoting Emp'rs Ins. of Wausau v. Sheedy, 42 Wis. 2d 161, 166, 166 N.W.2d 220 (1969)); Bank of Sun Prairie v. Opstein, 86 Wis. 2d 669, 681, 273 N.W.2d 279 (1979) (same) (citing Hanz Trucking, Inc. v. Harris Bros. Co., 29 Wis. 2d 254, 264, 138 N.W.2d 238 (1965)); Mansfield v. Smith, 88 Wis. 2d 575, 592, 277 N.W.2d 740 (1979) (same); Swedish Am. Nat'l Bank of Minneapolis v. Koebernick, 136 Wis. 473, 479, 117 N.W. 1020 (1908) (same); Monroe Water Works Co. v. City of Monroe, 110 Wis. 11, 22, 85 N.W. 685 (1901) (same).
Wisconsin Stat. § 421.102(2)(d) directs us to coordinate our interpretations of the Wisconsin Consumer Act "with the policies of the federal consumer credit protection act" without specifically citing to the applicable federal law. We coordinate our interpretation of the Wisconsin Consumer Act with the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA), 15 U.S.C. § 1692 et seq. (2006). We note that other cases have done so as well. See Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Wis., Inc. v. Hornik, 114 Wis. 2d 163, 172-73, 336 N.W.2d 395 (Ct. App. 1983) (interpreting Wis. Stat. § 425.304 to coordinate with a provision of the FDCPA); Hartman v. Meridian Fin. Servs., Inc., 191 F. Supp. 2d 1031, 1050 (W.D. Wis. 2002) (interpreting Wis. Stat. § 427.104(1)(j) to coordinate with a provision of the FDCPA).
While, by its specific terms, the FDCPA, 15 U.S.C. § 1692 et seq., applies only to actions by consumers against debt collectors, § 1692i(b), it has been interpreted such that courts *162are to examine collection practices in a fashion that will curb sharp practices by debt collectors and promote fairness to consumers. E.g., Gammon v. GC Servs. Ltd. P'ship, 27 F.3d 1254, 1258 (7th Cir. 1994).
We note that Brunton argued that interpreting waiver to require the intentional relinquishment of the known right to dismissal of the case would sacrifice judicial economy by permitting a defendant to litigate an action, thereby leaving the door open to dismissal of the action and potential re-filing in the proper county of venue. First, as we stated, the heart of the underlying purpose of Wis. Stat. § 421.102 is the protection of the consumer. See supra ¶ 26. This express directive from the legislature overrides any concerns of judicial economy. Second, the statute of limitations in actions filed under the Wisconsin Consumer Act continues to run. This, to some extent, preserves judicial economy. For example, here the parties litigated this case for 14 months prior to dismissal due to improper venue. However, the one year statute of limitations applicable here, see Wis. Stat. § 425.307(1), prevents Brunton from re-filing this action in the proper county, thereby avoiding duplicative efforts by the circuit courts.
The action was venued in Dane County for nearly seven months after Brunton informed Nuvell that Dane County was not a proper venue for the action.
Had Brunton dismissed the Dane County action and re-filed the action in Rock County when she raised the venue issue with Nuvell, Brunton would have had about four months to re-file her action in Rock County before the statute of limitations expired. Because Brunton waited for Nuvell to cure the defect she created, the statute of limitations bars her claim. Although this outcome may seem harsh, typically actions arising under consumer credit transactions will be brought by merchants. This statutory interpretation will encourage merchants to use fair credit collection practices and protect consumers, thereby promoting the purposes underlying the Wisconsin Consumer Act. Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(b)-(c).

=== CASE 9738303 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:39.393248+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, C.J.
¶ 55. (concurring). This case is in an unusual posture. In the instant case the consumer is the plaintiff, and the *167creditor is the defendant. In many, if not in most, consumer credit cases the creditor is the plaintiff, seeking a remedy against a consumer who is the defendant.
¶ 56. The rules adopted in the present case will apply in all cases, regardless of who is the plaintiff or defendant, and any interpretation of the statutes must promote the purposes and policies of the Wisconsin Consumer Act.
¶ 57. I would reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the cause to the circuit court to dismiss the action.
¶ 58. I reach this result even though the result seems harsh and at some level offends my sense of fairness. But the result reached is, in my opinion, required by the statute.
¶ 59. The sense of unfairness arises because Nuvell Credit Corporation (the defendant) knew that Brunton (the consumer/plaintiff) had brought the action in the wrong county. Nevertheless, Nuvell Credit continued to litigate the case in Dane County and then shouted, "Gotcha — wrong county!" only after doing so would end the consumer/plaintiff s case. Nuvell Credit actively participated in the litigation in Dane County Circuit Court, including discovery, for more than a year before objecting to venue; while participating in the litigation Nuvell Credit did not advise the circuit court of the defect in venue; then Nuvell Credit sought dismissal of the action only after the statute of limitations had run against the consumer/plaintiff, making it impossible for her to refile the claim in the proper county. Nuvell Credit's conduct seems "tricky" and wasteful of the circuit court's time, and means that the consumer/plaintiff never gets her day in court.
*168¶ 60. The appearance is that Nuvell Credit unfairly relied on a "technicality" to prevent the consumer/plaintiff forever from getting a determination on the merits of her claim. But the so-called "technicality" is a legislative enactment governing a court's jurisdiction, an enactment binding on the litigants and on the courts. See Kett v. Cmty. Credit Plan, Inc., 228 Wis. 2d 1, 12-13, 596 N.W.2d 786 (1999).
¶ 61. The sense of unfairness is mitigated somewhat by the fact that the consumer/plaintiff also knew that Dane County was the wrong venue, had the time to change the venue to Rock County, but did not act to change the venue.
¶ 62. I agree with the majority opinion in many respects: This case is a statutory interpretation case arising under the Wisconsin Consumer Act, chapters 421 to 427 of the statutes. The decision turns specifically on the interpretation of Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2). The legislature instructed the court how to interpret chapters 421 to 427 of the statutes. Section 421.101(1) instructs the courts to give a liberal construction and application to provisions of the Wisconsin Consumer Act to promote their underlying purposes and policies. A basic purpose of the Wisconsin Consumer Act is "the protection of customers." Majority op., ¶ 26.1
¶ 63. Section 421.401(2) requires dismissal of an action brought in the wrong county unless the defendant "appears and waives the improper venue." The *169parties agree, as do the majority opinion and I, that the defendant in the present case "appeared."2
¶ 64. The principal issue in the present case is what the word "waives" means in the statute.
¶ 65. The majority opinion determines that "waives" means "intentionally] relinquishes] . . . the known right to proper venue"3 and that this intentional relinquishment can be accomplished by an "express statement" or by conduct.4 According to the majority opinion, waiver by conduct "occurs when a party's conduct is 'so inconsistent with a purpose to stand upon one's rights as to leave no room for a reasonable inference to the contrary.'" Majority op., ¶ 38.5
*170¶ 66. I disagree that "waives" in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) includes waiver by conduct.6 Rather, I agree with Nuvell Credit that the meaning of "waives" in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2) requires an express waiver of improper venue. An express waiver is an affirmative expression in writing or by oral stipulation on the record in open court. Such an affirmative expression must be voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made.
¶ 67. This interpretation of "waives" gives litigants and courts a rule as "bright line" as possible, one that will protect the consumer and discourage confusion and litigation about the collateral issue of waiver by conduct.
¶ 68. This interpretation comports with the legislative statement of the purposes and policies of the Wisconsin Consumer Act. The explicit legislative rule of construction is that the Wisconsin Consumer Act "shall be liberally construed and applied to promote [its] un*171derlying purposes and policies." Wis. Stat. § 421.102(1). The legislature stated the underlying purposes and policies of chapters 421 to 427 as follows in § 421.102(2):
(a) To simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing consumer transactions;
(b) To protect customers against unfair, deceptive, false, misleading and unconscionable practices by merchants;
(c) To permit and encourage the development of fair and economically sound consumer practices in consumer transactions; and
(d) To coordinate the regulation of consumer credit transactions with the policies of the federal consumer credit protection act.
¶ 69. Express waiver promotes the legislative policy of "protecting] customers against unfair, deceptive, false, misleading and unconscionable practices by merchants."7 The consumer/customer is often the defendant, is often unsophisticated about the law, and frequently represents himself or herself, without an attorney. A requirement of express waiver protects the consumer against unwittingly relinquishing a right that the statute provides.
¶ 70. Express waiver also serves the purposes to "simplify" and "clarify" the law governing consumer transactions8 and to "encourage the development of fair and economically sound consumer practices in consumer transactions."9 Express waiver is simpler and clearer than construing waiver by conduct and it en*172courages the fair and sound practice of clear and explicit communication of consumers' rights in Wisconsin.
¶ 71. Nuvell Credit did not expressly waive its right to a proper venue in the present case. Nuvell Credit did not execute an affirmative expression in writing or enter into an oral stipulation on the record in open court to waive improper venue. Accordingly, I would reverse the decision of the court of appeals and conclude that the circuit court did not err in dismissing the present action.
¶ 72. For the reasons set forth, I write separately to state what I consider the proper interpretation of "waives" in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2).
¶ 73. I am authorized to state that Justice ANN WALSH BRADLEY joins this opinion.
"[T]he venue provision must be interpreted to protect consumers and favor their participation in the legal process. The legislature understood that consumers are likely to have limited resources, whereas creditors are more apt to have resources and be familiar with the law." Kett v. Cmty. Credit Plan, Inc., 228 Wis. 2d 1, 23, 596 N.W.2d 786 (1999).
I have some other questions about the majority opinion but do not enumerate all of them. For example, I think the majority speaks too broadly in stating at ¶ 32: "To appear and to waive cannot be found in a single act." The accuracy of this generalization will depend on what is viewed as a single act.
The Wisconsin Consumer Act, created by 1971 Wis. Act 239 (published April 18, 1972), refers to "the federal consumer credit protection act." Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(d) (emphasis added). A federal Consumer Credit Protection Act was adopted a few years before the Wisconsin Consumer Act. See Pub. L. 90-321, 82 Stat. 146 (1968) (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §§ 1601 et seq.). The majority opinion relies on cases referring to the federal Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, which was adopted after the Wisconsin Consumer Act. See Pub. L. 95-109, 91 Stat. 874 (1977) (codified at 15 U.S.C. §§ 1692 et seq.). No explanation is given for reliance on this later Act. See majority op., ¶¶ 41-43.
The majority opinion at n.10 cites Tower Auto. Milwaukee, LLC v. Samphere, an unpublished opinion of the court of appeals, as precedent, contrary to court rules. See Wis. Stat. § 809.23(3).
See, e.g., majority op., ¶¶ 36, 37, 38.
Majority op., ¶ 38.
I wonder whether the majority opinion's alternative way of expressing this thought — "affirmative acts unambiguously *170demonstrating that his conduct is intentionally undertaken and meant to give up the right to proper venue" — expresses a different test. Majority op., ¶ 38.
IO also disagree with the majority opinion's application of its definition of conduct to the facts of the present case.
The majority opinion concludes that although Nuvell Credit knew that the venue was improper and that it could get a dismissal of the action, its conduct of continuing litigation was merely "defending itself," not an intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue. Majority op., ¶ 50. If Nuvell Credit's conduct in the present case does not constitute an intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue, what conduct would be an intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue?
If I were to agree with the majority opinion's "conduct/waiver" approach, I would have to dissent. In addition to filing an answer and appearing, Nuvell Credit participated in discovery. I conclude that Nuvell Credit's conduct constitutes a waiver under the majority opinion's test.
Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(b).
Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(a).
Wis. Stat. § 421.102(2)(c).

=== CASE 9738304 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:39.397346+00 ===

MICHAEL J. GABLEMAN, J.
¶ 74. (concurring in part, dissenting in part). I join the majority opinion's definition of "waiver" as used in Wis. Stat. § 421.401(2), which includes waiver by conduct. However, I dissent because I would find that Nuvell's actions in this case did constitute waiver by conduct.
¶ 75. Under § 421.401(2), a circuit court must dismiss an improperly venued action "unless the defendant appears and waives the improper venue." The majority opinion rightly concludes that waiver in this statute is "the intentional relinquishment of a known right." Majority op., ¶ 37. This requires that the defendant (1) "knew the place of proper venue"; (2) "knew that he had the right to dismissal"; and (3) intentionally relinquished those rights. Id., ¶¶ 37-38.
¶ 76. The majority opinion is also correct that a party may intentionally relinquish its rights either expressly or by conduct. Id., ¶ 38 (citing Fraser v. Aetna *173Life Ins. Co., 114 Wis. 510, 523-24, 90 N.W. 476 (1902); Estate of Ross v. Ross, 181 Wis. 125, 134, 194 N.W. 151 (1923)). A party intentionally relinquishes its rights through conduct when the party's actions are "so inconsistent with a purpose to stand upon one's rights as to leave no room for a reasonable inference to the contrary." Fraser, 114 Wis. at 523-24. Over and over again, Wisconsin courts have recognized that waiver may be inferred as a matter of law from parties' actions; waiver need not be express. See, e.g., Milas v. Labor Ass'n of Wisconsin, 214 Wis. 2d 1, 9-10, 571 N.W.2d 656 (1997).1 Black's Law Dictionary also makes clear that waiver maybe either "express or implied." Black's Law Dictionary 1717-18 (9th ed. 2009). "Waiver," then, is a term of art. Unless the statutory or constitutional context clearly indicates otherwise, waiver in Wisconsin may be accomplished expressly or by conduct.2
*174¶ 77. Whether waiver by conduct has occurred, however, will obviously depend upon the particular conduct in each case. My parting of the ways with the majority occurs not with its statement of the law, but in its application of the law to the facts of this case. In my view, the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from Nuvell's conduct is that it waived its right to object to venue.
¶ 78. A brief overview of the timeline here will be helpful.
¶ 79. Brunton filed this action in the Dane County Circuit Court on December 16, 2005. Nuvell appeared and filed its answer on February 2, 2006, making no venue objection.
¶ 80. On May 23, 2006, Nuvell commenced a replevin action against Brunton in Rock County based out of the same consumer credit transaction. This, of course, was "a claim arising out of a . . . consumer credit transaction" under § 421.401(1), just like the suit at issue here.
¶ 81. On August 9, 2006, Brunton's attorney made Nuvell aware that the current suit was venued in the wrong county under § 421.401(2). Brunton requested that Nuvell stipulate to transferring venue to Rock County, but Nuvell refused that request on August 11, 2006.
¶ 82. Finally, on February 27, 2007, Nuvell moved for summary judgment, seeking dismissal of Brunton's suit because it was venued in Dane County instead of Rock County in violation of § 421.401. Conveniently, *175the statute of limitations on Brunton's claim had expired just two months prior.3
¶ 83. Thus, Nuvell litigated this suit for more than a year before raising its venue objections. Nuvell may have known that venue was improper when filing the replevin action in May 2006, and indisputably knew that venue was improper in August 2006. Therefore, Nuvell knew the place of proper venue, knew it had the right to dismissal, and yet continued to actively litigate for at least six months, and perhaps as many as nine months. I conclude that only one reasonable inference can be drawn from Nuvell's conduct: it intentionally relinquished its right to challenge venue.4
¶ 84. For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the court of appeals and respectfully concur in part, and dissent in part.
See also Hanz Trucking, Inc. v. Harris Bros. Co., 29 Wis. 2d 254, 264-66, 138 N.W.2d 238 (1965); Estate of Ross v. Ross, 181 Wis. 125, 134-35, 194 N.W. 151 (1923); Pabst Brewing Co. v. Milwaukee, 126 Wis. 110, 117-18, 105 N.W. 563 (1905).
The concurrence concludes that the word "waives" in § 421.401(2) does not include waiver by conduct; waiver may only be express, it suggests. Concurrence, ¶ 66.
The concurrence's analysis has nothing to do with the statute or case law, however. It chooses this approach, ignoring the generally understood meaning of waiver, because it is a simple, "bright line" rule, and because it will better protect consumers. See id., ¶¶ 67-70.
None of these policy-oriented reasons justify changing the well-settled meaning of the word "waives" — a meaning surely known by the legislature when drafting this statute. If the legislature wanted to allow only express waiver under § 421.401(2), it could have said so. The fact that it did not suggests that the legislature intended "waives" to have its ordinary, well-accepted meaning, which includes both express waiver *174and waiver by conduct. See Grobarchik v. State, 102 Wis. 2d 461, 467-68, 307 N.W.2d 170 (1981) (explaining that as a fundamental canon of statutory construction, we presume the legislature used technical terms or terms of art with their technical meaning).
The one-year statute of limitations would have begun to run with the commission of the allegedly improper debt collection practices. These occurred in November and December 2005, so the statute of limitations would have expired in late 2006.
As the concurrence likewise queries, "If Nuvell Credit's conduct in the present case does not constitute an intentional relinquishment of the known right to proper venue, what conduct would... ?" Concurrence, ¶ 66 n.6.

=== CASE 9738305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:41.024031+00 ===

Arterburn. C.J.
This is an appeal from a denial of a judgment in a petition for a writ of habeas corpus filed in the Madison Circuit Court by the appellant, James Russell. James Russell was convicted of second degree burglary and sentenced to imprisonment of not less than two years nor more than five in the Indiana State Reformatory on September 11, 1969. Before the minimum of two years was up, namely on June 15 of 1971, he was paroled and signed a parole agreement containing certain conditions of parole, all of which are not made apparent in the record. He claims that his parole was illegally revoked without proper notice and hearing and without his having an opportunity to be represented by counsel. He bases his appeal primarily upon Morrissey v. Brewer (1972), 408 U.S. 47, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484.
However, as stated in Morrissey v. Brewer:
“We begin with the proposition that the revocation of parole is not part of a criminal prosecution and thus the full panoply of rights due a defendant in such a proceeding does not apply to parole revocations. . . . Revocation deprives an individual not of the absolute liberty to which every citizen is entitled, but only of the *669conditional liberty properly dependent on observance of special parole restrictions.” Id., 92 S. Ct. at 2600, 33 L. Ed. 2d at 494.
A brief review of Indiana law regarding parole and parole procedures is in order. The public policy of this State as expressed in IC 1971, 11-1-1-9 [Burns’ Ind. Stat. Ann. §13-1609 (1972 Supp.)] vests the parole board with almost absolute discretion in paroling convicts on terms and conditions thought advisable:
•5» Hi
“Before ordering the parole of any prisoner, the Indiana parole board shall have the prisoner appear before it, and shall interview him. A parole shall be ordered only for the best interest of society, not as an award of clemency; it shall not be considered to be a reduction of sentence or pardon. A prisoner shall be placed on parole only when arrangements have been made for his proper employment, or for his maintenance and care, and only when the Indiana parole board believes that he is able and willing to fulfill the obligations of a law-abiding citizen. Every prisoner while on parole shall remain in the legal custody of the tvarden or superintendent of the institution from which he was paroled but shall be subject to the orders of the Indiana parole board.
The Indiana parole board may adopt such other rules not inconsistent with law as it may deem proper or necessary, with respect to the eligibility of prisoners for parole, the conduct of parole hearings, or conditions to be imposed upon parolees. Whenever an order for parole is issued it shall recite the conditions thereof.” (emphasis added)
* Sc *
It will be noted that all paroles are intended to be conditional. In the case before us, the appellant apparently signed an agreement reciting the conditions of his release and was fully cognizant of its implications and requirements.
Further, this Court has held that remaining at liberty under parole is not a “right” recognized by the Constitution. Instead, parole has been regarded as a “privilege” granted *670by the grace and indulgence of the state government in the hope of achieving reformation:
“This discretion of the board [parole board] is not subject to the supervision or control of the courts. It resembles that usually exercised by a board of pardons, or by the Governor of this State under the authority committed to him by the Constitution to grant reprieves, commutations of sentences, and pardons. The law confers upon the person imprisoned in the reformatory no absolute right of discharge under any circumstances until the maximum term of imprisonment prescribed as the punishment for the crime of which such inmate has been adjudged guilty has expired.” Terry v. Byers (1903), 161 Ind. 360, 363, 68 N. E. 596, 597-98.
From what we can gather from rather a meager record in this case, a parole officer received a letter from Father Doyle recommending a mental examination of the appellant (then on parole) apparently because of Doyle’s observations. The parole officer stated that the regular course of procedure in such matters was not to accept the letter as a fact, but rather, it put the officer on the alert to make a further investigation, which was done in this case.
On September 15, 1971, the appellant was arrested and taken to the St. Joseph County Jail. On September 22, he was returned to the Reformatory. A hearing was held on October 21 before the Parole Board. There was a decision to continue the matter for thirty days. A second hearing was held in the Reformatory on November 19.
The parole officer stated that the appellant was placed under' arrest and returned to the state reformatory at the time indicated for the purpose of a psychiatric evaluation since there were no other facilities that could perform any evaluation or examination.
From the record in this case it appears that the parole board was confronted with charges and evidence that Russell, the appellant, had:
1. left the state without permission.
*6712. used Robitussin cough syrup which contains a narcotic drug and
3. associated with other men with records all in violation of the appellant’s parole agreement. There is evidence to the effect that at the first hearing (October) he admitted the violations, but at the later hearing (November) referred to herein he denied the violations. The record does not disclose what witnesses were present other than the parole officer, or what evidence was introduced other than that the parole officer repeated at the habeas corpus proceeding regarding the admitted violations of the appellant at the first hearing.
In the Morrissey case relied upon by the appellant, the parole was revoked merely upon the statement of the parole officer to the parole board apparently without any hearing or opportunity of the parolee to appear and be heard. Id., 92 S. Ct. at 2596-98, 33 L. Ed. 2d 489-91. In the case before us it is true that the appellant was arrested by a parole officer apparently with the belief that he should be brought in for the purpose of a psychiatric examination and treatment. It appears without question that the appellant was informed of the charges of parole violation being made against him at the time the psychiatric examination was being called for. Although the testimony is in conflict, the parole officer stated that the appellant admitted the violation at the first hearing. In this case the appellant had a second hearing before the full parole board with opportunity to explain or minimize the violations charged and his parole was finally revoked. Morrissey specifically states that a parole board is sufficiently detached and neutral in its viewpoint that it can hear and make a finding for a revocation of a parole. Id., 92 S. Ct. at 2604, 33 L. Ed. 2d at 499. The major emphasis of the appellant here, however, is that he did not have an attorney, and an opportunity for cross-examination. The record does not show that he made such a request although the procedure outlined by the parole officer was that if any attorney desired to be heard that they permitted it, even though the *672Rules of the parole board did not permit appearances of attorneys on either side at the hearing. RULE OF THE INDIANA PAROLE BOARD NO. 13 IBurns’ Adm. Rules & Regs. Ann. (13-1609)-11 (1967)] adopted pursuant to IC 1971,11-1-1-9 [Burns’ Ind. Stat. Ann. § 13-1609 (1972 Supp.)]
The Indiana law gives an accused an attorney in a criminal proceeding. This the appellant had at the time of his original conviction. The hearing on revocation of his conditional parole is not a criminal proceeding, but is administrative in nature. The General Assembly of this State has vested almost complete discretion in the Indiana Parole Board to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its hearings pursuant to IC 1971,11-1-1-9, \_Burns’ Ind Stat. Ann. § 13-1609 (1972 Supp.)] The Morrissey case expressly recognized the desirability of allowing a degree of informality and flexibility in parole procedures. The whole context of Morrissey is that these hearings are not to have the strict formality of a trial in a criminal case. It is there said:
“We have not thought to create an inflexible structure for parole revocation procedures. The few basic requirements set out above, which are applicable to future revocations of parole, should not impose a great burden on any State’s parole system.” (emphasis added) Id., 92 S. Ct. at 2604, 33 L. Ed. at 499.
It will be noted that this case was apparently setting new standards which are applicable only “to future revocations of parole” and therefore, the standards set forth in Morrissey are not applicable in the case before us.
With reference to appellant’s contention that he was entitled to an attorney at the parole board hearing, the United States Supreme Court in that case also stated:
“We do not reach or decide the question whether the parolee is entitled to the assistance of retained counsel or to appointed counsel if he is indigent.” Id., 92 S. Ct. at 2604, 33 L. Ed. 2d at 499.
*673The appellant cannot rely upon Morrissey in insisting upon his right to an attorney.
Because of the informality of a parole board hearing and the nature of the so-called “rights” involved and the policy of the state of Indiana to give almost absolute discretion to a parole board, we, as a court, should not attempt to change that policy. The appellant has failed to present any prejudicial error in the trial court’s judgment.
The judgment is affirmed.
Givan, Hunter, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion in which Prentice, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738306 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:41.028971+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
I dissent from the majority because the policy of the parole board which prevents a citizen from being represented by his counsel at a parole revocation hearing violates that citizen’s rights to due process of law guaranteed to him by both the Federal and State Constitutions.
Recently the United States Supreme Court in Morrissey v. Brewer (1972), 92 S. Ct. 2593, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484, held that parole revocation hearings are the type of proceedings by which the individual may be condemned to suffer grievous loss and furthermore that the type of loss suffered is one within the contemplation of the “liberty or property” language of the Fourteenth Amendment. Therefore such hearings must be conducted pursuant to due process and certain procedural safeguards must be afforded to a parolee at his revocation hearing. The court, speaking through Chief Justice Burger, stated that the parolee must be given a preliminary hearing and further found that at his main hearing he should be afforded the opportunity to cross examine opposing witnesses, present his own witnesses, receive written notice of the claimed violation of parole, and have his hearing conducted before a neutral and detached hearing officer. Although the majority opinion specifically stated that it would not reach the *674issue of the right to retain counsel at such hearings I believe that both previous decisions of the higher federal courts delineating basic Fourteenth Amendment due process procedures and the nature of the right itself indicate that the State cannot act to bar counsel from such a hearing.1
The main purpose of a parole revocation hearing is to establish the truth or falsity of certain allegations. Essentially it is a fact finding process concerned with whether a parolee committed certain specified acts which violate his parole agreement. Attorneys are often the keystone of fact finding hearings and represent the most meaningful and significant aspect of basic due process procedure. The right to cross examine and present evidence in rebuttal, as guaranteed by Morrissey v. Brewer, supra, would be of little help to one untrained in their use. Attorneys, on the other hand, are experienced and trained in the use of these tools to establish or discredit facts and allegations. They can be of immeasurable assistance in clearly delineating the issues confronting the parolee, in presenting factual contentions in an orderly manner, in conducting cross examination and in generally insuring the interest of the parolee. I can think of no legitimate State interest which would justify the exclusion of counsel from this type of hearing. Rather it seems to me that the integrity of this fact finding process would only be strengthened by the presence of trained counsel.
The prior decisions of the United States Supreme Court, and lower federal courts, when confronting this issue indicate that the right to retain counsel is an integral part of the procedural requirements of due process as defined by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. Due process, essentially, is the opportunity to be heard. Wisconsin v. *675Constantineau (1971), 400 U.S. 433, 91 S. Ct. 507, 27 L. Ed. 2d 515; Grannis v. Ordean (1914), 234 U.S. 385, 34 S. Ct. 779, 58 L. Ed. 1363. All the procedural requirements incorporated into a due process hearing are tools to insure that this opportunity is afforded in a “meaningful manner”. Armstrong v. Manzo (1965), 380 U.S. 545, 85 S. Ct. 1187, 14 L. Ed. 2d 62. As Justice Sutherland wrote in reference to the right to be represented:
“The right to be heard would be, in many cases, of little avail if it did not comprehend the right to be heard by counsel.” Powell v. Alabama (1932), 287 U.S. 45, 53 S. Ct. 55, 77 L. Ed. 158.
Although the court in Powell was writing in reference to the Sixth Amendment and not in the context of Fourteenth Amendment due process proceedings with which we are concerned here, the rationale of the' observation prevails. The right to be represented by counsel is an important aspect of being heard in a meaningful manner, regardless of whether the proceeding is deemed criminal or non-criminal in nature. The United States Supreme Court, citing the rationale of the Powell decision above, has found that due process requires that counsel be allowed to represent a welfare recipient in an administrative hearing concerned with the termination of welfare benefits. Goldberg v. Kelly (1970), 397 U.S. 254, 90 S. Ct. 1011, 25 L. Ed. 2d 287. The United States Court of Appeals of the Seventh Circuit also included the right to be represented by counsel in its outline of Fourteenth Amendment due process requirements in reference to a probation revocation hearing. Gunsolus v. Gagnon, 454 F. 2d 416 (7th Cir. 1971). It seems apparent to me, therefore, that federal decisions delineating due process requirements include the right to retain counsel in those proceedings which necessitate a due process approach, and since the proceedings with which we are concerned here have been clearly held to require such an approach counsel should not be excluded from the hearings.
*676Furthermore the Constitution of this State at Article 1, § 12, contains a due course of law section comparable to the due process provision of the Fourteenth Amendment. Although parole revocation hearings are not strictly speaking an administrative proceeding the Appellate Court treatment of a similar situation in the context of Art. 1, § 12, is significant here. In a case dealing with hearings for unemployment compensation benefits the Appellate Court held that the exclusion of claimant’s counsel was a denial of due process. Hamm v. Review Board (1961), 132 Ind. App. 318, 177 N. E. 2d 337. The Court stated in its opinion:
“We do not deem it necessary to cite authority that the due process of law provisions in both constitutions apply equally to administrative boards, the same as the courts of law, and that the appellant herein has a right to be represented by counsel in this matter before the appeals referee, and at every stage of proceeding.”
It seems to me that the reasoning quoted in the Hamm case above applies even more strongly to our case here. The loss to be suffered by a revocation of parole is certainly as great, if not greater than that suffered by denial of unemployment benefits.2 A constitutional provision which would prohibit a counsel from a proceeding where one’s economic welfare is at stake would surely even more strongly condemn the exclusion of counsel where one’s liberty is at stake.
The majority opinion citation of Terry v. Byers (1903), 161 Ind. 360, 68 N. E. 596, is particularly inappropriate to this case. The Terry decision concerned not a parole revocation proceeding as we are faced with here, but rather a parole granting proceeding. There are recognized differences in the nature and concept behind these two types of hearings. A *677parole revocation hearing, as pointed out above, is essentially a fact finding hearing, but a parole granting hearing contemplates a more substantial degree of discretion and judgment on the part of the parole board which is not based particularly upon either establishing or discrediting certain facts. It should be pointed out also that the United States Supreme Court has specifically said that parole revocation proceedings must be conducted pursuant to certain procedural rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Clause, however, that court has not as yet extended those rights under the Fourteenth Amendment to a parole granting hearing.
The majority also cites sections of Indiana statutory law which grant to the parole board a certain amount of discretion in its proceedings. This statute (I.C. 1971, 11-1-1-9, being Burns § 13-1609) again deals mostly with the granting of paroles rather than the case at bar which concerns revocation. In any event it is elementary constitutional law that when the United States Supreme Court has decided that certain procedural rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Clause must be afforded in a proceeding then the statutes of the state must conform to that constitutional mandate. Thus the discretion which is allowed to be exercised by the Indiana Parole Board must be bounded by the procedural rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States.
Lastly this case does not pose the question as to whether or not the Morrissey decision is retroactive as the majority opinion seems to assume, but rather presents the issue of whether or not, given the fact that the Supreme Court has found that parole revocation proceedings should be conducted with certain procedural due process rights, the State can continue to exclude counsel from those proceedings. I believe that the answer is apparent and in the negative. I would hold therefore that the exclusion of counsel from parole revocation hearings deprives the parolee of due process of *678law under both Federal and State Constitutions and that if a parolee chooses to retain counsel at such a hearing he should be allowed to do so.
Prentice, J., concurs.
Note.—Reported in 291 N. E. 2d 361.
. After stating that they would not decide the question whether or not a parolee is entitled to the assistance of counsel at his revocation hearing the Court cited in a footnote the Model Penal Code § 305.16 which reads: “The institutional parole staif shall render reasonable aid to the parolee in preparation for the hearing and he shall be permitted to advise with his own legal counsel. . . .”
. It is also of note that the Legislature has deemed a right to have counsel present at all administrative adjudication so important that it has incorporated this right into a statute. See I.C. 1971, 4-22-1-22, being Burns § 63-3022. It has also provided that students faced with expulsion from school have the right to a hearing with the assistance of counsel if so desired. See I.C. 1971, 20-8-9.5-11, being Burns § 28-5364.

=== CASE 9738316 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:45.925713+00 ===

Otis, Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I agree that plaintiff is entitled to a new trial, but dissent from that part of the majority opinion which rejects in tort cases § 3.07(2) (b) of the Model Penal Code, 10 U.L.A. 484, adopted by the American Law Institute, if in so doing it is the intention of the court to approve the use of deadly force in effecting the arrest of any person suspected of committing a felony.
The majority defines reasonable force as follows:
“Reasonable force may include the intentional discharge of a firearm upon or toward that person only if the officer reasonably believes that absent such use of a firearm he could not effect the arrest.”
I would add to this rule the limitation that deadly force, that is the intentional killing of a fleeing felon, may not be used unless the arresting officer has probable cause to believe the felon may endanger the lives and safety of other people if not apprehended.
Unless we thus limit the use of deadly force in effecting an arrest for a felony, upon a retrial, the court in the instant case will be justified in instructing the jury that a police officer may shoot to kill a 15-year-old child suspected only of stealing an automobile.
Under the circumstances I would hold as a matter of law that if the jury finds the defendant used deadly force against the plaintiff, the jury must find defendant liable for damages.

=== CASE 9738317 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:45.929054+00 ===

Rogosheske, Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I agree that plaintiff is entitled to a new trial, but join my brother Otis in dissenting from that part of the majority opinion which leaves virtually unlimited a police officer’s privilege to *473use deadly force to apprehend a fleeing feony suspect.1 The majority concludes that deadly force may be used whenever the officer reasonably believes that absent such force he could not effect the arrest of the felony suspect. I join in urging that we adopt the rule that in effecting the arrest of a felony suspect deadly force may not be used unless the arresting officer believes the offense for which the arrest is to be made involved the use or threatened use of deadly force, or he has reasonable grounds to believe the felony suspect may endanger the lives and safety of other persons if his apprehension is delayed. See, Restatement, Torts, § 181; Model Penal Code, § 3.07(2), 10 U. L. A. 484.
When an officer believes the crime for which a suspect is being arrested included the use or threatened use of deadly force, or when the officer reasonably believes that the suspect he is pursuing may endanger the lives and safety of other persons if his arrest is delayed, there can be no doubt that the officer is not only privileged but has a duty to use deadly force to prevent the escape of the fleeing felony suspect. It is equally settled that an officer’s use of such force, other than in self-defense, is never justified or privileged in the arrest of a misdemeanor suspect. See, Prosser, Torts (4 ed.) § 26, p. 135, notes, 5 and 6. The difficult issue presented in this case is the scope of the officer’s privilege to use deadly force in effecting the arrest of a felony suspect whose immediate apprehension is not essential to public safety. As the majority opinion indicates, there are two conflicting interests at stake in these circumstances. The first is that of the state in preventing the escape of the felony suspect, in deterring future escape attempts, and in maintaining the effective arrest power of the police. The second is that of the felony suspect in his own life and in an orderly and impartial adjudication of his guilt or innocence. I believe a sufficient fac*474tual basis is presented to enable this court to balance these conflicting interests, and that it is our duty to do so.
It is very doubtful that the use of deadly force to apprehend a nondangerous, nonthreatening, fleeing felony suspect is necessary to the effective enforcement of the criminal law in Minnesota. As so well stated by the majority, the Hennepin County Sheriff’s Department, the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department, and the Minnesota Highway Patrol, without waiting for legislative guidance, have all voluntarily ordered their officers not to use deadly force against fleeing felony suspects unless the crime for which the arrest or recapture is sought is a dangerous felony where human life had been put in jeopardy.2 If these local agencies who are charged with the enforcement of the criminal law believe they can enforce that law and make the necessary arrests without the use of deadly force against nondangerous felons, then there is a substantial basis for doubting that the use of such force is essential to the arrest power of other police agencies in either metropolitan or rural Minnesota.
In conflict with this uncertain need for a lethal arrest power is the certain conviction of our society, embodied in our public policy of fundamental rights, that human life is not to be lightly forfeited. There is no felony in Minnesota, however heinous, that is punishable by death. Minn. St. 609.095, 609.10. In other states, capital punishment may be decreed only after due process of law has been afforded the felony suspect.3 I believe that the best interest of an ordered society demands that a man’s life may not be taken on the spot by a police officer without substantial justification. In my view, no such justification exists in the case of a fleeing felony suspect who is believed only to have committed a crime against property and who poses no risk to the lives and *475safety of others except his escape from immediate apprehension. As Professor Wechsler stated at the 1958 meeting of the American Law Institute (A. L. I. Proceedings [1958], p. 285):
“* * * [T]he preservation of life has such moral and ethical standing in our culture and society, that the deliberate sacrifice of life merely for the protection of property ought not to be sanctioned by law.”
The permanent paralysis of a 15-year-old boy who was caught with a stolen car and the distressed reaction of defendant police officer following the shooting emphasizes as nothing else can the tragedy of any other view.
The majority opinion acknowledges that the Model Penal Code has “much to recommend it” but declines to adopt that rule because the issue presents a “legislative and not a judicial question.” I cannot agree that our responsibility can be so easily abrogated. Although the legislature is charged with defining crimes and defenses, it is traditionally and historically the duty of courts to modify and refine liability for torts. See, Spanel v. Mounds View School Dist. No. 621, 264 Minn. 279, 118 N. W. 2d 795 (1962). As this is a case of first impression in Minnesota, we are asked to define the scope of a police officer’s privilege to use a firearm against a nondangerous felony suspect and thus necessarily to determine the issue of civil liability for resulting injury.
The majority persuasively asserts that there exists a legislative policy to which this court should defer in defining tort liability in the instant case. Minn. St. 609.065(3) provides that an intentional homicide by a police officer is not a crime when necessary to effect the lawful arrest of a felony suspect. Prosser warns us, however, that “the criminal law must be regarded as a very unreliable analogy to the law of torts.” Prosser, Torts (4 ed.) § 2, p. 9. Here, that warning is apt because this criminal statute distinguishes between the killing of felony and misdemeanor suspects, when sound policy dictates that the tort law *476should distinguish between the killing of dangerous and non-dangerous criminal suspects. Surely a police officer should not ibe imprisoned if he mistakes a nondangerous for a dangerous felony suspect and uses his firearm against the former. However, unless he is in violation of specific instructions, his employer ought to bear financial responsibility for mistakes committed in the line of duty. See, A. B. A. Standards for Criminal Justice, The Urban Police Function (Approved Draft, 1973) § 5.5.4 Viewed in this way, it does not follow, as the majority declares, that under the rule urged a police officer contemplating the use of force under emergency conditions would be held to conflicting standards of conduct by the civil and criminal law. A police officer who makes a mistake and uses deadly force against a non-dangerous felon would know unequivocally that he is committing a civil wrong. The legislature and the courts of this state, out of awareness of his difficult job in these emergency circumstances, will not jail him for his mistake, but in no way can that justify granting immunity for a civil wrong. The adoption of the Restatement rule would not result in confusion and unfairness and uncertainty. Rather, and hopefully, it would lead all police officers in Minnesota to do what some, if not most, well-trained and experienced police officers already practice, which is to follow the rule that the use of deadly force is not a proper arrest procedure for nondangerous, nonthreatening felons.
The adoption of the rule urged should be applied prospectively. Defendant officer in this case acted under the then pre- I vailing rules of the St. Paul Police Department. It would be manifestly unfair to apply a new rule to his past actions then] governed by a conflicting police department rule.
*477Mr. Justice Otis agrees with the opinion of Mr. Justice Rogosheske.
MacLaughlin, Justice (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I concur in the opinion of Mr. Justice Rogosheske.
Yetka, Justice (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I concur in the opinion of Mr. Justice Rogosheske.
“Deadly force” as a term of legal art means to me force used by an officer for the purpose of causing, or which he knows creates a substantial risk of causing, death or serious bodily injury.
The President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice has advocated a similar rule for law-enforcement officers. Task Force Report: The Police, p. 189 (1967).
Since June 1967, moreover, no one in the United States has been executed for a criminal offense.
A. B. A. Standards for Criminal Justice, The Urban Police Func-I tion (Approved Draft, 1973) § 5.5, provides: “In order to strengthen thel effectiveness of the tort remedy for improper police activities, munici-l pal tort immunity, where it still exists, should be repealed and munici-f palities should be fully liable for the actions of police officers who arel acting within the scope of their employment as municipal employees.”!

=== CASE 2215289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:59.723648+00 ===

207 Cal.App.2d 725 (1962)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ALBERTO GONZALES BARQUERA, Defendant and Appellant.  [fn. *]
Crim. No. 7923.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Sept. 20, 1962.
Chandler & Duncan for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and George W. Kell, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOX, P. J.
Defendant was convicted of the possession of heroin. It was also found that he had suffered a prior narcotics conviction for which he had served a term in the state prison. He has appealed.
Officer Virgin of the Los Angeles Police Department, Narcotics Bureau, arrested defendant at approximately 9:30 p. m. on January 3, 1961. The officer had been investigating defendant for quite some time. He had stopped defendant on three or four occasions for questioning during that period and, with defendant's consent, had searched him on these occasions. During this investigation the officer had observed defendant in company with numerous persons connected with the narcotics traffic. Two of them were under indictment for narcotic sales and another was on parole for a narcotics offense.
The officer had also received a letter from the El Paso, Texas, Police Department which requested information concerning defendant and revealed that defendant was engaged in the narcotic traffic between El Paso and Los Angeles. The El Paso Police requested information concerning a cafe which defendant was believed to have owned. The letter also gave a license number for a motor vehicle that defendant owned. The officer observed defendant in the motor vehicle that was described in the letter. *727
Prior to arresting defendant, the officer examined the local police records and discovered that defendant had suffered two prior narcotic convictions.
On January 3, 1961, Officer Virgin observed defendant's car parked in the vicinity of Ord and New High Streets in Los Angeles. The officer drove around the block and observed defendant talking to a person who had a prior conviction and who, in the officer's belief, was a narcotic pusher.
Defendant conversed with this person for approximately 10 minutes, returned to his automobile and drove to 5444 Huntington Drive where he parked it in the rear. Upon leaving the car he went to a storeroom under the house next door. Officer Virgin observed defendant put his hand, head and shoulders into the storeroom. After a few minutes defendant went into his own house where he remained for some 15 minutes, after which he emerged and again went to the storeroom. With respect to defendant's movements in going to the storeroom, then to his house and back to the storeroom, the officer testified that upon each of these occasions it was his opinion, based upon his experience as a narcotics officer, that defendant was either picking up a stash of narcotics or putting a stash down.
While defendant was in the immediate vicinity of the storeroom, Officer Virgin's partner approached defendant from one direction while Virgin approached from another. Virgin's partner said, "Nolo [defendant's nickname], police officers. I want to talk to you." Defendant thereupon "threw something toward his mouth, and as he did this two objects fell to the ground directly at his feet. One rolled one way, and one rolled the other way. Defendant then turned and ran. As he ran, he tripped and fell on some stairs," and both officers seized him. Officer Virgin picked up the fallen objects which were balloons, each of which contained heroin. Officer Virgin's partner thought that defendant had thrown something into his mouth. He thereupon attempted to extract same from defendant's mouth but did not find anything in it. Defendant was arrested. He stated that "this [apparently referring to the contents of the balloons] was all of the stuff he had, and that he did not swallow any." The officers did not have either a search warrant or a warrant for his arrest.
At the trial defendant testified that the officers had "jumped" him and had gotten an armhold on his neck. He further stated that he had two balloons containing heroin in his mouth at the time and that the officers, after a struggle, removed them with their fingers. *728
Defendant objected to the introduction of the exhibits seized at the time of the arrest upon the ground that they were the product of an illegal search and seizure. This objection was overruled and the evidence admitted.
On appeal defendant contends there was no probable cause for the officers to stop him and that the search was illegal; hence the evidence was inadmissible. We find no merit in defendant's position. It will be recalled that the arrest occurred at approximately 9:30 p. m. in the winter season, that the officers called to the defendant identifying themselves as police officers and stating they wanted to talk to him. [1] It has been consistently held that a police officer may question a person outdoors at night when the circumstances are such as would indicate to a reasonable man in like position that such a course is necessary to the discharge of the officer's duties. (People v. Ellsworth, 190 Cal.App.2d 844, 846 [12 Cal.Rptr. 433], and cases there cited.)
[2] Here the circumstances were such, considering defendant's associations, his prior convictions for narcotics violations, the letter from the El Paso Police Department, the observations of the officers just prior to the arrest, and the expert knowledge of the officers enabling them to interpret these observations, that the officers would have been derelict in their duty had they neglected to attempt to question defendant. Actually, the facts and circumstances known to the officers prior to their attempt to interview defendant would seem to be sufficient to "lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion" that defendant was guilty of a crime. (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 412 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577].) In addition, when the officers identified themselves, stating that they wanted to talk to him, defendant appeared to throw something in his mouth and began to run, dropping two objects to the ground as he attempted to make his getaway. This attempted flight added to the other circumstances previously noted was plainly adequate to establish probable cause for a lawful arrest. (People v. Taylor, 174 Cal.App.2d 448, 451 [344 P.2d 837]; People v. Cisneros, 166 Cal.App.2d 100, 102 [332 P.2d 376]; People v. Dewson, 150 Cal.App.2d 119 [310 P.2d 162].) It therefore follows the questioned evidence was properly admitted.
In an effort to establish an illegal search and seizure of the contraband, defendant testified he had the two balloons containing heroin in his mouth; that after a struggle one of *729 the officers "put his two fingers" in defendant's mouth and removed the two balloons therefrom. Officer Virgin testified they did not recover anything from defendant's mouth; that he observed defendant's throwing motion toward his mouth, and saw two objects fall to the ground directly at defendant's feet; that he retrieved these two objects which were balloons that contained a white powder that proved to be heroin. It is apparent that the trial judge disbelieved defendant's story and accepted the testimony of the officer as giving the correct version as to how the contraband was recovered. This was, of course, within the province of the trial court and is binding on appeal. (Dillard v. McKnight, 34 Cal.2d 209, 223 [209 P.2d 387, 11 A.L.R.2d 835].)
Defendant had a fair trial. We find no basis for reversing the judgment of conviction.
Affirmed.
Ashburn, J., and Herndon, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. In his notice of appeal prepared in propria persona, appellant identifies himself as Alberto G. Barquera, Jr.

=== CASE 9738318 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:47.307278+00 ===

Clinton, J.
Plaintiff, Dennis Rawlings, appeals to this court from a verdict of the jury and judgment entered thereon in favor of the defendant, Abbie Andersen, in an action to recover damages for injuries sustained in a collision between his motorcycle and the defendant’s Volkswagen automobile. The collision occurred at the intersection of Center and 40th Streets in the City of Omaha at about 4:15 p.m., on August 7, 1972. At the time of the collision the plaintiff was traveling east on Center Street. The defendant was coming from the east on Center Street and was about to make or was in the process of making a left-hand turn onto 40th Street. Center Street, at the accident scene, has four traffic lanes, two for eastbound and two for westbound traffic. West of 40th Street there is a cement median dividing the eastbound and westbound lanes. There is no cement median immediately east of 40th Street, but a median and left-turn lane are painted on the street’s surface.
*688The trial court submitted to the jury: (1) Determination of the defendant’s negligence based upon evidence of failure to maintain a proper lookout, failure to have her vehicle under proper control, and failure to yield the right-of-way to the defendant; and (2) plaintiff’s contributory negligence based upon evidence of failure to maintain a proper lookout, failure to have his motorcycle under proper control, and excessive speed under the circumstances. The jury rendered a general verdict for the defendant.
On appeal to this court the plaintiff makes the following assignments of error: (1) The court erred in giving the jury instructions in conflict with the physical facts of the case, since those facts are sufficiently clear to eliminate the question of point of impact and to justify a finding that the defendant was, as a matter of law, executing a left turn at the time of the collision and was in the plaintiff’s line of travel. (2) The court erred in refusing to allow a police division traffic investigator to testify as to the point of impact of the two vehicles. (3) The court erred in permitting testimony from the plaintiff’s physician that 17 months prior to the accident the plaintiff had told his doctor that he was at that time consuming daily “a fifth of booze.” (4) The court erred in permitting a witness to testify to the speed limit on Center Street at the point where the collision occurred. (5) The court erred in its refusal to require a witness at the taking of a pretrial discovery deposition to produce a statement used by the witness to refresh her recollection. (6) The court erred in refusing the plaintiff’s request made at the end of trial to amend his petition to allege the defendant at the time of impact was on the wrong side of the street and in not giving an instruction with reference thereto.
We treat the assignments in the order we have listed them. At an instruction conference, counsel for the plaintiff, in response to a question from the court, said: “Just that we except to all Instructions in conflict with *689the physical facts of the case, which in this case we deem are sufficiently clear to eliminate the question of point of impact, and sufficiently clear and persuasive as to justify a finding that the defendant was, as a matter of fact, executing a left turn at the time of the collision and was in the plaintiff’s line of travel.” The following then occurred: “THE COURT: There is nothing in the Instructions where I have made any comment on that. The Court is confused with your objections here. If you can point out the Instructions that are incorrect, we will make the ■ corrections, or at least consider your objections to the specific Instructions, but you haven’t done so. MR. SCHREMPP: I can’t point out a specific Instruction. THE COURT: That’s just your general theory? MR. SCHREMPP: Right. THE COURT: The record will so note. If it is an objection, it is overruled.” The plaintiff submitted no requested instruction on the point discussed.
The plaintiff’s position apparently is that the physical evidence is so conclusive the court should have instructed the jury on its own motion that the collision occurred south of the centerline of Center Street. The evidence was clearly sufficient to permit the jury to so find and nothing in the instructions given would have prevented the jury from coming to such a conclusion. However, such a determination by the jury would not have been determinative of the litigation for the jury could also have found that the defendant was not negligent in making a left-hand turn at the time and place she did, and that the collision was caused by the plaintiff’s contributory negligence more than slight. The plaintiff, to support his argument, relies upon the opinions of this court in Elwood v. Schlank, 126 Neb. 213, 252 N. W. 828: Miller v. Arends, 191 Neb. 494, 215 N. W. 2d 891; and the dissent of Johnsen, J., in Ross v. Carroll, 138 Neb. 1, 291 N. W. 726. In all these cases the question which was determinative of liability was on which side of the roadway did the collision occur. In *690Miller v. Arends, supra, we said that where the undisputed physical facts demonstrate the collision out of which the injuries arose was not caused by the negligence of the defendant, the evidence will not support a verdict for the plaintiff. That principle is not applicable in this case. Here the fact that the collision may have occurred (and if this court were the original trier of fact we would say it probably did occur) south of the centerline was not conclusive of the defendant’s negligence and certainly not conclusive of the absence of contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff.
The defendant’s evidence indicated that the defendant entered the left-turn lane east of the intersection with the intention of making a left turn onto 40th Street. She testified she had just begun the turn with perhaps her front wheels just south of the centerline when the plaintiff’s motorcycle suddenly appeared weaving and at high speed from between eastbound cars. She stated she stopped her car and the collision occurred. The testimony of a motorist following the plaintiff tends to support this version. Other testimony and evidence would indicate that she was further into her turn with the front of her car pointed southwest and that the point of impact may have been at about the dividing line between the two eastbound traffic lanes and near the east edge of the intersection. Evidence tending to support that version comes from other witnesses and is reinforced by the presence of what the investigating officer stated was under-carriage dirt on the street located at about the dividing line between the eastbound lanes and a few feet east of the east line of the intersection. This debris is shown in some of the photographs received in evidence. When the collision occurred the plaintiff and his motorcycle flew in the air. The motorcycle broke into two parts, one part landing at the base of a tree immediately adjacent to and south of the sidewalk on the south side of Center Street, 46 feet east of the east line of 40th Street; and the second *691part coming to rest also at the south edge of the sidewalk, but somewhat west of the tree. The evidence does not show clearly where the plaintiff landed. Photos received in evidence would indicate that the motorcycle struck the front of the automobile at a point about a foot left of center of the bumper. Both vehicles were severely damaged. Defendant testified that her vehicle was driven backward by the collision. The plaintiff did not testify as to the collision because of amnesia. His last recollection was that he was headed toward the 40th Street intersection in the southernmost eastbound lane of traffic shortly before the collision occurred. There is no physical evidence to show the precise line of travel of the motorcycle immediately before the collision. It is evident that the direction of flight of the motorcycle after impact was dependent upon the relative position and line of travel of the two vehicles at impact. There is nothing in the nature of the physical damage to the Volkswagen from which these matters can be conclusively determined. This was a question for the jury to decide.
The instructions given by the court correctly informed the jury of the law applicable to the case. No attack is made on the correctness of these instructions. They did not preclude the jury from finding that the collision occurred south of the centerline and near the east edge of the intersection. If the plaintiff felt that he was entitled to a more specific instruction as to some undisputed fact shown by physical evidence, it was up to him to make such a request in writing. A party may not complain that correct instructions are not sufficiently specific when no request is made for more specific instructions. Thorpe v. Zwonechek, 177 Neb. 504, 129 N. W. 2d 483; Dittrick v. Deuel, 181 Neb. 428, 149 N. W. 2d 57. The plaintiff’s first assignment is without merit.
During the course of the direct examination of the police officer who made the on-the-scene investigation of the collision, plaintiff laid a foundation to show that *692the officer’s duties included automobile accident investigation and that he had examined the scene of about two such accidents daily for a period of 4 years. He was then asked if he had sufficient experience to determine the significance of debris at an accident scene. The officer answered in the affirmative. He was then asked: “What do you understand with respect to debris in connection with any significance in an accident investigation?” Objection was made and sustained. He was permitted to testify to the location of debris and its nature, viz: “. . . it was a substance similar to that found under the undercarriage of vehicles.” He stated in response to a question that he did not know where it came from. He stated it was present when he arrived at the scene. He was not permitted to testify as to the time the deposit of debris was made nor to the position of the vehicles at the time of impact. He was not permitted to give his opinion as to where on the street the vehicles collided. Objections to questions designed to elicit the above information were made and sustained on the basis that they called for the conclusion of the witness and that sufficient and proper foundation had not been laid.
Heretofore we have held it has not ordinarily been permissible for an accident investigator to give his opinion as to the point of impact. Stillwell v. Schmoker, 175 Neb. 595, 122 N. W. 2d 538; Caves v. Barnes, 178 Neb. 103, 132 N. W. 2d 310. The reason usually given is that the witness may not give his opinion to the ultimate issue which is for determination by the jury. The plaintiff urges we apply sections 27-702, 27-703, and 27-704, R. S. Supp., 1975, which became law August 24, 1975. This case was tried previous to the effective date of the new evidence code. We ought not, unless justice requires it, reverse the decision of the trial court for following rules of evidence in effect at the time of trial even though legislative change then awaits only the effective date of the act. Justice does not require we do so *693in this case. We simply point out that, although the new rules abolish the “ultimate issue” rule, nonetheless under the provisions of section 27-702, R. S. Supp., 1975, the admissibility of such testimony depends upon whether the “specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue.” It is for the trial court to make the initial decision on whether the testimony will “assist” the trier of fact. The soundness of its determination, of course, depends upon the qualifications of the witness, the nature of the issue on which the opinion is sought, the foundation laid, and the particular facts of the case. Were we to say that section 27-702, R. S. Supp., 1975, is applicable, we would not be likely to disturb the discretion of the trial court in this instance. The plaintiff’s second assignment is not meritorious.
The plaintiff suffered severe, permanent injuries as a result of the collision. Life expectancy tables were received for the purpose of assisting the jury in determining damages for such permanent injuries. During cross-examination of the plaintiff’s physician the defendant’s counsel sought to elicit information as to the plaintiff’s previous habits which might affect his health and longevity. Questions concerning smoking habits were asked and answered. The following then occurred: “Q. Did he indicate to you a history with respect to the use of alcohol? A. Yes. Q. To the extent that that would affect his health? A. Probably.” Counsel then asked the following question: “Would you tell us what he had indicated the amount of alcohol that he was using?” Objection was made and after the court determined by inquiry of defense counsel that his purpose was to determine plaintiff’s “condition of health,” the following occurred: “Q. Let me ask it this way as a matter of preliminary investigation: The amount of alcohol that he told you he consumed, one which if it was on a prolonged period of time would that affect his health?” After some discussion the doctor answered, “Yes.” Then *694came the following: “Q. How much did he take at that time when he was consuming the alcohol?” Objection was made, “there being no showing and no claim by anyone that there was any influence of alcohol in connection with this accident.” The court then overruled the objection and stated that the only basis was the “health problem.” The doctor then answered as follows: “On January 12, 1971 in the History we had taken he told me that he was drinking a fifth of booze a day.” The following colloquy then took place: “THE COURT: ... he is trying to show the comparison of the health prior to the accident and after the accident. Is that what you are attempting to do? MR. WELCH: Yes, sir. It has no bearing upon the happening of the accident, merely upon his health. THE COURT: It is on that basis that the court is admitting this evidence and the jury is admonished to keep that in mind in their deliberations.” In an action where permanent, personal injury is claimed, the defendant may show as affecting damages that the plaintiff was a person of intemperate habits. Century “21” Shows v. Owens, 400 F. 2d 603; 9 A. L. R. 1406. Plaintiffs third assignment is not meritorious.
A motorist who witnessed the collision and who was traveling west on Center Street about 1/2 to 3/4 block from the collision site was permitted over objection to testify that he thought the speed limit at the scene of the accident was 35 miles per hour. Later in the trial an Omaha ordinance .was received in evidence which provided among other things: “. . . nor in any case at a greater rate of speed than twenty-five miles per hour, except on street or streets where a greater rate of speed is permitted, as designated by signs installed along such street or streets.” Objection to the witness’ testimony was solely upon the ground that he should not be permitted to testify “what the law is.” There was no objection on the basis of either insufficient foundation or that the testimony was not the best evidence. There *695was no error in admitting this testimony. A witness may testify as to the posted speed limit at a given location if an appropriate foundation is laid. The plaintiff’s fourth assignment of error is not meritorious.
The plaintiff’s fifth assignment relates to an order made by the trial court during the taking by the plaintiff of a pretrial discovery deposition of one of the defendant’s listed witnesses, denying the production of a written statement previously made by the witness. This witness later testified at the trial. During the deposition the plaintiff’s counsel asked the witness if her statement had been taken by anyone after the accident. It developed that she then had the statement in her possession. Plaintiff’s counsel asked to see it. Objection was made and almost immediately a ruling was obtained from the same judge who later presided at trial. He denied production because there was no showing of good cause.
Plaintiff relies upon section 27-612, R. S. Supp., 1975, effective August 24, 1975. That section is in part as follows: Rule 612. ' Writing used to refresh memory. “If a witness uses a writing to refresh his memory for the purpose of testifying, either before or while testifying, an adverse party is entitled to have it produced at the hearing, to inspect it, to cross-examine the witness thereon, and to introduce in evidence those portions which relate to the testimony of the witness.” This rule codifies in part previous law and in part enlarges previous rules. See Art. VI, Witnesses, p. 19 et seq., Nebraska Rules of Evidence, 1975, Nebraska Continuing Legal Education, Inc. This rule continues the former rule requiring that any writing used by a witness to refresh his recollection at a hearing must be produced for an adverse party. The rule adds to previous law by requiring, among other things, the production of any statement used by the witness to refresh his recollection previous to testifying and by permitting the adverse party to introduce the parts of the statement which re*696late to the testimony of the witness. Under the rule, however, a precondition to the production and use is the requirement that it has been used to refresh the witness’ recollection. In this case the gist of the witness’ testimony on the point of refreshment was that she just glanced at it. “What I looked at was the date.” There is here no disagreement involving either the date of the accident, the witness’ presence at the time, nor is the date of -the taking of the statement relevant. Even if the changes in the law are to be applied before the effective date of the act, the rule is not applicable here because the witness had not refreshed her recollection by means of the statement. The trial court did not err in its ruling.
The last assignment relates to the trial court’s refusal to permit the plaintiff at the end of trial to amend his petition to include an allegation that at the time of the collision the defendant was operating her vehicle on the wrong side of the street. The court gave as the reason for its ruling: “There is no evidence in the record that the defendant was operating her car on the wrong side of the street, under Nebraska law .... The evidence is that the defendant attempted to make a left turn at an intersection.” In his brief the plaintiff states his contention as follows: “We contend that when an automobile ‘cuts a corner’ on a left hand turn rather than going beyond the center point of the intersection, that automobile is operating on the wrong side of the street rather than simply failing to yield the right of way on a properly executed left hand turn.” No eyewitness testified that the defendant was driving her car south of the centerline as she approached the intersection. All the direct testimony is to the contrary.
An eastbound motorist whose car was passed by the motorcycle at “about the second entrance where you come out of Kilpatrick’s on the north side” (the record indicates that entrance is 192 feet west of the west line of 40th Street), and whose view of the collision was ob*697structed by a car or cars ahead of her own car, but who saw the motorcycle flying in the air, testified that moments later after the accident when she passed the collision site the Volkswagen was in the inner eastbound lane of traffic, facing directly west, and that the defendant then drove her car to the curb immediately after the witness’ car had passed. The photographs indicate that the Volkswagen after the collision was facing directly south with its front wheels against the curb. The photos and testimony also indicate that the debris previously mentioned was directly north of the rear of the car and north of the dividing line between the two eastbound traffic lanes. Any inference from the foregoing that the defendant was driving her car in the lane of traffic south of the centerline before the collision was entirely too speculative to require a wrong side of the street instruction. The court did properly instruct the jury on the law applicable to the proper manner of making left-hand turns at intersections. All the evidence indicating negligence on the part of the defendant was before the jury. It was properly able to consider under the instructions given whether the defendant was negligent in cutting the corner, and whether such negligence, if any, was the proximate cause of the accident. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing the request to amend made at the end of trial. The courts may, in the furtherance of justice, either before or after the judgment, permit the amendment of a pleading by conforming the pleading to the facts proved. § 25-852, R. R. S. 1943. Justice did not require amendment in this case.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738319 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:49:47.311859+00 ===

Brodkey, J.,
dissenting.
I would reverse and remand this case for a new trial. The record reveals that at the close of all the evidence, a conference was had between the court and counsel for the parties at which the following occurred: “MR. SCHREMPP: Comes now the plaintiff and at the close *698of all of the evidence moves the Court for an Order allowing plaintiff to amend his Petition to allege that the defendant under the present state of the evidence — that there is evidence of the fact that the defendant was operating her vehicle on the wrong side of the street, and further requests the Court that on the allowance of such an amendment that the same be included as a specification of negligence in Instruction No. 2.
“THE COURT: There is no evidence in the record that the defendant was operating her car on the wrong side of the street, under Nebraska law operating on the wrong side of the road or street. The evidence is that the defendant attempted to make a left turn at an intersection. Overruled and denied. Your request is denied and your motion is overruled.”
In this, I believe the court erred, as a review of the record reveals that there was testimony and evidence received during the trial from which the jury might well have concluded that the defendant, in fact, was driving on the wrong side of the street. This evidence exists apart from the evidence pointed out by counsel for the plaintiff relative to his claim that the defendant allegedly cut the corner in making a left-hand turn before reaching the east line of 40th Street as extended in a northerly direction through the intersection. I direct attention to the testimony of Ida Johnson, who was called as a witness for the defendant. She testified that on August 7, 1972, she was driving her car east on Center Street near the intersection of 40th and Center Streets at the time of the accident. She had stopped for a red light at 42nd and Center Streets, and when the light turned green she proceeded east in the right-hand lane. Shortly thereafter the plaintiff’s motorcycle passed her on the left and swerved in front of her and then swerved out in the middle between the cars on both sides. She lost sight of the motorcycle when it was approximately 1/2 block ahead of her and the next time *699she observed it it was going up in the air above the trees. She then proceeded through the intersection of 40th and Center Streets. She testified at that time the Volkswagen was stopped and to her left. She also testified that after she passed through the intersection, the driver of the Volkswagen moved it to the south curb, as shown in exhibit 2, which shows the Volkswagen with its front wheels against the south curb of Center Street. She went back to the scene of the accident and saw plaintiff lying in the street, and his motorcycle by a tree. The front of the Volkswagen was “mashed in.” We add parenthetically at this point that exhibits 9, 10, and 29, colored photographs showing the damage to the Volkswagen, strongly indicate that the collision between the motorcycle and the Volkswagen was a head-on collision, as the hood of the Volkswagen appears to have been pushed directly back toward the windshield of the automobile.
Witness Johnson was examined in great detail and at some length, both in direct examination and in cross-examination, as to the location of the Volkswagen when she observed it, and it is necessary and helpful to set out verbatim certain portions of her testimony. In direct examination by defendant’s attorney, as it appears in the record, the following questions were asked and answers given: “Q. What lane were you in when you passed in front of the blue Volkswage (sic)? A. Well, I was to the right of her. Q. What lane were you in? A. I was in the south lane. Q. And what lane was she in at that time? A. In the left lane. Q. Was she moving or stopped? A. No, she was stopped.” Later, on cross-examination by counsel for the plaintiff, the following appears: “BY MR. SCHREMPP: Q. Mrs. Johnson, you say that when you went past going east there was enough room in the curb lane for you to get by south of the Volkswagen, is that right? A. Yes. Q. The Volkswagen then was in the lane — A. To the left of me. Q. To the left of you? A. Yes. Q. In other words that *700would be the lane between the center line — well, it would be the first lane south of the center line, wouldn’t it? You were in the curb lane? A. Yes. Q. And the Volkswagen was in the lane immediately north of you? A. It was north of me. I had enough room to get past. Q. So there was one whole clear lane but the other lane was occupied by the Volkswagen, was it not? A. Yes. Q. At the time you drove past it after the accident in what direction was the Volkswagen facing in this lane? A. Well, it looked to me like it was just practically straight west. Q. Would you come here and put this up for us then, if you would, ma’am? Well, maybe I can help. If you place the car facing straight west in approximately that position, would that be about correct? A. I expect. It looked to me like it was just about straight. Q. In other words it was facing due west, wasn’t it? A. Yes. Q. This was after the whole collision was over? A. Yes.”
On further cross-examination of the witness, Ida Johnson, she gave these answers to questions propounded to her: “Q. All right, I will ask you this: You say that after you saw the motorcycle go up toward the trees that you drove east? A. Right. Q. On Center Street? A. Right. Q. And that you drove east on the curb lane, which would be the lane closest to the- south - right? A. Yes. Q. And in the next lane over; in other words, the lane next to you you saw the Volkswagen for the first time? A. Yes. Q. And it was in the lane right next to your lane, was it not? A. Yes. Q. And it was facing you say due west? A. Right. Q. No problem then about that where it was. A. I was going east and she was going west. Q. And you are sure of that? A. Sure, I am sure. I know which direction I was going. Q. Well then that would be correct as to where you saw the car, would it not? A. I was in the south lane and she was in the north lane. Q. All of course south of the center line? A. Yes.” She also testified that following the impact she saw the defendant drive her Volkswagen *701to the south curb and thought to herself “You shouldn’t have moved that.”
In addition, debris, which the police accident investigator testified was similar to that on the undercarriage of vehicles, was found in the left or northern east bound lane. ’■=
From the testimony quoted above and the evidence noted, it is clear there was indeed evidence in the record from which the jury could find that af the time of the accident the defendant was driving on the wrong side of the street. Had the jurors been iñstructed that driving on the wrong side of the street could be considered by them as evidence of negligence, and had they chosen to believe witness Johnson’s testimony, they might well have found, at least circumstantially, that at or immediately before the moment of impact the defendant was driving her Volkswagen in a westerly direction on the north half of the east bound lane of Center Street, all south of the centerline of Center Street.
The law applicable to this situation is that when a motion has been made to amend a pleading to. include a material allegation upon which some evidence has been received, such amendment should be allowed. Of course, whether or not the evidence is sufficient to support a favorable finding thereon remains a question of fact. Curren v. Certain Parcel of Land, 149 Neb. 477, 31 N. W. 2d 405 (1948); Seeman v. Pagels, 184 Neb. 757, 172 N. W. 2d 100 (1969); § 25-852, R. R. S. 1943. A litigant is entitled to have the jury instructed as to his theory of the case as shown by the pleadings and evidence, and a failure to do so is prejudicial. Maska v. Stoll, 163 Neb. 857, 81 N. W. 2d 571 (1957); Coyle v. Stopak, 165 Neb. 594, 86 N. W. 2d 758 (1957); Stillwell v. Schmoker, 175 Neb. 595, 122 N. W. 2d 538 (1963).
Since both the negligence of the defendant, and the contributory negligence of the plaintiff were issues in this case, it is possible that had the jury been instructed on the issue of whether the defendant, Mrs. Andersen, *702was driving on the wrong side of the road at the time of the accident, there being evidence in the record to sustain that contention on the part of the plaintiff, its conclusions and verdict may have been different, either as to defendant’s negligence, or as to the degree of contributory negligence of the plaintiff.
There being evidence in the record on the issue, the plaintiff was entitled to have his theory of defendant’s liability submitted to the jury under proper instructions, and I conclude that the failure of the court to do so was, in this case, prejudicial.
Finally, I am of the opinion that plaintiff’s objection to the testimony of witness Madsen as to the speed limit at the scene of the accident should have been sustained. While it is undoubtedly true that a witness may testify as to the posted speed limit at a given location if an appropriate foundation is laid, the record in this case is absolutely silent as to whether the witness had even seen a speed limit sign and his testimony as to his opinion of the applicable speed limit at that place was, to say the least, indefinite. During the course of the trial, the court, over objection of plaintiff’s counsel, permitted the attorney for defendant to read the following city ordinance to the jury: “It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on, over or upon any street or streets in the City of Omaha at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the traffic, surface, width and condition of the road and the hazard at intersections, nor at a rate of speed such as to endanger life or limb of any person, nor in any case at a greater rate of speed than twenty-five miles per hour, except on street or streets where a greater rate of speed is permitted, as designated by signs installed along such street or streets.” It is the general rule that municipal ordinances must ordinarily be pleaded and proved. Perrine v. Hokser, 158 Neb. 190, 62 N. W. 2d 677 (1954). The District Court may not, in original actions, take judicial notice of mu*703nicipal ordinances. Section 14-138, R. R. S. 1943, provides that city ordinances “may be proved by a certificate of the clerk under the seal of the city, and when printed or published in a book or pamphlet form, and purporting to be published or printed by authority of the city counsel, shall be read and received in all courts and places without further proof.” There is no showing in the record that counsel for the defendant read the ordinance in question to the jury out of such a book or pamphlet. Before permitting the counsel to read the ordinance in question to the jury, the judge commented that he would possibly give the ordinance to the jury as part of the instructions. In instruction No. 14, the court told the jury: “If you find from the evidence that any of the parties violated any of the laws of the State of Nebraska or City of Omaha Ordinances which are set out in these Instructions, the violation thereof is not in and of itself negligence as a matter of law; but the violation thereof is evidence of negligence which you should consider with all the other evidence in the case to determine whether or not the parties or either of them were guilty of negligence.” (Emphasis supplied.) However, the court did not instruct the jury as to the Omaha ordinance relative to speed, nor did he inform it of what the specific speed limit was at the location in question. This may have well resulted in confusing the jury, to the prejudice of the plaintiff. I feel that the plaintiff should be afforded a new trial, and an opportunity to present his theory of the case to the jury under proper instructions.