=== CASE 9736955 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:02.398018+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I join the court in affirming the defendant’s convictions. I do not agree, however, that the defendant’s death sentence must be vacated, and accordingly I dissent from that portion of the majority opinion. In the present case, the defendant’s eligibility for the death sentence was predicated solely on the aggravating circumstance found in section 9 — l(b)(7) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9-l(b)(7)). That provision authorizes imposition of the death penalty in cases in which “the murdered individual was under 12 years of age and the death resulted from exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty.” In People v. Odle (1988), 128 Ill. 2d 111, this court considered, on its own motion, whether section 9 — l(b)(7) was unconstitutional in light of the Supreme Court’s decision in Maynard v. Cartwright (1988), 486 U.S. 356, 100 L. Ed. 2d 372, 108 S. Ct. 1853. Odle ruled that the Illinois provision was valid. Discussing the requirements of the statute, the court emphasized: “the victim must be under the age of 12, and the conduct which brings about the victim’s death must not only be exceptionally brutal or heinous, it must also be such that it is indicative of wanton cruelty.” (Emphasis in original.) (Odle, 128 Ill. 2d at 141.) Recently we reaffirmed Odie, holding once again that section 9 — l(b)(7) is not facially invalid. People v. Kidd (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 432, 454-56. Relying on Odie and Kidd, the majority rejects the defendant’s argument before this court that section 9— 1(b)(7) is unconstitutional on its face. The majority also rejects the defendant’s related contention that the death sentence imposed in the present case was rendered unreviewable by the trial judge’s failure to provide written findings, or some other express statement, regarding his application of the statutory aggravating circumstance. Having determined in Odle and Kidd that section 9— 1(b)(7) is constitutional, the narrow question in this case is whether the sentencing judge properly found that the aggravating circumstance had been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. The majority agrees with the defendant that the provision was not established here. In explicating the terms “brutal,” “heinous,” and “wanton cruelty,” the majority turns to People v. La Pointe (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 482. That case considered identical language appearing in section 5 — 8—1(a)(1) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005 — 8—1(a)(1)), which authorizes the imposition of a term of natural life imprisonment when the offense of murder is accompanied by exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty. Citing Odie and People v. Mitchell (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 1, which involved imposition of an extended term of imprisonment for the offense of aggravated battery of a child (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 5—3.2(b)(2) (extended term may be imposed if felony “was accompanied by exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty”)), the majority states, “Cases in which this court has found brutal or heinous behavior to be present have generally involved prolonged pain, torture or premeditation.” (132 Ill. 2d at 445.) The majority concludes that the evidence in this case fails to support the trial judge’s finding that the defendant’s murder of the seven-month-old victim came within the scope of section 9— 1(b)(7). In support of its holding the majority notes that the victim’s death was caused by suffocation, “which occurred almost immediately after the injuries were inflicted,” and that there was testimony indicating that the injuries could have been the result of a single blow. The majority then states that there was no “conclusive evidence” that the victim’s death was premeditated, prolonged, or torturous. 132 Ill. 2d at 446. As noted, the majority declares that in cases involving exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty, the conduct in question has generally involved prolonged pain, torture, or premeditation. The majority’s formulation may be questioned. In La Pointe the court rejected the defendant’s argument that behavior of the type described is found only in cases involving torture or the infliction of unnecessary pain; in reaching that conclusion, the court relied on the same definitions of the terms “heinous” and “brutal” that are cited by the majority here. (La Pointe, 88 Ill. 2d at 501.) Although the court in La Pointe went on to describe the offense committed in that case as premeditated, it cannot be said that the court intended for that observation to additionally restrict the application of those terms. Assuming, however, that the majority is correct in its judgment that the statutory aggravating circumstance provided by section 9 — l(b)(7) requires proof of prolonged pain, torture, or premeditation, I would conclude that the necessary conduct was shown here. The medical evidence introduced at the defendant’s sentencing hearing established that the seven-month-old victim, Danny, was first struck against an object and then smothered; the cause of the child’s death was determined to be suffocation. According to the pathologist who performed the autopsy, the victim had contusions around his mouth and nose, apparently resulting from suffocation. The child also had incurred a small hematoma on the upper chest, a hematoma on the head, a small contrecoup injury to the brain, a mild hemorrhage in the myocardium, a hematoma in the left lung, and a bruised thymus. In addition to those injuries, the lobes of the child’s liver had separated, and his left arm was broken. The pathologist believed that the defendant had swung the child’s body into a hard object while holding him by the arm. Referring to Danny’s broken arm, the pathologist explained: “That most probably, my opinion is that it was the pivotal point, that the baby was held up by the arm. And while to some extent the lower third of the humerus was held immobile, the body kept moving and came in contact with the hard surface, and this resulted in a fracture of the humerus and the injuries to the remaining body.” The force of the impact caused the child’s liver to rupture. The defendant then smothered the victim, causing his death. Although the child’s suffering might not have been prolonged, it clearly was torturous. I note also the evidence suggesting that the defendant’s conduct in the present case may have been premeditated, which would further support a finding under the standard formulated by the majority. Danny had previously suffered a broken arm while in the defendant’s care, and other evidence indicated that the defendant resented the child. As the court correctly holds, the evidence of the defendant’s prior conduct toward the victim was admissible at trial because it tended to show motive and intent. By the same token, that evidence suggests the- deliberate, if not premeditated, nature of the defendant’s behavior in causing the child’s death. In light of the victim’s age, the nature and extent of his injuries, and the defendant’s conduct in causing the child’s death, I would conclude that the requirements of section 9 — 1(b)(7) were satisfied here. Because I find no merit in the defendant’s remaining contentions, I would affirm the sentences imposed, as well as the convictions.

=== CASE 9736956 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:04.148384+00 ===

PELLEGRINI, Judge.
Before this court are cross-motions for summary judgment questioning whether the Unfair Insurance Practices Act (UIPA)1 is unconstitutional because it permits commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicative functions in the office of Insurance Commissioner (Commissioner), and whether the Insurance Department’s (Department) placing of administrative “holds” on an agent’s applications is improper.
I.
Stone & Edwards Insurance Agency, Inc. (Stone & Edwards) is a licensed corporation authorized to sell insurance2 within the Commonwealth. Both Emerson Lightner and Gary Lightner (collectively, with Stone & Edwards, Petitioners) are licensed agents affiliated with Stone & Edwards.3
In February, 1988, the Department began investigating allegations of insurance law violations made against the Petitioners. As a result of the investigation, the Department determined $107,000 in premiums collected by Stone & Edwards to be unlawful, and in the summer of 1990, demanded *182that restitution be made. Stone & Edwards denied any impropriety and refused.
The Department, through the Deputy Insurance Commissioner for Consumer Service Enforcement and Program Services (Deputy Commissioner-Enforcement), commenced an enforcement action, P-91-10-35 (enforcement proceeding), seeking to have the existing licenses of Gary and Emerson Lightner revoked. The Lightners answered and requested a hearing. The Office of Hearing Appeals then appointed a hearing officer to take testimony and make a recommendation to the Commissioner pursuant to 31 Pa.Code § 56.1 and 1 Pa.Code §§ 35.123, 35.187.
While their investigation into Petitioners’ business practices was ongoing but before the enforcement proceeding was instituted by the Department, two insurance companies, Colony Life Insurance Company (Colony) and Aetna Life Insurance & Annuity Company (Aetna) applied to have Emerson Lightner licensed as their agent.4 The Department advised both Aetna and Colony that no new licenses would be issued for Emerson Lightner until the investigation of Stone & Edwards was resolved. No notice, however, of the “holds” on license applications was given to Emerson Lightner.
The day after the Department commenced the enforcement proceeding, it lifted the “hold” and denied the Colony and Aetna applications to have Emerson Lightner appointed their agent. The reason for this denial was that the Department considered Emerson Lightner to be “unworthy” for additional licenses based upon the underlying facts of the enforcement proceeding. Emerson Lightner appealed the denial (P92-0306 (license appeal)). Because the issues in the two proceedings were similar, the Insurance Commissioner appointed the same hearing officer to hear the license appeal and the proceedings were consolidated for hearing. On October 16, *1831992, the Department placed “holds” on any new license applications by either Gary or Emerson Lightner and Stone & Edwards pending disposition of the enforcement proceeding.5
Before any hearings were held on the enforcement proceeding and license appeal, Petitioners filed two petitions for review. The first was a complaint for declaratory judgment and request for injunctive relief (No. 216 M.D.1992) seeking to have Section 506 of the Administrative Code of 19296 and Section 102(a) of the Administrative Agency Law7 declared unconstitutional because facially, those provisions permit an impermissible commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicative functions within the Insurance Department.8 The second petition (No. 317 M.D.1992) sought to have Sections 7, 8 and 9 of UIPA declared unconstitutional also for impermissible commingling, as well as seeking a mandamus to have the Department issue the “held” licenses.9
*184Following the Department’s answers and the close of the pleadings, both parties filed motions for summary judgment,10 agreeing that the disposition of this matter turns strictly on questions of law.11 The cross-motion presents two general issues: 1) whether a statute which on its face vests both prosecutorial and adjudicative functions is unconstitutional because it purportedly permits impermissible commingling; and 2) whether the Department’s holding of Petitioners’ license applications pending the outcome of the enforcement action against Petitioners is unlawful.
II.
Article I, Sections 1, 9 and 11 of the Pennsylvania Constitution12 give to the people of Pennsylvania the right to due process guaranteeing those appearing in any judicial or *185administrative tribunal the right to a fair and impartial hearing. While the rights protected under those Articles and the rights guaranteed under the Fourteenth Amendment are substantially coextensive, the Pennsylvania due process rights are more expansive in that, unlike under the Fourteenth Amendment, a violation of due process occurs, even if no prejudice is shown, when the same entity or individual participates in both the prosecutorial and adjudicatory aspects of a proceeding. Compare Lyness v. State Board of Medical Examiners, 529 Pa. 535, 605 A.2d 1204 (1992) with Withrow v. Larkin, 421 U.S. 35, 95 S.Ct. 1456, 43 L.Ed.2d 712 (1975). Petitioners contend that their right to a fair hearing under the Pennsylvania Constitution is being denied because of the appearance of impermissible commingling by the purported vesting by UIPA of prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions to investigate unlawful insurance practices in the Insurance Commissioner.
Impermissible commingling exists within an administrative agency when the prosecutorial and administrative functions are not adequately separated. Lyness, supra; Dussia v. Barger, 466 Pa. 152, 351 A.2d 667 (1975). Due process rights not only can be violated when there is actual commingling, but even when an appearance that commingling of functions may have taken place within the agency exists. As our Supreme Court stated in Lyness:
Whether or not actual bias existed as a result of the board acting as both prosecutor and judge is inconsequential; the potential bias and the appearance of non-objectivity is sufficient to create a fatal defect under the Pennsylvania Constitution.
Id. 529 Pa. at 548, 605 A.2d at 1210 (citations omitted). See also Copeland v. Township of Newtown, 147 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 463, 608 A.2d 601 (1992). However, a single administrative agency may exercise both prosecutorial and adjudicative functions if “walls of division” are constructed within an agency that clearly separates those two functions. *186Lyness, 529 Pa. at 546, 605 A.2d at 1209.13
The “walls of division” necessary to prevent commingling appears to have been breached by Sections 7,14 815 and *187916 of UIPA17 by authorizing the Insurance Commissioner to both prosecute (allowing her to examine and investigate insurance agents and initiate proceedings against those agents for alleged violations of UIPA), and then adjudicate by holding hearings on the charges, determining the charged individual’s liability and administering the remedial action. However, it must be remembered that UIPA is no different than most regulatory statutes that provide that a single entity, a board or a person, has the power to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate violations of the statutes they are charged to enforce.
Like most statutes that appear to facially allow commingling18, UIPA has been implemented by the Department so that there is no commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions. Especially since Lyness, regulatory agencies have established “walls of division” between those performing prosecutorial and those performing adjudicatory functions. In implementing UIPA, the Commissioner has delegated all prosecutorial functions to the Deputy Commisioner — Enforcement, who is ultimately responsible for the initiation of UIPA prosecutions.19 In deciding whether to initiate an enforcement action under UIPA, the Deputy Commissioner has no interaction with the office of the Commissioner nor with the Office of *188Administrative Hearings, the Commissioner’s adjudicative arm.20 Department procedures dictate that the prosecutorial functions performed by the Deputy Commissioner — Enforcement remain outside the Commissioner’s purview.21 The uncontroverted evidence establishes that in practice, a wall of division between the Commissioner, the adjudicator, and that of the Deputy Commissioner — Enforcement, the prosecutor, exists with regard to prosecutions under UIPA, and there is no impermissible commingling.
Not challenging that there is indeed a “wall of division” between the adjudicatory and prosecutorial functions within the Department, Petitioners contend that it is insufficient to merely provide them with due process in practice. They contend that because UIPA facially permits an unconstitutional commingling of the prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions in the Commissioner, that alone deprives them of a right to the appearance of a fair and impartial hearing concerning the charges lodged against them. Simply, they contend that they are not only entitled to a fair and impartial hearing, but also a statute that specifically establishes a procedure that on its face guarantees a fair and impartial hearing. Because UIPA does not facially guarantee a fair and impartial hearing, they contend it is unconstitutional and the enforcement proceeding brought against them cannot be maintained. Moreover, because the enforcement action would then be dismissed, Petitioners also contend that they are entitled as a matter of law to requested additional licenses to serve as agents for additional insurance carriers.
Notwithstanding that UIPA may be implemented in a manner that would allow commingling to occur, that alone does not constitute a violation of an applicant’s rights to due process. To determine whether there has been a violation of a person’s *189right to due process, what is examined is not the process that is purportedly authorized, but instead, it is the process that the person is actually going to receive. In addressing a similar facial challenge to a statute which purportedly failed to protect the due process rights of a federal judge being disciplined, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, in two decisions, held that it is the due process received or are going to be received rather than the due process one claims the statute provides that is examined to determine whether there was a constitutional violation. In Hastings v. Judicial Conference of the United States, 770 F.2d 1093 (D.C.Cir.1985) (Hastings I), the court held that the District Court could not determine whether a statute on its face denied due process because the issue was not “ripe”. The court held that the issue was not ripe for determination because the judge facing discipline might receive all the process he was due depending on how the statute had been implemented. Id. at 1101. After the hearing had been held, in Hastings v. Judicial Conference of the United States, 829 F.2d 91 (D.C.Cir.1987) (Hastings II), the court held that a facial challenge to the statute was inappropriate because it was the process that the judge received at the hearing rather than what the statute provided that determined whether due process was violated. In Rafeedie v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 880 F.2d 506 (D.C.Cir.1988), the court stated that the lesson of the Hastings cycle is that “[if] there is a reasonable possibility that the Government will grant as much process that a reviewing court might interpret the relevant statute to require, a pre-enforcement statute challenge will be generally inappropriate.” 880 F.2d at 514.
The courts of this Commonwealth, while not addressing this issue squarely, have inferentially been in accord with the principle that due process is to be determined by the hearing received and not what a statute facially purports to provide. For example, in Lyness, even though the Medical Practice Act of 1974 facially permitted commingling,22 the Supreme Court did not dismiss the prosecution but merely remanded the *190proceeding back to the Board to provide a due process hearing.23
In this case, there is more than a realistic chance that Petitioners will receive a due process hearing because there are the “walls of division” in place that will guarantee that there is no commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicatory-functions entrusted to the Department. Nor is there a due process violation just because of the possibility that the statute may be interpreted so that there is an appearance of commingling. The “appearance of commingling” is again the appearance of the process applied, not some other procedure purportedly authorized but never given effect. Because the process that Petitioners will receive meets all the requirements of due process, their constitutional right to a fair and impartial hearing has not been violated.
III.
Petitioners contend that they are entitled as a matter of law to have their licenses to serve as agents for Colony and Aetna issued because they did not receive the pre-denial hearing required by 31 Pa.Code § 33.18, which provides: The Department may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license of any agent or broker upon finding, after a hearing, that such agent or broker has engaged in conduct which would disqualify him from initial issuance of a license ____
31 Pa.Code § 33.18.
Petitioners contend that because the denial of the Aetna and Colony license applications was based solely on the as yet *191unproven allegations in the enforcement proceeding, the regulation requires a hearing prior to the initial determination to deny the license. They contend the hearing is necessary to determine the validity of those allegations and the applicant’s “worthiness” to receive additional licenses. Because no hearing was held prior to the denial, Petitioners then contend that they are entitled to have the licenses issued. The Department, however, contends that the initial decision to deny a license is not the one referred to in the regulation, but the ultimate action taken by the Commissioner that is only made after a hearing is held.
Petitioners claim to a hearing prior to the initial determination is not maintainable because it does not apply to the initial decision to deny a license application. The initial decision to deny a license application is a staff function made by the Department’s Bureau of Agents and Brokers. 31 Pa.Code § 33.21. It informs the applicant of the reason the license is being denied. From this initial determination, an aggrieved applicant may appeal to the Commissioner who makes the determination for the Department as to whether to grant a license. 1 Pa.Code § 35.20. The Commissioner, as the Department’s adjudicator, is then required to hold a hearing on the applicant’s worthiness to be issued additional licenses. 31 Pa.Code § 33.18. Consequently, an applicant always receives a hearing as required by the regulations before the Department decides to deny the license.24
Because 31 Pa.Code § 33.18 does not require a hearing before the staff determination is made to deny the licenses, Petitioners’ request for an order granting summary judgment is denied. Correspondingly, the Department’s request for *192summary judgment declaring that its actions were in accord with its own regulations is granted.25
IV.
Even if they are not entitled to have the enforcement proceeding against them dismissed because of the purported facial commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicative powers under UIPA, Petitioners contend that they are still entitled to be issued licenses to represent new insurance carriers. As existing licensees, they contend that the Department has a non-discretionary duty under the Act to issue additional licenses without making a determination as to “worthiness” and the Department’s holding of their applications is improper and a violation of their due process rights. Specifically, Petitioners contend that they are entitled to a mandamus because:
• unless they have been previously found to be “unworthy” to sell insurance, the Department has a non-discretionary duty to issue licenses under Section 603 of the Act to serve as agents for additional companies once application is made.
•they are entitled to have the licenses applied for issued because the hold on their license applications without notice or hearing was an unconstitutional denial of due process.
• the decision to hold their license applications was an adjudication under the Administrative Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 101, that was invalid because they were not afforded either notice or hearing before the holds were instituted.
• once it has completed its investigation into their “worthiness”, the Department cannot avoid acting on their license applications by holding them.
For Petitioners to prevail in mandamus, they must establish that issuance of a license is a ministerial act or mandatory duty on the part of the Commissioner and there is a lack of *193any other adequate remedy. Equitable Gas Co. v. City of Pittsburgh, 507 Pa. 53, 488 A.2d 270 (1985).
A.
Petitioners contend that pursuant to Section 603 of the Act,26 the Department has a non-discretionary duty to issue licenses to existing license holders wishing to represent additional insurance companies once application is made. Section 603 provides:
The Insurance Commissioner may issue, upon certification as aforesaid by any company ... authorized by law to transact business within this Commonwealth, an agent’s license to any person of at least eighteen years of age and to any copartnership or corporation.... When the Insurance Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is worthy of license, and that he is reasonably familiar with the provisions of the insurance law of this Commonwealth, he shall issue a license stating that the company ... represented by the agent has complied with the requirements of the law and has been authorized by the Insurance Commissioner to transact business within this Commonwealth ...: Provided, That any applicant who shall have held, for any period during the five years immediately preceding the application, a license to transact, as agent, any class or kind of insurance business ..., shall be entitled, upon proper application, to receive a license ... without the necessity of submitting to an examination.
40 P.S. § 233(a) (repealed 1992) (emphasis added). Contrary to Petitioners’ contention, however, a plain reading of Section 603 does not require the Commissioner automatically to issue agents a license to represent additional companies upon appli*194cation. While it excuses an agent from submitting to an exam if he or she has been licensed to represent other companies in the previous five years, Section 603, by its very terms, requires that additional licenses be issued only “when the Insurance Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is worthy of license”.27 In construing this Section, we have held that whether an applicant is “worthy” of licensure is a discretionary determination to be made by the Commissioner. Fumo v. Insurance Department, 58 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 392, 427 A.2d 1259 (1981). Because Section 603 requires a determination of “worthiness” for every license application, mandamus will not lie to compel the issuance of Petitioners’ requested licenses and summary judgment on that basis is denied. Accord, Pennsylvania Dental Association v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Insurance Department, 512 Pa. 217, 516 A.2d 647 (1986).
B.
As to whether any due process rights were violated by the Department’s “holding” of Petitioners’ license applications without notice or hearing, Petitioners must demonstrate that they have a property right which has been impinged upon *195by the Commissioner.28 Our holding that licenses to represent additional insurance companies are contingent on the Commissioner finding the applicant “worthy” means that nothing in Section 603 entitles an applicant with a property right to a license to be an agent for an additional insurance company. Without an entitlement, the license applicant has no protected property interest in a license because it does not yet exist. See Appeal of Carlson, 152 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 285, 618 A.2d 1206 (1992) (applicant for position on township police force has no property interest in remaining on eligibility list); Pittenger v. Department of State, 142 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 57, 596 A.2d 1227 (1991) (no property interest in application to reinstate previously revoked medical license). Because no property rights of an applicant seeking to represent additional insurance companies have been impinged, Petitioners cannot establish any due process right was violated solely because the Department “held” their license applications.
C.
Even if they do not have a property right in their license applications, Petitioners argue that they are nonetheless entitled to summary judgment because the decision to “hold” applications itself constitutes an adjudication. If the decision to hold their license applications was an adjudication, then Petitioners reason that they were entitled to a hearing under the Administrative Agency Law prior to the implementation of that decision which they did not receive.29 As a result of that *196reasoning, they then contend that they are therefore entitled to an order directing the Department to issue the held license applications. We disagree for several reasons.
To be entitled to notice and a hearing under the Administrative Agency Law, the governmental action at issue must constitute an adjudication. An “adjudication” as defined by the Law is:
Any final order, decree, decision, determination or ruling by an agency affecting personal or property rights, privileges, immunities, duties, liabilities or obligations of any or all of the parties to the proceeding in which the adjudication is made.
2 Pa.C.S. § 101.
However, the action taken by the Department in withholding action on Petitioners’ applications is not a final order or determination. Rather, it is itself a barrier to any final order which may issue on the subject of those applications. Because the Administrative Agency Law applies only to final decisions, the protections of Section 504 are inapplicable to the “holding” of Petitioners’ license applications. See Sandy Creek Forest, Inc. v. Commonwealth, Department of Environmental Resources, 95 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 457, 505 A.2d 1091 (1986).
Even if the decision were an adjudication, mandamus to compel the issuance of licenses is not the proper remedy. Just because there is a due process violation does not mean that the person whose rights were violated is entitled to a license as a remedy, only an order requiring that he or she receive the process which is due. Roth v. Borough of Verona (Roth II), 102 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 550, 519 A.2d 537 (1986).
D.
Even though Petitioners were not entitled to a hearing before the Department placed a “hold” on their license *197applications, Petitioners are nonetheless entitled to have the holds on their pending applications lifted. Once an investigation into the “worthiness” of an applicant is completed, the Department has a non-discretionary duty to issue a decision one way or the other on the license application.
While a court cannot specify how a discretionary duty, such as issuing a license to represent additional insurance companies, is to be carried out, it can direct that discretion be exercised. Pennsylvania Dental Association v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Insurance Department, supra. As observed by the our Supreme Court:
Mandamus is a device that is available in our system to compel a tribunal or administrative agency to act when that tribunal or agency has been “sitting on its hands.”
Id. 512 Pa. at 227, 516 A.2d at 652 (emphasis added). See Marinari v. Department of Environmental Resources, 129 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 569, 566 A.2d 385 (1989). See also British Airways Bd. v. Port Authority, 564 F.2d 1002 (2d Cir.1977); and generally, Note, Judicial Review of Administrative Inaction, 83 Columbia L.Rev. 627 (1983).
The Department admits that its investigation into the worthiness of Petitioners for additional licenses is complete and if it were to issue a determination on the held applications, it would deny them and open the way for Petitioners to initiate the appeal process. While we recognize that the Department has wide latitude in conducting an investigation before issuing a license and we do not question the Department’s authority to refrain from taking any action on an application while that investigation is on-going, to hold these applications after the investigation is complete and a determination of unworthiness made is a de facto denial which the Department could make without ever having that decision challenged.30
*198In this case, all the elements of mandamus have been met. There is no adequate remedy for Petitioners other than mandamus because the Department’s refusal to take final action on the applications precludes any appeal. The Insurance Department Act places a duty on the Department to either grant or deny applications consistent with its processing, and while the Department does have discretion in the outcome of its determination, it does not have the discretion to refuse to process Petitioners’ applications. Because its investigation is complete and the Department has concluded that Petitioners are not worthy of a license, the Department has a non-discretionary duty to deny those applications and Petitioners are entitled to mandamus ordering the Department to either grant or deny all Petitioners’ license applications currently being held.
V.
Based on the foregoing discussion, the Department is entitled to partial summary dismissing those counts declaring:
• Sections 7, 8 and 9 of the Unfair Insurance Practices Act to be constitutional insofar as there is not an impermissible commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicative functions within the office of Insurance Commissioner in enforcement proceedings brought under that Act.
• the initial denial of Petitioners’ license applications to be lawful.
• the Department’s “holding” new license applications during the pendency of its investigation did not violate due process.
However, Stone & Edwards is entitled to mandamus directing the Department to either grant or deny the application of Sun Life Insurance Company to have Stone & Edwards licensed to *199be its agent because the Department’s investigation is complete, and it has a non-discretionary duty to process that application.
ORDER
AND NOW, this 3rd day of January, 1994, it is hereby ORDERED as follows:
1. That the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Insurance’s motion for summary judgment is granted in part and denied in part. Specifically:
a. No. 216 M.D.1992 is dismissed.
b. Petitioners’ counts challenging Sections 7, 8 and 9 of No. 317 M.D.1992 of the Unfair Insurance Practices Act are dismissed.
c. Any claims that Petitioners’ license applications should be granted are dismissed.
2. Petitioners’ motion for summary judgment is denied except that the Department is directed to either grant or deny the application of Sun Life Insurance Company to have Stone & Edwards licensed as its agent within twenty (20) days of entry of this order.
. Act of July 22, 1974, P.L. 589, No. 205, as amended, 40 P.S. §§ 1171.7-1171.11.
. Stone & Edwards brokers in life, accident, health, property and casualty insurance, as well as certain annuity investments.
. Emerson Lightner, while having retired as an officer of Stone & Edwards, still brokers policies through the firm. Gary Lightner writes policies for several insurance companies through Stone & Edwards and remains an active officer in the corporation.
. Even though licensed to represent other companies, every time one wishes to receive a license to represent a new insurance carrier, a new license must be obtained from the Commissioner. Section 603 of the Insurance Department Act (Act), Act of May 17, 1921, P.L. No. 789, as amended, 40 P.S. § 233.
. While Gary Lightner had no license applications pending when the hold was instituted by the Department, an application to have Stone & Edwards appointed its agent had been submitted by Sun Life Insurance Company.
. Act of April 9, 1929, P.L. 177, as amended, 71 P.S. § 186.
. 2 Pa.C.S. § 102(a). Petitioners also contended that the regulations promulgated under these statutes, 1 Pa.Code §§ 35.14, .121, .185, .187, .190 and .226; 4 Pa.Code § 9.1; 31 Pa.Code §§ 33.7, .18, .21 and 56.2, enabled the impermissible commingling.
. Petitioners’ request for injunctive relief in the No. 216 M.D.1992 action was denied by Senior Judge Silvestri on July 9, 1992. However, the same day, in Robert C. Griffin v. Pennsylvania Insurance Department, Senior Judge Silvestri issued a preliminary injunction against the Department staying enforcement proceedings under a commingling challenge to portions of the UIPA. Based upon this injunction, Plumley stayed proceedings in both the P91 and P92 actions.
. Hearings were held before Judge Friedman on Petitioners’ request for injunctive relief. Judge Friedman issued a decree nisi enjoining the Department in P92 (licensing action) on the basis that the provisions of the UIPA under which the proceeding was commenced permitted an unconstitutional commingling of functions under the Supreme Court's decision in Lyness v. State Board of Medicine, 529 Pa. 535, 605 A.2d 1204 (1992). Following post-trial exceptions, Judge Friedman filed a modified decree nisi, preliminarily prohibiting the Department from holding Petitioners' new license applications or denying such applications on the basis of unworthiness, ordering the Department to grant the license applications of Aetna and Colony, and temporarily enjoining proceedings in both the P92 and P91 actions. Judge Friedman then *184ordered No. 216 M.D.1992 and No. 317 M.D.1992 consolidated for the filing of dispositive summary judgment motions presently before us.
. While the Petitioners’ motion for summary judgment and the Department's counter-motion deal with both actions, Petitioners have not addressed in their brief the contentions raised in No. 213 M.D.1992, which, accordingly, are waived. Commonwealth by Zimmerman v. National Apartment Leasing Co., 108 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 300, 529 A.2d 1157 (1987).
. Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on file, along with testimony, demonstrate that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Pa.RX.P. 1035. McNeal v. City of Easton, 143 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 151, 598 A.2d 638 (1991).
. Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution provides in relevant part:
§ 1. All men are born equally free and independent, and have certain inherent and indefeasible rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing and protecting property and reputation, and of pursuing their own happiness.
§ 9. In all criminal prosecutions the accused hath a right to ... a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the vicinage; he cannot be ... deprived of his life, liberty or property, unless by the judgment of his peers or the law of the land.
§ 11. All courts shall be open; and every man for an injury done to him in his lands, goods, person or reputation shall have a remedy by due course of law, and right and justice administered without sale, denial or delay....
. We recently applied the Supreme Court’s "walls of division" principle in Cooper v. State Board of Medicine, 154 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 234, 623 A.2d 433 (1993). Cooper involved a post-Lyness challenge to disciplinary proceedings before the State Board of Medicine. Following Lyness, the Board adopted emergency interim regulations which prohibit Board members who participate in the decision to prosecute from participating in the adjudication of the merits of the case. In response to Cooper’s contention that Lyness requires an entity distinct from the Board initiate prosecutions, we stated:
In fact, the Lyness court implicitly concluded that sub-entities of administrative agencies could perform the prosecutorial and adjudicative without commingling those functions, as long as walls of division are constructed to eliminate the threat or appearance of bias, (citations omitted).
Thus, the separate entity that the court envisioned could consist of members of the Board itself, as long as none of those members had participated in the prosecution stage of the proceeding.
Id. at 237, 623 A.2d at 435.
. § 7 Power of Commissioner.
The Commissioner may examine and investigate the affairs of every person engaged in the business of insurance in this state in order to determine whether such person has been or is engaged in any unfair method of competition or in any unfair or deceptive act or practice prohibited by this act.
40 P.S. § 1171.7.
. § 8 Administrative Hearing.
(a) If, as a result of investigation, the Commissioner has good cause to believe that any person is violating any provision of this act, the Commissioner shall send notice of the violation by certified mail to the person believed to be in violation. The notice shall state the time and place for the hearing which shall not be less than thirty days from the date of such notice.
(e) Following the hearing, the Commissioner shall issue a written order resolving the factual issues presented at the hearing and stating what remedial action, if any, is required of the person charged. The Commissioner shall send a copy of the order to those persons participating in the hearing.
40 P.S. § 1171.8.
. § 9 Administrative Penalty.
Upon a determination by hearing that this act has been violated, the Commissioner may issue an order requiring the person to cease and desist from engaging in such violation or if such violation is a method of competition, act or practice defined in Section 5 of this Act, the Commissioner may suspend or revoke the person’s license.
40 P.S. § 1171.9.
. 31 Pa.Code § 56.2 implements these provisions:
(a) At the conclusion of an administrative hearing, ... the matter will be adjudicated by the Commissioner----
. See, General Dental Law, 63 P.S. §§ 122(h), (j).; Pharmacy Act, 63 P.S. §§ 390-5, 390-6; Veterinaiy Medicine Practice Act, 63 P.S. §§ 485.5, 485.25.
. Answer and new matter of the Insurance Department, Paragraphs 61-64. Answer and new matter of Thomas S. Buzby (Deputy Insurance Commissioner), Paragraphs 15-16. The Commissioner is authorized to delegate all of her prosecutorial functions to the Deputy Commissioner — Enforcement pursuant to Section 213 of the Administrative Code, as amended, 71 P.S. § 73.
. See N.T. July 9, 1992, at 47, 48; N.T. October 29, 1992, at 72-89.
The only contact between Deputy Commissioner Buzby’s office and that of the Office of Administrative Hearings came after Deputy Commissioner Buzby 'issued an order to show cause in the P91 enforcement action and application was made by his department to the Office of Administrative Hearings to have a hearing officer appointed. The hearing office in this case, Laura C. Plurnley, had no contact with Deputy Commissioner’s Buzby’s office prior to her appointment. N.T. July 9, 1992, at 34-37.
. See N.T. July 9, 1992, at 32-48; N.T. October 16, 1992, at 58-59; N.T. October 29, 1992, at 77-81.
. Section 15 of the Medical Practices Act provided that:
*190(a) The board shall have the authority to refuse, revoke or suspend the license of a physician....
Pursuant to regulations in force at the time, the determination of whether sufficient evidence existed to warrant a prosecution of a license revocation proceeding rested with the Board. 49 Pa.Code § 16.62(c) (1987).
. Lyness, 529 Pa. at 549, 605 A.2d at 1211. See also Dussia v. Barger, supra; Bunch v. State Board of Auctioneer Examiners, 152 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 616, 620 A.2d 578 (1993); and Georgia Pacific Corp. v. City of Reading Commission on Human Relations, 137 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 312, 585 A.2d 1166 (1991).
. Because the Department's denial of Petitioners’ license applications was not a final order, it is not an adjudication within the meaning of Section 101 of the Administrative Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 101, requiring a hearing at that level. We, therefore, find no merit in Petitioners’ contention that the denial of their license applications without hearing violated Section 504 of the Administrative Agency Law. See, e.g., Sandy Creek Forest, Inc. v. Department of Environmental Resources, 95 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 457, 505 A.2d 1091 (1985).
. Petitioners in this case did take an appeal from the initial Bureau decision to deny their applications to the Commissioner. This action, however, was instituted before hearings could be held in accordance with Sections 33.7 and 33.18.
. After the events prompting this action, Section 603 was amended by Section 3 of the Act of June 11, 1992, P.L. 284, No. 48, requiring licensees to obtain licenses for each class or line of insurance the applicant wishes to engage in rather than a separate license for each individual company. As the transition from the former license scheme is dependent on a date of transition which has not yet been established, only the former provisions are applicable to Petitioners. For the purposes of our discussion, therefore, we will simply refer to the law prior to amendment as the Act.
. One wishing to be licensed by the Commonwealth as an agent for an insurance company must first submit an application to the Department, accompanied by a certification from the insurance company that the applicant is worthy of licensure. 31 Pa.Code § 31.1. This application is then examined by the Division of Agents and Brokers for completeness. 31 Pa.Code § 33.2(a). If the application is complete and the applicant has either passed or is exempt from the requisite examination, the Division of Agents and Brokers conducts an investigation of the applicant in order to satisfy itself as to his or her worthiness for licensure. 33 Pa.Code § 33.21(e). If the Division of Agents and Brokers is satisfied as to the applicant’s worthiness and all other requirements are met, it must grant the license. 33 Pa.Code § 33.21(e). Conversely, if it is not satisfied that the applicant is worthy, the Division of Agents and Brokers will deny the application. Upon the refusal of the Division of Agents and Brokers to issue a license on the basis that it is not satisfied that the applicant is worthy, the applicant may file an appeal to the Commissioner and is entitled to a hearing on the issue of his or her worthiness for licensure. 1 Pa.Code § 35.20. The Commissioner then issues a decision either granting or refusing the license on the basis of the evidence adduced at that hearing. From this determination, an aggrieved applicant may then appeal to the Commonwealth Court in its appellate capacity. 2 Pa.C.S. § 702; 42 Pa.C.S. § 763(a).
. The threshold inquiry in any due process analysis is whether there exists any identifiable property or liberty interest at issue; for without such an interest, due process is not applicable. Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Assn. v. Greater Johnstown School Dist., 76 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 65, 463 A.2d 1198 (1983). A protected property interest results from a legitimate claim to entitlement under Commonwealth law rather than a mere desire for or unilateral expectation of it. Sweeney v. Tucker, 473 Pa. 493, 375 A.2d 698 (1977). The courts of the Commonwealth have recognized that the right to earn a livelihood is a protected property interest and an existing license to transact business cannot be revoked or suspended without the requisite process. Lyness, supra, at 542, 605 A.2d at 1207.
. Section 504 of the Administrative Agency Law provides:
*196No adjudication of a Commonwealth agency shall be valid as to any party unless he shall have been afforded reasonable notice of a hearing and an opportunity to be heard____
2 Pa.C.S. § 504.
. The provisions of 31 Pa.Code § 33.23(f) do not give the Department any authority to "hold” Petitioners' license applications after its investigation is complete. The Section provides:
(f) If a company’s request for the termination of a license in any way reflects on the worthiness of the agent, it shall be filed in duplicate. The duplicate copy shall be sent to the agency by the Department. In *198the absence of valid exception taken to the information and sustained by the agent, the Department will set up a “stop” against any new licenses, either as agent or broker, but without prejudice to licenses in force at the time of such termination.
As no petition for terminate Petitioners' representation has been filed by any insurance company, the Department cannot rely on this Section to justify continuing its "hold” after its investigation into the applicants’ worthiness is complete.

=== CASE 9736957 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:04.155534+00 ===

FRIEDMAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
The majority identifies two general issues for review by this court: (1) whether sections 7, 8 and 9 of the UIPA, vesting both prosecutorial and adjudicative functions within the Commissioner by authorizing her to investigate and initiate proceedings against insurance agents for alleged violations of the UIPA, adjudicate those charges and administer remedial action, are unconstitutional because they allow for impermissible commingling; and (2) whether the Department can properly “hold” Petitioners’ license applications on the basis of alleged “unworthiness.” In deciding the first of these issues, the majority concludes that although the “walls of division” necessary to prevent commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions appear to have been breached by sections 7, 8 and 9 of the UIPA, the Department implemented those provisions in *200such a way that there is no actual commingling. .With respect to the second issue, the majority concludes that the Department has no non-discretionary duty under section 603 of the Act to issue licenses to previously licensed agents wishing to represent additional companies. Moreover, the majority holds that applicants seeking to represent additional insurance companies do not have a protected property interest in those licenses and, thus, Petitioners cannot establish a due process violation where the Department “held” their license applications. I disagree with the majority’s analysis on these points.
Based on clear statutory language, Petitioners contend that the procedure set forth in sections 7, 8 and 9 of the UIPA gives rise to actual or apparent bias by permitting the commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicative functions. Contrary to the majority here, I would agree.
Because the Department’s Commissioner, either alone or through delegation to subordinates, commingles the investigative, enforcement, prosecutorial and adjudicative functions in the licensing proceedings, I would hold that Petitioners’ due process rights have been violated. Here, the Commissioner, through Buzby, her deputy commissioner,1 initiated enforcement proceedings against Petitioners by requesting the legal department to issue an order to show cause and/or to suspend or revoke the existing licenses. Such delegation does not mean that the Commissioner has relinquished her ultimate responsibility for this action.2 Furthermore, the Commissioner, through her appointed hearing officer, held hearings and adjudicated the charges initiated against Petitioners.
*201The Department argues that the adjudicative portion of the proceeding is significantly isolated from the prosecutorial functions by the actions of the hearing officer, Laura Plumley.3 The Commissioner delegates a portion of her adjudicative responsibility to Plumley, who presides over departmental hearings and makes recommendations to the Commissioner. The Department asserts that because Plumley, a “neutral and detached” party, acts as hearing officer and arrives at an independent recommendation regarding the outcome of the proceedings, those proceedings have not been tainted by commingling the prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions solely within the Commissioner.
However, this argument fails to recognize that the prescribed statutory scheme clearly dictates that the Commissioner shall have final authority in all phases of the proceedings. As the language of the statutes indicates, the duties required by the statutory scheme begin and end with the Commissioner. Although Plumley may conduct the hearing, at the Commissioner’s request, and may advise the Commissioner regarding the appropriate adjudication, the Commissioner retains the ultimate decision making power.4 Inserting Plumley into the administrative procedural morass does not *202diminish or enhance the Commissioner’s prescribed duties as both prosecutor and adjudicator.
Thus, because both prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions are commingled within a single individual, the Commissioner, the proceeding is constitutionally infirm. Dussia v. Barger, 466 Pa. 152, 351 A.2d 667 (1975). The Commissioner has the statutory and ultimate responsibility for all acts which the Commissioner delegates to deputies as part of their investigative or prosecutorial duties. Likewise, the Commissioner is the final adjudicator of hearings conducted by Laura Plumley. There must be a constitutional buffer between the Commissioner as prosecutor and the Commissioner as adjudicator. Lyness v. State Board of Medicine, 529 Pa. 535, 605 A.2d 1204 (1992). This buffer must be in the nature of a wholly separate and independent investigative and prosecutorial entity, acting without interference from the Commissioner. As the Pennsylvania Supreme Court stated: “Such a commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions in one individual offends fundamental notions of due process and is constitutionally impermissible.” Lyness at 545, 605 A.2d at 1209, quoting Commonwealth, Department of Insurance v. American Bankers Insurance, 478 Pa. 532, 534, 387 A.2d 449, 450 (1978)).
I recognize that a strong presumption exists in favor of the constitutionality of an act of the legislature and the burden lies heavily upon one challenging the act to show that it clearly, palpably and plainly violated the Constitution. Appleton Papers, Inc. v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry, 90 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 399, 495 A.2d 662 (1985). However, because these statutory procedures obviously allow for the impermissible commingling of prosecutorial and adjudicatory roles in the Commissioner, the statutes themselves “clearly, palpably and plainly” violate the due process guaranty afforded by the Pennsylvania Constitution as interpreted by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. As to its application here, I believe that the requisite “walls of division” have not been erected and so would hold sections 7, 8 and 9 of *203the UIPA unconstitutional as applied to Petitioners in the licensing proceeding.5
As to the second issue, the majority contends that section 603 of the Act does not require the Department, upon application, to issue additional licenses to existing license holders. Once again, I would disagree.
An understanding of the licensing process supports my position. Before they can sell insurance in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, prospective insurance agents must make application to the Commissioner. Initially, the agent is required to pass an examination to show familiarity with the insurance laws, the results of which can be retained for five years. In addition, the license candidate must supply an endorsement from the company with which he desires to do business to the effect that he has a good business reputation and is worthy of licensure. 31 Pa.Code § 33.21. In order to be issued a new license pursuant to section 603 of the Insurance Department Act (Act),6 the Commissioner must find an applicant “worthy of licensure.” Although the agent may have several existing licenses, the agent must submit a new license application for each new company the agent wishes to represent. The Department has testified that there are no published standards for worthiness and that this decision is purely discretionary on the part of the Department. The Department also testified that this “worthiness” determination is made each time the licensee applies for a new license.7
*204Although it lacks specific standards for determining “worthiness” to grant a new or additional license, the Department admitted that published standards for worthiness exist which apply to the revocation or suspension of a license. The standards are provided for in 31 Pa.Code § 33.7 and § 33.18. Section 33.7 states, in pertinent part:
(а) The Department may deny an application for agent’s or broker’s license if any of the following are shown to have occurred:
(3) In the case of a firm or corporate license applicant, where an active or inactive member of such firm or corporation is not eligible for individual license.
(б) The applicant has violated any section of the Commonwealth insurance laws for which violation the insurance commissioner has the authority to revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any insurance license then in force.
Section 33.18 provides:
(a) The Department may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license of any agent or broker upon finding after a hearing that such agent or broker has engaged in conduct which would disqualify him from initial issuance of a license. Such conduct includes the indicated bases for initial denial of a license provided in § 33.7 of this Title----
However, section 33.23(f) states:
(f) If the company’s request for the termination of a license in any way reflects upon the worthiness of the agent, it shall be filed in duplicate. The duplicate copy shall be sent to the agency by the Department. In the absence of valid exception taken to the information and sustained by the agent, the Department will set up a “stop” against any new licenses, either as agent or broker, but without prejudice to licenses in force at time of such termination.
Thus, according to the Department, it is possible for an applicant to be unworthy for a new license while being worthy to hold his current license. In this case, as long as the *205enforcement action is pending against Petitioners, the Department will deem them “unworthy” for a new licensure but seemingly concede their “worthiness” to retain existing licenses. I disagree with this reasoning.
The Department defends this practice by arguing that it would be unfair to consumers for the Department to be issuing “new” licenses to a party under investigation, because if the party is found to have violated Department regulations with regard to existing licenses and is later determined to be unworthy, then proceedings would have to be instituted to revoke or suspend the newly issued licenses. As a result, the Department contends that until the enforcement proceedings are concluded, all “new” license applications are put on “hold.” I cannot accept this justification; obviously, once the licensee is adjudicated “unworthy” by the Department, all existing licenses, whether they are newly issued or not, could be revoked in one proceeding. I believe that an agent or broker who holds a license to do business is deemed worthy by the grant of that license. Until that agent or broker is adjudicated as unworthy by the Department, he should not be denied a new license.
The majority also concludes that Petitioners have not demonstrated that any property right was impinged by the Commissioner and, therefore, that their due process rights were not violated by the “holding” of their license applications. On the contrary, I believe that Petitioners establish a right to due process in this case. In order for due process protection to apply here, Petitioners must demonstrate a substantial property interest. Lyness. The Department concedes that existing licenses create a property interest requiring due process protection; however, it contends that these same protections do not apply to licenses not yet issued. Replogle v. Liquor Control Board, 95 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 614, 506 A.2d 499 (1986), aff'd, 514 Pa. 209, 523 A.2d 327 (1987). The Department argues that because Stone and Edwards is seeking additional licenses and Emerson Lightner is applying for a new individual license, they cannot claim due process protection. (Transcript of October 16, 1992 at 27). I might agree if *206the line between new and existing licenses were as clear in this case. as the Department contends. However, where a notice of challenge to an existing license acts to hold up new applications and puts companies on notice that a question of an agent’s worthiness has been raised, which may affect contract renewal of licenses as yet unsuspended, the agent or broker has been effectively deprived of the right to earn a livelihood.8 Therefore, I would conclude that Petitioners’ new license applications are inextricably interwoven with their existing licenses and merit due process protection; that is, a hearing prior to the denial of or interference with the grant of such a license.
The unique circumstances which exist in the insurance industry prevent me from separating the old and new licenses. Because individual insurance companies do not handle all *207categories of insurance, the agent or broker must be licensed to sell insurance with many separate companies in order to offer a range of policies, such as fire, life, casualty and accident. It is impossible for an agent or broker to sustain a livelihood in the insurance industry unless the agent is free to write policies with any or all companies; therefore, the ability to hold unlimited licenses is essential to the livelihood of the agent or broker. Once licensed, unless that license is subsequently and properly suspended or revoked, an agent must be permitted to pursue his livelihood without interference. Accordingly, the Department cannot deprive a previously licensed agent or broker of the unfettered right to pursue his chosen livelihood by acquiring additional licenses without first affording due process.9 Government may not arbitrarily deny an individual opportunity to engage in a chosen private profession. “Due process demands that an individual whose livelihood is threatened by administrative action be given notice and a hearing to fairly rebut the evidence against him. Particularly should this be so in cases where the action of the administrative body, as regulator of qualifications for an entire field of private employment, may entirely foreclose an individual from employment opportunities.” Birkenfeld v. United States, 369 F.2d 491, 493-94 (1966).
*208Emerson Lightner has sixty-three current licenses to sell insurance within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania through Stone & Edwards. As to his individual license application, Lightner testified that because he has retired from the company, he no longer desires to write policies as an agent of Stone & Edwards where he would have to divide the commission between the insurance company and himself. Emerson Lightner stated that if he had the individual license for which he applied, he would be able to retain the entire commission for all new business that he generates. Thus, Emerson Lightner’s income is directly and adversely affected by the denial of a 'new license. I see no rational basis for distinguishing between Emerson Lightner’s continued worthiness to write policies through Stone & Edwards and the Department’s assessment of Emerson Lightner’s unworthiness, as an officer of Stone & Edwards, to obtain an individual license to write the identical policies. In either case, Emerson Lightner performs the same function and bears the same responsibilities. The only difference is that as an individual license holder, Emerson Lightner would receive 100% of the commission on premiums paid, whereas, as an agent of Stone & Edwards, he would have to share those commissions with the company. So long as the premiums charged meet the statutory guidelines, the Department has no duty or discretion to allocate the profits on sales of insurance policies.
Petitioners’ right to earn a living supports an acknowledged, substantial property interest in their existing licenses. Because this same interest is unavoidably affected by the acquisition of additional licenses, I would conclude that the two are inextricably interwoven and cannot be artificially distinguished. “[T]he right to pursue a livelihood or profession” triggers the “protective mechanism of procedural due process.” Lyness, 529 Pa. at 540, 605 A.2d at 1207.
“[T]he basic elements of procedural due process are adequate notice, opportunity to be heard, and the chance to defend oneself before a fair and impartial tribunal having jurisdiction of the case.” Lyness, 529 Pa. at 542, 605 A.2d at 1207 (quoting Commonwealth v. Thompson, 444 Pa. 312, 316, *209281 A.2d 856, 858 (1971)). However, Petitioners here did not receive adequate notice of the pending charges nor were they offered a timely hearing by the Department on the challenge to their new licenses; therefore, they were denied the first two elements of due process.
In Lyness, our Supreme Court addressed the third prong of due process, holding that the objectivity required by a fair and impartial tribunal could not exist where a single body acted as both prosecutor and adjudicator in the same proceedings and that, therefore, due process protections prohibit the commingling of these functions. Reasoning that due process is applicable to the right to pursue a livelihood or practice a profession, the Court explained:
In determining what process is due Pennsylvania citizens, this Court has established a clear path when it comes to commingling prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions. There is a strong notion under the Pennsylvania law that even an appearance of bias and partiality must be viewed with deep skepticism, in a system which guarantees due process to each citizen.
Id. 529 Pa. at 542, 605 A.2d at 1207 (emphasis in original). Additionally, in Dussia, then Justice, now Chief Justice Nix stated:
The decision to institute a prosecution is such a fundamental prosecutorial function that it alone justifies concluding a dual capacity where the individual also is charged with the responsibility of making the ultimate determination of guilt or innocence.
Dussia, 466 Pa. at 165, 351 A.2d at 674.
I would hold that a licensed agent or broker is entitled to the protections of due process in the acquisition of additional licenses as well as the retention of existing licenses. That was not provided to Petitioners here. Moreover, in proceedings against the Petitioners, the Commissioners’ prosecutorial and adjudicatory functions were impermissibly commingled.
Accordingly, because I believe that Petitioners were denied all three elements of due process, I must dissent.
. Respondent Thomas S. Buzby (Buzby) is a Deputy Insurance Commissioner for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for Consumer Services, Enforcement and Program Service and reports directly to the Commissioner. Buzby is responsible for enforcement actions against licensees and settlements.
. The majority implies that this delegation divests the Commissioner of responsibility and, thereby, creates the requisite "wall of division.” However, this is simply not the case because under the statutory scheme here, all of the delegable actions of the Commissioner remain her sole statutory duty.
. Respondent Plumley is an attorney in the Insurance Department Administrative Hearings Office, appointed by the Commissioner. Plumley presides over Department Hearings involving alleged violations of the insurance laws of Pennsylvania.
. In testimony, Plumley stated that although she does not make the final adjudication, she provides the Commissioner with a recommended decision and advice which, if not objected to by the Commissioner, becomes the Commissioner’s final adjudication. Plumley testified:
Q. What is your relationship with the Commissioner with respect to proceedings once you have held a hearing and drafted the proposed adjudication?
A. It’s the draft adjudication in the entirety of the docket,.... [It is] taken with a cover memo, ... and is forwarded to the Commissioner for her review. It will come back to me either signed or with notes please see me and advise me or I don’t like this, change it or whatever comments she wishes to make, and I will give her advice if she calls me up to discuss the matter with her. Basically I will modify the proposed adjudication as she directs, or if she doesn’t, if she signs it as it goes up, then it will be issued by the docket clerk.
(Transcript of October 29, 1992 at 59.)
. Because the challenged licensing regulations, at 31 Pa.Code §§ 33.7, 33.18 and 33.21, are dependent upon the constitutionality of UIPA sections 7, 8 and 9, they are also constitutionally infirm as applied to Petitioners.
. Act of May 17, 1921, P.L. 789, as amended, 40 P.S. § 233.
. Stone & Edwards has never been denied a license application nor been determined to be unworthy of a license pursuant to section 603 of the Act. Prior to the denial of the license in this case, Emerson Lightner, who has been lawfully writing insurance for various companies since 1946, has never been determined to be unworthy under section 603. Additionally, Gary Lightner, an agent for various companies since 1986, has never been denied a license application nor been determined as unworthy of a license under this section.
. Here, the challenge to Emerson Lightner's worthiness was made a matter of public record through publication in the Pennsylvania Bulletin. (May 15, 1992 edition at 18). Emerson Lightner himself was made aware of this notice when a company with which he currently does business inquired about the problem. Clearly then, the Pennsylvania Bulletin notice adversely affected Emerson Lightner’s business reputation, as he testified:
Q Because of the matter in the Pennsylvania Bulletin that was brought to your attention, have other people brought to your attention these proceedings that are pending in the Insurance Department, other customers particularly?
A A number of them. Many.
Q A number of them?
A Yes.
Q What is the nature of their statements to you?
A It's a cloud of uncertainty. Because of the accusation, there is an uneasy feeling, which you can immediately detect, and of course, the questions kind of skirt around the edges of that. But it’s very disheartening.
Q Are you able to tell the Court what effect, if any, these proceedings have had upon your own personal business and as an officer of Stone and Edwards Insurance Agency?
A It's had a very detrimental effect. Vety, very much so.
Q Except for these proceedings about which you were first formally notified on January 29, 1992, has your license, in the 46 years, ever been revoked or suspended or renewals denied by the Insurance Department?
A No, sir.
(Transcript of October 29, 1992 at 28-30).
. Nevertheless, the Insurance Department claims to have the right to put new licenses on hold because of its duty to protect unwary citizens seeking to buy insurance coverage. I suspect the Insurance Department’s overriding desire to fulfill its duty to protect Pennsylvania citizens is overstated. I note that in this case, a letter was sent to Stone & Edwards stating that payment of $107,000.00, the alleged overcharged amount, would resolve the matter. I find this ironic in light of the fact that Stone & Edwards has refused to pay because it claims to have committed no wrongdoing; however, by paying the alleged overcharge, thereby conceding the violation, its worthiness would be restored.
I am not suggesting that the practice is uncommon, nor that it does not serve the interest of judicial economy. In fact, this device is used even where criminal acts are charged, although not where the public interest would be jeopardized. See Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure No. 314. However, I do believe that the Insurance Department cannot claim that its "hold” on Petitioners’ license applications acts to protect our citizens when the mere exchange of money for alleged unworthy acts would absolve them from this label. (Transcript of October 29, 1992 at 155-160).

=== CASE 9736958 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:05.07939+00 ===

OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
Appellant Cal S. Sorenson appeals from a conviction for transporting a loaded, uncased firearm in a motor vehicle, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 97B.045(1) (1986). Appellant contends a conservation officer’s search of his private property was unconstitutional, and that the fruits of this search should have been suppressed by the trial court. We affirm.
FACTS
On November 9, 1987, state conservation officer Brian Buria was patrolling Caribou Township in Kittson County when he observed a substantial amount of vehicle traffic coming from and going to appellant Cal S. Sorenson’s hunting camp. Officer Buria decided to enter the camp and investigate whether any game or fish laws were being violated, and particularly whether all hunters had valid hunting licenses.
Appellant’s camp was posted with no trespassing signs, and a gated fence blocked the road leading to the camp. Offi*233cer Buria opened the gate and upon proceeding into the camp found a deer hanging from a meat pole. After examining the deer and discovering that it was properly tagged, Officer Buria noticed a deer stand in an adjoining field which appeared to exceed height restrictions. While on his way to examine the deer stand, Officer Buria heard appellant approaching in a vehicle. Officer Buria motioned for appellant to stop and observed that appellant had a loaded, uncased gun in the stopped vehicle. Officer Buria issued appellant a citation for violating Minn.Stat. § 97B.045(1) (1986). Appellant appeals from his conviction on this charge.
ISSUE
May a state conservation officer, in the performance of his duties, enter private land without first establishing probable cause to believe a violation of the law either has occurred, or is occurring?
ANALYSIS
Minnesota conservation officers are given broad statutory authority to “enter any land” to carry out the duties and functions of the fish and wildlife division of the Department of Natural Resources. Minn. Stat. § 97A.205(2) (Supp.1987) (emphasis added). The trial court held that this statute authorized Officer Buria to enter appellant’s private property without first establishing probable cause to believe a violation of the state’s game laws had occurred. Appellant contends that this statute, as interpreted by the trial court, is an unconstitutional infringement of the protections guaranteed by the fourth and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution and article one, sections two and ten of the Minnesota Constitution.
The Minnesota Supreme Court has ruled that Minn.Stat. § 97.50, subd. 2 (Supp. 1985), the predecessor of Minn.Stat. § 97A.205(2) (Supp.1987), authorizes war-rantless entry upon private land by conservation officers. State v. Hoagland, 270 N.W.2d 778 (Minn.1978). However, in Hoagland, the court found that the officers had probable cause to believe a game law violation had occurred and did not address the issue of whether conservation officers, without probable cause, could make warrantless searches upon private lands.
In the present case, the only information available to Officer Buria, prior to his entry upon appellant’s property, was that a hunting camp was located on appellant’s property, increased amounts of traffic were entering and leaving appellant’s property, and it was deer hunting season. This information, while supporting Buria’s conclusion that hunting was occurring on appellant’s land, did not give Buria probable cause to believe a game law violation had occurred. Consequently, we are faced with the issue of determining whether conservation officers need probable cause pri- or to making warrantless searches on private lands.
In order for appellant to establish that the conservation officer’s presence on his property was an unreasonable search and constitutionally prohibited, appellant must first establish that he had a “constitutionally protected reasonable expectation of privacy” in the area searched. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 360, 88 S.Ct. 507, 516, 19 L.Ed.2d 576 (1967). The activities engaged in by the conservation officer while on appellant’s property took place entirely in open fields. Consequently, appellant’s fourth amendment rights were not violated, because the special protections accorded by the fourth amendment do not extend to open fields. Hester v. United States, 265 U.S. 57, 59, 44 S.Ct. 445, 446, 68 L.Ed. 898 (1924).
Because open fields are accessible to the public and the police in ways that a home, office, or commercial structure would not be, and because fences or “No Trespassing” signs do not effectively bar the public from viewing open fields, the asserted expectation of privacy in open fields is not one that society recognizes as reasonable.
Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170, 171, 104 S.Ct. 1735, 1737, 80 L.Ed.2d 214 (1984).
*234We reject appellant’s contention that this case does not deal solely with a search of “open fields,” but also involves a search of the “curtilage” surrounding appellant’s cabin. Fourth amendment protection extends both to the home and to the curtilage immediately surrounding the home. The term curtilage has been defined to mean:
The area to which extends the intimate activity associated with the “sanctity of a man’s home and the privacies of life.”
Oliver, 466 U.S. at 180, 104 S.Ct. at 1742 (citing Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616, 630, 6 S.Ct. 524, 582, 29 L.Ed. 746).
Appellant’s arrest, which occurred a few hundred yards away from appellant’s cabin, was not within the cabin’s curtilage. See United States v. Eng, 753 F.2d 683, 686 (8th Cir.1985) (marijuana patch 325 yards from home was outside curtilage). Appellant’s contention that, while the arrest may have occurred outside the curtilage, the arrest was the unlawful fruit of the officer’s search within the cur-tilage, is without merit. The officer’s investigation within the area immediately surrounding the cabin was of a cursory nature. The officer did not investigate the area immediately surrounding the cabin. The only activity conducted near the cabin was the officer’s inspection of a deer to see that it was properly tagged.
Appellant’s claims based on violation of the state constitution were not brought to the attention of the trial court and cannot be raised for the first time on appeal. Nelson v. Nelson, 291 Minn. 496, 497, 189 N.W.2d 413, 415 (1971).
DECISION
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
RANDALL, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9736959 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:05.085781+00 ===

RANDALL, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The majority does correctly frame the issue where it states:
This information, while supporting Bu-ria’s conclusion that hunting was occurring on appellant’s land, did not give Buria probable cause to believe a game law violation had occurred. Consequently, we are faced with the issue of determining whether conservation officers need probable cause prior to making war-rantless searches on private lands.
The majority then finds that somehow conservation officers are an exception to the general laws governing search and seizure. I respectfully disagree and find that they are not.
The issues as I see them lie in four areas: (1) warrantless searches, (2) articulable suspicion to stop, (3) the force and meaning of Minn.Stat. § 97A.205(2) (Supp.1987), (4) the applicability, if any, of the “open fields” exception.
I.
Warrantless searches
The State of Minnesota concedes, and the majority acknowledges, that Officer Buria did not, prior to entering appellant’s land and stopping him, have knowledge leading to the level of probable cause to believe that a game law violation had occurred. It is time-honored law that searches conducted without a warrant issued upon probable cause are, per se, unreasonable and subject only to certain precise exceptions. State v. Hanley, 363 N.W.2d 735, 738 (Minn.1985).
The state does not claim any of the possible exceptions open to them such as war-rantless search but pursuant to consent,1 or a warrantless search but incident to a lawful arrest.2 Since the state concedes no *235probable cause for a warrantless search, this avenue to sustain the seizure of the uncased weapon, and thus the conviction, is closed to them.
II.
Articulable suspicion to stop
This issue comes closest to the actual fact situation. Even if the state had less than the necessary probable cause to arrest without a warrant (a valid warrantless arrest would lead to a valid search “incident to lawful arrest”) and then lawfully search appellant, or less than enough probable cause to legally search appellant without a warrant and then use the fruits of that search to justify an arrest, the state can use the fruits of this stop and search if the weapon was in plain sight and seized after a lawful stop premised on articulable suspicion that appellant was suspected of criminal activity. In order to make such a stop, “the detaining officer must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped of criminal activity.” United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S.Ct. 690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981).3
Cortez, has been cited by Minnesota appellate courts several times with approval. Appelgate v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 402 N.W.2d 106 (Minn.1987); State v. Mallory, 337 N.W.2d 391 (Minn.1983).
Once appellant’s vehicle was stopped, the uncased weapon was in plain view, so a “plain view” seizure would have been permissible if the stop was justified. But on the articulable suspicion prong, to justify the stop, the state fails. The facts do not justify, nor does the state claim that, at the time Officer Buria stopped appellant’s vehicle, he had any particularized and objective basis for suspecting that appellant was engaged in criminal activity. Id.
Although the majority points out that the officer, once on appellant’s land, claimed to have seen a deerstand in an adjoining field which possibly exceeded the legal height limit, there is no claim by the state that Officer Buria had a particularized belief that appellant was the person suspected of the criminal activity of erecting that possibly unlawful deerstand. The officer did not know when viewing the deerstand that it was even on appellant’s land, or in any way under his care or control. Appellant was not coming directly from the stand; and Buria does not claim that he specifically stopped appellant suspecting that the stand was his. Buria’s stop of appellant was based on classic “curiosity.” See Marben v. State, 294 N.W.2d 697 (Minn.1980), (quoting People v. Ingle, 36 N.Y.2d 413, 420, 369 N.Y.S.2d 67, 74, 330 N.E.2d 39, 44 (1975)):
All that is required is that the stop not be the product of mere whim, caprice, or idle curiosity.
Id. See e.g. Stark v. Perpich, 590 F.Supp. 1057, 1059 (D.Minn.1984) (absent articula-ble suspicion of unlawful conduct, use of roving patrols to stop vehicles at random is unconstitutional.)
It is settled law in Minnesota and other jurisdictions that game wardens, like all peace officers, need at least articulable suspicion for momentary stops and minimally intrusive detention.4
*236We do not need to decide this issue because (a) they clearly had reasonable grounds for stopping the truck for minimally intrusive investigative questions, see Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979), and State v. McKinley, 305 Minn. 297, 232 N.W.2d 906 (1975).
Richards at 551. A careful reading of Richards discloses nothing unique to the enforcement of game laws, as opposed to the enforcement of others. For valid stops, and/or searches, and/or arrests, Richards discusses the proper methods: 1) pursuant to probable cause; 2) pursuant to a lawful stop based on articulable suspicion; 3) pursuant to a violation of a law committed within the sight of the officer. None of these three are present in this case.
The United States Supreme Court case of Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979) is instructive. Prouse tracks the case history of the fourth amendment, auto stops, and seizure of evidence from that auto. Prouse (absent a narrow exception carved out for United States border patrols checking for illegal aliens near international borders, an exception not applicable here), held that law enforcement officers need at least ar-ticulable and reasonable suspicion that the motorist is engaged in some type of illegal activity before the stop can produce evidence that can be properly admitted in a criminal trial. Id. at 660, 99 S.Ct. at 1399.
III.
Meaning of Minn.Stat. § 97A.205(2)
The applicable statute states as follows:
An enforcement officer is authorized to: (1)execute and serve court issued warrants and processes relating to wild animals, wild rice, public waters, water pol-
lution, conservation, and use of water, in the same manner as a constable or sheriff;
(2) enter any land to carry out the duties and functions of the division;
(3) make investigations of violations of the game and fish laws;
(4) take an affidavit, if it aids an investigation;
(5) arrest, without a warrant, a person who is detected in the actual violation of the game and fish laws, a provision of chapters 84A, 86A, 88 to 106A 361, sections 89.51 to 89.61; or 609.66, subdivision 1, clauses (1), (2), (5), and (7); and 609.68; and
(6) take an arrested person before a court in the county where the offense was committed and make a complaint.
The subdivision in issue is subdivision (2).
The majority misreads State v. Hoagland if they claim that Hoagland and 97A.205(2) do anything except allow conservation officers to enter land without being called trespassers. As the majority concedes, Hoagland is not authority for conservation officers to make warrantless searches without probable cause. A conservation officer can enter private or public land pursuant to 97A.205(2) but oncé having entered remains subject to the fourth amendment of the Bill of Rights.5 Unless the officer has either probable cause that a crime has been committed, or enough artic-ulable suspicion to stop and question someone, neither of which the state has here, section 97A.205(5) does not supply missing constitutional requirements by osmosis.
It cannot be assumed that the legislature, in passing section 97A.205(2), intended to override or create an exception to the fourth amendment for conservation officers. To do so would be to presume that the legislature intended an unconstitutional result, and it is an established principle of *237statutory interpretation that statutes are construed so as to avoid an unconstitutional result. National Labor Relations Board v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago, 440 U.S. 490, 99 S.Ct. 1313, 59 L.Ed.2d 533 (1979); Application of Christenson, 417 N.W.2d 607 (Minn.1987).
The policy behind this principle is that courts presume that legislatures do not intend unconstitutional results. Therefore, to remain in harmony with the fourth amendment, the Minnesota statute at issue here must be interpreted, not to override the United States Constitution, but to be read in conformity therewith. With or without section 97A.205(5), the basic alternatives for a valid search remain. There must be a valid search warrant, or enough probable cause to support a warrantless search, or enough articulable suspicion to lawfully stop to investigate possible criminal activity. These three do not exist here. Section 97A.205(2), standing alone, is not a fourth.
IV.
Open field exception
I submit the so-called “open fields” doctrine simply has no applicability to this fact situation, and should not enter into the analysis. The leading United States Supreme Court case states that a game officer may enter “open fields” without probable cause since the owner of land has no reasonable expectation of privacy in that field. Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170, 171, 104 S.Ct. 1735, 1737, 80 L.Ed.2d 214 (1984). Reviewing the facts in Oliver, we find as follows: two narcotics agents walked around a locked gate marked with a “no trespassing” sign and saw, in plain view, marijuana growing on Oliver’s land. They seized the marijuana and arrested Oliver upon probable cause. Likewise, in Hester v. United States, 265 U.S. 57, 59, 44 S.Ct. 445, 446, 68 L.Ed.2d 898 (1924), federal revenue officers pursued Hester onto his private land where they seized moonshine whiskey dropped by Hester, and left in plain view during his flight from the officers.
In each case, the evidence was seized on private lands pursuant to the evidence of criminal activity being directly visible to the naked eye. If law enforcement officers, whether on or off the land, walk by, drive by, or fly over private land and see growing marijuana or other illegal activity in plain sight, it is reasonable and compatible with due process that they can use what they have seen to bolster further investigation and search.
Here, the uncased gun, the object of this exercise, was in no way, shape or form visible to Buria, either from outside the deer camp or after he had walked through the gate. All Buria could see was appellant’s vehicle. Appellant’s vehicle was not against the law. Appellant’s vehicle was not in the process of committing any violations of the law. Buria had to motion appellant over, stop appellant’s vehicle, walk up to it and look inside before he could see the uncased weapon. For this automobile stop which resulted in the search and seizure at issue, Buria needed at least articulable suspicion that the person he stopped, appellant, was engaged in some type of criminal activity. Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417-418, 101 S.Ct. at 694-695.
Buria did not, and thus the fruits of the stop must be suppressed if appellant’s fourth amendment rights are to be preserved. If Buria, either from outside the fence or after walking through the gate, saw an illegal weapon lying in plain view on the ground in the field, you would then have the Oliver “open fields” exception to consider.6 That is not our facts.
State troopers, county sheriffs, and municipal policemen are bound by the dictates of the Minnesota constitution and the Constitution of the United States in the performance of their duties, even when investigating and pursuing those suspected of major felonies. There are no exceptions because the crime under investigation is, *238for instance, drug dealing, violent assault, or homicide. Thus, the mandate against illegal stops, and against improper search and seizure ihust also, through the application of reason, apply to the conservation officer in search of the dastardly scofflaw who, knowing that the daily limit on sunfish is 30, catches 31.
I would reverse and suppress the seizure of the uncased weapon as being the product of a stop conducted without “articula-ble suspicion” and a warrantless search conducted without probable cause.
. "It is equally well-settled that one of the specifically established exceptions to the requirements of both a warrant and probable cause is a search that is conducted pursuant to consent. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 219, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 2043, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973)." Hanley at 738.
. “We need not decide whether the initial observations of the officers, before they stopped the truck, gave them probable cause to believe that they had witnessed a violation of the statute, something which would have justified both an arrest and a warrantless search under the motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement." *235State v. Richards, 284 N.W.2d 549, 551 (Minn.1979) (emphasis added).
. Based on footprints in the desert, knowledge of smuggling of illegal aliens, vehicle tracks, and other identifiable bits and pieces of information, border patrol officers had a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the person stopped of criminal activity. Thus the supreme court reversed, finding that the border patrol officers reasonably surmised that the vehicle and the occupants they stopped were engaged in criminal activity and therefore the stop and subsequent seizure and arrest were lawful. Cortez, 449 U.S. at 421, 101 S.Ct. at 696.
. Numerous jurisdictions, in addition to Minnesota, have applied fourth amendment standards to searches of vehicles involved in suspected game law violations. U.S. v. Munoz, 701 F.2d 1293 (9th Cir.1983) (holding articulable suspicion required for game warden to make roving vehicle stops to check for wood cutting permits and game violations; United States v. Stricklin, 534 F.2d 1386 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 831, 97 S.Ct. 92, 50 L.Ed.2d 95 (1976); State v. Odam, 40 Or.App. 551, 595 P.2d 1277 (1979) (articulable suspicion required to stop vehicle for suspicion of it containing unlawful game); Schultz v. State, 437 So.2d 670 (Ala.Ct.App.1983); State v. Tourtillott, 289 Or. 845, 618 P.2d *236423 (1980); State v. Wolfe, 137 Ariz. 133, 669 P.2d 111 (Ariz.App.1983); State v. Taylor, 145 Vt. 437, 491 A.2d 1034 (1985); Commissioner Commonwealth v. Palm, 315 Pa.Super. 377, 462 A.2d 243 (1983); State v. Hillock, 384 A.2d 437 (Me.1978).
. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. U.S. Const, amend IV.
. See Allinder v. State of Ohio, 808 F.2d 1180, 1185 (6th Cir.1987) ("There is no case where the open fields doctrine has been applied to allow a search of personal effects or of a commercial structure in a field.”)

=== CASE 9736960 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:06.193144+00 ===

BECK, Judge.
In this case we decide that a lessor-possessor of land may be held liable to a lessee for injuries caused by a dangerous condition upon a part of the land over which the lessor has retained control, if the lessor by the exercise of reasonable care could have discovered the condition and the unreasonable risk involved, and made the condition safe. Because there were disputed material facts on this issue, we reverse the trial court’s order granting summary judgment in favor of the landowner.
Appellant Nancy Bleam slipped and fell in the parking lot of the building in which she leased office space. Appellee Gateway Professional Center Associates (“Gateway”) owned the building. Sometime after the “slip and fall” incident, Bleam filed a complaint against Gateway alleging that she was injured in the fall and demanding damages on account of Gateway’s negligent maintenance of the parking lot. Gateway moved for summary judgment which the trial court granted; this timely appeal ensued. We reverse.
The trial court set forth the relevant facts in its opinion: Sometime in the morning of December 30, 1987, plaintiff arrived at defendant’s property in order to conduct her business. As she drove onto the defendant’s parldng lot, she observed that, due to a freezing rainstorm earlier that morning, much if not all of the entire parking lot was *147covered with a sheet of ice. Moreover, there were certain patches of snow/ice from a previous snowstorm which had not been totally removed by the defendant. Although there were approximately 150 parking spaces for plaintiff to choose from, she selected one of the parking spots that had the old snow/ice remaining. Plaintiff then went into her office in the defendant’s building and sometime later departed for lunch with an acquaintance. As she got to the driver’s door of her car, after having taken two steps on this accumulation of old snow/ice, she fell injuring herself.
Trial court opinion at 2.
Summary judgment is proper when “the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Pa.R.Civ.P. 1035(b). See Denlinger, Inc. v. Dendler, 415 Pa.Super. 164, 608 A.2d 1061 (1992). In making this determination, we must view the record in a light most favorable to the non-moving party, accepting as true all well-pleaded facts and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. Id. Any doubt regarding the existence of a genuine issue of material fact must be resolved in favor of the non-moving party. Id. See also Ott v. Unclaimed Freight Co., 395 Pa.Super. 483, 577 A.2d 894 (1990).
In support of its motion for summary judgment, Gateway filed a copy of the transcript of Bleam’s deposition testimony. The deposition unambiguously demonstrated that Bleam was aware of the icy condition of the space in which she parked.1 In opposition to Gateway’s motion, Bleam filed the transcript of a deposition taken of Dr. Robert Laurenzano, one of two general partners of Gateway. Dr. Laurenzano testified that Gateway has always been responsible for snow and ice remov*148al in the parking lot, and that the tenants depend upon Gateway for that service. He additionally testified that he was aware of the icy condition of the lot on the day of Bleam’s fall and that the company with which Gateway had contracted for snow removal at that time did not perform the job to his satisfaction.
We must first determine the law of the Commonwealth that pertains to Gateway’s potential liability. Only then will we be able to review the trial court’s conclusion that there are no genuine issues of material fact and that Gateway is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Pennsylvania courts repeatedly have recognized the validity of the principles set forth in Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 355-362 governing the liability of lessors to persons who enter upon that land. See Leary v. Lawrence Sales Corp., 442 Pa. 389, 275 A.2d 32 (1971); Deeter v. Dull, 420 Pa.Super. 576, 617 A.2d 336 (1992); Kobylinski v. Hipps, 359 Pa.Super. 549, 519 A.2d 488 (1986). Section 360 in particular responds to situations in which a person is injured in an area the control of which has been retained by the lessor.
§ 360. Parts of Land Retained in Lessor’s Control Which Lessee is Entitled to Use
A possessor of land who leases a part thereof and retains in his own control any other part which the lessee is entitled to use as appurtenant to the part leased to him, is subject to liability to his lessee and others lawfully upon the land with the consent of the lessee or a sublessee for physical harm caused by a dangerous condition upon that part of the land retained in the lessor’s control, if the lessor by the exercise of reasonable care could have discovered the condition and the unreasonable risk involved therein and could have made the condition safe.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 360 (1965).
The trial court, however, relied instead upon sections 342, 343 and 343A of the Restatement, which govern the duty of possessors of land generally.2 The trial court’s application of *149§§ 342, 343 and 343A led to its conclusion that, regardless of her status as a licensee or invitee, Bleam’s admission that she was aware of the ice on the ground where she parked precluded recovery against Gateway. We find that reliance upon these sections was erroneous, given the more specific applicability of § 360.3
While we find no precedential case that is directly on point with the facts of this appeal, we are guided by the principles *150espoused in Kobylinski, supra.4 There, plaintiff sued on behalf of the decedent, who died when he fell down an exterior stairwell upon arriving as a guest at defendant Hipps’s house. Hipps leased the house from its owner, co-defendant Schmidt. At trial, the jury rendered a verdict in favor of plaintiff, for which the lessor, Schmidt, was found to be 75% liable. Schmidt moved for judgment n.o.v. which was denied; following the entry of judgment against him, Schmidt appealed.
On appeal, lessor Schmidt claimed that the trial court erred by failing to fully instruct the jury with regard to a landlord’s duty to persons who enter upon his property. The trial court had told the jury that “[a] landlord may be liable for bodily harm sustained by a third party as a result of a defect or dangerous condition existing at the time of the lease.” Kobylinski, supra, 359 Pa.Super. at 553, 519 A.2d at 490. Schmidt contended, and a panel of this court agreed, that the instruction was insufficient and misleading. The Court noted that in fact, the general rule in Pennsylvania is that a landlord out of possession is not responsible for injuries suffered on the leased premises. Id. at 554, 519 A.2d at 491 (citing Pierce v. Philadelphia Housing Authority, 337 Pa.Super. 254, 257, 486 A.2d 1004, 1005 (1985)).
This court went on to explain that numerous exceptions to the general rule exist, in which liability does attach to a landlord out of possession. One such situation is where “the landlord has retained control over a portion of the property which is necessary to the safe use of the leased property; or, if the lessor shares with the lessee the right to possess any section of the property.” Kobylinski, supra (citing generally Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 356-362). The Court con-*151eluded that judgment n.o.v. should have been granted in lessor Schmidt’s favor because the property was leased as a private dwelling and no part of it remained under Schmidt’s control.
Lessor Schmidt also contended that the trial court erred when it instructed the jury that Restatement (Second) of Torts § 343, governing a possessor’s duty to an invitee, provided the standard for determining both defendants’ duties to the decedent. This Court held that the trial court erred in relying upon § 343 for either defendant. First, with respect to Hipps (the lessee), decedent was a licensee, not an invitee, and therefore § 343 was inapplicable. Moreover, the court stated that Schmidt, as a landowner out of possession, could not be placed on the same legal footing as Hipps, the actual possessor of the land. Thus, analysis of Schmidt’s duty pursuant to § 343, as opposed to § 360, was inappropriate. Id. 359 Pa.Super. at 549, 519 A.2d at 493.
In accordance with Kobylinski, we find that the trial court erroneously looked to the general Restatement sections concerning possessors of land, rather than the specific provisions that outline the potential liability of a landowner-lessor to its tenant. Applying § 360 to the evidence presented by both parties in support of and opposition to Gateway’s motion for summary judgment, we find that Gateway could be liable to Bleam despite her recognition of the risk involved in parking near ice and snow.
Comment b following § 360 addresses this exact issue:
The rule stated in this Section may also apply even though the person injured, whether he be the lessee himself or a third person, has knowledge of the existence of the dangerous condition. His knowledge may put him in contributory faulty ... [b]ut unless the danger is so apparent and so great that it is unreasonable for him to encounter it in view of the purpose of his use, or unless knowing the danger he fails to exercise that caution which a reasonable man would exercise under the same circumstances, the *152lessor remains liable to him notwithstanding his knowledge of the existence of the condition.
Restatement of Torts (Second) § 360, comment b.
We do not suggest that Bleam was entitled to summary judgment, but rather that there remain genuine issues of material fact which need to be resolved before a judgment in favor of either party properly can be rendered. Therefore, we find that the trial court erred as a matter of law.
Order reversed. Case remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Jurisdiction relinquished.
DEL SOLE, J., files a Dissenting Statement.
. Bleam also testified that she parked on the lower part of an inclined portion of the lot because she was afraid that if she tried to drive up the icy slope she may have trouble trying to leave later. Although she testified that the entire lot was not covered with "snow/ice” patches, there was no testimony directly establishing that there were spaces in the lower part of the lot that, did not have such hazards.
. These sections provide as follows:
*149§ 342 Dangerous Conditions Known to Possessor
A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to licensees by a condition on the land if, but only if,
(a) the possessor knows or has reason to know of the condition and should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such licensees, and should expect that they will not discover or realize the danger, and
(b) he fails to exercise reasonable care to make the condition safe, or to warn the licensees of the condition and the risk involved, and
(c) the licensees do not know or have reason to know of the condition and the risk involved.
§ 343 Dangerous Conditions Known to or Discoverable by Possessor
A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to his invitees by a condition on the land if, but only if, he
(a) knows or by the exercise of reasonable care would discover the condition, and should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such invitees, and
(b) should expect that they will not discover or realize the danger, or will fail to protect themselves against it, and
(c) fails to exercise reasonable care to protect them against the danger.
§ 343A Known or Obvious Dangers
(1) A possessor of land is not liable to his invitees for physical harm caused to them by any activity or condition on the land whose danger is known or obvious to them, unless the possessor should anticipate the harm despite such knowledge or obviousness....
Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 342, 343, and 343A. The term "invitee” or, more specifically, "business visitor” is defined as “a person who is invited to enter or remain on land for a purpose directly connected with business dealings with the possessor of land.” Id. at § 322(3). A "licensee” is "a person who is privileged to enter or remain in land only by virtue of the possessor’s consent.” § 330.
. It is a well-accepted rule of construction that when two provisions concern the same or similar matters, if the more general provision is in conflict with the more specific one, the specific provision must prevail. See 1 Pa.Cons.Stat.Ann. § 1933 (Purdon's 1993). See also Busic v. United States, 446 U.S. 398, 100 S.Ct. 1747, 64 L.Ed.2d 381 (1980); Olshansky v. Montgomery County Election Bd., 488 Pa. 365, 412 A.2d 552 (1980); Com. v. Smith, 375 Pa.Super. 419, 544 A.2d 991 (1988).
. We do not find Carrender v. Fitterer, 503 Pa. 178, 469 A.2d 120 (1983), to be apposite. Plaintiff Ruth Carrender, a patient/invitee of the defendant-landowners, slipped and fell on a patch of ice in defendants’ chiropractic clinic parking lot. In Carrender, there was no lessor/lessee relationship between the plaintiff and the landowner, and therefore, § 360 of the Restatement was not involved. Instead, the supreme court correctly applied § 343A to hold that the possessors of land did not owe their patient, an invitee, a duty to warn or take precautions against the known or obvious danger of icy parking lot conditions. Section 343A is not applicable here.

=== CASE 9736962 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:06.484707+00 ===

Boyle, J.
INTRODUCTION
This Court granted leave to appeal in the instant case to resolve two questions. We are asked to determine first, whether statements made by a defendant during the course of a polygraph examination should be admissible at trial as a matter of state or federal constitutional law or public policy. Secondly, we must determine whether the Court of *263Appeals erred in this case in imposing a duty on the trial court to hold a Walker1 hearing sua sponte in the presence of alerting circumstances.
We hold that neither state or federal law nor public policy requires the automatic suppression at trial of statements made by a defendant during the administration of a polygraph examination. We further hold that the facts of this case did not present an issue which required the trial court to conduct a Walker hearing sua sponte in order to determine whether the defendant made an intelligent and voluntary waiver of his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights.2
I. FACTS
The defendant was convicted by a jury in the Genesee Circuit Court of arson of a dwelling. He was sentenced to serve not less than 160 months nor more than 240 months in prison.
The Court of Appeals remanded the case to the trial court for the purpose of holding a Walker hearing to determine whether the defendant had waived his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent and his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights to the presence of counsel at a postpolygraph interrogation during which defendant made an allegedly incriminating statement. The Court of Appeals ordered that if the trial court were to find on remand that there was an ineffective waiver, de*264fendant’s confession should be suppressed, the conviction set aside, and a new trial ordered. On a finding of a valid waiver, the defendant’s conviction is affirmed.
The Court of Appeals summarized the testimony produced at trial as follows:
The charge against defendant arose out of a fire which started in an apartment formerly occupied by two of defendant’s friends. The evidence presented at trial revealed that the fire had been intentionally set. The evidence also revealed that on the day preceding the fire, defendant had assisted his two friends in moving out of the apartment. The landlord of the apartment had evicted defendant’s friends for nonpayment of rent.
A neighbor of defendant’s friends testified that just before the fire started he observed a man flicking a butane lighter on the patio of the apartment where the fire started. The neighbor also testified that he had seen the man earlier in the day helping someone move out of the apartment. The neighbor went on to testify that he had reported his observations to the police and, in a photographic lineup conducted on the day following the fire, he had identified defendant as the man who had been flicking the lighter. As a vital part of his case, the prosecutor also offered the testimony of a state police sergeant that defendant had allegedly confessed to setting the fire, which testimony was admitted over the objection of defendant.
Defendant testified at trial. He admitted that he had been in the general area of the apartment building when the fire started, but he denied any involvement in starting the fire. Through his own testimony, defendant went on to assert an alibi defense. He claimed that he and one of his friends who had just moved out of the apartment had been driving near the apartment building when they saw the fire. Defendant testified that after he and his friend saw the fire they went to the scene *265to watch. Defendant also denied that he had confessed. [156 Mich App 31, 34-35; 401 NW2d 296 (1986).]
II. SHOULD STATEMENTS MADE BY A DEFENDANT DURING THE COURSE OF A POLYGRAPH TEST BE ADMISSIBLE AT TRIAL AS A MATTER OF STATE OR FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OR PUBLIC POLICY?
In People v Barbara, 400 Mich 352, 364; 255 NW2d 171 (1977), this Court held that the results of a polygraph examination are not admissible at trial. The basic rationale for the Barbara Court’s conclusion was that the polygraph technique had not received the degree of acceptance or standardization among scientists which would allow admissibility. Id. See also People v Davis, 343 Mich 348, 370; 72 NW2d 269 (1955), quoting People v Becker, 300 Mich 562, 566; 2 NW2d 503 (1942).
The judicial concern with scientific consensus regarding the procedure is because " 'the quantity [the polygraph] attempts to measure — the truthfulness of a witness — is . . . directly related to the essence of the trial process.’ ” People v Barbara, supra, p 404, quoting note, The emergence of the polygraph at trial, 73 Colum L R 1120, 1141 (1973). Thus, exclusion at trial of polygraph results rests upon the judicial estimate that the trier of fact will give disproportionate weight to the results and consider the evidence as conclusive proof of guilt or innocence. See also McCormick, Evidence (2d ed), § 207, p 507.
The question whether statements made before, during, or after the administration of a polygraph examination, as opposed to the results themselves, should be excluded from trial as a matter of law or public policy has never been specifically addressed by this Court.
*266The general rule in other jurisdictions is that statements are not inadmissible merely because they were made during the course of a polygraph examination. Anno: Admissibility in evidence of confession made by accused in anticipation of, during, or following polygraph examination, 89 ALR3d 230. State v Erickson, 403 NW2d 281 (Minn App, 1987). In general, a defendant will be unsuccessful in challenging the admissibility of an alleged polygraph-induced confession unless specific coercive conduct or a denial of constitutional rights can be shown, as opposed to a mere allegation that the polygraph examination improperly influenced the defendant’s confession of the crime.
The defendant argues that because the polygraph test is scientifically unsound, it should not be used by police agencies and prosecutors as an investigative technique to secure admissions or confessions.
The fact that a test has not been deemed sufficiently reliable to authorize admission of the results in evidence does not support a logical inference that the defendant’s statements made during or following the test are not reliable. The premise cannot support the defendant’s conclusion because the statements made by an examinee during a polygraph examination can be disassociated from the underlying test.
By contrast, the rationale for excluding the results of hypnotically induced testimony extends to statements made after the examination, People v Gonzales, 415 Mich 615; 329 NW2d 743 (1982). During hypnosis the subject is in a condition of altered consciousness marked by heightened suggestibility. Id., p 623. Hypnosis contributes to the formation of memories, to a belief in the truth of those memories, and to the inability of the individual or any other person to distinguish between the *267real, but repressed, memories and those memories induced by the hypnosis. Id. Consequently, because the process of hypnosis "is not a reliable means of accurately restoring forgotten incidents,” id., p 626, and because posthypnotic testimony would unfairly denigrate the defendant’s right to cross-examination, the testimony of witnesses is excluded. However, the use of hypnosis has not been foreclosed "as an extremely useful investigative tool,” id., p 627, and we also have held that statements made before hypnosis that are not associated with the process are not excludable. People v Nixon, 421 Mich 79; 364 NW2d 593 (1984).
The reliability of statements made during a polygraph examination does not depend on the validity of the polygraph test or the examiner’s skill in conducting the test or interpreting its results, nor does the use of such statements improperly denigrate effective cross-examination. It follows, then, that a statement may be reliable and voluntary even though it was made during the course of a polygraph examination. See State v Blosser, 221 Kan 59, 60-63; 558 P2d 105 (1976). The key inquiry is whether the statement3 is voluntary, and such a determination is best made on the facts of each case.
The defendant further submits that there is confusion and ambiguity concerning the admissibility of statements obtained during the administration of a polygraph examination. We recognize a potential for confusion exists in a situation where a defendant may not knowingly and intelligently waive certain rights if the distinction between results of a polygraph examination and statements made before, during, or after a poly*268graph examination is not adequately explained to the defendant. See, e.g., People v Leonard, 421 Mich 207; 364 NW2d 625 (1984). However, not every situation involving the administration of a polygraph examination will give rise to this potential confusion. Where the distinction is sufficiently explained and the defendant is capable of understanding the distinction, a knowing and voluntary waiver of rights is clearly a possibility. Accordingly, a claim by a defendant that such confusion prevented a knowing and voluntary waiver of his rights can only be decided on a case-by-case basis.4
Therefore, we conclude, as have the overwhelming majority of jurisdictions that have considered the issue, that a blanket prohibition of polygraph use in investigative practices is not warranted. Further, we conclude that neither public policy nor federal or state law requires that statements made before, during, or after the administration of a polygraph examination are excludable per se as evidence at trial. Current procedures designed to test the voluntariness of such statements are adequate to insure that a statement that is unreliable or obtained without a knowing and intelligent waiver of a defendant’s rights will not be used at trial.
III. DID THE COURT OF APPEALS ERR IN IMPOSING A DUTY ON THE TRIAL JUDGE TO HOLD A WALKER HEARING SUA SPONTE IN THE PRESENCE OF ALERTING CIRCUMSTANCES?
In the landmark case, Jackson v Denno, 378 US 368; 84 S Ct 1774; 12 L Ed 2d 908 (1964), the *269United States Supreme Court held that the constitution requires that at some point during criminal proceedings a defendant have the right to object to the use of his confession and to have a fair hearing and reliable determination on the issue of voluntariness. In a later case, Wainwright v Sykes, 433 US 72; 97 S Ct 2497; 53 L Ed 2d 594 (1977), the Court further held, however, that "the Constitution does not require a voluntariness hearing absent some contemporaneous challenge to the use of the confession.” Id., p 86.
Michigan follows the so-called "orthodox” rule providing for a separate hearing outside the presence of the jury for the purpose of allowing the trial judge to determine the voluntariness of a confession. If the judge finds the confession to be involuntary, the matter ends there and the jury never considers it. If the confession is found to be voluntary, it is admitted with jury consideration limited only to weight and credibility, People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331; 132 NW2d 87 (1965). Michigan also requires that a defendant challenge the voluntariness of a confession before demanding that a Walker hearing be held. People v Shipp, 21 Mich App 415, 420; 175 NW2d 529 (1970); People v Hooks, 112 Mich App 477; 316 NW2d 245 (1982).
In People v Hooks, supra, p 480, Judge Riley recognized an exception to the general raise-or-waive rule where the factual situation itself raises a substantial question of voluntariness. "Alerting circumstances may be a defendant’s mental, emotional or physical condition, evidence of police threats, or other obvious forms of physical and mental duress.”
The reason for the alerting-circumstances exception is that a conviction based on an involuntary *270confession deprives the defendant of due process.5 " '[T]he proscription against the use of involuntary confessions reflects the basic societal conviction that the very integrity of the criminal justice system is compromised when it operates to take advantage of a person whose volitional capacity is seriously impaired.’ ” Hooks, supra, p 481, quoting United States v Powe, 192 US App DC 224, 232; 591 F2d 833 (1978). See also United States v Renteria, 625 F2d 1279, 1283 (CA 5, 1980); United States v Bentley, 726 F2d 1124, 1128-1129 (CA 6, 1984); United States v Taylor, 374 F2d 753, 756 (CA 7, 1967); Hizel v Sigler, 430 F2d 1398, 1400-1401 (CA 8, 1970); Jacobson v California, 431 F2d 1017, 1018-1019 (CA 9, 1970); United States v Hart, 729 F2d 662, 666 (CA 10, 1984); United States ex rel Gainer v New Jersey, 278 F Supp 127 (D NJ, 1967); Commonwealth v Harris, 371 Mass 462; 358 NE2d 982 (1976); State v Pearce, 266 NC 234; 145 SE2d 918 (1966).
In Hooks, the incriminating statement was obtained roughly eight hours after the defendant had been seriously wounded in the chest and struck on the head. At the time of the statement, he was attached to a life-support machine, had various tubes attached to his body, was in pain, under medication, and in a weakened state both physically and mentally. The defendant also testified that he had not read the officer’s transcription of his statement before he signed it and that the officer had to hold his head up so that he could see the line he was signing.
The weakened mental and physical state of the *271defendant was considered sufficient to present "an alerting circumstance which should have triggered the court’s sua sponte inquiry into the voluntariness of the statement.” Hooks, supra, p 482. Because the burden placed upon the trial court by this holding was "immense,” Judge Riley emphasized the necessity to rule narrowly on the basis of the extreme facts of the case.
Undoubtedly, certain alerting circumstances require the trial court to raise the issue of voluntariness on its own. We also agree that because of the heavy burden placed upon the trial court by such a rule, the Hooks rule is limited to those cases in which the evidence clearly and substantially reflects a question about the voluntary nature of a confession or implicates other due process concerns. We do not find in this case any challenge to the defendant’s statements that raise a due process issue regarding the defendant’s physical or mental capacity to make a voluntary statement,6 as in People v Hooks, supra, and, therefore, this exception to the general raise-or-waive rule is inapplicable. The rule of Jackson v Denno, supra, and the exception to the raise-or-waive rule is directed to those situations in which a confession might be involuntary in the traditional sense that that term was historically used in Fifth Amend*272ment jurisprudence. See, e.g., Payne v Arkansas, 356 US 560; 78 S Ct 844; 2 L Ed 2d 975 (1958); Haynes v Washington, 373 US 503; 83 S Ct 1336; 10 L Ed 2d 513 (1963). In this case, the Court of Appeals has extended the Hooks exception to require an additional inquiry sua sponte regarding whether the defendant made an intelligent and voluntary waiver of the prophylactic rules of Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966), and the Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Perhaps because over time the profession has come to use the term, "Walker hearing” to refer to that phase of motion practice in which all issues of admissibility of a defendant’s statements are resolved,7 the Court of Appeals did not distinguish the voluntariness issue from the separate and distinct concerns addressed in Miranda. The Court of Appeals decision focuses on whether the defendant’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights to counsel were validly waived as opposed to whether the defendant’s confession was voluntary. However, as the Supreme Court has observed, a "simple failure” to administer Miranda warnings is not in itself a violation of the Fifth Amendment. Oregon v Elstad, 470 US 298, 306, n 1; 105 S Ct 1285; 84 L Ed 2d 222 (1985).
The Miranda exclusionary rule, however, serves *273the Fifth Amendment and sweeps more broadly than the Fifth Amendment itself. It may be triggered even in the absence of a Fifth Amendment violation. The Fifth Amendment prohibits use by the prosecution in its case in chief only of compelled testimony. Failure to administer Miranda warnings creates a presumption of compulsion. Consequently, unwarned statements that are otherwise voluntary within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment must nevertheless be excluded from evidence under Miranda. [Id. at 306-307.]
Clearly, this is not a case involving a voluntariness issue such as Hooks. We therefore conclude that People v Hooks did not require the remand to the trial court here ordered.
IV. DID DEFENDANT WAIVE HIS CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS?
The primary grounds for the Court of Appeals decision to remand the case for a Walker hearing is an alleged ambiguity arising in the waiver form itself. The waiver form did not recite the well-established rule in Michigan that the results of a polygraph examination are not admissible at trial. People v Barbara, supra. Rather, it stated that any statements by the defendant made during the testing phase and questioning, before and after, could be used against him in a court of law. The Court of Appeals believed that these circumstances created an ambiguity in the acknowledgment portion of the waiver as to "whether any evidence would be admissible from the polygraph procedure.” 156 Mich App 44. (Emphasis added.)
We disagree with the Court of Appeals that the facts of this case raised clear and substantial questions as to whether the defendant voluntarily *274waived his Miranda right or his "Fifth8 or Sixth Amendment” rights to counsel.
The facts indicate that the defendant was arrested on October 14, 1983, approximately one month after the fire. After he was arraigned, he was released on bond. On November 10, 1983, defendant voluntarily submitted to a polygraph examination. Defendant’s counsel, Robin Wheaton, accompanied him to the Michigan State Police post in Flint where the examination was to take place.
Sergeant Bratton, who administered the interrogation and polygraph examination, testified that she read to the defendant in the presence of his attorney each of the statements in the acknowledgment and asked him if he understood his rights and was willing to waive them. The defendant replied in the affirmative, and then signed the acknowledgment included on the waiver form which included:
I understand that I have the right to remain silent and that anything that I say during the testing phase and questioning, before or after, can be used against me in a court of law. I further understand that I may exercise my right to remain silent and stop answering questions at any time. [156 Mich App 36.]_
*275During a separate hearing at trial, it was revealed that prior to the examination, and while in the presence of counsel, defendant signed a written waiver of his right to counsel during the examination and during the questioning immediately before and after the examination.
The waiver form was received into evidence. Also, during the separate record, Mr. Wheaton agreed with Sergeant Bratton that he had been present when the defendant was advised of his rights and waived them. He also elicited from the sergeant that these rights were not repeated immediately prior to the postexamination questioning which occurred approximately two hours after the initial warnings were given.
Sergeant Bratton was then permitted to testify at trial during the people’s case in chief that after the examination she asked the defendant a rhetorical question, that she thought he and Rod Anderson had set fire to the apartment. Defendant allegedly responded, "Right.”9
Before trial, defense counsel renewed his objection in a motion to suppress the statements. Defense counsel argued that although the examining officer read the defendant Miranda warnings prior to the polygraph examination, she did not do so again after the examination which continued for a considerable length of time, thus failing to insure that the defendant understood that the same protections applied after the test as before the test.
*276In denying the motion to suppress the statements, the circuit judge held that nothing in the testimony pinpointed a fatal passage of time between the Miranda warnings and the statement— therefore defendant’s waiver applied to the postexamination interview. The issue thus presented on this record is whether the failure to readvise the defendant of Miranda rights at the conclusion of the examination prevents a voluntary and intelligent waiver per se.
We conclude in the circumstances of this case that it was not necessary to rewarn the defendant of his constitutional rights in the limited exchange that ensued immediately after the polygraph machine was shut off. In Wyrick v Fields, 459 US 42, 47; 103 S Ct 394; 74 L Ed 2d 214 (1982), the United States Supreme Court rejected the Eighth Circuit Court’s holding that a failure to rewarn a suspect prior to the postpolygraph interview was a violation per se of his Fifth Amendment right to have counsel present at the interview. Recognizing that we are free to formulate another test, we adopt the Wyrick interpretation and hold that the admissibility of such statements is to be resolved by a review as to whether in the "totality of circumstances” the waiver of the Fifth Amendment right could be considered knowing and voluntary.
In this case, the only circumstance intervening between the preexamination rights and postexamination questioning which was alleged to be of moment was the two-hour time period that encompassed the preinterview conversation, the test itself and the postexamination interview. In addition, the same person who had warned defendant of his rights the first time, and who conducted the polygraph examination, also conducted the postexamination questioning. Cf. United States v Gillyard, 726 F2d 1426 (CA 9, 1984). Therefore, as in *277Wyrick, it was not reasonable to expect a rewarning of those rights at that time. Finally, and most importantly, the defendant’s waiver expressly extended to a postexamination interview.
Further, it is clear that this is not a situation in which defendant was isolated from counsel. While free on bond, the defendant appeared voluntarily for the examination and was accompanied by counsel who remained at the police station for the duration of the examination. Counsel and defendant were informed thát counsel could not be present during the examination, yet counsel made no objection. See State v Erickson, supra. There is no allegation that the defendant wished to confer with counsel during the questioning but was not allowed to do so. Nor does the defendant contend that the questioning was beyond what was expected or agreed upon. Cf. State v Baillargeon, 124 NH 355; 470 A2d 915 (1983).
This case is distinguishable from People v Leonard, supra. In that case, a stipulation was entered into by the prosecutor and defense counsel whereby the results of the polygraph examination and opinions drawn therefrom would not be admissible in evidence. Defense counsel argued that the stipulation suppressed all evidence from questions during the examination, including any statements made by the defendant. In Leonard, it was quite clear that there was a misconception on the defendant’s part as to what was and what was not to be admitted at trial.
In this case, the examining officer specifically informed the defendant that anything he might say during the testing phase and questioning, before or after, could be used against him in a court of law. Further, counsel was present when the defendant was so informed. Unlike Leonard, the instant defendant never attacked the state*278ment on the ground that because it was made during the course of a polygraph examination he believed the statement would be inadmissible at trial. Rather, the objection was based solely on the fact that the officer failed to rewarn the defendant of his constitutional rights.
CONCLUSION
Clearly the issue in this case is distinguishable from that presented by People v Hooks, supra. The trial court was not obligated to conduct a further hearing to determine the voluntariness of a defendant’s waiver of his right to remain silent or his Fifth or Sixth Amendment rights to counsel during interrogation. Therefore, the Court of Appeals erred in ordering a remand. Further, we find that this defendant made a voluntary and a valid waiver of his constitutional rights. There is no question that the defendant’s rights were waivable or that on this record they were in fact waived.
Riley, C.J., and Brickley, Archer, and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Boyle, J.
People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331; 132 NW2d 87 (1965).
The issue in this case is not whether "the Court of Appeals was within its authority in ordering an evidentiary hearing,” as the dissent suggests. Post, p 279. The issue is whether the Court of Appeals was correct in concluding that because of alerting circumstances the trial court erred in not sua sponte ordering a hearing. Defendant does not claim on appeal that trial counsel sought a hearing that was denied, nor does he make any allegations of fact that his statement was involuntary or not knowingly and understandingly made. The issue is one of law; whether the ambiguity of the form imposed a duty on the trial court to hold a hearing.
See Jackson v Denno, 378 US 368, 385-386; 84 S Ct 1774; 12 L Ed 2d 908 (1964).
The defendant does not claim that he failed to understand the advice of rights because of confusion or ambiguities in the waiver form.
Similar considerations arise when the evidence raises sufficient doubt as to defendant’s competency to stand trial. Because the conviction of a legally incompetent defendant is a deprivation of due process, evidence that raises a "bona fide” doubt as to competence obligates a sanity hearing sua sponte. Pate v Robinson, 383 US 375, 385; 86 S Ct 836; 15 L Ed 2d 815 (1966).
The United States Supreme Court has recently articulated a distinction between the interest protected by Miranda, the due process "voluntariness” inquiry, and the concerns underlying the evidentiary issue of reliability. In Colorado v Connelly, 479 US 157; 107 S Ct 515; 93 L Ed 2d 473 (1986), the Court held that coercive governmental activity was the aim of the due process voluntariness issue, that such activity is a predicate to finding that a confession is not voluntary within the meaning of the Due Process Clause, and that "Miranda protects defendants against government coercion leading them to surrender rights protected by the Fifth Amendment; it goes no further than that . . .,” supra, 479 US 170. The Court concluded that in the absence of police overreaching, the respondent’s mental condition did not preclude a finding of a voluntary waiver of Miranda rights, and that the admissibility of such statements is to be resolved by state laws governing the admission of evidence.
It is not only difficult to conclude that the circuit judge should have been alerted to a need for a Walker hearing on the basis of an alleged ambiguity in the waiver form, but since the defendant’s motion to suppress was renewed, it is even more difficult to conclude what the remand would encompass. Presumably since the defendant’s counsel did challenge the admissibility of the statement, but did not call defendant to the stand, the remand would be for this purpose. However, defendant does not claim he did not understand the waiver form or that counsel was ineffective. Although the opportunity was available to the defendant and his trial counsel at the circuit court hearing, it was not exercised. There is nothing in defendant’s pleadings to suggest that it would be exercised at the hearing on remand which the Court of Appeals has ordered.
The prosecutor assumes for the sake of this argument only that defendant was in "custody” for Miranda purposes at the time of the examination. See People v Lumley, 154 Mich App 618; 398 NW2d 474 (1986).
In Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433; 94 S Ct 2357; 41 L Ed 2d 182 (1974), the Supreme Court recognized that there is a distinction between the Fifth Amendment privilege as such and the particular "procedural safeguards” defined in Miranda to assure that Fifth Amendment rights not be denied individuals in the context of custodial interrogation. There may also be a distinction between the adequacy of waiver required for a Fifth and a Sixth Amendment right. People v Bladel (After Remand), 421 Mich 39; 365 NW2d 56 (1984), aff'd sub nom Michigan v Jackson, 475 US 625; 106 S Ct 1404; 89 L Ed 2d 631 (1986). In view of our conclusion that defendant’s statements were properly admitted, we need not resolve this question.
The record establishes that at the preliminary examination trial counsel did not specify the reason for his objection to the admission of defendant’s statement. Indeed, it appears that both the prosecutor and the defense counsel believed that it would be improper to inject evidence of the polygraph examination before the examining magistrate. Defense counsel ultimately withdrew the objection, relieving the prosecutor of any duty to introduce the waiver form. While it was inadvertently revealed that a polygraph examination was involved, that fact was not considered by the examining magistrate in his decision to bind over the defendant.

=== CASE 9736964 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:06.493654+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). The Court of Appeals was within its authority in ordering an evidentiary hearing on the questions whether Ray voluntarily waived his right to remain silent and to have his counsel present at the postpolygraph interrogation. The Court of Appeals has broad authority, no less so than this Court, to order an evidentiary hearing whenever in its judgment such a hearing is necessary or appropriate to enable it to discharge its reviewing function.1
The circumstances of this case indicate that there is reason to question the voluntariness of *280Ray’s "waiver.” The "admission” or "confession”2 at issue was made in response to questioning that occurred after the polygraph examination was completed. The "waiver” document states that the questioning before, during, and after the examination "cannot be conducted with a lawyer actually present in the examination room . . . .” Whatever may be the rationale for declaring that Ray’s lawyer could not be present for questioning before and during the polygraph examination,3 there is no apparent rationale for excluding his lawyer from the postpolygraph questioning.
The apparent overbreadth of the "waiver” and ambiguity noted by the Court of Appeals4 justify its decision to order an evidentiary hearing on the questions whether Ray voluntarily waived his right to remain silent and to have his counsel present at the postpolygraph interrogation.
In all events, there is no need to express an opinion concerning the admissibility of statements made during the polygraph examination itself as no such question is raised by the instant case.
*281We would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Levin, J.
The majority in the Court of Appeals spoke of "clear error” in holding "that the magistrate and the acting circuit judge should have been alerted to the need for a Walker hearing.” People v Ray, 156 Mich App 31, 44, 46-47; 401 NW2d 296 (1986).
Ray’s lawyer moved in the circuit court to suppress evidence of the statement, "Right,” stating that evidence of the statement had been introduced at the preliminary examination, that such a statement to be admissible in evidence must be voluntary, and that Ray’s constitutional rights were violated because, among other things, the officer did not repeat the Miranda warnings after the conclusion of the polygraph examination. The motion asked the court to "suppress the Defendant’s statement, or in the alternative, order an evidentiary hearing on this matter.”
The acting circuit judge did not order an evidentiary hearing, but rather reviewed the preliminary examination transcript and found that the defendant freely and voluntarily made the statement. At the trial, the circuit judge, referring to the motion heard by the acting circuit judge, said "[tjhey, obviously, did not have to make a separate record” and declared that the "Court sustains the ruling made by the lower court, apparently in review of the suppression material.”
The defendant’s lawyer thus sought an evidentiary hearing. The motion to suppress the evidence was decided on the basis of the testimony at the preliminary examination which was not focused on the issue of the voluntariness of the statement, raised by defendant’s motion filed after the preliminary examination. It thus appears that the issue was preserved by defendant’s lawyer and that the circuit court erred in deciding the voluntariness issue without an evidentiary hearing.
During the polygraph examination, Ray denied culpability. After the examination, the police sergeant who administered the examination told Ray that she thought that Ray and a friend set the fire. Ray responded, "Right.”
The rationale asserted for excluding defense counsel from questioning before and during the polygraph examination is that in both periods the examinee is linked to the machine, and the presence of persons other them the examiner and the examinee may distort the physiological responses monitored by the polygraph device. See Reid & Inbau, Truth and Deception: The Polygraph ("Lie-detector”) Technique (2d ed). (Physiological responses would not, however, be distorted by counsel observing through a one-way window.) But see Furedy & Liss, Countering confessions induced by the polygraph: Of confessionals and psychological rubber hoses, 29 Crim LQ 91, 103 (1986) (no scientific basis for assertion that the examiner must be alone with the examinee). During postexamination questioning, however, the rationale for exclusion is inapplicable because physiological responses are no longer being monitored.
The Court of Appeals said, "Defense counsel says the polygraph waiver was ambiguous and that the parties never understood defense counsel was waiving his right to be present at a post-polygraph interrogation.” People v Ray, n 1 supra, p 47.

=== CASE 2208125 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.782879+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 339 (1964)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
WALTER RAYFIELD FRANK, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8751.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Mar. 6, 1964.
Donald W. Boehme for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and David M. Rothman, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FORD, J.
The defendant was accused of the crime of possession of marijuana. (Health & Saf. Code,  11530.) In a nonjury trial he was found guilty. He has appealed from the judgment (order granting probation).
The sole question presented on this appeal is whether the marijuana was found and seized by the police officers as the result of conduct which constituted an unlawful search and seizure. The pertinent evidence will be stated.
Uluse E. Schubach, a police officer for the City of Los Angeles, arrested the defendant at his place of residence on April 11, 1962. Within a period of approximately two weeks prior to that time, the officer had been at the location of the house several times. He had received information from his superior officer that there was "a narcotic activity" at that address. The superior officer had received the information from Inspector Kerr, but Officer Schubach did not know where Kerr obtained that information. He knew that the telephone was in the name of Rosemary Day. An automobile in the vicinity was registered to "Mildred or Frank Walter Wallace." The only information which the officer had as to the defendant was that on the 9th day of February a "Frank Walter" had been arrested "for pills." But the officer did not know whether the person so arrested was the defendant.
Officer Schubach and three other officers, all in civilian clothes, went to the house on the day of the arrest. In response to Officer Schubach's knock, a small boy came to the door. The boy called his mother. Officer Schubach identified himself and Mrs. Rosemary Day told him to come in. He informed her that he was making an investigation as to narcotics. Mrs. Day gave him the names of the roomers in her house, stating that Walter Frank was in room 5. She further told the officer that she did not know whether she had the right to give him permission to search the rooms. She phoned her "boy friend" and then said, "Well, he said it's all right, so I'll take you upstairs."
Officer Schubach went to room 5 with Mrs. Day and Sergeant Loeber. Mrs. Day knocked on the door and informed the defendant that there were men present who wished to see him. The defendant opened the door and, after Officer Schubach *341 identified himself as a police officer, the two men entered the room. The defendant stated that he was Doug Belmont and not Frank. The officer asked where Frank was and the defendant replied that he had gone to the market and would be back in a little while. Officer Schubach then said that the officers had information as to activity in the house with respect to narcotics and that Mrs. Day had given them permission to search the premises for narcotics. The defendant said, "Go ahead," and the officers started their search. Marijuana was found in a closet. Thereupon the defendant admitted that he was Frank. Then the defendant said, "Where is your search warrant?"
On cross-examination Officer Schubach testified that he did not learn that some of the rooms in the house were rented to roomers until after the search of the premises, pursuant to Mrs. Day's permission, had commenced. When she told Officer Schubach that Walter Frank "owned the car out there" and that he lived in room 5, the officer went directly to that room. Mrs. Day and Sergeant Loeber accompanied him. Mrs. Day knocked on the door and asked, "Frank, are you in there?" The occupant of the room replied, "Yes." After the defendant opened the door, the officers identified themselves. Officer Schubach further testified that he "pointed to Mr. Frank, the defendant, and Rosemary [Mrs. Day] nodded her head that it was him." Then Officer Schubach entered the room. He asked the defendant who he was and thereafter, before a search was commenced, he asked him if he could have permission to search the room.
Rosemary Day, whose name was Mrs. Vail at the time of the trial, testified on behalf of the defendant. She gave the officers permission to search the house. When the defendant opened the door to his room, the officers entered. She heard an officer ask the defendant for permission to search his room. About five or ten minutes after the officers entered the room the defendant made "quite a point of the fact that he wanted a search warrant." But Mrs. Vail was uncertain as to what occurred when the officers first entered his room. At the time she had three or four roomers, each having a separate room. The rooms were furnished. They were cleaned and maintained by their occupants.
The defendant testified in his own behalf. He was taken into custody in February on an occasion when he was driving an automobile which had "two rolls of Benzedrine tablets in it," but he was later released. The automobile parked near *342 his house on April 11, 1961, was registered in the names of Mildred Wallace and Walter Frank. On that day, Officer Schubach and two other officers came into his room. He said that he was not Frank. When Officer Schubach asked him for some identification, the defendant asked the officer for a search warrant. He then told the officer that he was Frank but that he wanted a search warrant. Officer Schubach replied that he did not need a search warrant, that he had been given permission by Rosemary Day. As soon as the defendant opened the door, the officers started searching the room. They were searching "all the time" that he was asking for a search warrant.
The defendant objected to the introduction in evidence of the marijuana found in the search of his room. In the course of the argument made by the defendant's counsel, the trial judge stated: "It is my opinion there is consent in this case by the landlord."  [fn. 1] The objection was overruled.
Prior to the search of the defendant's room, the officers did not have reasonable or probable cause to arrest the defendant for possession of marijuana. (See People v. Harvey, 156 Cal. App. 2d 516, 520-521, 523-524 [319 P.2d 689].) The admissibility of the marijuana must rest upon a determination of the question of whether there was an effective consent to the search of the defendant's room. The record discloses that the trial judge made no determination as to whether the defendant consented to the search but found that the consent of Rosemary Day was all that was necessary. If that concept of the governing law was erroneous, the judgment must be reversed because there was conflicting evidence as to whether the defendant consented to the search. [1] Where the trier of fact has not considered an issue upon which there is a substantial conflict in the evidence, this court cannot affirm the judgment upon the assumption that consideration thereof would have resulted in a finding in favor of the People. (See Healy v. Brewster, 59 Cal. 2d 455, 464-465 [30 Cal. Rptr. 129, 380 P.2d 817]; Kyne v. Kyne, 60 Cal. App. 2d 326, 332 [140 P.2d 886].)
In People v. Gorg, 45 Cal. 2d 776, the Supreme Court stated, at page 783 [291 P.2d 469]: "Defendant was living in the Stevens home, and it is clear that whether he was in *343 fact a tenant, servant, or guest, Stevens believed that he had at least joint control over his quarters and the right to enter them, ... and authorize a search thereof. Under these circumstances the officers were justified in concluding that Stevens had the authority over his home that he purported to have, and there was nothing unreasonable in their acting accordingly. In this proceeding we are not concerned with enforcing defendant's rights under the law of trespass and landlord and tenant, but with discouraging unreasonable activity on the part of law enforcement officers, ... and when as in this case the officers have acted in good faith with the consent and at the request of a home owner in conducting a search, evidence so obtained cannot be excluded merely because the officers may have made a reasonable mistake as to the extent of the owner's authority." In People v. Caritativo, 46 Cal. 2d 68 [292 P.2d 513], similar circumstances were involved.
[2] Unlike the factual situations existing in the Gorg and Caritativo cases, the defendant in the present case was in his room at the time of the entry and search. Consequently, the problem is not what Mrs. Day's authority might reasonably have appeared to the officers to be had the defendant been absent from his room. The crucial defect in the reasoning of the trial court was the failure to recognize that the defendant, unlike a mere inanimate object in the room, was possessed of a substantial right of privacy with respect to his place of abode and was entitled to rely upon the constitutional protection against unreasonable search. [3] As aptly stated by Mr. Justice Frankfurter in Jones v. United States, 362 U.S. 257, at page 266 [80 S. Ct. 725, 4 L. Ed. 2d 697, 705, 78 A.L.R. 2d 233]: "Distinctions such as those between 'lessee,' 'licensee,' 'invitee' and 'guest,' often only of gossamer strength, ought not to be determinative in fashioning procedures ultimately referable to constitutional safeguards."
[4] There was evidence which, if believed by the trier of fact, would have sustained an inference that the defendant, upon being confronted in his room by the officers, did not consent to the search but insisted that the officers first have a search warrant. His constitutionally protected right of privacy was not so under the control of the person from whom he rented the room that he could not personally assert it under the circumstances of this case. If he did not consent to the search, it was unlawful. (See Tompkins v. Superior *344 Court, 59 Cal. 2d 65, 69 [27 Cal. Rptr. 889, 378 P.2d 113].) The trial court erroneously failed to determine that issue of consent.
The judgment is reversed.
Shinn, P. J., and Files, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. At an earlier point in the course of the argument, the trial judge stated: "I think the landlady has a right to give a consent there, whether it is a boarding house or an apartment house. She has an overriding consent. The law is pretty clear on that."

=== CASE 2208128 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.797074+00 ===

406 Mass. 397 (1990)
548 N.E.2d 856
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
PAUL A. RAMOS.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
December 4, 1989.
January 9, 1990.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., ABRAMS, NOLAN, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
Robert P. Reardon for the defendant.
Pamela L. Hunt, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
NOLAN, J.
On April 9, 1986, the defendant, Paul A. Ramos, was convicted of murder in the first degree on the grounds of deliberate premeditation and extreme atrocity or cruelty. The defendant appeals to this court, claiming (1) that he was denied his right to a jury drawn from a fair cross section of the community; (2) that the trial judge erred in admitting in evidence certain photographs of the victim and of the defendant's automobile; and (3) that there was insufficient evidence to sustain the conviction. In addition, the defendant *398 requests that we grant relief pursuant to our power under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. Finding neither error nor an occasion to exercise our power under G.L.c. 278, § 33E, we affirm.
From the evidence presented by the Commonwealth at trial, the jury could have found the following facts. At 1:30 A.M. on September 12, 1985, a Carlisle police officer, Dale Schofield, patrolling alone, was driving south on Lowell Street toward Carlisle center. The defendant's automobile turned out of Litchfield Drive and onto Lowell Street cutting off the officer's cruiser and forcing her to stop. The officer observed that the defendant's automobile appeared to have been in an accident. The front grille appeared to be broken and a leafy branch was sticking out of the front end. After the automobile completed its turn, the officer pulled into Litchfield Drive in order to turn around and follow the car. As she was turning around, the officer noticed a small fire approximately one hundred feet down Litchfield Drive, about ten to fifteen feet off the roadway. The officer turned on her revolving blue lights and pursued the defendant's automobile. The officer could clearly read the automobile's registration plate and observed that inside there was only the defendant. After being followed for approximately eight-tenths of a mile, the defendant stopped. Officer Schofield exited her cruiser with her flashlight and approached the defendant's automobile on the driver's side. As she approached the automobile, the officer noticed blood on the back of it. As she neared the driver's door, she noticed blood across the back of the defendant's shirt. She also observed that the defendant's hands, on the steering wheel, were bloodied. The officer told the defendant to put his automobile in park and to produce his license and registration. The license and registration identified the defendant, Paul A. Ramos, as the driver and owner of the automobile. Upon being asked the source of the blood, the defendant stated that he "had an accident back there." The officer observed that the defendant's clothes were disheveled. His shirt was unbuttoned, partially untucked, and smeared with blood on the front, back, and sleeves. His belt *399 was unbuckled. The top of his pants was unfastened and his pants were unzipped about three inches. The interior of the defendant's automobile appeared to be in disarray. There were items tossed on the front seat and on the floor of the passenger seat. The officer observed that there was a great deal of blood in the automobile; there was blood on the passenger's front seat and on the console between the two front bucket seats.
Shortly thereafter, Schofield's "backup," Officer Keith Gearin, arrived. When Schofield asked him whether he had seen the fire on Litchfield Drive, Gearin proceeded to Litchfield Drive. Within minutes Gearin called the dispatcher. Upon hearing this call, Schofield took out her revolver and requested another backup.[1] When the backup arrived, she instructed the defendant to put his hands outside the automobile. Schofield further checked the interior of the defendant's automobile. She noticed a purse and its scattered contents and a bottle of transmission fluid on the floor of the passenger side.
The defendant was handcuffed and seated in the rear of Officer Schofield's cruiser. He was taken to the Carlisle police station and then to the State police barracks in Concord. There was no conversation during the trip. Once inside the barracks, Carlisle police Chief David Galvin officially informed the defendant that he was under arrest for murder and advised the defendant of his rights. Chief Galvin then went to Litchfield Drive where he met several State troopers.
The State police took over the investigation but were assisted by the local officers. At the scene, the officers noticed, among other things, that many small saplings near the body were knocked down and large amounts of blood had splattered on the surrounding foliage. The officers also observed and photographed several tire marks. The officers spoke with a Litchfield Drive resident who stated that he had been *400 awakened at 1:06 A.M., by a woman's calling for help. He then heard the sound of tires spinning for three to five seconds. Some time later he heard the sound of "metal on metal." After a pause, he heard the sound of an automobile driving away toward Lowell Street at a high rate of speed.
After photographing and securing the scene at Litchfield Drive, the officers proceeded to the location of the defendant's car which was parked on Lowell Street. They observed numerous reddish-brown stains on the exterior of the automobile. Hair was observed on the front bumper guard. One trooper removed a large, leafy branch from the place where the grille would have been. This branch was later determined to match the remnant of a broken sapling near the location of the body. The car was then towed to the Concord barracks.
At the barracks, the defendant was booked and processed. A chemist tested the defendant's hands for the presence of blood. Each of the defendant's ten fingers and the backs and palms of his hands tested positive. His clothes were taken and later tested. His T-shirt was stained with type B blood, the victim's type. The sleeves, the front, and the top of the back of his dress shirt were also stained with the victim's type blood. His pants had blood on the front leg, zipper, and the pocket area. His belt tested positive for blood on both ends.
Shortly after 6 A.M., two State troopers interviewed the defendant.[2] The defendant stated that he had known the victim previously but did not know her name. He said that she came up to him on Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge while he was making a telephone call and asked him for a "fix." He then gave her and two white men from Somerville[3] a ride to *401 a place in Cambridge where he had previously taken her to buy drugs. She got out and returned with three packs of cocaine. He then drove on Massachusetts Avenue toward Arlington. One of the men (John Dever) departed from the vehicle on the way to Arlington Heights where he had earlier parked his white Ford pickup truck. The others kept going. The victim was in the passenger seat, and the remaining man (Kerivan) was behind her. The victim and Kerivan got "high" on cocaine. The defendant said that he had been drinking heavily all evening.
According to the defendant, the other man, whose name the defendant did not know, killed the victim while the defendant was driving. The other man then told the defendant to get rid of the body. The man left the defendant's automobile, took the defendant's keys, got transmission fluid from the trunk, and gave it to the defendant. He told the defendant to clean up and get rid of the body, and then he left, presumably on foot,[4] saying that he would call later.
The defendant then drove for five more minutes looking for a place to dump the body. He took the body out of the car. He was quite sure that she was dead. As he was dragging her out of the automobile, he could tell that she had been killed with a razor because he had been a barber. He did not know where the razor was. He poured the transmission fluid on her and lit her with book matches. He admitted that he may have hit her with his car; he was in a hurry to leave. He said that his pants were unbuckled because they were too tight.[5]
The defendant then consented to a search of his automobile.[6] Experts tested the interior and exterior of the automobile for blood. Much of the exterior of the automobile tested *402 positive for blood: the front bumper, the under portion of the bumper, bumperette, front registration plate, passenger side mirror, rear window, passenger side wheel area, passenger side rear quarter panel, and rear bumper area. Heavy stains underneath the automobile in the front axle area tested positive for blood. Much of the interior of the automobile also tested positive for blood: the front passenger door jamb, dashboard, glove compartment, windshield, front seat, console, passenger floor, and items on the floor and the right side of the driver's seat. Extracts of the blood taken from the front bumper, rear bumper, inside the passenger door, and the console were analyzed and determined to be of the victim's blood type.
The troopers also found an empty bottle of transmission fluid on the floor of the passenger side. The bloody fingerprint of the defendant's left middle finger was clearly visible on the bottle. The only item in the glove compartment was an empty box for a "Morris Special Razor, sculptured edge." The razor itself was discovered on October 25, 1985, after a second search warrant was obtained for the automobile. During this second search, a white Morris sculptured edge razor, stained with blood, was found underneath the console. The victim's neck and facial wounds were consistent with wounds which would be caused by a razor of this type.
An autopsy conducted on the body disclosed that the victim suffered multiple incised wounds, fractures, contusions, abrasions, and burns. Her neck was cut from the right side to the left. The cut was six inches long by three-quarters of an inch wide and caused hemorrhaging into the surrounding tissues, tore muscles, and cut the left jugular vein. A triangular-shaped incised wound extended from her right eye to her right ear. This cut was four inches long by one inch wide. Both of the victim's hands were cut in numerous places.
Additionally, the autopsy revealed that the victim's first four ribs were fractured on the right side. There were three fractured ribs on the left side. Her pelvis was fractured in three places and her clavicle was fractured in two places. Her shoulder was wounded by enough force to separate the *403 skin from the bone. The first cervical vertebra was fractured and dislocated, severing the spinal cord and separating the head from the neck. Hemorrhaging surrounded the area of each of the fractures, an indication that the victim was alive when she suffered the fractures.
The victim also had several fresh abrasions and contusions over her face, neck, shoulder, chest, back, thigh, and leg. Areas of her abdomen, thigh, and groin had fourth degree burns. Her face, chest, and left arm were also burned.
The medical examiner testified that the victim would have been capable of walking around after the infliction of the neck and face wounds. She would have died from those injuries alone within one-half to three-quarters of an hour. She would have died from the fractures of the ribs and pelvis alone within three to four hours, and would have died within one to two minutes after the fracture of the first cervical vertebra.
The medical examiner further testified that the victim was alive when she suffered the cuts to her face and neck and when she suffered the fractures. The incised wounds of the face and neck, the fracture, and the burning were all contributing causes of death.
An expert in crime scene reconstruction and blood pattern analysis reviewed photographs of the automobile as well as some of the physical evidence in the case. From his opinions the jury could conclude that the victim had been sitting in the front passenger seat of the defendant's automobile, facing the windshield, when a right to left movement, coming from the defendant, caused the victim to begin bleeding heavily. Still bleeding heavily and still alive, the victim left the automobile by the front passenger door and walked toward the rear of the automobile spurting blood and contacting various parts of the car. The victim remained upright as she moved at a forward angle across Litchfield Drive.[7] The *404 defendant's automobile ran over her while her blood was still liquid, contacting vegetation in the area as it did so.
John Dever testified that he was at the "99" Restaurant in Woburn on the night of September 11, 1985, when he met the victim. He had not seen her for some time. The two conversed and then drove toward the Green Parrot Lounge in Cambridge together in Dever's white pickup truck. Because he had been drinking and because he had both a headlight and a taillight out on the truck, Dever took back roads and parked the truck in Arlington. He and the victim then hired a taxicab to take them to the Green Parrot Lounge. At the Green Parrot Lounge, the victim met Michael Kerivan. At approximately 11 P.M., Dever left the lounge to use the public telephone across the street. The victim and Michael Kerivan followed. The defendant was using the public telephone, and the victim spoke with the defendant. The three were offered a ride by the defendant. They went to the defendant's automobile. The victim seated herself on the front passenger side. Dever and Kerivan sat in the back, Kerivan on the rear driver's side. The defendant drove. After driving to Cambridge they drove back to Arlington Heights to the place where Dever had parked his truck. Dever and Kerivan got out. Dever gave Kerivan a ride home and then went home himself. The victim did not get out of the automobile, but remained with the defendant. Kerivan's testimony at trial was consistent with Dever's testimony except that Kerivan remembered that the four had stopped at a building in Cambridge which the victim entered, perhaps to buy cocaine.
The defendant testified at trial. His defense, in essence, was that, although Dever got out of the defendant's automobile in Arlington Heights, Kerivan remained in the car with the defendant and the victim. The defendant continued driving with the victim in the front passenger seat and Kerivan sitting directly behind her. After approximately one-half hour, the victim and Kerivan began to argue about drugs. Then, according to the defendant, Kerivan grabbed the victim around the neck and blood started going "everywhere." The defendant had to stop the automobile for a moment because *405 the victim was falling toward him and getting blood all over him. The defendant continued driving until Kerivan told him to turn off into Litchfield Drive. The defendant did so and stopped on Litchfield Drive. Kerivan got out and asked the defendant if he had anything that would burn. The defendant refused to help Kerivan but informed him that there was transmission fluid and antifreeze in the trunk. The defendant then handed Kerivan the car keys. The defendant exited the car, walked down an embankment and vomited. He saw Kerivan remove the victim's body and carry it across the road. He never saw Kerivan or his car keys again and did not notice any fire. After he finished vomiting, he noticed that his car had been moved to the other side of Litchfield Drive and was now facing Lowell Street. He retrieved his spare keys from his wallet and left the scene, intending to go home.
1. Racial composition of the venire. The defendant, who is black, contends that the presence of only one black person in the venire deprived him of the right to a jury drawn from a fair and reasonable cross section of the community. Nothing in the record indicates a violation of the statute (set forth in the margin)[8] which governs the random selection of jurors. Thus, the defendant has not met his burden.
"In order to establish a prima facie violation of the fair-cross-section requirement, the defendant must show (1) that the group alleged to be excluded is a `distinctive' group in the community; (2) that the representation of this group in *406 venires from which juries are selected is not fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the community; and (3) that this underrepresentation is due to systematic exclusion of the group in the jury-selection process." Duren v. Missouri, 439 U.S. 357, 364 (1979). Commonwealth v. Samuel, 398 Mass. 93, 94 (1986). Commonwealth v. Pope, 392 Mass. 493, 500 (1984).
The defendant has not complied with the requirements of Mass. R. Crim. P. 13 (a) (1) and (2), 378 Mass. 871 (1979), and Mass. R. Crim. P. 20 (a), 378 Mass. 889 (1979), to raise this issue. Hence, the issue is not properly before us. Commonwealth v. Samuel, supra at 94-95. Commonwealth v. DeArmas, 397 Mass. 167, 169 (1986). Commonwealth v. Pope, supra at 498, and cases cited. We pause to note that the record contains no evidence to support the defendant's claims under the Federal or State Constitutions. See Duren v. Missouri, supra at 357; Commonwealth v. Williams, 378 Mass. 217, 221-222 (1979); Commonwealth v. Peters, 372 Mass. 319, 322-323 (1977).
2. Photographs. The defendant next contends that it was an abuse of discretion and therefore error for the judge to admit in evidence certain photographs of the defendant's automobile and of the victim. The defendant contends that the photographs of the defendant's motor vehicle were prejudicial because the photographs were duplicative and because the jurors were afforded an opportunity to view the automobile. The defendant contends that the photographs of the victim were prejudicial and added nothing material to the case.[9] We reject the defendant's contention that it was error to admit the photographs.
It is well settled in a case such as the present one, in which the defendant is accused of committing murder with extreme atrocity or cruelty and with premeditation and deliberation, that photographs indicating the force applied and portraying *407 the injuries inflicted may properly be admitted on the issue of whether the murder was committed with extreme atrocity or cruelty, as well as on the issue of premeditation and deliberation. Commonwealth v. Bys, 370 Mass. 350, 358 (1976), and cases cited (extreme atrocity or cruelty). Commonwealth v. Sielicki, 391 Mass. 377, 382 (1984) (premeditation and extreme atrocity). It is also well settled that, if the photographs possess evidential value on a material matter, they "are not rendered inadmissible solely because they are gruesome or may have an inflammatory effect on the jury." Commonwealth v. Bys, supra. Commonwealth v. Rogers, 351 Mass. 522, 531 (1967).
Whether the photographs were "so inflammatory in nature as to outweigh [their] probative value and preclude [their] admission is a question to be determined by the trial judge in the exercise of his sound discretion." Commonwealth v. D'Agostino, 344 Mass. 276, 279 (1962). "It is not a valid objection to admissibility that the medical examiner had already testified in detail as to the wound and other conditions shown by the photographs." Commonwealth v. Bys, supra at 360, quoting Commonwealth v. Jones, 319 Mass. 228, 229 (1946). We reject the defendant's contention that it was error to admit the photographs of the victim. The Commonwealth had the right to prove its case. There was no abuse of discretion.
Further, we reject the defendant's contention that the duplicative nature of the photographs of the defendant's automobile rendered them inadmissible. See Commonwealth v. Bys, supra at 359 (the fact that evidence is cumulative does not render it inadmissible). The defendant's automobile was the initial scene of the crime. The photographs depicting the condition and contents of the automobile were relevant to the jury's understanding of what occurred. There was no error.
3. Sufficiency of evidence. The Commonwealth presented evidence which, if believed, proved that the defendant slashed the victim's throat, inflicted numerous facial wounds with a razor, ran over her with his automobile, and then doused her with transmission fluid and set her on fire.
*408 The Commonwealth's evidence speaks for itself. There was sufficient evidence, read in the light most favorable to the Commonwealth, to warrant a finding of murder in the first degree on the grounds of deliberate premeditation and extreme atrocity or cruelty.
4. G.L.c. 278, § 33E. We have reviewed the entire record pursuant to our duty under G.L.c. 278, § 33E, and conclude that this case presents no occasion for the exercise of our authority under that statute. We affirm the conviction.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  About one hundred feet down Litchfield Drive from Lowell Street, and about ten feet off the roadway, was the body of a woman. She lay on her back, parallel to Litchfield Drive. Portions of her body had been burned. There was a severe laceration to her neck and to the right side of her face.
[2]  Before trial, the defendant filed a motion to suppress his statements. This motion was withdrawn after an agreement was reached among counsel, with the defendant's consent, that an edited version would be admitted without objection. The voluntariness of the statement was not made a live issue at trial.
[3]  These two men were eventually identified as John Dever and Michael Kerivan. Both men testified at trial.
[4]  In traveling to the Lowell Street and Litchfield Drive area of Carlisle from various directions, none of the officers saw any pedestrians or hitchhikers.
[5]  The defendant said he had a thirty-six inch waist. The defendant's pants were size "thirty-six xx."
[6]  Notwithstanding the defendant's consent, the troopers obtained a search warrant for the automobile before searching it.
[7]  The blood spatters on the road, the expert opined, were inconsistent with having been made by someone carrying a bleeding body.
[8]  General Laws c. 234A, § 3 (1988 ed.), provides: "Juror service in the participating counties shall be a duty which every person who qualifies under this chapter shall perform when selected. All persons selected for juror service on grand and trial juries shall be selected at random from the population of the judicial district in which they reside. All persons shall have equal opportunity to be considered for juror service. All persons shall serve as jurors when selected and summoned for that purpose except as hereinafter provided. No person shall be exempted or excluded from serving as a grand or trial juror because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, economic status, or occupation. Physically handicapped persons shall serve except where the court finds such service is not feasible. The court shall strictly enforce the provisions of this section."
[9]  The defendant also objects to the photographs of the victim on the basis that a white chemical powder (which Officer Gearin had apparently used to extinguish the fire) appeared on portions of the body.

=== CASE 9736965 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:11.030588+00 ===

The opinion of the Court was delivered by
GARIBALDI, J.
At issue is whether a police officer’s pat-down of defendant during a legitimate investigatory stop was constitutional under the Fourth Amendment of the Federal Constitution and Article I, paragraph 7 of the New Jersey Constitution. Defendant, Ronald Valentine, indicted for possession of a knife by a person previously convicted of a crime, contrary to N.J.S.A. 2C:39-7, moved to suppress the knife on the ground that it was the subject of an illegal search and seizure. The trial court denied defendant’s motion to suppress, holding that both the investigatory stop and the frisk of defendant were constitutional, whereupon defendant entered a guilty plea. The Appellate Division unanimously agreed that the investigatory stop was constitutional, but a majority of that court concluded that the search did not survive constitutional scrutiny, wherefore it reversed the conviction. 269 N.J.Super. 508, 636 A.2d 69 (1993). The dissenting judge would have upheld the pat-down as constitutional. The State appealed as of right, Rule 2:2-1(a), and we now reverse.
I
On June 22, 1990, at approximately 12:10 a.m., Officer Nuccio was on routine patrol in a marked police car. As he patrolled the city of Red Bank alone, he observed a woman, Debra Collier, standing in the middle of Willow Street onto which he had just turned. As Officer Nuccio pulled up closer to the woman, he observed defendant duck behind a tree, which was located on the side of Willow Street adjacent to the Jersey Central Power and Light storage yard and across from a residential area.
Officer Nuccio testified that he was personally familiar with the area as a high-crime area. In fact, he testified that he had made well over a hundred arrests in the area for offenses ranging from *540burglaries, robberies, and purse snatchings to possession and distribution of controlled dangerous substances.
On observing defendant duck behind the tree, Officer Nuccio alighted from his car and approached defendant. Although the area was not well lit, Officer Nuccio spotted defendant walking out from behind the tree. Defendant was walking towards Officer Nuccio with his hands in his pockets. As defendant moved closer to him, Officer Nuccio recognized him from previous encounters. Officer Nuccio testified that he was aware that defendant had a lengthy arrest sheet, “that he had been involved in weapons offenses, armed robberies, prior C.D.S. complaints and stuff like that.”
Officer Nuccio asked defendant “what he was doing.” Defendant responded that he was “about to urinate, until he saw the police vehicle.” Debra Collier testified that Officer Nuccio questioned defendant about why he needed to urinate behind a tree, inasmuch as he lived “right around the corner.” According to Collier, defendant responded that “when nature call [sic] that happens, sometime just like that.”
Officer Nuccio testified that he was “uncomfortable” with defendant’s responses to his questions and defendant’s overall demean- or. According to Officer Nuccio, defendant would not make eye contact with him, continually looked around, and was evasive in his answers to the questions put to him. As a result, Officer Nuccio commanded defendant to remove his hands from his pockets and move over toward the police car. Defendant complied, but, according to Officer Nuccio, he continued acting nervously. At that point, Officer Nuccio radioed for backup because he “didn’t feel comfortable [by himself] the way things were going together.”
Officer Nuccio then conducted a pat-down of defendant. On conducting the pat-down, Officer Nuccio felt a hard object in defendant’s right jacket pocket. The officer removed the object— a locked blade knife in the open position — and put it in his pocket. Backup then arrived, and the police placed defendant under arrest.
*541In denying defendant’s motion to suppress the knife seized during the pat-down, the trial court concluded that sufficient evidence justified the pat-down:
[H]e’s got a guy with his hands in his pocket. Coming out from behind the bushes. In a very high crime area. Whose [sic] been arrested before and [sic] armed robbery, weapons offenses, burglaries, robberies in that area and its twelve o’clock at night. And he won’t make any eye contact and he’s looking around.
The Appellate Division disagreed. Over the dissent of Judge Keefe, the Appellate Division concluded that the evidence was insufficient to support the limited frisk for weapons, even though the evidence justified the investigatory stop. Noting that defendant had complied with Officer Nuccio’s request to remove his hands from his pockets and to move toward the police car, that no evidence suggested that defendant had behaved in a hostile and threatening manner, and that Officer Nuccio had not identified the criminal activity he suspected of defendant, the Appellate Division concluded that Officer Nuccio could not reasonably have believed that defendant might be armed and dangerous. The court also was reluctant to encourage police officers to rely on their knowledge of a person’s prior criminal record as a reason to support a frisk. Accordingly, the Appellate Division found the frisk unconstitutional. The dissenting judge, however, noting the officer’s isolation, the late hour, the high-crime area, defendant’s furtive movements combined with his suspicious behavior, and his prior convictions for weapons offenses and armed robberies, found Officer Nuccio’s pat-down reasonable.
II
In the landmark case of Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968), the Supreme Court established the standards governing what has come to be known as “stop and frisk.” In Terry, a police officer observed three men repeatedly looking into a store. The officer concluded that the three were about to commit a robbery. He approached the men, identified himself as a police officer, and asked their names. After receiving a mumbled reply, the officer conducted a pat-down of the men, finding *542two weapons. In analyzing the constitutionality of the seizure, the Court examined whether (1) the officer had been justified in making the initial stop; (2) the officer had been justified in frisking defendants; and (3) the officer’s frisk had been sufficiently limited in its scope. Id. at 20, 88 S.Ct. at 1879, 20 L.Ed.2d at 905.
As we stated in State v. Thomas, 110 N.J. 673, 678, 542 A.2d 912, 915 (1988), “The first component of the Terry rule concerns the level of reasonable suspicion that must exist before an ‘investigatory stop’ legitimately may be undertaken.” The essence of that standard is “‘that the totality of the circumstances — the whole picture — must be taken into account. Based upon that whole picture the detaining officers must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped of criminal activity.’” Ibid, (quoting United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417, 101 S.Ct. 690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621, 629 (1981)); accord State v. Davis, 104 N.J. 490, 504, 517 A.2d 859, 867 (1986) (adopting totality-of-circumstances standard announced in Cortez).
The Appellate Division unanimously concluded that under the totality of the circumstances, Officer Nuccio’s investigatory stop of defendant was constitutional under the first component of Terry. The issue here focuses on the second component of Terry, namely, the standard by which we must judge an officer’s decision to frisk a suspect incident to a lawful investigatory stop. Whether a police officer’s protective search for weapons is justified is a separate question from whether the stop was permissible in the first place. Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. at 678-79, 542 A.2d at 915.
The Terry Court identified the concerns that it considered in establishing a workable standard to govern the constitutionality of a frisk incident to a lawful stop:
We are now concerned with more than the governmental interest in investigating crime; in addition, there is the more immediate interest of the police officer in taking steps to assure himself that the person with whom he is dealing is not armed with a weapon that could unexpectedly and fatally be used against him. Certainly it would be unreasonable to require that police officers take unnecessary risks in the performance of their duties. American criminals have a long tradition *543of armed violence, and every year in this country many law enforcement officers are killed in the line of duty, and thousands more are wounded. Virtually all of these deaths and a substantial portion of injuries are inflicted with guns and knives.
[392 U.S. at 23-24, 88 S.Ct. at 1881, 20 L.Ed.2d at 907 (footnote omitted).]
Based on those concerns, the Terry Court established the now well-known and often-quoted standard governing the frisk of a suspect incident to a lawful investigatory stop.
The officer need not be absolutely certain that the individual is armed; the issue is whether a reasonably prudent man in the circumstances would be warranted in the belief that his safety or that of others was in danger. And in determining whether the officer acted reasonably in such circumstances, due weight must be given, not to his inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or “hunch,” but to the specific reasonable inferences which he is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience.
[Id. at 27, 88 S.Ct at 1883, 20 L.Ed.2d at 909 (footnote and citation omitted).]
Although we recognize that Article I, paragraph 7 of the New Jersey Constitution may give greater protection against unreasonable searches and seizures than does the Fourth Amendment, see, e.g., State v. Bruzzese, 94 N.J. 210, 216, 463 A.2d 320, 323 (1983), cert, denied, 465 U.S. 1030, 104 S.Ct. 1295, 79 L.Ed.2d 695 (1984), we do not interpret the New Jersey Constitution to demand a higher standard than the Fourth Amendment in order to justify a frisk incident to a lawful investigatory stop. See State v. Lund, 119 N.J. 35, 573 A.2d 1376 (1990); Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. 673, 542 A.2d 912; Davis, supra, 104 N.J. 490, 517 A.2d 859; State ex reí H.B., 75 N.J. 243, 381 A.2d 759 (1977) (all applying Terry standard); see also State v. Dilley, 49 N.J. 460, 231 A.2d 353 (1967) (applying standard later adopted in Terry).
Terry directs that courts measure the reasonableness of a pat-down incident to a lawful investigatory stop with an objective standard (“a reasonably prudent man”). Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. at 679, 542 A.2d at 915. Nonetheless, courts judge the reasonableness of the pat-down within the context of the circumstances confronting the police officer. Thus, the Terry standard is an objective one, but
[t]he process does not deal with hard certainties, but with probabilities. Long before the law of probabilities was articulated as such, practical people formulated certain common-sense conclusions about human behavior; jurors as factfinders are *544permitted to do the same — and so are law enforcement officers. Finally, the evidence thus collected must be seen and weighed not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but as understood by those versed in the field of law enforcement.
[Cortez, supra, 449 U.S. at 418, 101 S.Ct at 695, 66 L.Ed.2d at 629.]
Terry, however, does not permit police officers to conduct pat-downs whenever the circumstances satisfy only the first component of Terry — namely, whenever some objective manifestation exists that the suspect was or is involved in criminal activity. To the contrary, Terry created
an exception to the requirement of probable cause, an exception whose “narrow scope” this Court “has been careful to maintain.” Under that doctrine a law enforcement officer, for his own protection and safety, may conduct a patdown [sic] to find weapons that he reasonably believes or suspects are then in the possession of the person he has accosted. Nothing in Terry can be understood to allow a generalized “cursory search for weapons” or, indeed, any search whatever for anything but weapons.
[Ybarra v. Illinois, 444 U.S. 85, 93-94, 100 S.Ct. 338, 343, 62 L.Ed.2d 238, 247 (1979) (footnote and citation omitted).]
Although a generalized cursory search for weapons is impermissible, “[v]arious circumstances may give rise to an objectively reasonable suspicion that a suspect is armed and dangerous,” Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. at 679, 542 A.2d at 915, justifying a search for weapons. In certain circumstances, “the right to frisk must be immediate and automatic if the reason for the stop is ... an articulable suspicion of a crime of violence.” Terry, supra, 392 U.S. at 33, 88 S.Ct. at 1886, 20 L.Ed.2d at 913 (Harlan, J., concurring). See, e.g., People v. Shackelford, 37 Cob.App. 317, 546 P.2d 964, 967 (1976) (upholding protective search where defendant was suspected of rape and robbery); State v. Kea, 61 Haw. 566, 606 P.2d 1329, 1332 (1980) (upholding protective search where defendant was suspected of being about to commit assault with deadly weapon); State v. Gilchrist, 299 N.W.2d 913, 917-18 (Minn.1980) (upholding protective search where defendant was suspected of homicide); Mays v. State, 726 S.W.2d 937, 944 (Tex.Cr.App.1986) (upholding protective search where defendants were suspected of burglary), cert, denied, 484 U.S. 1079, 108 S.Ct. 1059, 98 L.Ed.2d 1020 (1988).
*545Even in situations in which an officer does not believe a suspect is engaged or about to become engaged in violent criminal activity, the right to frisk for weapons during a permissible investigatory stop is frequently automatic where a police officer has a specific and objectively-credible reason to believe that the suspect is armed. See, e.g., Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146-47, 92 S.Ct. 1921,1923, 32 L.Ed.2d 612, 617-18 (1972) (upholding protective search based on informant’s tip that suspect was carrying “a gun at his waist”); State v. Collins, 479 A.2d 344, 346 (Me.1984) (upholding protective search based on officer’s knowledge that defendant may have been armed on prior occasion); State ex reí H.B., supra, 75 N.J. at 250-51, 381 A.2d 759, 762-63 (upholding protective search based on informant’s tip that suspect was carrying a gun); cf. Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. at 684, 542 A.2d at 918 (implying that justification for frisk would have been stronger had informant indicated that defendant had gun).
Oftentimes, however, a law-enforcement officer is confronted with far less clear circumstances. Even in those more murky and difficult situations, however, law-enforcement officers must make instantaneous decisions about whether a frisk for weapons is justifiable. The task is an unenviable one often fraught with life- and-death consequences.
We are mindful of Judge Friendly’s warning that “courts should not set the test of sufficient suspicion that the individual is ‘armed and presently dangerous’ too high when protection of the investigating officer is at stake.” United States v. Riggs, 474 F.2d 699, 705 (2d Cir.), cert, denied, 414 U.S. 820, 94 S.Ct. 115, 38 L.Ed.2d 53 (1973). Over fifteen years ago, Chief Justice Hughes realized the importance of a realistic approach to reviewing police behavior in the context of the ever-increasing violence in society. State ex rel. H.B., supra, 75 N.J. at 245, 381 A.2d at 759-60.
As the front line against violence, law-enforcement officers are particularly vulnerable to violence often becoming its victims. Since 1984, nine New Jersey police officers have been killed in the line of duty. In 1992, 3,988 police officers were assaulted in the *546line of duty. Uniform Crime. Reports for the State of New Jersey — 1992, at 180-81. Violence against law-enforcement officials is not unique to New Jersey. From 1982-1991, 743 federal law-enforcement officers were killed in the line of duty in the United States. See Uniform Crime Reports: Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted — 1991.
We must evaluate the reasonableness of a Terry frisk in that context. Just as the decision concerning whether the initial investigatory stop is justified, the decision concerning whether a frisk for weapons is justified depends on all the facts and circumstances of the case. As we said in Davis, supra, 104 N.J. at 504, 517 A.2d at 867,
to determine the lawfulness of a given seizure under New Jersey law, it is incumbent upon a reviewing court to evaluate the totality of circumstances surrounding the police-citizen encounter, balancing the State’s interest in effective law enforcement against the individual’s right to be protected from unwarranted and/or overbearing police intrusions.
No mathematical formula exists for deciding whether the totality of the circumstances provide an officer with a reasonable belief that a suspect was armed and dangerous. Id. at 505, 517 A.2d at 867. “Such a determination can be made only through a sensitive appraisal of the circumstances in each case.” Ibid. Although the cases are fact-sensitive, they, nevertheless, provide us with guideposts in our consideration of whether Officer Nuccio’s pat-down of defendant was reasonable.
Some cases suggest that a suspect’s offer of a weak alibi to explain his or her actions may help give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the suspect is armed. See People v. Allen, 50 Cal.App.3d 896, 123 Cal.Rptr. 80, 81 (1975) (discussing defendant’s claim that he was on his way back to hotel when he was in fact walking away from hotel); Davis, supra, 104 N.J. at 496 n. 4, 517 A.2d at 862 (finding reasonable pat-down of suspects on stolen bicycles who claimed their car, which was nowhere to be found, had run out of gas and that bicycles were conveniently in vehicle’s trunk).
*547Although a stop in a high-crime area does not by itself justify a Terry frisk, see Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325, 334-35 n. 2, 110 S.Ct. 1093, 1098 n. 2, 108 L.Ed.2d 276, 286 n. 2 (1990), the location of the investigatory stop can reasonably elevate a police officer’s suspicion that a suspect is armed. See United States v. Trullo, 809 F.2d 108 (1st Cir.) (upholding protective search and noting that officer’s suspicions that narcotics dealer might be armed were justifiably elevated when officer confronted suspect in high-crime area known for drug dealing, and noticed bulge in suspect’s pocket), cert, denied, 482 U.S. 916, 107 S.Ct. 3191, 96 L.Ed.2d 679 (1987).
Like the high-crime-area factor, the lateness of the hour at which an investigatory stop occurs cannot be the sole basis justifying a frisk for weapons. However, the lateness of the hour, like the location at which such a stop occurs, justifiably elevates a police officer’s reasonable belief that a suspect is armed and dangerous. See Lund, supra, 119 N.J. at 48, 573 A.2d at 1383. That observation is especially true when the defendant’s activity is entirely inconsistent with time of day. See Collins, supra, 479 A.2d at 345 (noting that time of 1:15 a.m. raised reasonable suspicions regarding defendant’s carrying of office supplies in business district).
Moreover, a police officer’s knowledge of a suspect’s criminal history, especially where that history involves weapons offenses, is a relevant factor in judging the reasonableness of a Terry frisk. Although an officer’s knowledge of a suspect’s criminal history alone is not sufficient to justify the initial stop of a suspect or to justify a frisk of a suspect once stopped, an officer’s knowledge of a suspect’s prior criminal activity in combination with other factors may lead to a reasonable suspicion that the suspect is armed and dangerous. Terry itself acknowledges that police officers must be permitted to use their knowledge and experience in deciding whether to frisk a suspect. “[I]n determining whether the officer acted reasonably ... due weight must be given, not to his inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or hunch, *548but to the specific reasonable inferences which he is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience.” Terry, supra, 392 U.S. at 27, 88 S.Ct. at 1883, 20 L.Ed.2d at 909. In many instances, a reasonable inference may be drawn that a suspect is armed and dangerous from the fact that he or she is known to have been armed and dangerous on previous occasions.
In Thomas, we suggested that an officer’s knowledge that a defendant had been armed at a prior arrest would bolster an objectively-reasonable suspicion that the defendant was armed and dangerous at that stop. 110 N.J. at 684, 542 A.2d at 918. Likewise, the Supreme Court has implied that knowledge of a person’s criminal history would be a factor supporting a legitimate frisk. Ybarra, supra, 444 U.S. at 93,100 S.Ct. at 343, 62 L.Ed.2d at 246.
However, a frisk never will be justified based solely on an officer’s knowledge of a suspect’s criminal history. The Appellate Division’s reliance on United States v. Hairston, 439 F.Supp. 515 (N.D.Ill.1977), and State v. Giltner, 56 Haw. 374, 537 P.2d 14 (1975) is therefore misplaced. In both of those cases, to justify his pat-down the police officer relied exclusively on his knowledge of the suspect’s previous encounters with law enforcement. In Hairston, the officer stopped the defendant for a noisy muffler at two o’clock in the afternoon on a busy street. The defendant alighted from the car to present his license to the officer. The officer recognized the defendant as a convicted felon. Furthermore, the officer testified that he noticed a bulge in the defendant’s pants. Without first patting down the defendant, the officer reached into the pants and removed a handgun.
The trial court found that the seizure was unconstitutional. First, the court rejected the notion, as we do today, that the sole fact that the defendant was a convicted felon justified the seizure. 439 F.Supp. at 518. Second, the court questioned whether the officer had actually seen a bulge in the defendant’s pants. Ibid. Third, even if the officer had seen the bulge, the scope of the search “went far beyond what was ‘minimally necessary.’ ” Id. at 519.
*549The officer in Hairston knew only that the defendant was a convicted felon. Nothing in the record suggested that the officer knew that the defendant had carried weapons previously. Here, Officer Nuccio had personal knowledge that Valentine had carried weapons on previous occasions. In addition, unlike Valentine, the defendant in Hairston took no action that could have reasonably led the officer to conclude that he was armed. Finally, the court in Hairston concluded that the scope of the search had been impermissible, where as the scope of the search conducted by Officer Nuccio was, without question, consistent with the dictates of Terry.
Likewise, in Giltner, supra, 537 P.2d 14, the sole reason for the frisk was the officer’s knowledge that Giltner had been armed on a previous occasion. An elderly woman informed police officers of a disturbance at an unspecified part of an apartment building. The officers investigated and observed three men on the second-floor landing in the building. Without any evidence that the three men on the balcony were the same rowdy group to whom the elderly woman had referred, one of the officer’s frisked Giltner because he recognized him as a person whom he had known to be armed on a previous occasion.
The Supreme Court of Hawaii held that the stop and frisk were impermissible, finding that
[t]here was nothing unusual or suspicious about the conduct of the defendant and his companions in this case. Nor was there anything in the surrounding circumstances which could have justified the seizure of the defendant. The officer could not point to specific and articulable facts from which he could have reasonably inferred that the defendant had committed, or was about to commit an offense. It was not enough that on a previous occasion, personally known to the officer, the defendant had been offensively armed.
[Id. at 17.]
Unlike the situation in Giltner, the circumstances of this ease unquestionably warranted the stop of defendant. Moreover, unlike the situations in Hairston and Giltner, the justification for defendant’s frisk by Officer Nuccio was not the sole fact that *550defendant had been armed on a prior occasion. That was just one of the factors that Officer Nuccio considered.
Given the volatile times in which we live, we certainly cannot require police officers to ignore the fact that a suspect whom they are confronting has a history of criminal behavior, particularly weapons offenses. We acknowledge that permitting the use of a suspect’s prior criminal history alone to justify a Terry frisk may lead to unwarranted intrusions on a suspect’s constitutional protections in certain circumstances. We do not hold, however, that a suspect’s criminal history alone may justify a Terry frisk. We hold merely that a Terry frisk is not automatically invalid because the frisking officer’s reasonable suspicion is grounded, in part, by the suspect’s prior criminal history. We see no reason to exclude evidence seized pursuant to such a frisk as a prophylactic device to curb potential police overreaching. As the Terry Court itself was aware, “[t]he exclusionary rule has its limitations ... as a tool of judicial control. It cannot properly be invoked to exclude the products of legitimate police investigative techniques on the ground that much conduct which is closely similar involves unwarranted intrusions upon constitutional protections.” Id. at 13, 88 S.Ct. at 1875, 20 L.Ed.2d at 901.
Moreover, considering a suspect’s prior criminal activity is nothing extraordinary. Courts assessing the reasonableness of an officer’s assessment of probable cause to arrest may consider evidence of prior crime on the part of the suspect. See Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 174-75, 69 S.Ct. 1302, 1310, 93 L.Ed. 1879, 1890 (1949). Professor LaFave explains that the reason for limiting the use of prior crime evidence at trials is not because the evidence is not relevant but because it has the unfair effect of overcoming the presumption of innocence. Wayne La-Fave, Search and Seizure: A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 3.2(d), at 579-83 (2d ed. 1987); see also Commonwealth v. Gullett, 459 Pa. 431, 329 A.2d 513, 517-18 (1974). That unfairness is not equally present when we are assessing an officer’s articulable concerns for personal safety. In addition, courts commonly *551use a defendant’s prior criminal history in sentencing. To allow the judiciary to take prior criminal history into account in the review of probable cause determinations and in sentencing, while denying law-enforcement officers the power to take it into account when confronting a suspect on the street would make little sense. In sentencing defendants, trial courts view criminal history in order to determine what sentence will best protect the public from the defendant. The much more immediate need to protect oneself demands that we permit law-enforcement officers to take criminal history into account.
III
Whether a frisk is reasonable depends on the facts in each case. Based on our review of the totality of circumstances, we find that Officer Nuccio reasonably concluded that defendant might be armed and dangerous, justifying the pat-down. Officer Nuccio’s suspicion that defendant was engaged or about to become engaged in criminal activity was reasonable. Approaching a suspect believed to be engaged in criminal activity, Officer Nuccio was initially alarmed that defendant had his hands in his pockets. He asked defendant to remove his hands from his pockets and to explain why he had ducked behind a tree after seeing the police vehicle. Defendant gave a weak excuse, suggesting to Officer Nuccio that he was lying. Moreover, defendant refused to make eye contact with Officer Nuccio, and he repeatedly looked around the area. In addition, Officer Nuccio testified that he recognized defendant as someone who had a long history of criminal activity, including armed robberies and weapons offenses. All the foregoing occurred after midnight on a dark street known to Officer Nuccio as a high-crime area. For Officer Nuccio to conclude that the suspect might be armed and that his safety was in danger was eminently reasonable.
Based on that reasonable suspicion, Officer Nuccio conducted a pat-down of defendant’s outer clothing. The pat-down was well within the scope permitted under Terry. 392 U.S. at 29, 88 S.Ct. *552at 1884, 20 L.Ed.2d at 911. It was doubtless “confined in scope to an intrusion reasonably designed to discover [weapons] for the assault of the police officer.” Ibid.
The decision to frisk and the scope of the frisk of defendant were unlike the frisk at issue in Thomas, supra, 110 N.J. 673, 542 A.2d 912. There, the police received an anonymous tip that a man named Ike was in possession of illegal drugs in a bar. Id. at 675, 542 A.2d at 913. When the officers entered the bar, they spotted the defendant, who fit the informant’s description. One of the officers recognized the defendant from a prior arrest for drug possession. The officer immediately confronted the defendant, patting him down in order to discover “possible weapons or anything that [might have been] in his possession at the time.” Id. at 676, 542 A.2d at 913.
Unlike the circumstances in this case, the circumstances in Thomas could not have reasonably caused the officers to fear for their safety. The frisk of Thomas occurred in a well-lit bar. Three officers were on the scene. The informant had given no indication that Thomas was armed, nor did any of the officers have knowledge of the fact that the defendant had been armed on previous occasions. Finally, the frisk of Thomas exceeded the permissible scope of a Terry frisk in that it was designed to uncover more than weapons. See also Ybarra, supra, 444 U.S. at 93-94, 100 S.Ct. at 343, 62 L.Ed.2d at 247; Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 88 S.Ct. 1889, 20 L.Ed.2d 917 (1968) (both cases finding scope of frisk exceeded Terry's mandate).
Nor are the circumstances surrounding the frisk of defendant analogous to those at issue in Lund, supra, 119 N.J. 35, 573 A.2d 1376. There, a state trooper stopped a car for minor motor-vehicle violations. The trooper signalled the driver to pull the car over, and he pulled up behind the car. The trooper then observed the driver reach behind him to his left. Id. at 41, 573 A.2d at 1380. He approached the car from the passenger side, observing a windbreaker stuffed in the backseat in the vicinity of the movement that he had previously observed. The trooper also *553observed a travel bag with a brown bag on top of it in the backseat. The trooper then asked for the driver’s license and the car registration. The driver appeared nervous, according to the trooper. Ibid. Based on those facts, the trooper ordered the driver and passenger out of the car and conducted a Terry frisk of both of them, which revealed no weapons. Id. at 42, 573 A.2d at 1380. The trooper then proceeded to search the car, while his partner guarded the driver and passenger outside the car. The trooper removed the jacket, discovering a white towel stuck in the seat. On removing the towel, he discovered a large manila envelope containing cocaine. Ibid.
We concluded that the nervousness and the furtive movements of the driver did not establish a specific particularized basis for an objectively reasonable belief that defendants were armed and dangerous. Id. at 48, 573 A.2d at 1383. Unlike Valentine, the car occupants in Lund were not suspected of any criminal behavior. The sole justification for the stop was a motor-vehicle violation. Moreover, the officer in Lund had no knowledge that those defendants had carried weapons on previous occasions.
IV
As previously stated, no mathematical formula exists for determining what set of facts gives rise to a reasonable belief that a suspect is a potential threat to an officer and thus justifies a protective search for weapons. Instead, we must balance the competing interests. Balancing the right to be protected from unwarranted and overbearing police intrusions against the State’s need for effective law enforcement and police safety, we hold that the frisk of defendant was reasonable under the totality of the circumstances. Officer Nuccio’s personal knowledge of defendant’s prior criminal history of armed robberies, weapons and drug offenses, the fact that defendant initially had his hands in his pockets, defendant’s decision to duck behind a tree after seeing a police car, defendant’s nervousness, defendant’s failure to make eye contact with Officer Nuccio, the high-crime nature of the area, *554and the time of the night all contributed to Officer Nuccio’s reasonable belief that defendant was armed and dangerous. The frisk of defendant was, therefore, reasonable.
Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Appellate Division and reinstate the conviction.

=== CASE 9736967 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:17.541497+00 ===

NARICK, Senior Judge.
Before this court are cross-appeals by Charles R. Wolfe (Employee) and Edgewater Steel Company/Aetna Life & Casualty Company (Employer) from the order of the Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (WCAB) affirming in part and reversing in part the order of the referee, and directing Employee to appear at a medical examination scheduled by Employer without the presence of legal counsel.
On August 24, 1990, Employer filed a petition with the WCAB requesting that Employee be ordered to submit to a *364physical examination, and/or that his benefits be suspended for his failure to submit to a physical examination which had been scheduled on August 8, 1990 pursuant to Section 314 of the Pennsylvania Workmen’s Compensation Act (Act).1 The WCAB remanded the petition to a referee for a hearing. A hearing was held on February 4, 1991, where the referee found the following facts.
Employee suffered an injury to his back on July 3, 1985 while turning over a ten foot T-bar at work. On December 15, 1986, Employer filed its first petition for termination of benefits based on the opinion of Ronald L. Zimmerman, M.D., who stated that Employee’s back problems were caused by diabetic polyneuropathy and not the work-related injury. The referee denied this first petition on April 26, 1988. A second petition for termination was filed on December 19, 1988, based on the medical examination and opinion of G. Malcolm Cottingham, M.D., that Employee’s disability was caused by the same diabetic complications and not the 1985 injury. The second petition was also denied by the same referee on October 3, 1989.
*365Less than a month later, Employer notified Employee that a third medical examination was scheduled with a third physician, Herbert G. Kunkel, Jr., M.D., for December 11, 1989. For a variety of reasons, the examination was re-scheduled three times, and finally on August 8,1990, Employee appeared for the medical examination. Because Employee believed that this third medical examination evidenced a pattern of harassment, he arrived at Dr. Kunkel’s office accompanied by his attorney, Mr. Richard G. Spagnoli, who stated that he intended to be present during the history portion of the examination. Employee’s counsel did not notify Employer prior to the date of the medical examination that he intended to attend the examination.
Dr. Kunkel advised Employee that office policy dictated that no one attend the examination with the patient, and Dr. Kunkel. called the attorney for Employer, Mr. Dale A. Cable, to clear up the situation. Mr. Spagnoli refused to speak with Mr. Cable on the telephone. With Mr. Cable’s advice, Dr. Kunkel agreed to allow Mr. Spagnoli to attend only the history portion of the examination if the session were tape recorded and if Mr. Spagnoli would agree not to speak, nor edit Employee’s responses, nor gesture to Employee during the examination. Mr. Spagnoli refused to agree to these conditions, and because of this stalemate, the medical examination did not take place.
After the hearing, the referee ruled by order and opinion that Employee’s counsel had a right to be present during the history portion of the examination, as did opposing counsel. The referee also concluded that since the Employee’s right to have counsel present during a physical examination had not been specifically addressed or defined by the courts, the referee would not suspend payment of benefits.
The WCAB affirmed the referee in part, and reversed in part. It concluded that the drawbacks in having counsel physically present at a medical examination outweighed the advantages, and it ordered Employee to appear at the medical examination scheduled by Employer without legal counsel. Although the WCAB held that a claimant does not have a *366right to have counsel present at a physical examination, it also held that there might be circumstances of such a compelling nature to warrant the presence of counsel. In that case, the WCAB would allow a claimant the opportunity to present facts demonstrating those circumstances. However, the WCAB ruled that here Employee had failed to show a compelling reason for allowing counsel to be present.
On appeal, Employee raises two issues for our review: 1) whether a person receiving workmen’s compensation benefits has an absolute right to have counsel present during a physical examination with one of the employer’s medical experts, and 2) whether the WCAB’s findings are supported by substantial competent evidence. In Employer’s cross-appeal, Employer claims that it is entitled to a suspension of payment of Employee’s benefits because Employee refused to submit to the medical examination without, reasonable cause or excuse. We will address each claim in the order presented above.
Employee first asserts that the WCAB erred as a matter of law in holding that he did not have an absolute right to his attorney’s presence at the medical examination, or at least the history portion of the medical examination. We disagree.
In the recent case, Maranc v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Bienenfeld), 156 Pa. Commonwealth Ct. 572, 628 A.2d 522 (1993), the claimant argued that he was entitled to his counsel’s presence at a medical examination because all such examinations by an employer’s physician were adversarial in nature. We disagreed and held that a claimant did not have an absolute right to have his lawyer present at a medical examination. We stated, “[t]he referee, not the doctor, is the fact-finder. The referee is not obliged to accept a doctor’s testimony even if he is the only expert medical witness to testify and his testimony is uncontroverted.” Id. at 575-76, 628 A.2d at 524-25 (citation omitted).
The physician’s examination is a source of information regarding the employee’s disability for the referee to consider when the referee makes findings of fact. It is when these *367facts are presented, and in preparation for the presentation of these facts at deposition and during the hearing, that the adversarial procedure begins. If we were to push the adversarial procedure back to the doctor’s office by involving attorneys for both parties in the medical examinations, we would have attorneys objecting and interrupting, and the equivalent of a hearing or deposition taking place during a physical examination. This is not the atmosphere in which a fair and reasonable medical examination can take place.
As we held in Marañe, Employee’s counsel can adequately protect his client’s interests by cross-examining Dr. Kunkel at a hearing or deposition. Employee is also entitled to produce his own physician to testify and rebut Employer’s physician. Id. Moreover, if Employee’s counsel is concerned about the accuracy of the history part of the examination, a written history can be provided to Employee for use during the examination.
Section 314 of the Act provides that an employee is entitled to have a physician or physicians of his own selection participate in any examination requested by the employer or ordered by the WCAB. In attempting, as we must, to ascertain the intention of the General Assembly in promulgating this section of the Act, we are guided by the principle of statutory construction and logical analysis expressed in the maxim, “expressio unius est exclusio alteráis,” which basically means that where some things are specifically designated in a statute, things omitted should be understood as excluded. 1 Pa.C.S. § 1921; City Council Of the City of Hazelton v. City of Hazelton, 134 Pa. Commonwealth Ct. 174, 578 A.2d 580 (1990), aff'd by an equally divided court, Hazelton v. City Council of Hazelton, 528 Pa. 604, 600 A.2d 191 (1991); Samilo v. Commonwealth Insurance Department, 98 Pa. Commonwealth Court 232, 510 A.2d 412 (1986). Thus, for example, in Young v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (St. Agnes Hospital and Pacific Employers Insurance Co.), 39 Pa. Commonwealth Ct. 265, 395 A.2d 317 (1979), we interpreted the statutory language of Section 422 of the Act2, which states *368that a physician’s certificate is admissible in workmen’s compensation claims involving twenty-five (25) weeks or less of disability, to mean that the General Assembly intended to exclude the use of such certificates in claims involving more than twenty-five (25) weeks of disability.
Similarly, here, because Section 314 of the Act expressly designates the employee’s physician or physicians as the individuals who may be present during the medical examination, and does not so designate lawyers, we must therefore conclude that the legislature intended to exclude all individuals except for an employee’s physician from the medical examination. Therefore, the WCAB did not err in finding that an employee does not have a right to have his lawyer present during the medical examination.
Employee next claims that the WCAB’s conclusions and its own findings of fact are not supported by substantial evidence of record.3 Employee argues that these findings contrast sharply with the factual findings made by the referee at the hearing, and resulted in opposing conclusions concerning the necessity of counsel at the medical examination. In particular, Employee takes issue with Findings of Fact Nos. 3 and 4 which state that Employee refused to attend the medical examination without specific clarification as to the right of his counsel to attend with him, and that Employee presented no evidence why the particular facts of this case would require the presence of counsel at a medical examination. (WCAB Opinion at 3.)
*369Employee also takes issue with the WCAB’s conclusion that Employee failed to demonstrate that there were compelling circumstances requiring the presence of counsel. Pursuant to Section 314 of the Act, the compensation authorities determine whether an employee has reasonable cause for refusing to submit to a medical examination. Blair v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Fullington Bus Co.), 80 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 459, 471 A.2d 1289 (1984). Refusal to undergo such an examination because of the absence of an employee’s counsel may be deemed reasonable under certain compelling circumstances; however, the WCAB ruled here, according to Finding No. 4, that Employee presented no evidence at all to support his claim that his counsel’s presence was necessary, and, therefore, Employee had no reasonable cause for refusing to submit to a medical examination.
It is settled law that where the WCAB takes no additional evidence, the ultimate fact-finder is the referee whose findings of fact, if supported by substantial evidence, must be accepted. Carrier Coal Enterprises v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Balla), 118 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 201, 544 A.2d 1111 (1988); Yantos v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Vulcan Mold & Iron Co., Division of Vulcan, Inc.), 128 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 231, 563 A.2d 232 (1989). Consequently, here, the WCAB erred in making findings of fact without taking additional evidence. If it were true, as the WCAB opinion states,4 that the referee failed to establish a factual record, the WCAB should have remanded the case to the referee for a hearing, or the WCAB itself should have taken additional testimony. Neither of these procedures was followed.
Moreover, despite the WCAB’s statements, the referee did establish a factual record at the hearing. The record shows that the parties stipulated to the operative facts involved and *370to the admission of exhibits documenting, among other matters, the previous medical examinations ordered by Employer and Dr. Kunkel’s letter describing what occurred at his office. Despite the WCAB’s assertions to the contrary, the referee’s findings of fact were based Qn this factual record.
The WCAB’s conclusion, that Employee presented no compelling evidence demonstrating the need for counsel’s presence in this particular medical examination, was not based on the factual record developed by the referee, but instead on its own findings of fact which were created without taking any additional testimony. However, the referee, basing her decision on the facts developed at the hearing, came to a different conclusion. She concluded that because of the extensive prior litigation challenging the work-related causation of Employee’s disability, the attorney’s presence was needed for the history portion of the examination. Given these conflicting conclusions, the WCAB’s error in creating its own findings of fact is clearly not harmless. We therefore remand this case to the. WCAB for consideration of the referee’s findings as developed at the hearing, in order to determine whether the facts of this particular case require the presence of Employee’s counsel during the medical examination.5
On cross-appeal, Employer argues that Employee’s benefits should be suspended because he unreasonably refused to submit to a WCAB ordered physical examination. Employer states that this refusal was based on Employee’s counsel’s insistence on being present at the medical examination, but because Employee had no right to have his counsel present, the refusal was unreasonable.
We have held that the referee, as the ultimate factfinder, has the discretion to determine the reasonableness of a claimant’s non-compliance with an order to submit to a medical examination. Marañe. Nothing less than a manifest abuse of discretion by the compensation authorities will justify the interference of this Court in the exercise of their judgment.*371Caggiano v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Kawecki Berylco Industries, Inc.), 42 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 524, 400 A.2d 1382 (1979).
Here, the referee concluded, and the WCAB affirmed6 that because the Employee’s right to his attorney’s presence at the medical examination was not clearly defined by the courts of this Commonwealth, Employee’s insistence on the presence of legal counsel was not unreasonable. Therefore, the referee would not order the suspension of Employee’s benefits. We hold that this conclusion, affirmed by the WCAB, does not constitute an abuse of discretion especially because the referee’s decision and the WCAB’s order were filed prior to our decision in Marañe in which this Court held that there is no absolute right to counsel during a medical examination.
Accordingly, we affirm the order of the WCAB regarding Employer’s cross-appeal, and vacate the order of the WCAB regarding Employee’s appeal. This case is remanded to the WCAB for consideration of the factual record and the factual findings developed by the Referee, in order to determine whether the circumstances of this particular case justify Employee’s counsel’s presence at the medical examination.
ORDER
AND NOW, this 12th day of January, 1994, the order of the Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board in the above-captioned matter is hereby affirmed in part and vacated in part and the case is remanded in accordance with the foregoing opinion.
Jurisdiction relinquished.
. Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended, 77 P.S. § 651. Section 314 provides in pertinent part:
At any time after an injury the employe, if so requested by his employer, must submit himself for examination, at some reasonable time and place ... The board may at any time after such first examination, upon petition of the employer, order the employe to submit himself to such further examinations as it shall deem reasonable and necessary, at such times and places and by such physicians as it may designate; ... The refused or neglect, without reasonable cause or excuse, of the employe to submit to such examination ordered by the board, either before or after an agreement or award, shall deprive him of the right to compensation, under this article, during the continuance of such refusal or neglect, and the period of such neglect or refusal shall be deducted from the period during which compensation would otherwise be payable.
The employe shall be entitled to have a physician or physicians of his own selection, to be paid by him, participate in any examination requested by his employer or ordered by the board.
Act 44 of 1993 has amended Section 314 to provide that such petitions are originally assigned by the department to a referee, rather than the WCAB. However, this does not affect the disposition of the present case. Act of July 2, 1993, P.L. -, No. 1993-44.
. 77 P.S. § 835.
. This Court's review of WCAB decisions in a workmen’s compensation case is limited to determining whether an error of law was committed, whether any necessary findings of fact are not supported by substantial evidénce, or whether constitutional rights have been violated. 2 Pa. C.S. § 704. Employee objects to the WCAB’s findings, especially the WCAB’s Findings of Fact Nos. 3 and 4, on the basis that they are not supported by substantial evidence in the record. This objection would be better understood as an objection to making any factual findings at all when no new testimony has been taken, and it is therefore an error of law. It is also true, however, that if the WCAB is not basing its factual findings on any facts of record then there will not be any substantial evidence supporting these findings.
. For reasons which are not clear, the WCAB notes in its opinion that the referee did not take testimony and therefore did not make a record for review by the WCAB. However, the record shows that the parties stipulated to the basic facts during the hearing, and therefore, a factual record was developed by the referee. (39a-46a.)
. The referee and/or the WCAB may, of course, impose whatever conditions or limitations they deem necessary to protect the integrity of the medical examination.
. The WCAB did not directly discuss the issue of whether Employee should suffer suspension of his benefits because of his refusal to undergo the medical examination without the presence of his counsel. In its order affirming in part and reversing in part, the WCAB reversed only as to the question of the presence of legal counsel at the examination, and, therefore, we must assume it affirmed the referee’s decision that suspension of benefits was not warranted.

=== CASE 9736969 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:17.918291+00 ===

Lynch J.
This is an action to recover for loss of consortium due to a personal injury allegedly sustained by the plaintiffs husband on October 22, 1980, in the course of his employment by the defendant. Because the alleged injury occurred in 1980, this claim is unaffected by G. L. c. 152, § 24, as appearing in St. 1985, c. 527, § 35, which effectively abolished loss of consortium actions for spouses and children of *479employees covered by workers’ compensation. The single question on appeal is whether the doctrine of issue preclusion, also known as collateral estoppel, bars the plaintiff from litigating the question whether her husband was injured on October 22, 1980.
The plaintiff’s husband had earlier instituted a workers’ compensation claim in which he claimed such an injury. A member of the Industrial Accident Board, subsequently affirmed by the reviewing board, found that the husband had not sustained the claimed injury. Relying on that determination, the defendant sought and obtained summary judgment in the instant litigation on the ground that the workers’ compensation decision collaterally estopped the plaintiff from re-litigating the injury question. The plaintiff appealed, and we transferred the case to this court on our own initiative. This court affirms the judgment.
“A fundamental precept of common-law adjudication, embodied in the related doctrines of collateral estoppel and res judicata, is that ‘a right, question or fact distinctly put in issue and directly determined by a court of competent jurisdiction . . . cannot be disputed in a subsequent suit between the same parties or their privies ....’” Fidler v. E.M. Parker Co., 394 Mass. 534, 539 (1985), quoting Montana v. United States, 440 U.S. 147, 153 (1979). This principle applies when the earlier determination has been made in a workers’ compensation proceeding before the Industrial Accident Board. Martin v. Ring, 401 Mass. 59, 63-64 (1987). Furthermore, mutuality of parties is not always required. Martin v. Ring, supra at 61. Home Owners Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass’n v. Northwestern Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 354 Mass. 448, 454 (1968).
In Fidler v. E.M. Parker Co., supra, we held that a spouse, not a plaintiff to the prior adjudication, was precluded from relitigating settled issues in the loss of consortium claim where the claim and the spouse’s prior personal injury claim were “sufficiently related,” and no “other circumstances existed which warrant [ed] relitigation of the issues.” Id. at 541-542, 548.
*480Here the defendant seeks to invoke issue preclusion to bar a plaintiff from relitigating an issue decided against the plaintiff’s spouse in a prior case. The principal difference between this case and Fidler is that here the plaintiff could not have been a party to her husband’s prior workers’ compensation claim, while in Fidler the spouse could have, but did not, join in his wife’s tort claim. This court has ruled that a spouse’s loss of consortium claim is an independent cause of action, Ferriter v. Daniel O’Connell’s Sons, 381 Mass. 507, 543 (1980) (Wilkins, J., dissenting). The Legislature, however, has since nullified the Ferriter decision by preventing recovery for loss of consortium by spouses or children of employees subject to the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act, G. L. c. 152, § 24, as amended through St. 1985, c. 527, § 35.
Although, under the teaching of Ferriter, the plaintiff’s loss of consortium remains a separate cause of action, the relationship to her spouse’s claim is symbiotic. Central to both claims is the causation of her husband’s back injury. Diaz v. Eli Lilly & Co., 364 Mass. 153, 167-168 (1973). The workers’ compensation claim has established that this injury did not occur to the husband in the course of his employment. The plaintiff does not dispute that this issue was fully litigated in the workers’ compensation case. We conclude that the spouse ought not to be able to recover for claims resulting from injuries to her husband that prior workers’ compensation proceedings have established are not compensable. Under Fidler, the wife’s claim is “sufficiently related” and no “other circumstances exist which warrant relitigation of the issues.” Id. at 541-542, 548. “Although it is not as clear that collateral estoppel should apply to preclude a party not a plaintiff in the prior action from litigating an issue, the policy of repose is especially significant when the spouse of a nonprevailing litigant seeks to litigate a claim related to the spouse’s alleged injuries. The trend in the law is against allowing suits for loss of consortium where the injured spouse would be collaterally estopped from litigating the same or similar issues. See Roy v. Jasper Corp., 666 F.2d 714, 716 *481(1st Cir. 1981) (holding that, under New Hampshire law, a spouse is collaterally estopped by prior judgment from litigating loss of consortium claim). ‘When a person with a family relationship to one suffering personal injury has a claim for loss to himself resulting from the injury, the determination of issues in an action by the injured person to recover for his injuries is preclusive against the family member, unless the judgment was based on a defense that is unavailable against the family member in the second action.’ Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 48 (2) (1982).” Fidler, supra at 547.
It is true that the plaintiff is precluded from joining her husband’s workers’ compensation claim. On the other hand, the defendant could not have avoided the prior claim because participation in the workers’ compensation program is now compulsory for most employers. Ferriter v. Daniel O’Connell’s Sons, supra at 520. Fairness requires that, when a spouse with a sufficiently related claim has fully litigated an issue, an employer should not be forced to relitigate the same issue. To provide otherwise would defeat the basic purpose of issue preclusion “to conserve judicial resources, to prevent the unnecessary costs associated with multiple litigation, and to ensure the finality of judgments.” Martin v. Ring, 401 Mass. 59, 61 (1987).
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2208104 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.573771+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 67 (1964)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
SANTIAGO T. MELENDEZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 4350.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Feb. 20, 1964.
Benjamin M. Davis and George Franklyn Duke for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Albert W. Harris, Jr., and Michael R. Marron, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
MOLINARI, J.
This is an appeal by defendant from a judgment of conviction for violation of Health and Safety Code section 11530, i.e., possession of marijuana. The sole *68 question presented is whether the evidence is sufficient to prove defendant guilty of possessing marijuana. The case was tried without a jury, and, aside from the testimony of a forensic chemist produced by the People, was, pursuant to stipulation, submitted to the court below upon the testimony presented at the preliminary hearing in the municipal court.
The evidentiary background is as follows: On September 8, 1962, Police Officer Charles Anderson, in company with another officer,  [fn. 1] responded to a call reporting an altercation in the hallway of the Hudson Hotel in San Francisco. Upon arrival, the officers observed defendant and a woman in a hallway of the hotel. The woman stated to the officers that she was afraid of defendant because he was "going to shoot her with some white powder, and put her to sleep." Anderson examined the woman's arms and observed "[n]umerous apparent needle punctures in them," near or about the crook of the arm. The woman denied using narcotics. During this conversation defendant and the woman were in the hallway outside defendant's hotel room,  [fn. 2] the door to which was slightly ajar. The woman requested Anderson to accompany her so that she could get her purse, and he thereupon followed her into the room. There was no one else in the room. Anderson observed, on a night stand and in full view, a syringe, a hypodermic needle, and several vials or ampules which were labeled "methedrine." At this point, defendant, who had remained in the hallway, was requested to come into the room. Confronted with the syringe and the ampules found on the night stand defendant admitted that they were his. He produced another container bearing his name and containing more ampules. When asked to verify his name, defendant produced a driver's license. He also produced from his wallet a prescription label bearing a different name. At that time he also showed the officers prescriptions for some of the methedrine ampules. The officers thereupon proceeded to make a search of the room. Anderson's partner found a brass pipe which he called to Anderson's attention. Anderson testified that he saw the pipe in his partner's hand; that it was found in his "immediate presence. ..." After stating that he "believed" that the pipe was in the drawer of the dresser, to which answer defendant's counsel interposed a motion to strike, Anderson testified as follows: *69 "My partner was investigating the dresser, and I know he opened the drawer, but whether he took the pipe from the top of the dresser, or out of the drawer he opened I couldn't say."  [fn. 3] This pipe was described as consisting of two pieces of brass connected by a piece of bamboo "in the shape of a right angle cigarette holder ...."
Other than hereinabove narrated, Anderson could recall no other conversation with defendant. He stated that he did not believe that there had been any conversation relative to the subject contraband, or the evidence in question. The pipe was delivered to the crime laboratory. John F. Williams, a forensic chemist, whose qualifications as an expert were stipulated to, testified that when he received the pipe it "had an odor of burnt material which was similar to burnt marijuana"; and that there was a small amount of black material in the brass and wooden portions of the pipe which was extracted and chemically tested; that what he saw was a black substance "like the heel of an ordinary pipe"; that it was a gummy material with some ash, similar to "anything else that is burned"; that had the material been scraped out and weighed "[i]t would have been a matter of a few milligrams or a very small fraction of a gram at most"; that for the purposes of the chemical tests some of the material was scraped from the brass portion which constituted the bowl, and some was soaked from the side of the bamboo or stem; that the black material was examined under a low power microscope and that no plant structure was noted; that there were no actual plant parts in the pipe; that the chemical tests disclosed the residue of "active ingredients from marijuana"; that the tests proved that marijuana had been in the pipe at some time or other and that now some of the "active ingredients remained"; and that these ingredients consisted of "certain compounds which are present in marijuana."  [fn. 4]*70
[1] The foregoing evidentiary narrative must be considered in the light of the well-established principle that in a prosecution for unlawful possession of narcotics the People must prove that the accused exercised dominion and control over the drug with knowledge of its presence and narcotic character. (People v. Redrick, 55 Cal. 2d 282, 285 [10 Cal. Rptr. 823, 359 P.2d 255]; People v. Gorg, 45 Cal. 2d 776, 780 [291 P.2d 469]; People v. Gory, 28 Cal. 2d 450, 454 [170 P.2d 433]; People v. Tabizon, 166 Cal. App. 2d 271, 273 [332 P.2d 697]; People v. Rodriguez, 151 Cal. App. 2d 598, 601 [312 P.2d 272].) [2] Accordingly, the crime of possession of narcotics requires a physical or constructive possession with actual knowledge of the presence of the narcotic substance and knowledge of the narcotic character of the article possessed. (People v. Winston, 46 Cal. 2d 151, 160-161 [293 P.2d 40]; People v. Gory, supra, at p. 456.)
[3] Although the parties to this appeal have argued to some extent the question whether defendant had exclusive access to the room in question, and whether, if such access was nonexclusive, there were other evidentiary factors present sufficient to support a finding of knowing possession on the part of defendant, the principal question on this appeal is whether the possession of the subject smoking pipe, from which a gummy black material extracted therefrom was determined by chemical tests to contain certain active ingredients found in marijuana, constitutes the knowing possession of the narcotic itself. Stated more succinctly, the question for determination is whether the People's evidence was sufficient *71 as a matter of law to convict defendant of "possession" of marijuana, because of the nature and state of the substance claimed by the prosecution to be a narcotic.
This very same question was presented to the reviewing court in People v. Aguilar, 223 Cal. App. 2d 119 [35 Cal. Rptr. 516], recently decided.  [fn. 5] The appellate court there held that where a narcotic is imperceptible to the human eye, and its presence, qualitatively and quantitatively, can be detected only with the aid of a forensic chemist and laboratory, the evidence is not sufficient to sustain a conviction of knowing possession of the narcotic. The rationale of Aguilar is that: "It is not scientific measurement and detection which is the ultimate test of the known possession of a narcotic, but rather the awareness of the defendant of the presence of the narcotic. Guilt or innocence on a charge of illegal possession may not be determined solely by the skill of the forensic chemist in isolating a trace of the prohibited narcotic in articles possessed by the defendant. (Pp. 122-123.) Accordingly, the essence of the holding in Aguilar is that "[t]he presence of the narcotic must be reflected in such form as reasonably imputes knowledge to the defendant." (P. 123; italics added.)"
In Aguilar, a motel room occupied by the defendant and his brother was searched by officers who found packages containing hypodermic needles, spoons and eye droppers. A forensic chemist testified that he examined " 'debris' " (scrapings) found on each of the two spoons, and that in his opinion the debris contained heroin. (P. 120.) Upon discovery of these packages the defendant stated " 'There is nothing in there but an outfit.' " (P. 120.) In a conversation with one of the officers the defendant stated that he was " 'hot' " (meaning addicted to narcotics); that he had done well for a year on the Naline program, but that he had met a fellow who " 'turned him on again' "; that he had been using narcotics for more than one month " 'real heavy' "; and that he was " 'running' from his parole officer ..." (P. 120.) The reviewing court there inferred from the evidence that heroin in powder form had been liquefied and the resultant emulsion drawn from the spoons by means of hypodermic needles and used for injection purposes. "What remained in the bottom of the spoons," said the court, "was residue which was in a completely different form from that of heroin *72 powder." (P. 122.) The court went on to note that "The crystalline incrustations on the spoons could remain in that state indefinitely, long after actual use of the spoons for injection purposes. ... Any nonscientifically trained person, albeit an addict, observing the spoons, likewise would have been unable to detect the presence of heroin since neither powder nor liquid remained." (P. 122.)
The appellate court in Aguilar discussed several California cases wherein it was held that the presence of a narcotic in a minute amount or in fragmentary form is sufficient to sustain a finding of knowing possession of the narcotic (see People v. Anderson, 199 Cal. App. 2d 510, 520 [18 Cal. Rptr. 793]; People v. Marich, 201 Cal. App. 2d 462, 463-465 [19 Cal. Rptr. 909]; People v. Salas, 17 Cal. App. 2d 75, 78 [61 P.2d 771]; People v. Jones, 113 Cal. App. 2d 567, 570 [248 P.2d 771]; People v. One 1959 Plymouth Sedan, 186 Cal. App. 2d 871, 874 [9 Cal. Rptr. 104]), and distinguished these cases on the basis that the small quantity of narcotics there found was in a recognizable state, while under the facts of the case before it the substance was in a completely different form, unrecognizable as a narcotic except by the scientific measurement, detection and skill of a forensic chemist.
Comparing the facts in Aguilar with those in the case at bench we find a marked similarity. Here, the evidence is that marijuana was at some time smoked in the subject pipe, and that what remained in it was a gummy black material in a completely different form than that of the vegetable matter recognizable as marijuana. Like the crystalline incrustations on the spoons in Aguilar, the gummy material attached to the pipe in the instant case could have remained there indefinitely in that state, long after the marijuana had been smoked. It is apparent, moreover, from Williams' testimony that a nonscientifically trained person could not detect the presence of marijuana even by observing the black material in the bowl of the pipe. It is significant to note, moreover, that Aguilar is a much stronger case from the prosecution standpoint than the present case in that there the chemist was able to detect a minuscule amount of heroin. In the case at bench, the chemist was not able to detect any marijuana plant structure or material, but only certain active ingredients consisting of "certain compounds which are present in marijuana." Moreover, it is clear from Williams' testimony that he himself doubted that the substance which he chemically tested was then identifiable as marijuana. If one scientifically *73 trained and aided by the techniques of forensic science finds difficulty in identifying a substance, certainly it cannot be reasonably expected that a nonscientifically trained person can make such identification. While not of paramount significance in the determination of the question presented in this case, it is noteworthy that, unlike the factual situation in Aguilar, defendant did not admit that he was a narcotic user or that he was in possession of narcotics paraphernalia; nor did he make any other admissions. Defendant was not interrogated concerning the pipe nor was any conversation had with respect to it. He was not shown to be a user of narcotics or to have any connection with them.
We conclude, therefore, that even if it be assumed that the substance in question was in fact a narcotic, under the circumstances of this case it cannot be said that its presence was reflected in such a form as reasonably imputed knowledge to defendant that it was marijuana. Accordingly, a finding that defendant "possessed" marijuana is not warranted within the requirement of knowing possession, and the evidence is not sufficient to sustain a conviction of knowing possession of the narcotic.
The judgment is reversed.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.
"The Court: What is not clear to me is, now, the statute says or condemns possession of marijuana. Now, was there in this pipe marijuana or a residue of marijuana? The Witness: Well, once marijuana is burned it burns itself out usually as ordinary tobacco does, plus a brown gummy resin which--"
"The Court: Is there any further light to be thrown on that. I don't know that you can. The Witness: No. I think that is going to resolve itself as a technicality which I suppose the Court will have to decide whether the material which has been reduced to an ash and the condensate from the gaseous material is still the original material."
"The Court: Somewhere along the line marijuana stops and these components start. The Witness: That is right, completely. Just like coal, when you burn it, you get coal tar which contains a number of the constituents of coal, yet they are condensed out and used as specific chemicals, in this case, some of the active ingredients remained identifiable, at the bottom, and leaves an ash, then you would have nothing. It is a fine point to know where the line should be drawn."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The record does not disclose the name of this officer.
[fn. 2]  2. At oral argument defendant's counsel conceded that this was defendant's room.
[fn. 3]  3. The committing magistrate then overruled the objection. No objection to this testimony was interposed in the court below.
[fn. 4]  4. Pertinent is the following testimony elicited from Williams by the trial court: "The Court: Is it your testimony that marijuana had been in the pipe or that marijuana was in the pipe or both? The Witness: Well, the marijuana, in some form, had been volatilized and condensed out in the pipes which would infer, I think, that the material had been smoked in the pipe and some of the residue was left. The Court: Well, did the residue consist of marijuana? The Witness: It consisted of some of the active ingredients of marijuana, but a similar test on a tobacco pipe, for instance, that hasn't some marijuana, would not show the chemical tests for the cannabis sativa, which is in the marijuana and that was present in the pipe."
[fn. 5]  5. A hearing was denied by the Supreme Court on January 29, 1964.

=== CASE 9736988 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:03.107392+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN, concurring: I concur with the decision of the majority. However, in my opinion, whether the employee was in the course of his employment when he was injured was, in this case, a question of law and not of fact. The opinion notes Professor Larson’s statement that “[v]oluntary intoxication which renders an employee incapable of performing his work is a departure from the course of employment.” (1A A. Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation §34.00, at 6 — 64 (1985).) This rule has been accepted by this court, which has stated that intoxication which does not incapacitate the employee from following his occupation is not sufficient to defeat recovery. District HI, International Association of Machinists & Aerospace Workers v. Industrial Comm’n (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 544, 558; M & M Parking Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 252, 256. I have no quarrel with the application of this rule to the usual employment activities. If the employee could perform the work associated with his duties, then, under the rule, recovery is and should be allowed, even though the employee had consumed a considerable amount of alcohol. However, when the legislature has enacted a statute making it illegal to drive an automobile with an alcohol concentration in the blood above a certain level, and the employee had an alcohol concentration in his blood above that, and was driving an automobile as a part of his employment, then I would hold that the employee had departed from the course of his employment. He could no longer legally perform his duties of driving an automobile. I would, therefore, hold that he was legally incapacitated. It is a Class A misdemeanor to drive a motor vehicle with an alcohol concentration in one’s blood of 0.10% or more. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11 — 501.) Artiele V of the Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11 — 500 et seq.) and article II of the Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 6 — 201 et seq.) express a strong public policy of this State against driving a motor vehicle with alcohol concentration in one’s blood in excess of 0.10% or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. Conforming to this public policy, I would hold that a person who, while in the course of his employment, operates a motor vehicle in violation of these statutory provisions, and is injured in an accident while doing so, has departed from the course of his employment and is not entitled to recover under the Workers’ Compensation Act.

=== CASE 2208268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.317652+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 483 (1988)
MAGNETIC DATA, INC., Respondent,
v.
ST. PAUL FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant.
No. C7-88-823.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
October 18, 1988.
Review Granted December 21, 1988.
*484 Philip A. Pfaffly, Gregory D. Peterson, Moss & Barnett, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Timothy P. Tobin, Beverly J. Babcock, Gislason, Dosland, Hunter & Malecki, Minnetonka, for appellant.
Heard, considered and decided by KALITOWSKI, P.J., and NIERENGARTEN and HACHEY,[*] JJ.
OPINION
NIERENGARTEN, Judge.
This is an appeal from summary judgment declaring the appellant insurance company responsible for indemnifying and defending its insured against claims by the insured's customer. We affirm.
FACTS
The respondent Magnetic Data Inc. (MDI) is a computer company whose principal business is inspecting and repairing computer disk cartridges. A computer disk cartridge comprises a protective plastic molding and a disk platter upon which data can be magnetically encoded and stored. A disk cartridge can be inspected for defects by visual inspection, gauge measurement, or electronic inspection. The electronic inspection process necessarily erases all data encoded on the disk. A disk cartridge is "certified" when the cartridge is inspected by all three processes and no defects are found.
In February 1984, the Sanger Corporation (Sanger) arranged with Control Data Corporation (Control Data) to have MDI inspect twenty-two computer disk cartridges for defects. Ten of the cartridges contained information that had been fully backed up (i.e., copied or transferred to other sources). The remaining twelve cartridges (the critical cartridges) were not backed up; the critical cartridges were supposed to be visually inspected and gauge tested only, and were not to be certified. In early March 1984, the cartridges were *485 delivered to MDI by a Control Data employee. For reasons not evident in the record, MDI employees certified all twenty-two cartridges consequently erasing valuable client information from Sanger's critical disk cartridges. According to the parties' stipulation to facts, MDI's employees "specifically intended to certify the twelve critical disk cartridges" and knew certification would result in erasure of the data magnetically encoded on the cartridge disks.
Sanger sued MDI and Control Data asserting it incurred damages as a result of the erasures. MDI tendered defense of the suit to its insurer, St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company (St. Paul Fire), claiming the damages were covered under a comprehensive general liability (CGL) policy which MDI purchased from the appellant St. Paul Fire. St. Paul Fire refused to defend the suit claiming the losses were not covered under the policy. MDI commenced an action for a declaratory judgment on the coverage issue.
St. Paul Fire contended the CGL policy did not cover the damages resulting from the loss of the computer data because the destroyed information was not "tangible" property and the erasure was neither an "accidental event" nor an "occurrence" under the terms of the insurance policy. St. Paul Fire also contended the standard CGL policy exclusions excluded coverage for losses resulting from damage to property under MDI's control or arising out of damage to MDI's products or work.
According to the CGL policy, the insurance agreement was intended to protect against two kinds of liability claims: (1) "Claims resulting from bodily injury to others," and (2) "Claims resulting from damage to other people's property."
This agreement covers the type of claim  Bodily Injury or Property Damage  for which a limit is shown in the Coverage Summary. We'll pay amounts you and others protected under this agreement are legally required to pay as damages for a covered bodily or property damage claim resulting from an accidental event.
* * * * * *
Property damage means any damage to tangible property of others that happens while this agreement is in effect. This includes loss of use of the damaged property resulting from the damage. Property damage also includes loss of use of others' property that hasn't been physically damaged if caused by an accidental event that happens while this agreement is in effect.
* * * * * *
Accidental event means any event that results in bodily injury or property damage that the protected person didn't expect or intend to happen.
The CGL policy and a broadening endorsement issued to MDI contain several exclusions which limit the coverage of the insurance policy.
Business risk. We won't cover loss of use of tangible property that hasn't been physically damaged when the loss of use is caused by your failure to live up to a contract or by the failure of your products or work to live up to your promises. But we will cover loss of use of tangible property of others that's caused by sudden or accidental damage or destruction of your products or work after they've been used by another person.
* * * * * *
Damage to your products or work. We won't cover damage to any of your products caused by the product itself or by any of its parts. * * * Nor will we cover damage to your work that's caused by the work itself or by materials or equipment connected with it.
* * * * * *
Control of property. We won't cover damage to any of the following:
* * * * * *
4. Property on your premises or premises of any other protected person for the purpose of being worked on by you or on your behalf.
*486 Both parties moved for summary judgment on the coverage issue. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of MDI, and ordered St. Paul Fire to defend MDI against Sanger's claims in the underlying action and "indemnify [MDI] against any and all damages awarded to the Sanger Corporation as a result of its loss of use of the data erased from the computer disk cartridges inspected and repaired by [MDI]." The court also ordered St. Paul Fire to reimburse MDI $22,094.25 for costs and attorney fees incurred in defending the underlying liability action and in prosecuting the declaratory judgment action. St. Paul Fire appeals from the summary judgment.
ISSUE
Did the district court err by granting summary judgment in favor of the respondent?
ANALYSIS
Upon proper motion by a party, the district court shall render summary judgment
if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that either party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.
Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.03.
The underlying facts are not contested. The parties dispute only the district court's interpretation of the insurance policy language and the court's application of the law. Accordingly, this court must determine whether the district court "properly interpreted and applied the law to the facts." See Associated Independent Dealers, Inc. v. Mutual Service Insurance Cos., 304 Minn. 179, 183-84, 229 N.W.2d 516, 519 (1975).
In the interpretation of insurance contracts, as with any other contract, we start with the principles that the parties are free to contract as they see fit and that the language of the contract is to be given its plain and ordinary meaning. However, it is equally true that the terms of a contract must be read in the context of the entire contract, and the terms will not be so strictly construed as to lead to a harsh and absurd result.
Employers Mutual Liability Insurance Co. v. Eagles Lodge of Hallock, 282 Minn. 477, 479-80, 165 N.W.2d 554, 556 (1969) (citations omitted).
"Accidental Event"
Both parties agree MDI's employees specifically intended to certify the cartridge disks and knew full certification "would result in the erasure of the data magnetically encoded on the disks." The parties also agree MDI's employees "expected and intended" the data encoded on the magnetic disk would be erased. St. Paul Fire contends damages resulting from the erasure are not covered by the CGL policy because the policy does not cover events which are "expected" or "intended" by the insured. MDI asserts that the MDI employees did not specifically intend to cause consequential damages to Sanger and its clients.
Accident, as a source and cause of damage to property, within the terms of an accident policy, is an unexpected, unforeseen, or undesigned happening or consequence from either a known or an unknown cause.
Hauenstein v. St. Paul-Mercury Indemnity Co., 242 Minn. 354, 358-59, 65 N.W.2d 122, 126 (1954) (footnote omitted).
MDI's employees inspecting Sanger's disk cartridges apparently did not know or realize the critical cartridges were not supposed to be electronically inspected. The actual certification process apparently was performed according to industry standards and the record before this court does not contain any evidence indicating the employees performing the certification processes expected or should have expected their actions would result in damages to Sanger and its clients. This case is unlike Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Bartlett, 307 Minn. 72, 240 N.W.2d 310 (1976), overruled on other grounds, Prahm v. Rupp Construction Co., 277 N.W.2d 389 (Minn.1979), wherein a construction contractor knowingly *487 used inferior brick and intentionally installed out-of-plumb walls "contrary to contract standards of workmanship," and therefore should have expected any resulting property damage. See Bartlett, 307 Minn. at 79, 240 N.W.2d at 313-14.
We believe the certification of the twelve critical cartridges was an "accidental event" within the meaning of MDI's CGL policy because the loss of Sanger's data on the critical cartridges was "an unexpected, unforeseen, or undesigned happening or consequence." See Hauenstein, 242 Minn. at 358, 65 N.W.2d at 126. The record does not indicate MDI's employees realized the erasure would result in loss of unduplicated information. While the technical task of erasing the data from the disks was performed intentionally, the certification process itself was accidentally or mistakenly performed, and the loss of the computer data was the type of accidental loss intended to be covered by MDI's CGL policy. See Bartlett, 307 Minn. at 78, 240 N.W.2d at 313 (the liability policy was designed to protect the insured from "fortuitous losses" occurring in connection with the insured's work; "If property damage occurs because of mistake or carelessness on the part of the contractor or his employees, [the contractor] reasonably expects that damage to be covered."); see also Larsen v. General Casualty Co. of Wisconsin, 99 F.Supp. 300, 302 (D.Minn.1951), aff'd, 196 F.2d 170 (8th Cir.1952) (the negligence of the insured's employee "accidentally" caused the damage; the "occurrence or mishap unintentionally caused" was an "accident" within the "plain intendment of the policy"). Finally, coverage of Sanger's consequential damages does not violate fundamental insurance concepts because, under the circumstances, we do not believe erasure of the information stored in the critical cartridges constituted an intentional or reckless act by which MDI sought to "consciously control the risks covered by the policy." See Bartlett, 307 Minn. at 78, 240 N.W.2d at 313.
We conclude the erasure of the data on the critical cartridges was an "accidental event" within the meaning of the CGL policy. Accordingly, we must determine whether coverage of Sanger's consequential damages is excluded by other provisions in MDI's insurance policy.
"Tangible Property"
The parties dispute whether the erasure of the magnetically encoded data resulted in damage to "tangible" property. MDI states "it is the information stored on the disk cartridges which is of value to MDI's customers" and contends erasure of the information caused rearrangement of the subatomic particles on the cartridge disks. MDI submitted affidavits from two computer experts who suggest the subatomic particles on the surface of a magnetic disk are tangible property. St. Paul Fire claims erasure did not result in damage to tangible property and asserts the CGL policy does not cover any loss unless some damage to "tangible" property occurs.
Although the policy defines "property damage" as "any damage to tangible property of others," insurance coverage is not necessarily limited to tangible property damage because the CGL policy further provides:
Property damage also includes loss of use of others' property that hasn't been physically damaged if caused by an accidental event that happens while this agreement is in effect.
(emphasis added). The insurance policy defines an "accidental event" as "any event that results in * * * property damage that the protected person didn't expect or intend to happen." (emphasis added).
By its own terms, the policy does not limit coverage to claims arising from damage to tangible property. So long as an accidental event occurred which resulted in unexpected or unintended "property damage," including "loss of use of others' property that hasn't been physically damaged," the property damage is covered unless it is otherwise excluded by the policy. Even if magnetically encoded computer data is not tangible property, the computer information encoded on the critical cartridge disks was property of Sanger and its clients. Cf. Fingerhut Products Co. v. Commissioner *488 of Revenue, 258 N.W.2d 606, 610 (Minn. 1977) (the court characterized marketing "information" as "intangible property"). Since the computer information encoded on the critical cartridge disks was property and was unexpectedly or unintentionally destroyed during the certification process, Sanger's loss of use of that property constitutes "property damage" within the meaning of MDI's CGL policy because the erasure was "caused by an accidental event." It is immaterial whether any tangible property was damaged. It also is immaterial whether the computer data itself is tangible or intangible property because, under the specific language in MDI's CGL policy, loss of use of property is covered even if the property "hasn't been physically damaged" if the damage was "caused by an accidental event." Accordingly, coverage of Sanger's loss-of-use claim against MDI is not excluded by the terms of the CGL policy.
Care, Custody or Control
The CGL policy and its broadening endorsement exclude coverage of damage to "[p]roperty on [MDI's] premises * * * for the purposes of being worked on by [MDI] or on [MDI's] behalf." (emphasis added). The CGL policy exclusion is analogous to a typical care, custody or control exclusion. In determining whether MDI was exercising care, custody or control within the meaning of its CGL policy, we examine the facts of this case in light of the following three factors:
(1) Whether the property is realty or personalty;
(2) the location, size, shape, and other characteristics of the property; and (3) the insured's duties with respect to the property as a whole, the property damaged, and other workers.
Ohio Casualty Insurance Co. v. Terrace Enterprises, Inc., 260 N.W.2d 450, 453 (Minn.1977) (footnote omitted).
Since the damaged property in this case was personalty rather than realty, this factor does not necessarily favor coverage. See id. at 453 (the damaged property was realty, "a factor favoring coverage").
In analyzing the facts under the second factor, we distinguish between the physical components of the disk cartridges and the information encoded on the cartridge disks. Even though the parties have stipulated that the disk cartridges were "located at the business premises of MDI" and that the "disk cartridges were certified while in the care, custody and control of MDI," we do not believe coverage necessarily is precluded under the care, custody or control exclusion because the damaged property  Sanger's computer information  was not on MDI's premises "for the purposes of being worked on." Sanger suspected certain computer disk cartridges were defective and that the cartridges may have caused Sanger's computer system to malfunction. However, there is no evidence in the record indicating the information encoded on the magnetic disks was the source of the suspected defects; nor is there any indication in the record that MDI was authorized or expected to perform any inspection processes that would affect Sanger's computer information.
Our distinction between the physical computer disk cartridges and the magnetically encoded information stored on the disks may be technical because the computer disks and the magnetically encoded information contained on those disks are intimately related. However, we do not believe the distinction is artificial given the unique characteristics of the property involved. Sanger's information apparently was readily transferable and could have existed independent of the specific disks upon which it was encoded, and its existence on the critical cartridge disks apparently was fortuitous. Sanger's expectations about the type of work which would be performed on the critical cartridges also supports our conclusion that the disk cartridges and the information encoded on the disks were separate property. Sanger authorized only visual inspection and gauge testing of the critical cartridges and did not authorize electronic inspection because that process necessarily would erase unduplicated information stored in the critical cartridges. We only can conclude therefore that while the critical cartridges were on *489 MDI's premises for the purposes of being worked on, the information encoded on the critical cartridge disks was separate property and not on MDI's premises for the purposes of being worked on.
The third factor also is conclusive and favors coverage. MDI did not exercise sole control over the disk cartridges or the magnetically encoded data. Sanger approached Control Data about its computer problems and informed Control Data that twelve of the twenty-two disk cartridges were not backed up and should not be certified. The record indicates Control Data arranged with MDI for inspection of Sanger's disk cartridges. The record also indicates that the Control Data employee who delivered the critical cartridges to MDI "may or may not have instructed MDI personnel that these critical cartridges were to be visual and gauge tested only." Direct communication with Sanger about the details and the extent of the inspection process was an essential element of the inspection work; that portion of the project was performed by persons not under MDI's supervision or control.
Since MDI was not authorized to perform inspection processes which would affect the information magnetically encoded on the cartridge disks and its control over other workers involved in essential elements of the inspection project was limited, the property damaged was not in MDI's care, custody or control within the meaning of its CGL insurance policy.
Work Products Exclusion
According to the broadening endorsement, the CGL policy does not cover "damage to any of [MDI's] products caused by the product itself or by any of its parts." The policy also does not cover "damage to [MDI's] work that's caused by the work itself or by materials or equipment connected with it." The CGL policy further states it will not cover certain business risks. MDI asserts the work product exclusion does not apply because the damages were not caused by MDI's "shoddy workmanship," but resulted from "a mistaken assumption as to what work its customer wanted performed."
The work product and business risk exclusions in the CGL policy exclude coverage of damages arising from MDI's breach of contract and damages resulting from "faulty workmanship in the performance of the contracts." See Bor-Son Building Corp. v. Employers Commercial Union Insurance Co. of America, 323 N.W.2d 58, 63 (Minn.1982); see also T.E. Ibberson Co. v. American & Foreign Insurance Co., 346 N.W.2d 659, 661 (Minn.Ct.App.1984) (work product exclusions are intended to deny coverage of damages resulting from the insured's own negligence).
"The risk intended to be insured is the possibility that the goods, products or work of the insured, once relinquished or completed, will cause bodily injury or damage to property other than to the product or completed work itself, and for which the insured may be found liable."
Bor-Son, 323 N.W.2d at 63 (quoting Henderson, Insurance Protection for Products Liability and Completed Operations  What Every Lawyer Should Know, 50 Neb.L.Rev. 415, 441 (1971)).
The record does not contain any evidence that the quality of MDI's work in certifying the critical cartridges was substandard and there is no evidence that MDI's product itself, i.e., the inspection and certification of the disk cartridges, was damaged. Sanger's loss-of-use claims are based on MDI's accidental or mistaken certification of Sanger's disk cartridges and are distinguishable from the kinds of damages which arise out of contractual business risks typically excluded under work product and business risk exclusion provisions. See Knutson Construction Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., 396 N.W.2d 229, 234 (Minn.1986) (an insurer does not assume contractual business risks "because it has no effective control over those risks and cannot establish predictable and affordable insurance rates"). We conclude Sanger's loss-of-use damages are the kind of third party damages the CGL policy was intended to cover.
*490 This court cannot construe the CGL policy so strictly in favor of St. Paul Fire as to absolve the insurer of all liability; nor can we construe the insurance policy so strictly against St. Paul Fire as to create a new insurance contract imposing additional liabilities on the insurer. See Employers Mutual Liability Insurance Co. v. Eagles Lodge of Hallock, 282 Minn. 477, 480, 165 N.W.2d 554, 556 (1969). However, "[i]n construing an insurance policy, the paramount question is what hazards the parties intended to cover." Employers Mutual Casualty Co. v. Kangas, 310 Minn. 171, 174, 245 N.W.2d 873, 875 (1976). MDI is a computer company engaged primarily in the business of inspecting and repairing computer disk cartridges. The parties concede the actual value of a disk cartridge is negligible, and it is evident from the record that one of MDI's primary insurable risks is consequential loss of information and third parties' inability to store, copy and transfer computer data because of MDI's mistaken or accidental conduct in inspecting or repairing disk cartridges. Given the nature of MDI's business and the unique circumstances of this case, we conclude the loss of information on Sanger's cartridge disks was a hazard MDI and St. Paul Fire intended the CGL policy to cover. Accordingly, we affirm the district court which ordered St. Paul Fire to defend MDI against Sanger's claims in the underlying action and indemnify MDI for damages awarded to Sanger as a result of the loss of use of Sanger's computer data.
DECISION
MDI's comprehensive general liability insurance policy covers Sanger's loss-of-use claims because the erasure of Sanger's computer information constitutes "property damage" which was "caused by an accidental event." The property damage is not excluded under the care, custody or control exclusion because Sanger's computer information was not on MDI's premises "for the purposes of being worked on" by MDI. Sanger's loss-of-use claims also are not excluded under the work product or business risk exclusions because Sanger's property damages are the kind of third party property damages the CGL policy was intended to cover.
The district court's summary judgment in MDI's favor, including its judgment for attorney fees and costs incurred in the underlying actions, is affirmed.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. 6, § 2.

=== CASE 2208282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.508985+00 ===

820 A.2d 978 (2003)
STATE
v.
Robert GORE.
No. 2000-47-C.A.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
March 31, 2003.
Aaron L. Weisman, Virginia M. McGinn, Providence.
Paula Rosin, Kelly Monteiro, Providence.
ORDER
This case came before the Supreme Court on February 4, 2003, pursuant to an order directing the parties to appear and show cause why the issues raised in this appeal should not be summarily decided. After hearing the arguments of counsel and reviewing the memoranda of the parties, we are satisfied that cause has not been shown. Accordingly, we shall decide the appeal at this time.
On October 24, 1997, defendant, Robert Gore (Gore or defendant), was charged by criminal information, with several crimes relating to a domestic altercation with his then girlfriend, complainant Joyce Bullock (Bullock or complainant). Specifically, defendant was charged with three counts of domestic assault with a dangerous weapon in a dwelling house with intent to murder in violation of G.L. 1956 § 11-5-4.[1] Count I alleged that defendant committed an assault with intent to murder with a knife as the dangerous weapon; count 2 alleged the use of a cord or string; and count 3 alleged that the dangerous instrumentality was defendant's hands. Additionally, count 4 charged simple assault and battery against a police officer, arising from defendant's arrest, and count 5, possession of marijuana, was later dismissed. The defendant was acquitted on count 2, assault with a dangerous weapon with intent to murder by use of a cord or string, but was convicted of the lesser-included offense of assault with a dangerous weapon in violation of § 11-5-2. The defendant was also convicted of count 3, assault with a dangerous weapon with intent to murder by use of his hands, and acquitted of the remaining offenses. The trial justice sentenced defendant on count 2 to twenty years at the Adult Correctional Institutions, with twelve years to serve and eight years suspended with probation, and on count 3, a concurrent term of thirty years, twelve years to serve, the balance suspended with probation.[2] The defendant has appealed.
In the early morning hours of April 12, 1997, there was a domestic altercation between defendant and complainant.[3] During the previous evening, the couple had consumed several alcoholic beverages together at a bar, but departed separately after a minor disagreement erupted between them. Later at home, defendant and complainant began to fight and defendant became physically abusive, choking *979 Bullock with his hands. She also testified that defendant struck her with a piece of wood and pushed her through the, coffee table, breaking its frame. Although Bullock was temporarily able to escape defendant's assault, he regained control of her, placed his knee on her chest, and choked her again using both hands. The defendant eventually desisted and ordered Bullock to remove her clothes. According to Bullock, when she refused, Gore "picked up a butcher knife * * * and he put it to my throat." Bullock then agreed to remove her clothing if Gore put down the weapon. Although Gore complied, complainant testified that he then wrapped a boot cord or string around her throat and attempted to strangle her.
After a lengthy struggle, Bullock escaped the couple's apartment and notified the police who discovered Gore hidden under the porch of the apartment and arrested him. The complainant was taken to the hospital by rescue where she remained for two-and-a-half days. The initial examination of Bullock revealed "multiple bruises of her face and abrasions of her neck and a mark on the neck which looked like it probably had been inflicted by some kind of cord or rope[.]" The examining physician testified that Bullock had sustained multiple bruises, a black eye, a contusion of the kidney and some internal swelling of the vocal cords that was treated with medication.
The defendant presents a markedly different version of the altercation. At trial, Gore testified that he returned to the apartment on the night of the incident intending to retrieve his personal belongings and spend the night at a hotel when Bullock threw one of his bags on the floor.[4] Gore admitted that he "grabbed [Bullock] from behind by her neck" with his hands and told Bullock to remove her clothes. However, defendant denied using a knife or striking her with a piece of wood; defendant also denied threatening to kill Bullock but admitted that Bullock sustained injuries when he pushed her and she struck her head.
The defendant raises two issues on appeal. First, with respect to count 2, for which he was convicted of the lesser-included offense of assault with a dangerous weapon, Gore challenges the refusal of the trial justice to instruct the jury on simple assault. Based on the evidence presented, Gore argues that a jury could have found him guilty of simple assault. The defendant argues that a cord is not an inherently dangerous instrumentality and therefore, the determinative fact was whether it was used in a manner likely to produce serious bodily injury or death. Gore suggests that on the basis of this record, a jury could believe that he used this weapon in a manner not likely to produce death or serious injury. He points to the evidence that he inflicted the more serious injuries with his hands and contends that the fact that he wrapped the cord around the neck of the victim and tightened, it, causing visible marks to the skin, raises a question about the manner in which he used the string. We reject this argument. Whether a defendant has committed an assault with a dangerous weapon is not dependant on the nature and extent of his victim's injuries.
A defendant is entitled to a jury instruction in accordance with the law relevant to the issues raised by the parties and the evidence presented. A lesser-included offense instruction is available only if warranted by the evidence adduced at trial. *980 See State v. Froais, 653 A.2d 735, 737 (R.I.1995) (citing State v. Messa, 594 A.2d 882, 884 (R.I.1991)). The evidence must point to an actual and adequate dispute concerning the distinguishing element(s) between the lesser and the greater offenses in question. Id.
The differentiating element between an assault and an assault with a dangerous weapon "is that an assault with a dangerous weapon requires that a defendant have the actual present ability to inflict harm on the victim by use of a dangerous weapon." Froais, 653 A.2d at 737 (citing State v. Jeremiah, 546 A.2d 183, 186 (R.I.1988)). It does not turn, as defendant suggests; on the nature and extent of the victim's injuries, or indeed on whether injury resulted, but whether the instrumentality was used in such a way that it could produce serious bodily injury. See State v. Zangrilli, 440 A.2d 710 (R.I.1982) (hands constituted dangerous weapons when used in such a way that may have produced a victim's death or serious bodily injury). The test is not whether serious bodily injury results from the assault, but whether the object was so used that serious bodily injury may have resulted. State v. Mercier, 415 A.2d 465, 467 (R.I.1980). (Emphasis added.) We are of the opinion that a cord or string, although not intrinsically dangerous, is certainly capable of producing serious injury or death when it is wrapped around a victim's neck and tightened. This act can be characterized as attempted strangulation by ligature, certainly conduct that can readily lead to death.
The defendant also contends that the trial justice failed to articulate sufficient reasons for denying the motion for a new trial and that he overlooked and misconceived material evidence. The defendant claims that when the trial justice considered the existence or absence of material factual evidence and the credibility of witnesses he did not sufficiently articulate his reasoning. Although the trial justice stated that he believed the complainant's version of the events, defendant suggests that he seemed to cast some doubt on Bullock's testimony by stating that her testimony was "not so unbelievable." Gore also argues that the trial justice was equivocal in his analysis of the evidence by his use of the terms "I believe" and "If I'm not mistaken." Further, he claims the trial justice overlooked or misconceived evidence about the duration of the incident and the fact that Gore stopped the assault of his own volition. In short, defendant posits that if he intended to kill complainant, he would have done so. We deem this argument to be without merit.
In deciding a motion for new trial, the trial justice must determine whether there was sufficient evidence for the jury to find defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Rieger, 763 A.2d 997, 1001 (R.I.2001). The trial justice often serves as a "thirteenth juror and exercises independent judgment on the credibility of witnesses and on the weight of the evidence." State v. Banach, 648 A.2d 1363, 1367 (R.I.1994).
In this case, there was little dispute about the defendant's conduct; he admitted that he strangled Bullock with his hands and with a boot string, thus obviating the need for the trial justice to reiterate the testimony adduced at trial. We are satisfied that the trial justice decided to believe the complainant's version of the events that night and rejected the defendant's testimony. He found the complainant to be a credible witness and was unsure about the defendant's testimony. The trial justice concluded that the state *981 had presented sufficient evidence to establish the defendant's guilt for the crimes for which he was convicted and that the jury followed and understood his instructions in reaching their verdicts. We see no reason to disturb these findings. In denying the defendant's motion for a new trial, the trial justice neither overlooked nor misconceived the evidence, nor was he otherwise clearly wrong.
Accordingly, the defendant's appeal is denied and dismissed and the judgment of conviction is affirmed. The papers in this case may be remanded to the Superior Court.
NOTES
[1]  General Laws 1956 § 11-5-4 provides:
"Assault with dangerous weapon in dwelling house.  Whoever, being armed with a dangerous weapon, assaults another with intent to rob or murder, shall, if the assault is committed within a dwelling house, be punished by imprisonment in the Adult [C]orrectional [I]nstitution[s] for not less than ten (10) years to life."
[2]  The trial justice also directed that Gore attend a domestic violence program and further ordered that he have no contact with complainant.
[3]  Gore is six-feet, two-inches tall and weighs 170 pounds. Bullock is an asthmatic who is five-feet, two-inches tall and weighs 112 pounds.
[4]  This bag was alleged to contain bottles of scented oils worth several hundred dollars.

=== CASE 9736989 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:12.999988+00 ===

RUDMAN, J.
[¶ 1] The Town of Pittston appeals from the summary judgment entered and the injunctive relief granted by the Superior Court, (Kennebec County, Marden, J.), declaring the Town’s ordinance, which prohibited the spreading of septage, illegal because it is preempted by state law. The Town asserts that its ordinance is not preempted by state statute but, rather, it is within the police powers granted to it by the state constitutional amendments and statutes extending “Home Rule” to the Towns. Jerald Smith cross-appeals, arguing that the Superior Court erred, first, when it concluded that Smith’s application for septage spreading was “moot” because the court had invalidated the Town’s ordinance, and second, when the court denied Smith injunctive relief requiring the Town to consider Smith’s application before it passed another moratorium. We agree with the Town that its ordinance prohibiting the spread of septage does not violate state law. We, therefore, vacate the judgment of the Superior Court and remand for entry of judgment in favor of the Town.
I. BACKGROUND
[¶ 2] In April 1999, Smith attended the monthly meeting of the Town of Pittston’s municipal officers seeking permission to spread septage over property he was in the process of purchasing. At that time, the Town of Pittston did not have an ordinance controlling the spreading of septage. Smith returned to the May 1999 meeting of the municipal officers, and was referred *1202to the Planning Board to file a new business permit application.
[¶ 3] Smith appeared before the Planning Board at its May 27, 1999, meeting and was directed to file an application for consideration at its June meeting. The Planning Board, however, conducted a site visit of the Hunts Meadow Road property Smith held under contract, contingent upon his receiving the permit. At the June 24, 1999, meeting of the Planning Board, Smith presented a new business application, an incomplete site plan review application, and a copy of a Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) application for a permit to spread septage. Smith also paid a twenty-five dollar application fee. The Planning Board tabled action on Smith’s application pending its receipt of “legal advice from the Maine Municipal Association (MMA) as to the legal requirements for septage spreading applications.” The MMA advised the Planning Board that the municipal officers were the appropriate reviewing body for a septage spreading permit application.
[¶ 4] The municipal officers, on June 23, 1999, certified a petition for a 180-day moratorium on septage spreading to be placed on a warrant at a special Town meeting. On July 28, 1999, the day Smith purchased the property, the voters approved a 180-day moratorium on permits for septage spreading. At their August 4, 1999, meeting, Smith asked that the municipal officers cause his application to be reviewed by DEP prior to the Town’s review. The municipal officers declined to act because of the moratorium.
[¶ 5] In October 1999, the Town certified a petition for the Town’s first septage ordinance. This proposed ordinance prohibited the “spreading, storing, or dumping of septage in the Town of Pittston” unless approved by the voters of the Town of Pittston. The ordinance also established a minimal performance criteria tied to state statutes and DEP rules, and required the operator to have a monitoring system.
[¶ 6] On November 24, 1999, Smith submitted another DEP septage spreading permit application to the municipal officers for referral to the DEP for review. The parties dispute whether this is the first complete application. Smith contends that the Town officials never faulted Smith’s application for incompleteness and that, in fact, one of the Planning Board members indicated what Smith needed to do to complete the June 1999 application. The Town contends that Smith’s November application is his only application.
[¶ 7] At a special Town meeting on December 22, 1999, the voters approved the proposed ordinance. That same day, Town officials forwarded Smith’s septage spreading application for DEP review. The Town clerk certified a second petition for a warrant article for a second septage ordinance on January 10, 2000, and the voters approved the second ordinance at a special Town meeting on March 18, 2000. In addition to reiterating the prohibition on new septage spreading applications and having an effective date of January 10, 2000, this second ordinance established a fee schedule, a septage monitoring board, and revised and expanded performance criteria.
[¶ 8] On January 6, 2000, the DEP returned Smith’s septage spreading permit application because it was incomplete. Smith returned to the municipal officers on February 2, 2000, and requested that his revised application be forwarded to the DEP for review.
[¶ 9] The voters adopted this second ordinance at a special Town meeting on March 18 and voted to appropriate $10,000 to reimburse the Town residents who expended funds to draft and defend the first *1203septage ordinance, and to enter into a septage disposal contract with Interstate Septic Systems to comply with 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305(6) (2001).
[¶ 10] The municipal officers voted to disburse those funds on May 24, 2000. The Town approved a third septage ordinance at a special Town meeting on October 19, 2000. This third ordinance (Ordinance III) replaced the previous two and contained a retroactive date making it effective as of July 23, 1999. Among other requirements, the new ordinance boosted the annual renewal fee to $5,000 per year.
[¶ 11] The DEP approved Smith’s permit application on May 15, 2001, granted a five-year license, and set performance requirements and license conditions. Of the almost twenty-five acres Smith proposed to use, the DEP permitted Smith to spread septage on approximately eighteen acres in two separate areas.
[¶ 12] On May 25, 2001, Smith asked the Town to comply with the statute and approve his application, contending that the subsequently adopted ordinance did not apply to his application. The Town replied that its ordinance, adopted in October 2000, prohibited the spreading of septage and as a result the Town would not comply with the statute or consider Smith’s request for a permit.
[¶ 13] On December 21,1999, Smith filed his first three-count complaint against the Town seeking a declaratory judgment that the first Town ordinance violated state law. Smith amended his complaint on May 25, 2000, seeking a declaration that the second ordinance was illegal and demanding that the Town be reimbursed the $10,000 expended in litigation costs.
[¶ 14] After several months of discovery, the Town moved for a summary judgment on January 10, 2001. Smith then further amended his complaint to incorporate twelve counts seeking declaratory and in-junctive relief declaring the Town’s ordinances illegal and enjoining their application to Smith’s permit application.
[¶ 15] The Superior Court entered a summary judgment in favor of the Town on Smith’s first eight counts; the first five counts addressed the previous two ordinances, and the three other counts, which the court denied because Smith did not show a particularized injury, addressed Smith’s claims about the Town’s appropriations. The court reserved judgment on the final four counts pending further briefing and pleading by the parties. Nonetheless, the court did expressly indicate in dicta how it expected to rule on the legality of Ordinance III. The court suggested that the Town’s ordinance is preempted by the state statute, concluding “[m]unicipalities may regulate but not prohibit the spreading and dumping of septage.”
[¶ 16] On February 5, 2002, the court issued its second opinion entering a summary judgment in favor of Smith on his claim that the Town’s ordinance violated state law (Count IX). The court granted the Town a summary judgment on Count XI of Smith’s complaint, thereby upholding the saving clause of Ordinance III, which repealed the previous two ordinances.1 The court concluded that it did not need to decide whether Smith’s application was a “pending” application:
This decision renders moot the plaintiffs argument that his application was pending prior to passage of the Town’s sep-tage spreading ban. The governing statute directs a municipality without ordinances dealing with septage to follow the DEP guidelines. 38 M.R.S.A. *1204§ 1305(6). As this court’s order will leave the Town without a valid septage ordinance, the municipal officers under DEP siting and design guidelines may-review the plaintiffs application.
[¶ 17] After the court issued its second order, Smith sought the court’s reconsideration of whether his application was “moot” and sought a temporary restraining order (TRO) against the Town to keep the Town from adopting another moratorium. Smith indicated in his affidavit that he requested the Pittston municipal officers to review his application approved by the DEP, but the municipal officers declined to do so on the ground that a special Town meeting was scheduled a week later to consider another moratorium. The court denied the motion for reconsideration. It ruled that it would not grant Smith a TRO against the Town from passing another moratorium, but enjoined the Town from enforcing the moratorium, which was scheduled to be considered by the voters on the same day as the TRO hearing. Moreover, the court concluded,
[t]his court is satisfied that, as a matter of law, implementation of a 180-day moratorium in light of the stay provided on judgments of appeal would constitute significant disruption of the status quo as to the relationship of these parties with respect to the subject matter. The court further concluded, in light of all the evidence in this case, that the moratorium is presented in bad faith and as a deliberate attempt to circumvent the findings of this court and the appellate process.
[¶ 18] The Town appealed from the summary judgment decision holding the ordinance preempted by state statute and from the injunction against enforcement of the moratorium. Smith cross-appealed from the court’s refusal to grant injunctive relief, its decision that the issue of whether the application was pending was moot, and the court’s ruling that Smith had not shown a particularized injury as a predicate to challenging the Town’s expenditure of $10,000.
II. DISCUSSION
A. Standard of Review
[¶ 19] “We review a trial court’s grant of a summary judgment for errors of law and independently examine the parties’ statements of material facts to determine if a genuine issue of material fact exists.” White v. McTeague, Higbee, Case, Cohen, Whitney & Toker, P.A., 2002 ME 160, ¶ 6, 809 A.2d 622, 623.
B. Statutory Background
[¶ 20] The Legislature has adopted a comprehensive set of laws governing the disposal of garbage, sludge, septage and other waste. Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and Solid Waste Management Act, 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1301-1319-Y (2001 & Supp.2002). In its Declaration of Policy, the Legislature found “municipal waste recycling and disposal facilities have not been developed in a timely and environmentally sound manner because of diffused responsibility for municipal waste planning, processing and disposal among numerous and overlapping units of local government.” Id. § 1302. In addition, the Legislature decreed, “the provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally to address the findings and accomplish the policies in this section.” Id.
[¶ 21] The Act defines “disposal,” “sep-tage,” “sludge,” “solid waste,” and “waste facility separately.”2 Id. § 1303-C(12), *1205(27), (28-A), (29), (40). Section 1304 authorizes the DEP to “adopt, amend, and enforce” rules governing the “location, establishment, construction, and alteration of waste facilities as the facility affects the public health and welfare or the natural resources of the State.” Id. § 1304.
C. Preemption
[¶ 22] At the center of this dispute lies section 1305(6), detailing municipal powers and duties in regulating and providing for the disposal of septage. Section 1305(6) requires that municipalities provide for the disposal of all septic tank and cesspool septage located within the municipality, and provides:
[e]ach municipality shall provide for the disposal of all refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from all septic tanks and cesspools located, within the municipality. In addition, any person may provide a site for disposal of sep-tage. In addition to making application to the Department of Environmental Protection for approval of any site, that person shall have written approval for the site location from the municipality in which it is located, unless the site is located in a Resource Protection District under the jurisdiction of the Maine Land Use Regulation Commission. A municipality may determine whether approval of the site must be obtained first from the department or the municipality. The municipal officers shall approve, af*1206ter hearing, any such private site if they find that the site complies with municipal ordinances and with local zoning and 'land use controls. In the absence of applicable municipal ordinances and local zoning and land use controls, the municipality shall base its approval of the site on compliance with the siting and design standards in the department’s rules relating to septage management. For purposes of this subsection, “municipality” means a city, town or plantation.
Id. § 1305(6).
[¶ 23] In addition, the Act provides that municipalities are “prohibited from enacting stricter standards than those contained in this chapter” and in relevant portions of DEP’s rules for solid waste disposal facilities, but the Act is silent about other waste facilities. Id. § 1310-U.3 Municipalities may enact other ordinances regulating solid waste facilities, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (1996) (Maine’s Home Rule statute), “provided that the standards are not more strict than those contained in this chapter and in chapter 3, subchapter I, article 5-A and 6 and the rules adopted under these articles.” 38 M.R.S.A. § 1310-U.
[¶ 24] Just as federal laws may preempt state laws either expressly or by implication, Gade v. Nat'l Solid Wastes Mgmt. Ass’n, 505 U.S. 88, 98, 112 S.Ct. 2374, 120 L.Ed.2d 73 (1992), state statutes may preempt local ordinances either expressly or implicitly, see 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. Maine’s statute extending “home rule,” as provided by the Maine Constitution, indicates that a municipality may adopt any ordinance or “exercise any power or function” which is “not denied expressly or by clear implication.” 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.4 It includes the following standard for determining when an ordinance may be preempted by implication: “[t]he Legislature shall not be held to have implicitly denied any power granted to municipalities under this section unless the municipal ordinance in question would frustrate the purpose of any state law.” Id. § 3001(3). The determinative factor is, therefore, whether the ordinance “would frustrate the purpose of any state law.” School Comm, of Town of York v. Town of York, 626 A.2d 935, 939 (Me.1993) (discussing 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001(3)). We will view municipal action as preempted only when the application of the “municipal ordinance prevents the efficient accomplishment of a defined state purpose.” Id. at 938 n. 8.
*1207[¶ 25] On two occasions, we have held that state statutes preempt ordinances banning or strictly regulating the siting or operation of solid waste disposal facilities.5 Sawyer Envtl. Recovery Facilities, Inc. v. Town of Hampden, 2000 ME 179, ¶¶ 31-38, 760 A.2d 257, 265-266; Midcoast Disposal, Inc. v. Town of Union, 537 A.2d 1149, 1151 (Me.1988). In Midcoast Disposal, we found a Town’s total ban on waste facilities was contrary to “a clear legislative intention to remove any authority a municipality may have had to prohibit the establishment and operation of a private facility within its borders for the disposal of out-of-town solid waste.” Midcoast Disposal, 537 A.2d at 1151. We specifically interpreted the Board of Environmental Protection’s (DEP’s antecedent agency) statutory authority to license public or private waste facilities as preempting a municipal ordinance barring the location of any such facility in the Town. Id. (interpreting 38 M.R.S.A. § 1304(8)(A) (repealed 1987)).
[¶ 26] More recently, we concluded that the Act preempted a Town’s ordinance prohibiting the expansion of a landfill as a non-conforming use. Sawyer Envtl., 2000 ME 179, ¶¶ 24-34, 760 A.2d at 263-66. Consistent with our holding in Midcoast, the Town’s ordinance in Sawyer exceeded the class of local regulations permitted by the applicable statute and the limited municipal role accorded the Town. Id. (interpreting 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1310-S, 1310-U). The zoning ordinance, as applied, absolutely banned the location and expansion of landfills within the Town, and, therefore, was “preempted by the State solid waste management laws establishing a comprehensive regulatory scheme under which the State, through the DEP, regulates the location and expansion of landfills.” Id. ¶ 33.
[¶ 27] In contrast, however, a Town ordinance “imposing future limitations on sewer usage” does not violate the Home Rule statute. Tisei v. Town of Ogunquit, 491 A.2d 564, 570 (Me.1985). In Tisei, we interpreted the charter of the Ogunquit Sewer District, not the Act, and found it did not preclude the Town’s adoption of a restrictive ordinance. Id.
[¶ 28] Addressing the septage provisions of the Act, we held that, in the absence of a local septage ordinance, Town officials could not expand upon the siting and design requirements provided in section 1305(6) and related DEP rules. Hutchinson v. Cary Plantation, 2000 ME 129, ¶ 13, 755 A.2d 494, 497. In Hutchinson, the Assessors of Cary Plantation were limited to Department rules and could not consider additional factors when assessing the applicant’s renewal permit. Id. Specifically, a footnote in Hutchinson anticipated the preemption issue presented in this case by noting, “Cary Plantation does not challenge the Legislature’s authority to designate specific areas of review by the municipality.” Id. ¶ 11 n. 4.
[¶ 29] In light of these authorities, the Superior Court erred in holding the Town of Pittston’s ordinance invalid for several reasons. First, unlike section 1310-U, section 1305(6) clearly contemplates the DEP and Town’s joint participation in licensing the spread of septage. Section 1305(6) obligates the Town of Pittston to “provide for the disposal of all refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from small septic tanks and cess*1208pools located within the municipality.” The record reflects that the Town of Pitt-ston has provided for the disposal of sep-tage by virtue of its contract with Interstate Septic Systems and that DEP has certified that the Town’s contract satisfies the requirements of section 1305(6). Thus, application of the ordinance is consistent with the defined state purpose to provide for safe and effective waste management. See 38 M.R.S.A. § 1302. Second, in section 1310-U, our Legislature clearly demonstrated that it is aware of its authority to preempt municipal participation in waste management matters. The Legislature chose not to include septage as one such matter under section 1305(6) and, instead, made the Town a party to the septage licensing process.
[¶ 30] Finally, the second sentence of section 1305(6) states, “[i]n addition, any person may provide a site for the disposal of septage,” and further explains how such a site must be approved by both the DEP and the municipality. The Legislature approached the problem of septage disposal from two directions: making municipalities responsible for septage disposal, while at the same time allowing private persons to provide disposal sites, subject to state and local regulation. The latter provision not only allows a continued role for businesses utilizing and profiting from septage disposal, see L.D. 209, Statement of Fact (107th Legis.1975) (“Traditionally, private enterprise has provided sites for the disposal of septic tank and cesspool material.”), but also helps to assure an adequate and affordable supply of appropriate disposal sites, cf. 38 M.R.S.A. § 1302 (stating that one reason for waste management statutes is “that environmentally suitable sites for waste disposal are in limited supply and represent a critical natural resource”).
[¶ 31] If the Town’s ordinance prohibited all methods of septage disposal, Smith would have a stronger argument that the purposes of section 1305(6) are frustrated. However, the ordinance prohibits septage spreading, also known as land application, which is only one method of septage disposal.6 The DEP’s regulations permit land application of septage, and Smith received a land application license under the Septage Management Rules. 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 420, §§ 4-10 (2003). Other portions of the DEP regulations, however, permit different disposal methods, including the composting of dewatered septage, id. ch. 409, § 1(A)(3) (2003), and the addition of septage to wastewater treatment facilities, id. ch. 555.7 The Town of Pittston’s ban on land application may have the effect of making septage disposal within the Town more difficult and expensive, but it does not frustrate the purposes of section 1305(6) because the ordinance still permits septage disposal within the Town by other methods. Ac*1209cordingly, the Superior Court erred in holding that the ordinance was invalid.
D. Viability
[¶ 32] Smith requested the Superi- or Court to declare that the third septage ordinance could not be applied to his application because it was pending and, therefore, viable at the time the ordinance was enacted. Title 1, section 302 prohibits the application of statutes and ordinances to pending applications for administrative actions. See 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 (1989).8 For the purposes of section 302, we have determined that an application is “pending” when a “municipality takes the threshold step of acting on the substance of a proposal.” Littlefield v. Inhabitants of the Town of Lyman, 447 A.2d 1231, 1235 (Me.1982). The provisions of section 302, however, are inapplicable by the express terms of Ordinance III.
[¶ 33] Ordinance III, adopted on October 19, 2000, states that its prohibition on sep-tage spreading “shall apply, notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, to all proceedings, application^], and petitions except those which were pending pri- or to June 23, 1999.” We held in City of Portland v. Fisherman’s Wharf Assocs. II, 541 A.2d 160 (Me.1988), that because section 302 is a rule of statutory construction, an express provision of retroactivity within a municipal ordinance removes the ordinance from its application. Id. at 164 (“[I]f either a statute or an ordinance contains a provision of retroactivity, section 302’s rule of prospectivity is negated.”). Any factual dispute as to whether a substantive review occurred after June 23, 1999, is, therefore, immaterial.
[¶ 34] The pertinent factual issue is whether Smith’s application had received a substantive review before June 23, 1999, and on this point there is no dispute. Smith did not file an application with the municipal officers until November 24,1999, over five months after the effective date of the ordinance. Smith’s application was not pending and is subject to the provisions of Ordinance III.
E. Expenditure of Town Funds
[¶ 35] In Counts VI, VII, and VIII, Smith challenged the Town’s appropriation and expenditure of funds to reimburse citizens for expenditures related to the first septage ordinance, claiming that this ap*1210propriation was illegal because it was not for a public purpose.9
[¶ 36] Smith’s Rule 56(h) statement of material facts was defective, as the trial court found, because he did not “properly controvert defendant’s statements [of material facts] by either admitting, denying or qualifying ... [and] fail[ed] ... to give proper record references.” According to the Town’s statement of material facts, the money at issue was appropriated “for the purpose of hiring experts to defend the first septage spreading ordinance and to pay legal fees and mailing expenses which were incurred in bringing the ordinance to a vote at the December 22, 1999, special Town meeting,” and monies were disbursed from the appropriation “in order to pay all costs incurred by citizens relating to the first septage spreading ordinance.” On those facts, which Smith did not properly dispute, the expenditure was for a public purpose and was not illegal. Cf. Delogu v. State, 1998 ME 246, ¶ 10, 720 A.2d 1153, 1155 (stating that we interpret article IV, part 3, section 1 of the Maine Constitution “to require that taxation and spending at either the state or local level be for a public purpose to be constitutionally valid”). The Town was thus entitled to a summary judgment on Counts VI, VII, and VIII.
F. Injunction
[¶ 37] The Town argues that the court erred in enjoining the Town from enforcing a proposed moratorium. Smith argues that the court erred in not enjoining the Town to “give [Smith’s] application ... substantive review prior to the scheduled vote on the new moratorium.”
[¶ 38] Smith’s request that the court order the municipal officers to consider his septage-spreading application the same day the court entered its order and before the moratorium vote became moot when, on February 21, 2002, that vote occurred. The propriety of the injunction against enforcement of the moratorium is also moot because if the moratorium was adopted — a fact that does not appear in the record — then it expired by its own terms on August 20, 2002. Moreover, our determination that Ordinance III is valid makes any issue with respect to the moratorium moot because the moratorium merely duplicated the ordinance’s ban on the spreading, storage, or dumping of sep-tage.
The entry is:
Judgment for Jerald Smith on Count IX of his complaint vacated. Remanded for entry of judgment in favor of Town of Pittston on that count. Judgment for the Town of Pittston on the remaining counts of Smith’s complaint affirmed. Appeal and cross-appeal from the order on post-judgment injunction dismissed as moot.
. Smith and the Town agreed separately to dismiss Count X, which sought a declaration that Ordinance III was overbroad and could not be enforced, without prejudice.
. The following statutory definitions apply:
12. Disposal. "Disposal” means the discharge, deposit, dumping, spilling, leaking *1205or placing of hazardous, biomedical or solid waste, waste oil, refuse-derived fuel, sludge or septage into or on land, air or water and the incineration of solid waste, refuse-derived fuel, sludge or septage so that the hazardous, biomedical or solid waste, waste oil, refuse-derived fuel, sludge or septage or a constituent of the hazardous, biomedical, or solid waste, waste oil, refuse-derived fuel, sludge or septage may enter the environment or be emitted into the air, or discharged into waters, including ground waters.
27. Septage. "Septage” means waste, refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from septic tanks, cesspools or any other similar facilities.
28-A. Sludge. "Sludge” means nonhazardous solid, semisolid or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or wet process air pollution control facility or any other waste having similar characteristics and effect. The term does not include industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permits under the federal Clean Water Act,
33 United States Code, Section 1342 (1999).
29. Solid waste. "Solid waste” means useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing, including, but not limited to, rubbish, garbage, refuse-derived fuel, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material and landscape refuse, but does not include hazardous waste, biomedical waste, septage or agricultural wastes. The fact that a solid waste or constituent of the waste may have value or other use or may be sold or exchanged does not exclude it from this definition.
40. Waste facility. "Waste facility” means any land area, structure, location, equipment or combination of them, including dumps, used for handling hazardous, biomedical or solid waste, waste oil, sludge or septage. A land area or structure does not become a waste facility solely because:
A. It is used by its owner for disposing of septage from the owner’s residence;
B. It is used to store for 90 days or less hazardous wastes generated on the same premises;
C. It is used by individual homeowners or lessees to open bum leaves, brush, deadwood and tree cuttings accrued from normal maintenance of their residential property, when such burning is permitted under section 599, subsection 3; or
D. It is used by its residential owner to bum highly combustible domestic, household trash such as paper, cardboard cartons or wood boxes, when such burning is permitted under section 599, subsection 3.
38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C(12), (27), (28-A), (29), (40) (2001 & Supp.2002).
. Section 1310-U deals with solid waste, not septage.
. The Home Rule statute reads as follows:
3001. Ordinance power
Any municipality, by the adoption, amendment or repeal of ordinances or bylaws, may exercise any power or function which the Legislature has power to confer upon it, which is not denied either expressly or by clear implication, and exercise any power or function granted to the municipality by the Constitution of Maine, general law or charter.
1.Liberal construction. This section, being necessary for the welfare of the municipalities and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to affect its purposes.
2. Presumption of authority. There is a rebuttable presumption that any ordinance enacted under this section is a valid exercise of a municipality's home rule authority.
3. Standard of preemption. The Legislature shall not be held to have implicitly denied any power granted to municipalities under this section unless the municipal ordinance in question would frustrate the purpose of any state law.
4. Penalties accrue to municipality. All penalties established by ordinance shall be recovered on complaint to the use of the municipality.
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
. In another context, we have held that a Town ordinance restricting the granting of liquor licenses worked at "cross purposes" with the extensive statutory scheme regulating alcohol found in 28 M.R.S.A. § 252-A(1) (repealed 1987). Ullis v. Town of Boothbay Harbor, 459 A.2d 153, 159-160 (Me.1983).
. The ordinance also prohibits the storage and dumping of septage. Storage is not covered by section 1305(6) because it does not constitute "disposal.” See 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303 — C(12). Dumping is not at issue here because, to the extent that dumping means something different than spreading, Smith did not propose to dump septage.
. The section of the DEP Septage Management Rules applicable to municipalities also notes the variety of available septage disposal methods, mandating that each municipality receive a license ensuring its compliance with the first sentence of 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305(6), but exempting "[a]ny municipality which complies with this requirement by obtaining a license for its own septage land application site, septage processing [including composting] facility, or wastewater treatment facility.” 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 420, § 17 (2003). The record shows that Pittston did not operate its own disposal facility, but obtained a DEP license to dispose of all septage from the Town at a licensed composting facility in Rockland.
. Section 302 reads:
302. Construction and effect of repealing and amending Acts The repeal of an Act, resolve or municipal ordinance passed after the 4th day of March, 1870 does not revive any statute or ordinance in force before the Act, resolve or ordinance took effect. The repeal or amendment of an Act or ordinance does not affect any punishment, penalty or forfeiture incurred before the repeal or amendment takes effect, or any action or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal or amendment, for an offense committed or for recovery of a penalty or forfeiture incurred under the Act or ordinance repealed or amended. Actions and proceedings pending at the time of the passage, amendment or repeal of an Act or ordinance are not affected thereby. For the purposes of this section, a proceeding shall include but not be limited to petitions or applications for licenses or permits required by law at the time of their filing. For the purposes of this section and regardless of any other action taken by the reviewing authority, an application for a license or permit required by law at the time of its filing shall be considered to be a pending proceeding when the reviewing authority has conducted at least one substantive review of the application and not before. For the purposes of this section, a substantive review of an application for a license or permit required by law at the time of application shall consist of a review of that application to determine whether it complies with the review criteria and other applicable requirements of law.
. In Count VI, Smith sought a declaration that the appropriation was void. In Count VII, Smith sought an injunction enjoining the Town from disbursing $10,000 for non-public purposes, and in Count VIII, Smith sought an order requiring the Town to seek return of a portion of the $10,000 disbursed for nonpublic purposes.

=== CASE 9736990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:13.005524+00 ===

DANA, J„
with whom SAUFLEY, C.J. and LEVY, J., join,
dissenting.
[¶ 39] Because the Pittston ordinance illegally frustrates the Legislature’s intent to encourage the development of affordable, environmentally suitable waste disposal sites by effectively preventing the private disposal of septage within the Town, I respectfully dissent from that portion of the Court’s opinion that concludes otherwise.
[¶ 40] The Court explains that pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305(6) (2001) Pittston has two responsibilities. First, it must *1211provide for the disposal of all septage within the municipality, and second, it must permit “any person to provide a site for septage disposal.” Id. According to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (1996), to the extent that the Pittston ordinance frustrates the purpose of either of these requirements, the ordinance is ultra vires. See Hallissey v. School Admin. Dist. No. 77, 2000 ME 143, ¶ 11, 755 A.2d 1068, 1072 (public bodies, as the creation of state legislatures, “may exercise only that power which is conferred upon them by law. The source of that authority must be found in the enabling statute either expressly or by necessary inference as an incidence essential to the full exercise of powers specifically granted.”) (citation omitted). I agree that Pitt-ston has satisfied its first obligation, but I disagree that Pittston’s ordinance does not frustrate the purpose behind the second provision. The Court concludes that Pitt-ston’s broad ban on the “spreading, storing or dumping” of septage does not frustrate the Legislature’s intent because the ordinance does not prohibit all methods of septage disposal. According to the Court, because any person may construct his or her own wastewater treatment facility or compost dewatered septage, the ordinance does not frustrate the purpose of the statute. I disagree.
[¶ 41] To be charitable, the Court’s suggestion that Smith could build a private wastewater treatment facility is, at least, impractical. First, the DEP has not established rules specifically for the licensing of private wastewater treatment plants. Therefore, the requirements for such an endeavor are unclear. Second, assuming the rules for public plant licensing apply to private plant licensing, this is an extremely expensive septage disposal option, not only because of the high initial cost of building a wastewater treatment plant but because the daily volume of septage Smith could receive at such a facility could not exceed 1% of the average daily design flow for that facility. See 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 555-3 § 9(A) (2003). The idea of building a wastewater treatment facility for the primary purpose of septage disposal is impractical because, notwithstanding the huge front-end cost of construction, the owner would have to find some way of substantially diluting the septage so that it could be treated. The DEP’s recognition that “the addition of septage [to wastewa-ter treatment facilities] stresses sludge handling capacity causing high operation and maintenance costs,” 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 555-4 (2003), Basis Statement, supports the conclusion that it is an undesirable disposal alternative.
[¶ 42] The second method the Court suggests, the composting of dewatered sep-tage, is impractical and may also run afoul of the ordinance. The dewatering and composting of septage is so rarely employed that the DEP has only provided us with a definition.10 The DEP has not established any rules for the disposal of the effluent from the “dewatering” process. If Smith wanted to undertake such a process it is unclear how he would go about it. The absence of any rules suggests that this disposal method is rarely, if ever, employed. Furthermore, it is difficult to envision a process for dewatering and composting septage that would not conflict with Pittston’s ban on the “spreading, storing or dumping” of septage. Finally, assuming for purposes of this discussion that Pittston would regard dewatered septage *1212as something other than septage,11 Smith would still have to contend with the disposal of the liquid effluent.
[¶ 43] The Legislature spoke clearly when it declared the policy behind the waste management statute. Recognizing that “environmentally suitable sites for waste disposal are in limited supply and represent a critical natural resource” and that “municipal waste recycling and disposal facilities have not been developed in a timely and environmentally sound manner because of diffused responsibility for municipal waste planning, processing and disposal among numerous and overlapping units of local government,” 38 M.R.S.A. § 1302 (2001), the Legislature provided that “any person may provide a site for disposal of septage,” id. § 1305(6). While the Legislature clearly intended municipalities to have a meaningful role in regulating those facilities,12 it did not intend to allow municipalities to ban all practical septage disposal options. The Court substantially understates the impact of the Pittston ordinance when it concludes that it makes private septage disposal “more difficult and expensive.” Pittston has thwarted the Legislature’s intent to foster the creation of adequate, affordable, environmentally suitable, private septage disposal sites. Its ordinance is, therefore, ultra vires. Thus, I would affirm the Superior Court’s judgment in this respect.
. " ‘Dewatered Septage’ means the solid fraction removed from septage, by mechanical means such as a sand filter, clarifier or belt filer press.” 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 400 § 1(PP) (2003).
. The fact that the DEP categorizes the rules for composting dewatered septage as solid waste management rules, 06-096 CODE ME. R. ch. 409(1)(A)(3) (2003), and the definition of “solid waste” specifically excludes septage, 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C(29) (Supp.2002), suggests the DEP regards dewatered septage as something other than septage.
. Section 1305(6) permits municipalities to enact ordinances regulating the conditions of septage disposal sites, but also provides that “municipal officers shall approve, after hearing, any private site if they find that it complies with municipal ordinances and with local zoning and land use controls.” 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305(6) (emphasis added). In the absence of municipal regulations, state "siting and design standards” apply. This language demonstrates the Legislature’s intent that municipalities would have a limited role, limited to the development of "siting and design standards,” because municipal approval is mandated once those standards are met. The statute's provision concerning “coordination between municipality and department,” which allows a municipality to suggest conditions to be imposed on a proposal for sludge land application that the Department of Environmental Protection may then reject, further supports this interpretation. See id. § 1305(9)(A).

=== CASE 2208289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.58088+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 384 (1988)
Robert Allan CORNELL, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Iowa, Appellee.
No. 87-69.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 19, 1988.
*385 James P. Cleary, Phoenix, Ariz., for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Bruce Kempkes, Asst. Atty. Gen., and Gary G. Kimes, Co. Atty., for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and LARSON, SCHULTZ, LAVORATO, and NEUMAN, JJ.
HARRIS, Justice.
In this postconviction proceeding the petitioner, Robert Allan Cornell, challenges his first-degree murder conviction which we affirmed in State v. Cornell, 266 N.W. 2d 15 (Iowa 1978) cert. denied Cornell v. Iowa, 439 U.S. 947, 99 S.Ct. 340, 58 L.Ed.2d 338 (1978). Following the filing of that opinion and prior to this proceeding Cornell unsuccessfully challenged his conviction by several proceedings in federal court. See Cornell v. Iowa, 628 F.2d 1044 (8th Cir. 1980) cert. denied 449 U.S. 1126, 101 S.Ct. 944, 67 L.Ed.2d 112 (1981). In the present case the district court denied postconviction relief but the court of appeals (3-2) reversed and ordered a new trial. On further review we vacate the decision of the court of appeals and affirm the district court.
The facts appear in our opinion in Cornell's first appeal and need not be detailed here. It is enough to state that in August 1976 Kenneth Crow, the petitioner (Cornell), and Cornell's young stepbrother, Glen Albert Oliver (Albert) drove from Des Moines to Texas in Cornell's car. They returned in a few days without Crow. A few days later Albert told law enforcement officers that, at daybreak on the day of their return to Des Moines, Cornell shot Crow with a .38 caliber revolver in some woods near an interstate highway in southern Iowa. With Albert's help Crow's body was found the next day. He had been shot in the head.
The State charged Cornell with first-degree murder under Iowa Code section 690.1,.2 (1975), and the case was tried to a jury. The defense urged that Albert fabricated his testimony. Cornell testified that Crow voluntarily left the car alone and alive after an argument with Cornell. The defense claimed that Bryce Oliver (Bryce), Albert's 19-year-old brother, was Crow's killer. The jury returned a verdict of guilty.
Because the appeal turns on a constitutional issue, we review the record de novo and evaluate the totality of the circumstances. Conner v. State, 362 N.W.2d 449, 458 (Iowa 1985). The burden of proof is on the defendant to establish materiality. State v. Anderson, 410 N.W.2d 231, 234 (Iowa 1987). The reviewing court should consider any adverse effect that the failure to disclose might have had on the preparation or presentation of the defendant's case. Id. at 234-35.
I. Cornell's first and principal assignment is his claim that exculpatory evidence was improperly suppressed in violation of the disclosure rule laid down in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215 (1963). To establish this claim Cornell must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that:
1. The prosecution suppressed evidence;
2. This evidence was favorable to the accused; and
3. The evidence was material to the issue of guilt.
Brogdon v. Blackburn, 790 F.2d 1164, 1167 (5th Cir.1986).
On the issue of suppression, the Brady rule applies when information is discovered after trial "which had been known to the prosecution but unknown to the defense." United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 103, 96 S.Ct. 2392, 2397, 49 L.Ed.2d 342, 349 (1976); State v. Nunn, 356 N.W.2d 601, 605 (Iowa App.1984). Exculpatory evidence is not "suppressed" if the defendant either knew or should have known of the essential facts permitting him to take advantage of the evidence. United States v. LeRoy, 687 F.2d 610, 618 (2d Cir.1982).
Cornell bases his claim on four evidentiary items. The court of appeals correctly *386 found that two of the items were otherwise made known to Cornell through other channels and any failure to disclose them had no impact on Cornell's defense. The two items which remained were:
1. A statement taken from Jody Seidenkranz on October 6, 1976, in which she said she was at her mother's residence when Cornell and Albert returned home. Cornell said Crow got out of his car at Mt. Ayr and stole his gun. Jody said Albert agreed with Cornell's statement.
2. A September 29, 1976, statement in which Bryce admitted taking a razor scraper from his pocket during a fight with Crow. The fight occurred about four days before Crow left for Texas.
The question, said to be one of materiality in accordance with the third Brady test, is whether the claimed violation can be said to have probably changed the outcome of the case. The United States Supreme Court revisited the materiality question in United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 105 S.Ct. 3375, 87 L.Ed.2d 481 (1985). The Bagley court applied the same test of materiality to the Brady rule which it had applied to test prejudice resulting from ineffective assistance of counsel in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). Bagley holds that a defendant is entitled to a new trial where "there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different." Bagley, 473 U.S. at 682, 105 S.Ct. at 3384, 87 L.Ed.2d at 494. A "reasonable probability" is "a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome." Id. The Bagley inquiry requires consideration of the totality of circumstances, including the possible effects of nondisclosure on defense counsel's trial preparation. Id. We adopted and applied the Bagley standard in State v. Anderson, 410 N.W.2d at 232-34.
We find no reasonable probability that disclosure of this testimony would have led to a different result. Jody Seidenkranz's statement's only use would have been to impeach Albert. Albert's testimony was otherwise impeached because of several inconsistent statements. His acquiescence in Cornell's statement is easily explained by Cornell's threats.
We are far from convinced that trial counsel would have used Seidenkranz's statement if it had been disclosed. This is because it would have emphasized Cornell's threats against Albert in his attempt to keep Albert quiet.
The second statement, containing the admission by Bryce Oliver that he made threats with a razor toward Crow, was also of impeachment value. Cornell knew about the fight between Bryce Oliver and Kenneth Crow. At the trial Cornell testified Bryce Oliver assaulted Kenneth Crow with a razor sharp knife a week before Crow was killed. But Cornell and his counsel did not know that Bryce Oliver had made a statement admitting he threatened Crow with a razor scraper during the argument. This statement is inconsistent with Bryce Oliver's deposition testimony in which he denied pulling a knife on Crow. It is also inconsistent with Bryce Oliver's trial testimony in which he stated he did not recall threatening Crow during the argument.
Bryce's statement has impeachment value because it draws into question the credibility of Bryce Oliver's trial testimony. The statement might also be said to be corroborative of Cornell's defense theory. But it cannot be said there is a reasonable probability that its exclusion changed the result. See Hamann v. State, 324 N.W.2d 906, 910 (Iowa 1982) (even where prosecutor used perjured testimony, new trial is mandated only if materiality standards are met. Effect on trial, not culpability of prosecutor, is a critical issue).
Under the Bagley test the failure to furnish either item of evidence was not material. The district court was correct in so holding.
II. We find no merit in Cornell's claim that newly discovered evidence warrants a new trial. Five items of newly discovered evidence are suggested. Iowa Code section 663A.2(4) provides that a petitioner is entitled to postconviction relief if "[t]here exists evidence of material fact, not previously *387 presented and heard, that requires vacation of the conviction or sentence in the interest of justice." In State v. Whitsel, 339 N.W.2d 149, 156 (Iowa 1983) we ruled the petitioner must prove the following propositions by preponderance of the evidence to obtain a new trial on account of newly discovered evidence:
1. The evidence could not have been discovered earlier in the exercise of due diligence;
2. The evidence is material to the issue, not merely cumulative or impeaching; and
3. The evidence would probably change the result if a new trial is granted.
Id. at 156.
Motions for new trials on the basis of newly discovered evidence are looked upon with disfavor. Jones v. Scurr, 316 N.W.2d 905, 910 (Iowa 1982).
The district court concluded that the newly discovered evidence was based mostly on testimony that was vague, uncertain, unreliable and totally incredible. We agree with this conclusion. Again, Cornell fails to meet the materiality test because he fails to show that the newly discovered evidence would have changed the outcome of the trial.
III. Finally, Cornell contends he was denied effective assistance of counsel by the misconduct of both the State and his own attorneys. In Taylor v. State, 352 N.W.2d 683 (Iowa 1984), we summarized the applicable law as follows:
The person claiming that his trial attorney was ineffective, depriving him of his Sixth Amendment right to counsel, must show that (1) counsel failed to perform an essential duty, and (2) prejudice resulted therefrom. Petitioner has the burden to prove both of these elements by preponderance of the evidence.
Id. at 684-85 (citations omitted).
One claimed failure had to do with his counsel's failure to secure the withheld exculpatory evidence discussed in division I of this opinion. We have already found that Cornell was not prejudiced by this failure. It follows that he was not prejudiced by any failure of his counsel to compel its production. Cornell also asserts his counsel's conduct fell below the normal range of competence. There is nothing in the record to support this claim.
All of Cornell's assignments are without merit. The district court correctly dismissed his petition for postconviction relief.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2208293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.615337+00 ===

548 N.E.2d 1167 (1989)
Gene E. ROBINSON, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Chris T. KINNICK and Laura Kinnick, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 53A01-8908-CV-299.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
November 30, 1989.
Rehearing Denied January 11, 1990.
Transfer Denied May 17, 1990.
Richard D. Schreiber, Schreiber & Sevenish, Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellant.
Mark R. Smith, Jennings & Maas, Indianapolis, for defendants-appellees.
BAKER, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Plaintiff-appellant, Gene E. Robinson (Robinson), appeals the entry of an adverse summary judgment in favor of defendant-appellants, Chris T. Kinnick and his wife Laura Kinnick (the Kinnicks), on his suit to recover for the personal injuries he sustained when he fell from the roof of the Kinnicks' home.
We affirm.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
In late January, or early February, 1985, Robinson was hired by the Kinnicks as an independent contractor to aid in the construction of their personal residence. Specifically, Robinson was hired to perform roofing work on the home. Early in the morning of February 28, 1985, Robinson climbed a ladder in order to get to the back part of the roof where he was to continue shingling that day. Although Robinson observed water, frost, and ice on the roof's surface, he proceeded to shingle. While in the process of carrying a bundle of shingles across the roof, Robinson slipped on *1168 an accumulation of ice, slid down the roof, and fell 26 feet to the ground.
Thereafter, Robinson filed a complaint against the Kinnicks in order to recover for the personal injuries he sustained from the fall. In his complaint, Robinson alleged the Kinnicks had been negligent in failing to provide him with adequate safety equipment or proper supervision and in permitting him to work on the roof when they should have known it was not safe due to the inclement weather conditions. The Kinnicks subsequently filed a motion for summary judgment alleging that they owed no duty to provide Robinson with safety equipment or supervise his work. Further, they asserted that Robinson had superior knowledge of any allegedly dangerous conditions on the roof absolving them of any duty with respect thereto. Following a hearing, the trial court granted the Kinnicks' motion for summary judgment. Robinson subsequently instituted this appeal.
ISSUES
Robinson raises the following issues for our review:
I. Whether the Kinnicks voluntarily or gratuitously assumed a duty to provide a safe work place to Robinson.
II. Whether the Kinnicks owed a duty to provide Robinson a safe place to work under IND. CODE 22-1-1-10.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
The rules governing summary judgment are well settled. In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, we apply the same standard as that employed by the trial court. Summary judgment may be granted only if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with affidavits and testimony, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Howard v. H.J. Ricks Construction Co., Inc. (1987), Ind. App., 509 N.E.2d 201, trans. denied. The party seeking summary judgment has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Wingett v. Teledyne Industries, Inc. (1985), Ind., 479 N.E.2d 51. If there is any doubt as to the existence of a material factual issue, the motion should be resolved in favor of the nonmovant. In ascertaining the existence of any doubt, the contents of all pleadings, papers, and affidavits are liberally construed in favor of the nonmovant. Bell v. Northside Finance Corp. (1983), Ind., 452 N.E.2d 951. We will reverse only if the record discloses an unresolved issue of fact or an incorrect application of the law to undisputed facts. Morris v. Lyons Capital Resources, Inc. (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 221.
In his complaint, Robinson asserted the Kinnicks were negligent in failing to exercise due care for his safety. It is axiomatic that in order to recover on a theory of negligence, a plaintiff must establish that there existed a duty on the part of the defendant in relation to the plaintiff. Whether a duty exists is a question of law for the court. State v. Flanigan (1986), Ind. App., 489 N.E.2d 1216. Absent a duty, there can be no actionable negligence based upon a breach of such.
As a general rule, an owner of property is not required to provide an independent contractor with a safe place to work. Howard, supra; Hoosier Cardinal Corp. v. Brizius (1964), 136 Ind. App. 363, 199 N.E.2d 481, 486, trans. denied. Robinson contends, however, that the Kinnicks gratuitously or voluntarily assumed a duty to provide him with a safe work place. In support of this contention, he cites Plan-Tec, Inc. v. Wiggins (1983), Ind. App., 443 N.E.2d 1212.
A duty of care may arise where one party assumes such a duty, either gratuitously or voluntarily. Plan-Tec, supra; Clyde E. Williams & Associates, Inc. v. Boatman (1978), 176 Ind. App. 430, 375 N.E.2d 1138, trans. denied. The assumption of a duty creates a special relationship between the parties and a corresponding duty to act in the manner of a reasonably prudent person. Id. Whether a party has assumed a duty and the extent of that duty, if any, are questions for the trier of *1169 fact. Perry v. Northern Indiana Public Service Co. (1982), Ind. App., 433 N.E.2d 44, trans. denied.
In several instances our courts have determined that there existed sufficient facts of probative value to create a jury question regarding whether a party gratuitously assumed a duty to provide a safe work place to another. Perry, supra; Plan-Tec, supra; Phillips v. United Engineers (1986), Ind. App., 500 N.E.2d 1265.
In Perry, a contractor's employee was seriously injured when he fell from an elevated fan housing where he had been sent to work without scaffolding or other safety equipment. Although the defendant-property-owner did not contractually undertake the duty of job site safety, this court held that by its actions it nevertheless may have assumed such a duty. In reversing the entry of summary judgment in favor of the defendant, this court concluded that the fact that the property owner held regular safety meetings for employees of subcontractors and employed safety men with jurisdiction of the safety program on the job site, presented sufficient evidence to allow the question of assumption of a duty to go to the jury.
In Plan-Tec, an employee of a subcontractor was injured when scaffolding upon which he was working to modify the exterior skin of a building collapsed and fell to the ground. Plan-Tec, the construction manager of the project, had not contractually agreed to provide on the job safety. This court, however, found that several facts presented sufficient evidence to create a factual issue to the jury as to the assumption of that duty. Specifically, Plan-Tec had appointed a safety director for the job site, held weekly safety meetings, issued directives instructing contractors to observe certain safety precautions on the job site, and inspected the scaffolding each morning before contractors were permitted to work on the project.
In Phillips, the decedent was fatally injured when he fell 119 feet from an unfinished catwalk where he had been installing sheet metal siding. The defendant-construction engineer of the project appointed a "safety coordinator" for the job site who conducted bi-weekly safety meetings for superintendents of contractors. The safety coordinator also conducted tours of the job site during which he noted safety violations and unsafe practices and after which he advised the violator by letter to remedy the problem. The Phillips court determined that this evidence was sufficient to present to a jury the question of whether the defendant had assumed a duty regarding the safety aspects of the project.
In each of the above cases, the entity sought to be charged with the assumption of a duty appointed safety inspectors, held regular safety meetings, inspected the job site on a daily basis, and directed that certain safety precautions be taken on the job site. These factors reveal a deliberate attempt to control or actively supervise safety at the job site. In the case at bar, however, the evidence in the record shows that the Kinnicks did not appoint a safety director to supervise the job site, did not hold safety meetings, and did not prescribe any safety precautions to be taken on the project or provide written safety rules to persons at the site. Further, the Kinnicks did not conduct daily inspections of the project in general or of the roof in particular or advise any of the workers at the site about what safety equipment to utilize. In fact, many independent contractors brought their own safety equipment to the job. There was insufficient evidence as a matter of law to create a factual question for a jury as to whether the Kinnicks assumed a duty toward Robinson.
This holding is consistent with our decision in Teitge v. Remy Construction Co., Inc. (1988), Ind. App., 526 N.E.2d 1008. In that case, Teitge was injured when he fell from the roof of a building through an unguarded skylight to a concrete floor below. In affirming the trial court's entry of judgment on the evidence in favor of an architect on the project, this court held there was insufficient evidence to present a question to the jury as to whether he assumed a duty toward Teitge. As in our case, the architect had not appointed a safety director or conducted safety inspections *1170 on a regular basis. Further, the project administrator informed each contractor that it was responsible for the safety of its own employees.
Robinson points out, however, that the Kinnicks provided certain safety equipment to the independent contractors and had nailed two by four inch toeboards to the top of the roof where Robinson was working when he fell. These factors do not miraculously create a genuine issue of material fact. It is true that various safety equipment was present at the job site. The Kinnicks, however, did not require that the independent contractors utilize the equipment but rather merely made it available for their use if they so chose. The Kinnicks did not maintain written rules requiring the safety equipment be used or conduct safety meetings advocating the use of the equipment. There is absolutely no evidence from which a reasonable juror could conclude that based upon this conduct the Kinnicks assumed a duty to provide Robinson with a safe place to work. With respect to the toeboards nailed on the roof, in the absence of any other evidence indicating the contrary, one or two instances of safety precautions taken by the defendant does not raise a jury question as to whether a duty was assumed. Teitge, supra. The trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the Kinnicks on this basis.
Additionally, IND. CODE 22-1-1-10 provides:
Every employer and place of employment under the jurisdiction of the department of labor created by this chapter shall:
(1) furnish employment that is safe for the employees therein;
(2) furnish and use safety devices, safeguards, methods and processes reasonably adequate to render employment and place of employment safe; and
(3) do every other thing reasonably necessary to protect the safety of the employee.
In the alternative, Robinson contends the Kinnicks violated the duty to provide a safe work place allegedly imposed upon them under this statute. In support of his position, Robinson cites Maynard v. Flanagin Brothers, Inc. (1985), Ind. App., 484 N.E.2d 71, reh. denied 490 N.E.2d 1147, trans. denied.
In Maynard, an employee of an independent contractor was injured when a trench he had been excavating for sewer lines collapsed, burying him. The plaintiff sued the prime contractor, independent contractor, and subcontractor on the project to recover for the injuries he sustained in the accident. Summary judgment was granted in favor of the prime contractor based upon the general rule that a prime contractor is not liable for injuries to servants of an independent contractor. On appeal, Maynard argued that as an exception to the general rule, a prime contractor was charged with the duty to provide for his safety by virtue of the construction industry regulations promulgated by the Indiana Department of Labor pursuant to IND. CODE 22-1-1-11. In reversing the entry of summary judgment, the Third District of this court held that the term "place of employment" in IND. CODE 22-1-1-11 imposed upon prime contractors a duty to insure compliance with the construction industry safety regulations for the protection of all workers on a job site including those beyond the basic employer-employee relationship.
Robinson seeks to extend this reasoning to IND. CODE 22-1-1-10 and argues that the duty to provide a safe work place imposed by that statute applies to the Kinnicks as they provided a "place of employment." The Kinnicks argue that the Maynard rationale is not applicable to IND. CODE 22-1-1-10 and thus the statute only imposes a duty with respect to the basic employer-employee relationship.
We need not decide whether the Maynard rationale can serve a basis upon which to extend the protection of IND. CODE 22-1-1-10 to independent contractors. Even if that statute applied beyond the area of employers and employees, Robinson has failed to establish that it imposed a duty upon the Kinnicks. The holding in Maynard was expressly limited to prime *1171 contractors. Robinson, however, has wholly failed to show how the Kinnicks could be considered prime contractors. In the present case, the Kinnicks were the property owners/contractees and not prime contractors. Robinson conceded he was an independent contractor and was not an employee of the Kinnicks. Thus, the Kinnicks were not charged with a specific duty to provide a safe work place for Robinson under IND. CODE 22-1-1-10.
Accordingly, the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of the Kinnicks is affirmed.
RATLIFF, C.J., and ROBERTSON, J., concur.

=== CASE 9736991 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:16.224804+00 ===

JUSTICE REINHARD delivered the opinion of the court: Following a stipulated bench trial in the circuit court of Du Page County, defendant, Charles F. Bessler, was found guilty of the offenses of unlawful use of weapons (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 24—1(a)(7)), possession of a firearm without having a firearm owner’s identification (FOID) card (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 83—2), and unlawful possession of not more than 2.5 grams of a substance containing cannabis (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 56½, par. 704(a)) and was sentenced to an 18-month term of periodic imprisonment, a $250 fine, and a $100 fine on the convictions, respectively. Defendant appeals, contending that his pretrial motion to suppress evidence should have been granted because the search of his garage pursuant to a search warrant was based on an earlier unlawful warrantless administrative search of the premises. Defendant’s motion to suppress evidence alleges that on March 24, 1987, police officers entered a garage at 310 East Elm, Villa Park, Illinois, pursuant to a search warrant, and shortly thereafter arrested and charged him with unlawful use of weapons, possession of a firearm without having a FOID card, and unlawful possession of cannabis. Defendant’s motion further states that the search warrant was obtained through false and misleading allegations. In an amendment to the motion to suppress, defendant also alleges that the “predicate search which was the basis for the search warrant was illegal” because there was no authority for the police and a housing inspector to go upon the property and look into the garage. At the hearing on the motion to suppress, the testimony shows that defendant lived with his parents at 310 East Elm in Villa Park and rented from them the detached garage to the rear of the residence. The garage is approximately 10 to 15 feet behind the house. Defendant uses the garage to work on cars and store tools. On March 24, 1987, the garage door was secured by a padlock and chain and the one window was boarded up. No one could see inside according to defendant. On the morning of March 24, 1987, at about 10:45, David Jones, a property maintenance and housing inspector for the Village of Villa Park, and Officer Robert Budig of the village police department went to 310 East Elm. According to Jones, the village’s building department previously received a telephone call from a neighbor complaining that five or six males were seen going in and out of the garage at 310 East Elm. The caller suggested that someone might be living in the garage. If true, according to Jones, this would allegedly constitute a violation of a Villa Park ordinance. Jones decided to investigate the report, and he requested that the Villa Park police department send-an officer to accompany him. Jones stated that it is common for building inspectors to request a police officer to accompany them on certain inspections if going alone would make the inspector uncomfortable. Budig and Jones testified that the purpose of the visit was to determine whether anyone was, in fact, living in the garage. The two knocked at the door of the house but received no answer. They then went behind the house to inspect the garage to determine if someone was living there. Jones believed he could enter onto the property and search the exterior of the premises for purposes of enforcing code violations. He based this assumption on a village ordinance which allowed certain village officials to enter structures or premises for the purpose of making inspections. They attempted to look into the window of the garage, but were unable to do so because the window was covered. They testified, however, that the pedestrian door, though chained and padlocked, could be opened about two to three inches. They attempted to peer into this small opening, but apparently Officer Budig’s flashlight was not powerful enough to sufficiently illuminate the inside of the dark garage. Leaving Jones at the garage, Officer Budig then drove to the police station to retrieve a more powerful flashlight. When Budig returned, he and Jones tried again to look into the garage. Budig stated that he saw on a table in the garage a mound of white, powdery substance on a piece of glass which appeared to be cocaine. He said that next to the white powder were two chunks of another substance he believed was “crack” cocaine. He also observed a glass water pipe and a scale. Officer Budig later swore to these facts in an affidavit, and a warrant to search the premises was subsequently issued based on this information. A search of the garage was conducted at 6:20 p.m. that day according to the search warrant inventory form. The search produced, inter alia, a .20 gauge shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches in length, less than 2.5 grams of a green, leafy substance later determined to be cannabis, and drug paraphernalia. Defendant testified that he returned to the garage sometime early in the afternoon of March 24, 1987, and found the condition of the garage to be different from the way he had left it. According to the defendant, the material covering the garage window was pulled away and the window broken so that light could enter the garage. At 7 p.m. that day defendant was arrested. After his arrest, defendant made certain incriminating statements to the police. Following the circuit court’s denial of the motion to suppress on the basis that the initial inspection of the garage pursuant to the municipal ordinance was not violative of defendant’s constitutional rights and that the search warrant was properly obtained, defendant stipulated to facts to be submitted to the court at a bench trial. The facts so stipulated were that the search of the garage pursuant to the search warrant resulted in the seizure of a shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches in length and less than 2.5 grams of cannabis and that, following the search, defendant admitted the property seized was his and he did not have a FOID card. Following this stipulation of facts, the circuit court found defendant guilty of the three charges set forth above. On appeal, defendant has abandoned his contention below that the affidavit for search warrant contained false and misleading allegations and proceeds on the sole ground that the initial entry onto his premises and search of the garage without a warrant was violative of the fourth amendment’s prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures (U.S. Const., amend. IV). In support thereof, defendant argues that administrative searches of a home, such as conducted here, are significant intrusions upon persons’ fourth amendment rights and, when conducted without a search warrant, have been held to lack the traditional safeguards which the fourth amendment guarantees to individuals, citing Camara v. Municipal Court (1967), 387 U.S. 523, 18 L. Ed. 2d 930, 87 S. Ct. 1727. In responding to this argument, the State concedes that the garage was within the curtilage of the home. Further, the State has not contended that the village ordinance authorizing a village code enforcement official “to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this code” (Villa Park, Ill., Ordinance 2224 (March 16, 1987) (enacting provisions of the 1984 BOCA Basic/National Existing Structures Code)) is constitutional. (See Camara v. Municipal Court (1967), 387 U.S. 523, 18 L. Ed. 2d 930, 87 S. Ct. 1727 (where a similar ordinance authorizing warrantless administrative searches of a home was held violative of the fourth amendment).) Instead, the State maintains, citing Illinois v. Krull (1987), 480 U.S. 340, 94 L. Ed. 2d 364, 107 S. Ct. 1160, that the “good faith” exception to the exclusionary rule is applicable here, where the initial search was based upon the officer’s reasonable reliance upon a village ordinance which allowed warrantless administrative inspections on private residential property, even if the ordinance is later deemed unconstitutional. In Illinois v. Krull, the question before the Supreme Court was whether a similar exception to the exclusionary rule, as set forth in United States v. Leon (1984), 468 U.S. 897, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677, 104 S. Ct. 3405 (fourth amendment exclusionary rule does not apply to evidence obtained by police officers who acted in objectively reasonable reliance upon a search warrant issued by a magistrate, but where the warrant was ultimately found to be unsupported by probable cause), should be recognized when officers act in objectively reasonable reliance upon a statute authorizing warrantless administrative searches, but where the statute is ultimately found to violate the fourth amendment. (Krull, 480 U.S. at 342, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 370, 107 S. Ct. at 1163.) The Court held that the defect in the Illinois statute allowing State officials to inspect records of motor vehicle dealers, parts dealers, automobile scrap processors, and similar businesses without a warrant at any reasonable time, found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court, was not sufficiently obvious so as to render a police officer’s reliance upon the statute objectively unreasonable. (480 U.S. at 359, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 381, 107 S. Ct. at 1172.) Thus, the “good faith” exception to the exclusionary rule was extended to a warrantless administrative search where the State statute allowing the inspection of certain business premises was subsequently found unconstitutional.  There is a significant difference between the facts in the instant case and those in Illinois v. Krull. The warrantless administrative search undertaken here, as authorized under the municipal ordinance, was of a private residence, whereas in Illinois v. Krull the State statute implicated allowed warrantless administrative inspections of a heavily regulated business. The greater latitude to conduct warrantless inspections of commercial property reflects the fact that the expectation of privacy that the owner of commercial property enjoys in such property differs significantly from the sanctity accorded an individual’s home. (Donovan v. Dewey (1981), 452 U.S. 594, 598-99, 69 L. Ed. 2d 262, 268-69, 101 S. Ct. 2534, 2537-38.) The physical entry of the home is the chief evil against which the wording of the fourth amendment is directed. (Payton v. New York (1980), 445 U.S. 573, 585-86, 63 L. Ed. 2d 639, 650, 100 S. Ct. 1371, 1379-80.) In the absence of consent or exigent circumstances, the entry into a home to conduct a search or make an arrest is unreasonable under the fourth amendment unless done pursuant to a warrant. Steagald v. United States (1981), 451 U.S. 204, 211-12, 68 L. Ed. 2d 38, 45, 101 S. Ct. 1642, 1647. As this case does not come within the “good faith” exception to the exclusionary rule established in United States v. Leon or Illinois v. Krull, we decline to create another exception to the exclusionary rule which would invade the long-protected sanctity of the home from warrantless searches. Such a judicially created “good faith” exception should be left to the Supreme Court. (See People v. Ross (1985), 133 Ill. App. 3d 66, 73-74, 478 N.E.2d 575.) In view of our holding on this basis, we need not make further inquiry into such potential issues as whether there may be reliance on a municipal ordinance, as is the case here, rather than a State statute, as in Illinois v. Krull, for the “good faith” exception to apply, and whether the officer could objectively reasonably rely on the ordinance which was substantially similar to the ordinance previously held defective over 20 years ago in Camara v. Municipal Court.  We, therefore, conclude that the officer’s peering into the garage within the curtilage of defendant’s home without a warrant and not under some recognized exception to the warrant requirement was violative of defendant’s fourth amendment rights. Where the initial search is unlawful, the information gained therefrom cannot form the basis for the issuance of a search warrant, and evidence so obtained is inadmissible. People v. Bowen (1987), 164 Ill. App. 3d 164, 177-78, 517 N.E.2d 608; see People v. Koniecki (1985), 135 Ill. App. 3d 394, 401, 481 N.E.2d 973. Accordingly, the denial of the motion to suppress evidence was manifestly erroneous, and the judgment of conviction is reversed. The cause is remanded for a new trial. The evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant and defendant’s statements made subsequent to his arrest are suppressed.  The State requests in its brief, however, that should this court reverse the denial of the suppression order entered below, we also remand to allow evidence to be taken in order to determine whether defendant’s post-arrest statements were otherwise admissible under Brown v. Illinois (1975), 422 U.S. 590, 45 L. Ed. 2d 416, 95 S. Ct. 2254. In Brown, the Supreme Court held that a confession rendered inadmissible by a prior illegal arrest is admissible if, after considering such factors as whether Miranda warnings were given, the temporal proximity of the arrest and confession, the presence of intervening circumstances and the purpose and flagrancy of the official misconduct, it is shown that the confession is sufficiently attenuated from the taint of the illegal arrest. Brown, 422 U.S. at 602-04, 45 L. Ed. 2d at 426-27, 95 S. Ct. at 2261-62.  As the circuit court denied defendant’s motion to suppress, the State had no reason to urge admission of defendant’s statements pursuant to Brown v. Illinois. Thus, there is no evidence in this record from which we can properly determine whether the statements were sufficiently attenuated from the taint of the illegal arrest. Consequently, it will be necessary, should the State seek to admit defendant’s statements at a new trial, that the trial court conduct a pretrial evidentiary hearing to ascertain whether the statements are admissible under Brown v. Illinois. See Brown, 422 U.S. at 604, 45 L. Ed. 2d at 427, 95 S. Ct. at 2262; see also Morales v. New York (1969), 396 U.S. 102, 24 L. Ed. 2d 299, 90 S. Ct. 291. The judgment of the circuit court is reversed, and the cause is remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded. McLAREN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9736992 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:16.22952+00 ===

JUSTICE INGLIS, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the majority and would find that the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule as articulated in Illinois v. Krull (1987), 480 U.S. 340, 94 L. Ed. 2d 364, 107 S. Ct. 1160, is controlling in the case at bar. The good-faith exception was first recognized by the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Leon (1984), 468 U.S. 897, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677, 104 S. Ct. 3405, and was later expanded in Illinois v. Krull. In Leon, the defendant was arrested after a search of his residence revealed a large quantity of narcotics. The search was based on a facially valid search warrant later determined to be invalid. The Court held that evidence seized on the authority of a search warrant later found to be invalid need not be excluded if the police officer’s reliance on the warrant was objectively reasonable. The Court reasoned that to exclude evidence under these circumstances would not further the underlying purpose of the exclusionary rule, which is to deter police misconduct, because at the time of the search and seizure the police officer was acting as a reasonable police officer should. 468 U.S. at 918-19, 82 L. Ed. 2d at 696, 104 S. Ct. at 3418. In Krull, relying on the same rationale used in Leon, the Court extended the good-faith exception to situations in which a police officer conducts a search and seizure under the authority of a statute later found to be unconstitutional. The Court reasoned: “The approach used in Leon is equally applicable to the present case. The application of the exclusionary rule to suppress evidence obtained by an officer acting in objectively reasonable reliance on a statute would have as little deterrent effect on the officer’s actions as would the exclusion of evidence when an officer acts in objectively reasonable reliance on a warrant. Unless a statute is clearly unconstitutional, an officer cannot be expected to question the judgment of the legislature that passed the law. If the statute is subsequently declared unconstitutional, excluding evidence obtained pursuant to it prior to such a judicial declaration will not deter future Fourth Amendment violations by an officer who has simply fulfilled his responsibility to enforce the statute as written.” (Krull, 480 U.S. at 349-50, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 375, 107 S. Ct. at 1167.) To fit within the Krull type of good-faith exception, the officer’s reliance on the constitutionally defective statute must be objectively reasonable. Further, the legislature which enacted the statute must not have wholly abandoned its responsibility to enact laws consistent with the constitution. Krull, 480 U.S. at 355, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 378-79, 107 S. Ct. at 1170. The majority found that the holding in Krull was inapplicable to the case at bar because Krull involved an inspection of a commercial property, whereas in the case at bar a private residence was inspected. I find no support for the distinction made by the majority. (See People v. Mashaney (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 390, 393-94.) Krull was substantially based on the holding and reasoning in Leon which involved a search of a private residence. While it is true that a private dwelling is generally afforded more protection than commercial property (Donovan v. Dewey (1981), 452 U.S. 594, 598-99, 69 L. Ed. 2d 262, 268-69, 101 S. Ct. 2534, 2537-38), the protection is provided through meeting the good-faith requirement, not by barring the application of the exception altogether. In applying the good-faith requirement to the case at bar, I believe the police officer’s actions fell within the Krull exception to the exclusionary rule. It does not seem unreasonable for an officer to rely on an ordinance designed to enforce the city’s building codes. The applicable standard is that of a “reasonable officer,” not of an attorney, or other legal professional, trained to research the law. In addition, it does not appear to me that the Village “wholly abandoned” its obligation to pass constitutional laws. While we may declare the ordinance to be unconstitutional, that fact alone does not suggest that the Village “wholly abandoned” its obligation. If it did, the good-faith exception in Krull could never be met. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2208299 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.65526+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 461 (1988)
Jacob KUITERS, Relator,
v.
COUNTY OF FREEBORN, Respondent.
No. C5-87-2415.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 21, 1988.
*462 Phillip A. Kohl, III, Albert Lea, for appellant.
Paul G. Morreim, Freeborn Co. Atty., Albert Lea, for respondent.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
Relator, Jacob Kuiters, appeals from an order denying him a new trial following a decision of the tax court which denied his petition for a reduction of his real estate tax assessment. The tax court found that Kuiters' agricultural property was assessed in excess of its market value, but nevertheless denied him relief because agricultural property in the county was assessed, on average, at 115% of its market value.
Relator Jacob Kuiters owned six parcels of agricultural land in Freeborn County. The county assessor's estimated market value for the six parcels on January 2, 1983 was $601,200 and on January 2, 1984 was $537,500. Kuiters brought a timely challenge to these assessments pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 278.01, subd. 1 (1986), claiming that the assessed values were in excess of the property's "market value." He also claimed that the property was assessed unequally in comparison to other agricultural property in the county, and other classes of property, and sought equalization.
The tax court found that the property was valued in excess of market value for both years. The correct market value of the property was $549,500 for January 2, 1983, and $494,550 for January 2, 1984. The court ordered that the 1984 assessment be reduced to the actual market value as determined by the court, and that all appropriate refunds be made to the taxpayer. The court, however, refused to reduce the 1983 assessment, because it determined that in 1983, agricultural land was assessed at approximately 115% of market value in Freeborn County. This finding was based on an assessment/sales ratio study prepared by the Minnesota Department of Revenue. The court held that it could not reduce Kuiters' assessment to its market value because to do so would create an unconstitutional inequality in assessment levels of agricultural land in the county. The court also declined to equalize Kuiters' property with other agricultural property in the county because equalization would require Kuiters' assessment to be raised to 115% of market value. The court determined that for 1983, it did not have the power to raise assessments.[1] Finally, the tax court declined to equalize Kuiters' assessment with property in other classes.
Neither party disputes the factual findings as to the market value of Kuiters' property, or the finding that agricultural land in Freeborn County was assessed on average at 115% of market value. The only issue disputed on appeal is the tax court's refusal to reduce Kuiters' real estate assessment to the market value of the property. This issue presents a question of law. Therefore, we must review the decision of the tax court to see if its decision "was not in conformity with law" or if it committed an "error of law." Minn.Stat. § 271.10, subd. 1 (1986); Red Owl Stores, Inc. v. Commissioner of Taxation, 264 Minn. 1, 117 N.W.2d 401 (1962).
The tax court refused to reduce Kuiters' assessment to the market value of the property, holding that to do so would create an unconstitutional inequality in the taxing district. The tax court reasoned that valuing Kuiters' property at 100% of its market value, as required by Minn.Stat. §§ 273.11, subd. 1 (1986) and 278.01, subd. 1 (1986), while other property in the same class was valued on average at 115% of market value would violate the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution, amendment XIV, and the uniformity *463 clause of the Minnesota Constitution, art. X, § 1.
The uniformity clause of the Minnesota Constitution provides: "Taxes shall be uniform upon the same class of subjects * * *." The equal protection clause provides: "No state shall * * * deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." We have held that the scope of protection afforded to individuals under these two provisions is identical. Lund v. Hennepin County, 403 N.W.2d 617, 619 (Minn.1987), appeal dismissed, ___ U.S. ___, 108 S.Ct. 50, 98 L.Ed.2d 15 (1987). We have stated that "[t]he right to uniformity and equality is the right to equal treatment in the apportionment of the tax burden." Hamm v. State, 255 Minn. 64, 70, 95 N.W.2d 649, 654 (1959).
Uniformity of taxation must necessarily begin with the uniform valuation of property. Assessment practices which result in a taxpayer's property being valued "at a substantially higher percentage of its market value than is other property in the taxing district" violate the uniformity requirements of the state and federal constitutions. In re Objection to Real Property Taxes, 353 N.W.2d 525, 529 (Minn.1984). In Dulton Realty Inc. v. State, 270 Minn. 1, 132 N.W.2d 394 (1964) we addressed non-uniform assessment practices by assessors in various counties, who, at the time of Dulton, assessed properties for tax purposes at varying fractions of the properties' true market value. We held that such practices violated the uniformity and equal protection clauses, and we suggested legislative reforms to require assessors to value property at its true and full value. Id. at 21-22, 132 N.W.2d at 408. In 1967, the legislature amended Minn.Stat. § 273.11 to require that all property be valued at its "market value." 1967 Minn.Laws ch. 32, art. 7, sec. 3. The purpose of the change was to ensure that assessors valued property uniformly by requiring them to value all property at its "market value." Johnson v. County of Ramsey, 290 Minn. 307, 310-11, 187 N.W.2d 675, 677 (1971).
Minnesota Statute § 273.11, subd. 1 (1986) provides that, with several exceptions which do not apply here, "all property shall be valued at its market value." Minnesota Statute § 278.01, subd. 1 (1986) provides in part:
Any person having any estate, right, title, or interest in or lien upon any parcel of land, who claims that * * * the parcel has been assessed at a valuation greater than its real or actual value, or that the tax levied against the same is illegal * * * may have the validity of the claim, defense, or objection determined by the district court of the county in which the tax is levied or by the tax court * * *.
The statutory language is clear. The assessment of Kuiters' property in excess of its market value was a violation of the statutes. Kuiters filed a timely objection to the assessment and brought a proper action under section 278.01, subd. 1 to have the assessment reduced. The court determined that the market value of Kuiters' property for January 2, 1983 was $549,500 and the assessor valued the property at $601,200 in that year. Although we note that the prevailing economic conditions during the assessment years in question made it difficult for the county to accurately assess agricultural property, those conditions do not constitute a defense to a claim of overassessment under Minn.Stat. § 278.01, subd. 1 (1986).
We are not persuaded, as the tax court was, that the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution, amendment XIV, and the uniformity clause of the Minnesota Constitution, art. X, § 1 bar Kuiters' action to have his real estate assessment for 1983 reduced. This case is factually different from other cases in which we have applied these constitutional provisions. In our previous cases, taxpayers have raised these constitutional issues in unequal or discriminatory assessment cases. In all of the cases, the assessments were already less than the "market value" of the properties. See e.g. In re McCannel, 301 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1980); Johnson v. Ramsey County, 290 Minn. 307, 187 N.W.2d 675 (1971); Dulton Realty Inc. v. State, 270 Minn. 1, 132 N.W.2d 394 (1964); Hamm v. State, 255 Minn. 64, 95 N.W.2d *464 649 (1959). It was necessary in those cases to depart from the statutory requirement of "market value" to ensure uniformity and equal treatment in the assessment of property for tax purposes. In Hamm v. State, we stated: "where it is impossible to secure both the standard of the true value, and the uniformity and equality required by law, the latter requirement is to be preferred as the just and ultimate purpose of the law." 255 Minn. at 70, 95 N.W.2d at 654 (quoting Sioux City Bridge Co. v. Dakota County, 260 U.S. 441, 446, 43 S.Ct. 190, 192, 67 L.Ed. 340 (1923)).
In the present case, Kuiters and other agricultural property owners were assessed at varying levels, most of which exceeded the market values of the properties. The tax court found that the average assessment was 115% of market value. Unlike the analysis in prior cases, we cannot ignore the statutory requirements. To do so would defeat the very purpose of those statutes, which is to provide constitutionally mandated uniformity in taxation by ensuring that all property is initially assessed on a uniform basis  its market value. If we were to adopt the position of the tax court, the continued viability of the right of action created by section 278.01, subd. 1, to correct overassessments would be doubtful. A taxpayer could not petition for a reduction if his or her property was overassessed unless the property was additionally assessed unequally in comparison to other property. We read section 278.01 subd. 1, to provide a right of action independently for both overassessment and unequal assessment claims.
We also note that the constitutional issue relied upon by the tax court was improperly raised in this case. The tax court does not have original jurisdiction to decide constitutional issues. Erie Mining Co. v. Comm. of Revenue, 343 N.W.2d 261, 264 (Minn.1984); In re McCannel, 301 N.W.2d 910, 919-20 (Minn.1980). The tax court acquires jurisdiction to decide all issues in a particular case, including constitutional issues, when the case is transferred to the tax court from the district court. McCannel, 301 N.W.2d at 920. However, plenary jurisdiction exists in the tax court only when "the constitutional issue is raised in the district court before the case is transferred to the tax court." Id. (emphasis added)
The record in the present case indicates that the district court, at the time it transferred the case, was unaware of the constitutional issue of the applicability of Minn.Stat. §§ 278.01, subd. 1 (1986) and 273.11, subd. 1 (1986). It appears that the issue was not raised until trial in the tax court. The proper procedures for such occurrence were set out in Erie Mining, supra:
If any party raises a constitutional issue, the tax court should stay the proceedings and refer the constitutional question to the district court. The district court may either decide the constitutional issue, or refer the matter back to the tax court which will then have subject matter jurisdiction to rule initially on the constitutional issue.
343 N.W.2d at 264. These procedures were followed in Nagaraja v. Comm. of Revenue, 352 N.W.2d 373, 374 n. 1 (Minn.1984) and should have been followed in this case.
Finally, we reject the tax court's analysis that reducing Kuiters' assessment to the market value of the property while other agricultural property was assessed in excess of market value would create unconstitutional inequality in the taxing district. Other agricultural property owners in the county who were assessed at levels in excess of the market values of their property could have petitioned, as Kuiters did, for a reduction under Minn.Stat. § 278.01, subd. 1 (1986). This statutory remedy is the exclusive remedy available to taxpayers for relief of improper taxation. Bethke v. County of Brown, 301 Minn. 380, 223 N.W. 2d 757, 761 (1974). Their failure to exercise their statutory rights amounts to a waiver of those rights which cannot become a defense to granting relief to a taxpayer, such as Kuiters, who has exercised his rights.
The tax court erred in refusing to reduce the assessor's January 2, 1983 estimated market value for Kuiters' property to its *465 actual market value, as required by Minn. Stat. § 278.01, subd. 1 (1986).
Reversed and remanded for an order consistent with this opinion.
NOTES
[1]  Cf. 1986 Minn. Laws ch. 473, sec. 5, codified at Minn.Stat. § 278.05, subd. 1 (1986). The issue of the applicability of this provision is not before the court.

=== CASE 9736993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:17.558685+00 ===

JUSTICE HOWERTON delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant was tried by jury in Pope County and convicted of aggravated criminal sexual assault. The jury was not instructed in writing, at the close of the case, that defendant was presumed innocent and that the State had the burden of proving his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Defendant neither requested nor tendered the instruction. However, during voir dire the prospective jurors were questioned on both concepts, and the jurors were reminded of both concepts in closing arguments; nevertheless, we reverse and remand. The instruction reads: “Defendant is presumed to be innocent of the charges against him. This presumption remains with him throughout every stage of the trial and during your deliberations on the verdict, and is not overcome unless from all the evidence in the case you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty. The State has the burden of proving the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt, and this burden remains on the State throughout the case. The defendant is not required to prove his innocence.” Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 2.03 (2d ed. 1981). Defendant argues the failure to instruct on presumption of innocence and burden of proof requires reversal of conviction. The State replies that the jury was told throughout the proceedings that defendant was presumed innocent and the State had the burden of proving his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; therefore, the jury was sufficiently informed of these legal principles and the need for a formal, written instruction averted. In deciding between these arguments, we are not writing upon a clean slate. A like issue has been decided previously, but on constitutional grounds. People v. Cage (1986), 146 Ill. App. 3d 726, 497 N.E.2d 386, appeal denied (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 562; People v. Williams (1983), 120 Ill. App. 3d 900, 458 N.E.2d 1312; People v. Carpenter (1981), 101 Ill. App. 3d 792, 428 N.E.2d 983; People v. Donald (1974), 21 Ill. App. 3d 696, 315 N.E.2d 904; People v. French (1972), 5 Ill. App. 3d 908, 284 N.E.2d 481; People v. Ayala (1986), 142 Ill. App. 3d 93, 491 N.E.2d 154. Each of these cases decided whether the failure to give the instruction deprived defendant of a fair trial guaranteed by the United States Constitution. Each decision necessarily involved an examination of the record and an evaluation of whether the failure to give the instruction in light of the totality of the circumstances had deprived defendant of a fair trial. This approach is permissible insofar as the United States Constitution is concerned, because the guarantees of the United States Constitution do not require giving the presumption of innocence instruction in every case. Rather, the totality of the circumstances is assessed on a case-by-case basis. Kentucky v. Whorton (1979), 441 U.S. 786, 60 L. Ed. 2d 640, 99 S. Ct. 2088. We are struck, however, by what we feel is obvious. Under this approach, any decision by an appellate court not only will be fact specific, and therefore, of diminished precedential value, but will depend also on the value judgments of courts whose beliefs and composition may be subject to change. Recitation of the facts of this case is illustrative. In this case, before voir dire the circuit judge told the array of prospective jurors that defendant was presumed innocent, and that the State had the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, but the circuit judge continued and said, “after all the evidence and the argument of counsel, the court will at that time instruct the jury in writing as to law applicable to the case.” In voir dire, the court queried the prospective jurors if they had any prejudice against the defendant simply because he was charged with the crime. Each was urged to be fair and to apply the law without bias or prejudice. Each was questioned if he had “any quarrel with the concept that the defendant is innocent until proven guilty.” The 12 selected had satisfied the court and counsel by their answers. In closing argument, the prosecution said, “As the defendant sits here right now, he is viewed as being not guilty. It is the State’s burden to prove him guilty.” To complete the illustration, if we were to decide this case on United States constitutional grounds, we would say-that all the admonitions given in this case were negated when at the close of the case the court read to the jury Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction No. 1.01(2) which said, “[t]he law that applies to this case is stated in these instructions and it is your duty to follow all of them.” (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 1.01(2) (2d ed. 1981)). As the colloquialism “the little print takes away the big print” is sometimes true, likewise here the written instruction diminished the impact of the oral admonition. The scheme in which the pattern instructions are written, as well as our own experiences as trial lawyers, and trial judges, all would lead us to believe that most likely the written instruction would always work to take away the oral admonitions. We do not say all this, however, because we do not decide this case on United States constitutional grounds. But, we must say, in order to be candid, that we recognize that different courts might give different results in this case if they were to decide according to the method of analysis that proceeds under the United States Constitution, and cases growing out of Kentucky v. Whorton. We need not, however, add to the hodge-podge of decisions. We can avoid adding to the number of cases reviewed; we can avoid further cluttering the reports of decisions; we can give clear directions to circuit courts, if we avoid constitutional-fact analysis and make a directive to the circuit courts of the fifth district. In so doing we are completing what we did not do in People v. French (1972), 5 Ill. App. 3d 908, 284 N.E.2d 481. Whereas, in that case we did not reach the question of whether it is reversible error to fail to give this instruction in any case, in this case we do reach that question.  We, therefore, make a directive for the circuit courts of the fifth district: The presumption of innocence and burden of proof instruction must be given in the fifth district, in all criminal cases, formally, in writing, and at the close of the case, whether tendered or requested. To the close readers of opinions, we do not encourage hair-splitting by this decision. We stress that there is no distinction to be made. We do not imply that a different result could be expected in some future case if the written instructions were not to take away oral admonitions like these that had been given before voir dire, during voir dire, and in closing arguments here. Quite the contrary, we have made a directive that is to be followed in all circumstances.  The State has argued that defendant’s failure to request the instruction, failure to tender the instruction and the failure to object to the instructions given operate as a waiver. We hold that this error is grave, contrary to the State’s argument, and therefore, we are unable to find waiver in defendant’s failure to tender the instruction, or his failure to object to the instructions given, or from his failure to include the error in his post-trial motion. We base our findings of grave error on our own experiences. The error is fraught with danger. The danger is apparent. This is an experienced trial judge we reverse. We cannot know what was in his mind, but if he did not give the instruction, then what might a less experienced judge do? We can guarantee protection of defendants’ rights by this directive. Let this instruction be one of the rubrics in the liturgy of a criminal trial, and no one, defendant included, need evermore worry about a jury being ignorant of the presumption of innocence and burden of proof, or otherwise misunderstanding these concepts that are so cherished by Americans. The high value we, as a people, place upon these concepts has caused the committee note to this instruction to say it must be given in all cases, because it embodies the “touchstone of American criminal jurisprudence.” (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 2.03 (2d ed. 1981).) Our holding in this case makes mandatory that which the committee has suggested. Although we do not reverse because of it, nevertheless one more issue needs to be addressed: notetaking. Notetaking by the jury is an entitlement conferred on jurors by statute. “The members of the jury shall be entitled to take notes during the trial, and the sheriff *** shall provide them with writing materials ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 115— 4(n). The circuit court, the State’s Attorney and the defense attorney in this case agreed that the jury would not take notes. Notes, of course, were not taken in consequence of that stipulation. Defendant has raised the failure to allow the jurors to take notes as an issue on appeal. The State has replied that because defendant agreed that jurors would not take notes, he cannot raise it on appeal. The State is wrong.  Defendant’s agreement was a nullity. The statute confers nothing on defendant. The jurors are the beneficiaries of the entitlement. Defendant had no standing to stipulate away that which was not his.  On consideration of the merits of the issue, we find that the statute uses the word “shall,” which ordinarily is mandatory. We find, therefore, that notetaking is a statutory entitlement of jurors; it cannot be denied by the trial judge or waived by counsel. (Cf. People v. Youngbey (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 556, 413 N.E.2d 416.) Furthermore, that entitlement will be always unfulfilled, unless courts ensure it is bestowed on each jury. That can only be done by physically ensuring that all jurors are provided note pad and pencil for their use, if they so desire. This case is reversed and remanded. Reversed and remanded. RARICK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9736994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:17.562723+00 ===

JUSTICE CHAPMAN specially concurring: I concur in the result reached by the majority, but I am troubled by its careful avoidance of any discussion of the basis for its ruling; it cites not a single case and it refers to no statute. Most importantly, it repeatedly asserts that the holding is not based on any provision of the United States Constitution. To this last assertion I would reply that the repetition of a statement does not make it any more true, contrary to the cries of the butcher in The Hunting of the Snark: “ ‘As the Bellman would tell you,’ he added with pride, T have uttered that sentiment once.’ ‘Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat, You will find I have told it you twice. ‘Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete, If only I’ve stated it thrice.’ ” L. Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark, in Logical Nonsense, The Complete Works of Lewis Carroll, at 279 (1942). The majority apparently finds itself in a quandary; if it states that its holding is based upon the due process clause of the United States Constitution, then it would not be able to reach its decision because Kentucky v. Whorton (1979), 441 U.S. 786, 60 L. Ed. 2d 640, 99 S. Ct. 2088, holds that failure to give a requested instruction on the presumption of innocence does not in and of itself violate the Constitution, but that such a failure must be evaluated in the light of the totality of the circumstances in the case. It seems to me, however, that by going to the other extreme and deciding to make its decision a part of the court-made law of this district, the majority must suffer the criticism of Justice Black, dissenting in Linkletter v. Walker (1965), 381 U.S. 618, 14 L. Ed. 2d 601, 85 S. Ct. 1731, when he stated: “The inference I gather from these repeated statements is that the rule is not a right or privilege accorded to defendants charged with crime but is a sort of punishment against officers in order to keep them from depriving people of their constitutional rights. In passing I would say that if that is the sole purpose, reason, object and effect of the rule, the Court’s action in adopting it sounds more like law-making than construing the Constitution.” (Emphasis added.) Linkletter, 381 U.S. at 649, 14 L. Ed. 2d at 620, 85 S. Ct. at 1748 (Black, J., dissenting). Finally, I would refer the majority to its comment that the “ ‘little print takes away the big print.’ ” (191 Ill. App. 3d at 594.) I would then ask it to examine its big-printed holding that there is no constitutional basis for its decision with its small-print statement that “[w]e can guarantee protection of defendants’ rights by this directive.” (191 Ill. App. 3d at 595.) If there is truly no constitutional basis for its decision, then what is the basis of the defendants’ rights that the majority is so desirous of protecting? The constitutional basis in any decision in this case cannot be denied. Both the United States Supreme Court and our own State supreme court have held that the reasonable doubt standard is of constitutional dimension. In In re Winship (1970), 397 U.S. 358, 364, 25 L. Ed. 2d 368, 375, 90 S. Ct. 1068, 1073, the Supreme Court stated: “Lest there remain any doubt about the constitutional stature of the reasonable-doubt standard, we explicitly hold that the Due Process Clause protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is charged.” In People v. Pembrock (1976), 62 Ill. 2d 317, 342 N.E.2d 28, our supreme court, in discussing the appropriate standard for commitment under the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act, stated that “[t]he requirements of due process, under both the United States and Illinois constitutions, mandate that the drastic impairment of the liberty and reputation of an individual which results from civil commitment under the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act be justified by proof beyond a reasonable doubt.” Pembrock, 62 Ill. 2d at 321, 342 N.E.2d at 29. In my judgment there are other and more appropriate ways to reach the proper result which the majority has reached. First, with regard to this case, under the totality of circumstances approach set forth by the United States Supreme Court in Kentucky v. Whorton, when the jury is told in the written instructions that “the law applicable to this case is contained in these instructions,” and when those instructions do not inform the jury of the reasonable doubt standard and the presumption of innocence, I would hold that the defendant was deprived of due process under either the United States or the Illinois Constitution. Alternatively, and with regard to future cases, I would hold that the due process clause, article I, section 3, of the Illinois Constitution requires that the reasonable doubt-presumption of innocence instruction be given by the court in writing at the close of every criminal case. If the due process clause mandates that no one is to be deprived of liberty unless the presumption of innocence is overcome by proof beyond a reasonable doubt then the jury must be properly advised of the standard under which it may convict. The failure to advise is reversible error in any case and I would so hold. For the above reasons I concur in the result reached by the majority.

=== CASE 9736995 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:18.136772+00 ===

*722OPINION BY GRACI, J.:
¶ 1 Appellant, Michael L. Hudson (“Hudson”), appeals from a judgment of sentence entered in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County on June 15, 1999. For the reasons set forth below, we affirm the judgment of sentence.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
¶ 2 We adopt the following factual recitation set forth in the trial court’s opinion of December 17, 2001:
On February 16,1997, three men, at gun point, forced their way into a home occupied by Mabel McKenzie, Oneaca Boni-fate, Valerie Budzinski and Tiffany Eger, located on Graham Street in the Garfield Section of the City of Pittsburgh. There were also a number of minor children who resided in the residence. The three men, with the use of a handgun and threatening remarks, corralled all of the occupants of the residence into the dining room area and required that they either sit or lay on the floor. One of the men kept watch over the occupants of the residence while the other two ransacked the house looking for various items of personal property. After approximately a half hour filled with threats, during which the firearm was pointed at various people in the residence, including the minor children, the three men exited the residence with various items which belonged to the occupants.
The police were immediately called and an initial report was taken by Officer Gregory Woodhall of the City of Pittsburgh Police. Thereafter, the incident was assigned to two Pittsburgh detectives who conducted interviews at the residence. Subsequent to the interviews, one of the occupants contacted the detectives and indicated that a friend, identified at trial as “Steve,” had heard on the street that three individuals, defendant, Michael Hudson, (hereinafter referred to as “Hudson”), defendant, Ronald Jenkins, (hereinafter referred to as “Jenkins”), and Jacob Hornbuckle, (hereinafter referred to as “Hornbuckle”), were involved in the incident. With this information, the detectives created a photo array and presented the photo array to three of the four adult occupants of the residence. The occupants of the residence were able to identify Hudson, Jenkins and Hornbuckle as the perpetrators involved. Jenkins was arrested and charged with four counts of robbery, one count of burglary and one count of criminal conspiracy. Hudson was also arrested and charged with one count of burglary [18 Pa.C.S. § 8502(a) ], four counts of robbery [18 Pa.C.S. § 3701(a)(1) ], one count of criminal conspiracy [18 Pa.C.S. § 903(a) ], and four counts of simple assault [18 Pa. C.S. § 2701(a) ].
Opinion, 12/17/01, at 1-2 (footnote omitted).
¶ 3 In March, 1999, Hudson attempted to enter into a plea agreement, which the trial court rejected following a hearing. Hudson’s attorney immediately requested permission to present the proposed plea agreement to a different judge. The trial court denied the request and Hudson proceeded to trial. Following a joint trial in April, 1999, Hudson and Jenkins were convicted by a jury of all charges filed against them. Leslie Perlow, Esq., represented Hudson at all times up through and including sentencing.
¶ 4 At a sentencing hearing on June 15, 1999, the trial court sentenced Hudson as follows: on count one (burglary), ten to twenty years imprisonment; count two (robbery), ten to twenty years; count *723three (robbery), ten to twenty years; and count six (conspiracy), five to ten years. The trial court ordered these sentences to run consecutively. The court also sentenced Hudson to a concurrent term of incarceration of three to six months on an unrelated narcotics offense.1 Hudson’s aggregate sentence totaled thirty-five to seventy years. New counsel was appointed and post-sentence motions were filed on Hudson’s behalf. The trial court denied Hudson’s motions and this appeal followed.
¶ 5 Hudson asserts the following claims on appeal:
I. The trial court denied [Hudson] a fair and impartial trial by making prejudicial remarks directly to the jury
II. [Hudson] received ineffective assistance of counsel because his trial counsel made a statement that lead [sic] the trial court to admonish trial counsel before the jury and/or trial counsel failed to request a mistrial after the trial court made several prejudicial remarks to the jury which deprived [Hudson] of a fair and impartial trial
III. The trial court erred by, without placing sufficient reasons on the record and without explaining the appropriate sentencing guideline ranges, sentencing [Hudson] beyond the standard range which sentence was unreasonable under the circumstances of this case [and]
IV. The trial court erred by refusing to recuse himself and allow [Hudson] to plead guilty before a different judge
Brief for Appellant, at i.
II. DISCUSSION
¶ 6 Hudson’s first two issues concern a comment by his attorney, Leslie Perlow, Esq., at the conclusion of her cross-examination of Commonwealth witness Valerie Budzinski, one of the residents of the apartment where the robbery occurred and a victim of the crimes. Immediately preceding Ms. Budzinski’s testimony, two of the other adult victims, Mabel McKenzie and Oneaca Bonifate, had each identified Hudson as one of the perpetrators. During cross-examination by Ms. Perlow, Ms. Budzinski admitted that she had not been able to describe the perpetrators after the incident, nor could she positively identify Hudson in court as one of her assailants. N.T. Trial, April 19-22, 1999, at 159:7-18. After some additional questioning, Ms. Perlow concluded her cross-examination of Ms. Budzinski by stating, “I appreciate your honesty.” Id. at 161:3.
¶ 7 After the jury had been excused for the day, the Commonwealth’s attorney lodged an objection to Ms. Perlow’s remark as an unfair and implicit attack on the credibility of Ms. McKenzie and Ms. Bonifate, who had both identified Hudson as one of the perpetrators. Id. at 163:9-17. The trial judge admonished Ms. Per-low for making the “uncalled for” remark and announced that he would address the jury the following day. Id. at 163:20-21.
¶ 8 At the commencement of the proceedings the next day, the trial court instructed the jury as follows:
Yesterday, there was a comment made my Ms. Perlow, which I’m going to *724speak about before we start. Everybody in this Courtroom plays a role. Ms. Nagy’s our Court Reporter. She’s responsible for making sure the record is maintained and is accurately transcribed. Mr. Clark is the Prosecutor whose job it is to take the cases brought into the system and to put forth that information to a jury or, if a non-jury, to myself.
Ms. Perlow and Mr. Kalocay are Defense Counsel.2 They represent an individual who’s accused. Their job is to put forward their information and make sure that the evidence is put in properly and to represent their clients accordingly. In a jury trial, my sole function is to make sure that the evidence is given to you properly and to make rulings on objections. The function of a jury is fact-finder. As fact-finder, you’re going to pass on credibility.
The gratuitous statement by Ms. Perlow yesterday, thanking somebody for their honesty, was precisely that, and it was offensive to me. And I think it should be offensive to you because she was intending or unintentionally going into your particular province as fact-finder. So I’m going to ask you disregard that remark, and we have already dealt with Ms. Perlow.
With that, Mr. Clark, ready [to] call your next witness?
Id. at 164:5-165:7.
¶ 9 Hudson first argues that the trial court’s instructions deprived him of a fair and impartial trial. He contends that the trial court essentially instructed the jurors to be offended by Ms. Perlow’s statement and that the court’s remarks effectively bolstered the credibility of Ms. McKenzie and Ms. Bonifate at the expense of Ms. Budzinski’s credibility. Hudson also suggests that the trial court’s exhibition of hostility toward defense counsel unduly influenced the jury’s perception of him and his case.
¶ 10 “A trial court has wide discretion in phrasing jury instructions, and absent an abuse of discretion or an inaccurate statement of law, there is no reversible error.” Harman ex rel. Harman v. Borah, 562 Pa. 455, 756 A.2d 1116, 1127 (2000) (citing Commonwealth v. Ragan, 560 Pa. 106, 743 A.2d 390, 397 (1999)). “A trial judge is not required to remain mute when counsel speaks of irrelevant and prejudicial matters. Counsel may properly be admonished on such occasions without nullifying the entire trial as long as the trial judge does not display partiality or prejudice by his conduct, manner of speech, or choice of language.” Commonwealth v. Phillips, 183 Pa.Super. 377, 132 A.2d 733, 737 (1957) (citations omitted). “An accepted guide in determining prejudicial effect is that, if the remark may be said with fair assurance to have had but a slight effect upon the jury, if any at all, and one is not left in doubt that it had no substantial influence in the case, it will not vitiate an otherwise fair trial.” Id. at 736 (citations omitted).
¶ 11 Ms. Perlow’s remark was clearly improper, and the trial court was entitled, if not obligated, to caution the jury regarding that impropriety. In our view, the trial court’s instructions in that regard reflect an accurate assessment of the duties of the participants in a jury trial. Most importantly, the court reminded the jurors that, as “fact finder,” they are responsible for passing on issues of credibility. N.T. Trial, April 19-22, 1999, at 164:21-22. Although the judge was critical of Ms. Per-low, his criticism was directed toward her individually and not toward Hudson. We *725fail to see how the court’s remarks can be viewed as projecting an adverse inference upon the defendant or his case. The instructions did not, as Hudson argues, reflect the court’s opinion as to the credibility of Ms. Budzinski or any other witness. The effect upon the jury of either Ms. Perlow’s remark or the trial court’s instructions, if there was any at all, would have been slight. We have no doubt that this isolated incident could not have had a substantial influence on the outcome of the case, especially given the overwhelming evidence of Hudson’s guilt. On this record, there was no prejudice to Hudson and his argument fails.
¶ 12 Hudson next argues that Ms. Per-low rendered ineffective assistance by (1) making the challenged statement to Ms. Budzinski, and (2) failing to request a mistrial after the trial court’s allegedly prejudicial curative remarks. Since Hudson is raising these ineffective assistance of counsel claims on direct appeal, we must begin with a discussion of our Supreme Court’s recent pronouncement in Commonwealth v. Grant, 813 A.2d 726 (Pa.2002).
¶ 13 In Grant, the Supreme Court held that “as a general rule, a petitioner should wait to raise claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel until collateral review.” Id. at 738.3 Underlying the rule announced in Grant is the Court’s observation that “time is necessary for a petitioner to discover and fully develop claims related to trial counsel ineffectiveness.” Id. at 737. As a result, “the record may not be sufficiently developed on direct appeal to permit adequate review of ineffectiveness claims[.]” Id. Because “appellate courts do not normally consider issues that were not raised and developed in the court below!,]” id., the Grant court reasoned that “[deferring review of trial counsel ineffectiveness claims until the collateral review stage of the proceedings offers a petitioner the best avenue to effect his Sixth Amendment right to counsel.” Id.
¶ 14 Grant leaves one open question however: may an appellate court address the merits of an ineffective assistance claim when the claim was, as is the case here, properly raised in a timely post-sentence motion filed in and ruled upon by the trial court in conformity with Pa. R.Crim.P. 720? We answer that question affirmatively. Grant is concerned with the difficulty an appellate court faces when trying to resolve ineffectiveness claims without the benefit of an adequately developed record. If an appellant obtained new counsel after verdict, new counsel could seek a new trial based on the ineffective assistance of trial counsel in a timely-filed post-sentence motion under Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure 720(B)(1)(a) (iv). Pa.R.Crim.P. 720(B)(l)(a)(iv). The trial court would then have to determine if a hearing was required or if the claim could be resolved on the existing record. Pa.R.Crim.P. 720(B)(2)(b). Thereafter, the trial court could resolve the ineffectiveness claim in the time frame established by the rule. Pa.R.Crim.P. 720(B)(3). If that issue was then raised on direct appeal, this court could resolve it. That situation is different from the one governed by Grant where the issue of trial counsel’s ineffectiveness was not raised in a timely post-sentence motion but was, instead, raised for the first time *726on appeal. Grant simply has no application where the issue was properly raised and decided by the trial court before the direct appeal process started.
¶ 15 This is the exact scenario presented in the case sub judice. As we indicated above, the fact that the trial court conducted a hearing on and addressed (and rejected) Hudson’s ineffective assistance and other post-sentencing claims allays the concerns of our Supreme Court in Grant and provides us with an adequate record on appeal. Therefore, we shall proceed to the merits of Hudson’s ineffective assistance of counsel claims.
¶ 16 Since these ineffective assistance of counsel claims were presented to and ruled upon by the trial court in post-sentence motions, we review that court’s denial of relief by determining if its findings are supported by the record and its order is free of legal error. This is the standard we generally apply when reviewing a PCRA court’s dismissal of a post-conviction petition. See Commonwealth v. Kutnyak, 781 A.2d 1259 (Pa.Super.2001). Our role here, given the procedural posture of this case, is similar to that where we examine a PCRA court’s denial of relief on a claim of ineffectiveness of counsel. Accordingly, we will apply the same standard.
¶ 17 The legal standard applicable to ineffective assistance of counsel claims is well settled.
To prevail on a claim that counsel was constitutionally ineffective, the appellant must overcome the presumption of competence by showing that: (1) his underlying claim is of arguable merit; (2) the particular course of conduct pursued by counsel did not have some reasonable basis designed to effectuate his interests; and, (3) but for counsel’s ineffectiveness, there is a reasonable probability that the outcome of the challenged proceeding would have been different. A failure to satisfy any prong of the test for ineffectiveness will require rejection of the claim.
Commonwealth v. Wharton, 811 A.2d 978, 986 (Pa.2002) (citations omitted).4 Our review demonstrates that the trial court committed no error in applying this standard.
¶ 18 The trial court determined that Hudson suffered no prejudice as a result of the court’s curative instructions to the jury following Ms. Perlow’s improvident remark since, in the trial court’s opinion, the result would have been the same had the instructions not been given. Opinion, 12/17/01, at 10. We agree. As a result, Hudson’s claim fails to satisfy the third prong of the standard set forth in Wharton. Moreover, the trial court’s curative instructions were, as we have already discussed, proper in all respects. Therefore, there is no merit to Hudson’s argument that trial counsel should have raised an objection. Commonwealth v. Williams, 532 Pa. 265, 615 A.2d 716, 720 (1992) (“[C]ounsel can never be found ineffective for having elected not to raise a meritless claim.”) (citations omitted).
¶ 19 We also agree with the trial court’s determination that Hudson was in no way prejudiced by the substance of Ms. Perlow’s remark to Ms. Budzinski. Opinion, 12/17/01, at 9,10. Indeed, if there was any effect upon the jury it would have been to Hudson’s benefit since the implication was that Ms. Budzinski, who could not positively identify Hudson as one of the *727perpetrators, was more credible than the preceding witnesses who had positively identified Hudson. Accordingly, we reject Hudson’s second claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.
¶ 20 In his third issue, Hudson argues that the trial court abused its discretion in imposing an aggregate sentence of thirty-five to seventy years in prison. Hudson does not contend that the sentence imposed was illegal. Rather, he claims that the trial court failed to acknowledge, on the record, the appropriate sentencing guideline ranges and its reasons for exceeding those ranges. Brief for Appellant, at 33. “[T]his type of claim goes to the discretionary aspects of sentence.” Commonwealth v. Davis, 737 A.2d 792, 798 (Pa.Super.1999). The Pennsylvania Rules of Appellate Procedure explicitly require that:
An appellant who challenges the discretionary aspects of a sentence in a criminal matter shall set forth in his brief a concise statement of the reasons relied upon for allowance of appeal with respect to the discretionary aspects of a sentence. The statement shall immediately precede the argument on the merits with respect to the discretionary aspects of sentence.
Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f) (emphasis added).
¶ 21 Hudson has failed to include the requisite Rule 2119(f) statement. While this does not automatically waive his claim on appeal, “ “we may not reach the merits of [the] claims’ where the Commonwealth has objected] to the omission of the statement.” Commonwealth v. Farmer, 758 A.2d 173, 182 (Pa.Super.2000), reargument denied, appeal denied, 565 Pa. 637, 771 A.2d 1279 (2001) (citation omitted). The Commonwealth has noted its objection to the omission of the Rule 2119(f) statement and, accordingly, we find that Hudson has waived his challenge to the discretionary aspects of his sentence.
¶ 22 Finally, Hudson claims that the trial court abused its discretion in denying his request to present his rejected plea agreement to a different judge. Hudson claims that this decision was equivalent to a denial of a request that the trial judge recuse himself from the case. We first note our disagreement with Hudson’s characterization of his request as a recusal motion.
The standards for recusal are well established. It is the burden of the party requesting recusal to produce evidence establishing bias, prejudice or unfairness which raises a substantial doubt as to the jurist’s ability to preside impartially. As a general rule, a motion for recusal is initially directed to and decided by the jurist whose impartiality is being challenged.
Commonwealth v. Abu-Jamal, 553 Pa. 485, 720 A.2d 79, 89 (1998), cert. denied, Abu-Jamal v. Pennsylvania, 528 U.S. 810, 120 S.Ct. 41, 145 L.Ed.2d 38 (1999) (citations omitted). Hudson did not direct a motion for recusal to the trial judge following the court’s rejection of his plea agreement, and we find no merit to his argument that a recusal motion can somehow be inferred from his request to present the plea to a different judge.5
¶ 23 With regard to Hudson’s failed plea agreement, the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure state unequivocally that “[t]he judge may refuse to accept a plea of guilty[.]” Pa.R.Crim.P. 590(A)(3). “The Pennsylvania Rules of *728Criminal Procedure grant the trial court broad discretion in the acceptance and rejection of plea agreements.” Commonwealth v. Rosario, 418 Pa.Super. 196, 613 A.2d 1244, 1249 (1992). “There is no absolute right to have a guilty plea accepted.” United States ex rel. Culbreath v. Rundle, 466 F.2d 730, 735 (3d Cir.1972). Nor is there an absolute right to present a rejected plea agreement to a different judge, and Hudson cites no authority in support of that proposition. Moreover, we agree with the trial court that acceptance of the plea agreement by another judge of the court of common pleas would have violated the well-settled legal principle that “judges of coordinate jurisdiction sitting in the same case should not overrule each others’ decisions.” Commonwealth v. Starr, 541 Pa. 564, 664 A.2d 1326, 1331 (1995) (citations omitted).
¶ 24 Judgment of sentence affirmed.
¶ 25 FORD ELLIOTT, J., files a concurring statement.
. Hudson was charged at Criminal Complaint No. 9801541 with two counts of violating the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780-113, and related misdemeanor and summary offenses. Hudson entered a plea of guilty to these charges at his sentencing hearing on June 15, 1999.
. The reference is to Michael Kalocay, Esq., counsel to co-defendant Ronald Jenkins.
. The Grant court noted the possibility that, when properly asked to do so, it might announce two limited exceptions to its general rule: where an appellant “raise[s] an allegation that there has been a complete or constructive denial of counsel or that counsel has breached his or her duty of loyalty.” Grant, 813 A.2d at 738, fn. 14. The Supreme Court has yet to announce either of these exceptions. If it were to do so, neither would be implicated here.
. The standard applicable to claims of ineffective assistance of counsel raised on direct appeal is the same as that applied to such claims raised under the PCRA. Commonwealth v. Kimball, 555 Pa. 299, 724 A.2d 326, 332 (1999).
. Even if we were to accept Hudson’s premise, he has not presented the slightest indicia of bias, prejudice, or unfairness on the part of the trial judge. Dissatisfaction with the judge’s rejection of his plea agreement certainly does not qualify.

=== CASE 9736997 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:18.392571+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
Sullivans appeal from a judgment of foreclosure entered in favor of the Federal Land Bank of Omaha (FLB). We reverse.
FACTS
FLB instituted this action to foreclose its mortgage against real estate owned by Sul-livans. Prior to trial, Sullivans’ attorney wrote a letter to FLB’s attorney asking if there was a possibility that the case could be settled. On September 11, 1986, FLB’s attorney replied with the following offer of settlement:
Thank you for your letter dated September 3rd, proposing a resolution of the above matter. After consideration by my client, we are willing to do the following:
We will accept a deed in lieu of proceeding with the foreclosure action upon the following conditions:
1. All 1985 real estate taxes must be paid;
2. The FmHA mortgage must be released;
3. There can be no other liens of whatsoever nature or kind against said property at the time of conveyance; and
*7014. The parties will execute a mutual release.
My client has authorized me to extend this offer to you which must be accepted within ten (10) days. I would believe that if you contacted the FmHA they would realize there is no equity in the property and release their mortgage, (emphasis added)
A copy of this letter was sent to Wayne Williamson, who is the assistant vice president of special accounts at the FLB office in Yankton, South Dakota.
On September 19, 1986, Sullivans accepted FLB’s offer to settle the case. However, three weeks later FLB’s attorney wrote to Sullivans’ attorney stating: “Any compromises regarding Federal Land Bank loans must be cleared through Omaha. The proposed compromise was not approved and therefore we have been requested to proceed through the foreclosure process.”
The case went to trial and FLB obtained a judgment of foreclosure. The trial court found that FLB was not bound by the offer made by its attorney and that FLB was not estopped to proceed despite the settlement agreement between the parties.
ISSUE
Did the parties enter into a binding settlement agreement precluding the trial court’s judgment of foreclosure?
DECISION
Sullivans recognize the general rule that an attorney who is clothed with no authority other than that arising from his employment has no implied power by virtue of his general retainer to compromise and settle his client’s claim or course of action. Northwest Realty Co. v. Perez, 80 S.D. 62, 119 N.W.2d 114 (1963). Nevertheless, Sullivans argue that an attorney who has or appears to have authority from his client can compromise and settle his client’s claim. Sullivans contend that even if FLB’s attorney had only ostensible authority to settle the case, FLB should be bound to the agreement since Sullivans acted in reliance upon the agreement.
In the law of agency, a principal will be liable for contracts made in its behalf by an agent if the agent was authorized to enter into the agreements. Mueller v. Union Pacific, 220 Neb. 742, 371 N.W.2d 732 (1986); 3 C.J.S. Agency § 408. This authority may be actual or ostensible. Actual authority is created by manifestations from the principal to the agent, SDCL 59-3-2, while ostensible authority is created when the principal allows a third person to believe the agent has authority to act on the principal’s behalf. SDCL 59-3-3. Strictly speaking, ostensible agency is no agency at all; it is in reality based entirely on an estoppel. Chleboun v. Varilek, 81 S.D. 421, 136 N.W.2d 348 (1965); Hartford Accident & I. Co. v. Bear Butte Valley Bank, 63 S.D. 262, 257 N.W. 642 (1934). “[WJhere it appears that the principal knew, or by a proper supervision of the affairs of the agency ought to have known, of the acts of the agent, or the general course and manner in which he was conducting the business of the agency, he is estopped as against innocent third persons from denying the power of the agent to act.” Hartford Accident & I. Co., 63 S.D. at 267, 257 N.W. at 645. If the agent had ostensible authority, the principal is bound by the acts of his agent “to those persons only who have in good faith, and without negligence, incurred a liability or parted with value upon the faith thereof.” SDCL 59-6-3.
In this case, the trial court proceeded on the assumption that FLB’s attorney had only ostensible authority to extend the offer of settlement. It found that FLB was not estopped by the settlement agreement since Sullivans did not incur a liability or part with any value in reliance on the agreement until after they received notice disclaiming the agreement. See SDCL 59-6-3. However, a careful review of the record indicates that FLB’s attorney had actu,al authority to settle the case, thereby rendering the estoppel argument irrelevant.
It is well settled that actual authority can be created by the acquiescence of the *702principal in the actions of the agent. Kansas Educational Ass’n v. McMahan, 76 F.2d 957 (10th Cir.1935); H. Reuschlein & W. Gregory, Agency and Partnership § 14 (1979). See also Restatement (Second) of Agency § 26 (1958). SDCL 59-3-2 states: “Actual authority is such as a principal intentionally confers upon the agent, or intentionally or by want of ordinary care, allows the agent to believe himself to possess. ” (emphasis added) Here, FLB acquiesced in its attorney’s actions, allowing the attorney to believe he possessed actual authority to settle the case. First, in a letter to Sullivans’ attorney dated August 26, 1986, FLB’s attorney invited settlement proposals from the Sullivans. A copy of this letter was sent to FLB officer Wayne Williamson, but FLB made no attempt to stop the negotiations or inform its attorney of limitations to his authority. Then in the letter dated September 11, 1986, set forth in the facts above, FLB’s attorney made a concrete offer of settlement, indicating that his client was in complete agreement with the offer. Again, a copy of the letter was sent to FLB officer Williamson, but FLB failed to disavow the offer. The letter containing the settlement offer clearly shows the attorney’s belief that he possessed authority to settle the case, and FLB’s failure to act upon receipt of the letter constitutes acquiescence in the offer. Therefore, FLB’s attorney had actual authority, as defined by SDCL 59-3-2, to settle the case, and the agreement is binding on the parties.
This result is consistent with the rulings of other courts which have faced the same issue. Of particular importance is International Telemeter Corp. v. Teleprompter Corp., 592 F.2d 49 (2d Cir.1979), in which Teleprompter’s attorney wrote a letter to opposing counsel stating: “Teleprompter now wishes to settle the litigation ... on the terms which have been agreed upon.” A copy of the letter was sent to Teleprompter’s general counsel, who took no immediate action to disavow the settlement agreement. Later, Teleprompter argued that its attorney had no authority to bind it to a settlement. The federal appeals court disagreed and upheld the agreement for the following reasons: 1) Teleprompter knew that the other party believed Teleprompter’s attorney had authority to settle the matter and did nothing to correct the impression. 2) The attorney sent copies of all the correspondence to Teleprompter. 3) Teleprompter officials failed to disavow the attorney’s actions even when the attorney sent copies of his letter announcing that a settlement had been reached. 592 F.2d at 55-56. We find the court’s reasoning in Teleprompter to be persuasive and hereby adopt its rationale. See also Capital Dredge and Dock v. City of Detroit, 800 F.2d 525 (6th Cir.1986); Corbesco, Inc. v. Local No. 542, 620 F.Supp. 1239 (D.Delaware 1985); Brumbelow v. Northern Propane Gas Co., 169 Ga.App. 816, 315 S.E.2d 11 (1984). FLB acquiesced in the actions herein and must abide by the agreement negotiated by its attorney.
REVERSED.
WUEST, C.J., and MILLER, J., concur.
MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9736998 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:18.396523+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. We have long had the Northwest Realty rule. “The rule is almost universal that an attorney who is clothed with no other authority than that arising from his employment in that capacity has no implied power by virtue of his general retainer to compromise and settle his client's claim or cause of action.” Northwest Realty Company v. Perez, 80 S.D. 62, 65, 119 N.W.2d 114, 115 (1963) (reaffirmed in Petersen v. Petersen, 90 S.D. 666, 673, 245 N.W.2d 285, 288 (1976)). I think that the majority opinion shreds that rule. In my opinion, the trial court was correct when it found that the defendants had not parted with any value or incurred any obligation in reliance on the alleged settlement offer. Based on the statutory provisions, SDCL 59-6-3,* the *703trial court was correct in concluding that FLB was not equitably estopped from foreclosing.
The reliance on International Telemeter Corp. v. Teleprompter Corp., 592 F.2d 49 (2d Cir.1979), is particularly inappropriate. In that case, just as here, the defendant in a patent infringement suit had initiated settlement discussions. That is about the only similarity. In Teleprompter, negotiations were carried on for a period of nine months during which time drafts and redrafts of settlement agreements were exchanged. At the eleventh hour, a third party involved in the negotiations withdrew. In an attempt to save the settlement, counsel for the defendant attempted to redraft the agreement, omitting references to the third party. Then, as the opinion specifically notes, new management for defendant corporation refused to proceed. That scenario, upon which the majority would decide this case, is obviously as different from the facts in this case as night is from day.
The total period of correspondence in this case was approximately two months. Only one month elapsed between the offer and the withdrawal. No documents were prepared, let alone exchanged. Most importantly, the offer was withdrawn, not on a change of management but apparently for the reason that Sullivans had failed to fully disclose their assets on a financial statement they had furnished to FLB.
Finally, I would point out that the Teleprompter opinion is self-limiting in that it is specifically noted therein that New York law governs the enforceability of the settlement agreement which was negotiated, consummated, and to be performed in New York and which was explicitly made subject to New York law. I think that South Dakota law, embodied in the statute above cited, should govern here. I would affirm the trial court.
SDCL 59-6-3 provides: "A principal is bound by acts of his agent under ostensible authority, to *703those persons only who have in good faith, and without negligence, incurred a liability or parted with value upon the faith thereof.”

=== CASE 9736999 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:18.399958+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
A judgment of foreclosure entered below, based on fact and correct in law, should be sustained. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
We see another erosion of the doctrine of stare decisis in the case before us. Northwest Realty has been the law of this state since 1963. There is no reason to depart from it. Basically, that rule is: An attorney may negotiate for and advise settlement of a controversy, but the decision is ultimately the client’s. For recent cases, in accord with our precedent, see Dillon v. City of Davenport, 366 N.W.2d 918 (Iowa 1985); Aetna Life & Cas. v. Anderson, 310 N.W.2d 91 (Minn.1981); and Smith v. Ganz, 219 Neb. 432, 363 N.W.2d 526 (1985). The majority opinion obtains a result by not accepting the findings of fact and conclusions of law and by disregarding the testimony at trial.
In this case, the trial court entered a specific finding that Sullivans did not part with any value or incur any obligations in reliance upon the settlement offer. The trial court concluded that Sullivans did not meet the requirements of SDCL 59-6-3. Said statute provides: “A principal is bound by acts of his agent under ostensible authority, to those persons only who have in good faith, and without negligence, incurred a liability or parted with value upon the faith thereof.”
This entire case may be said to rest upon the old Hobelsberger precedent. In re Estate of Hobelsberger, 85 S.D. 282, 181 N.W. 2d 455 (1970). Were the findings of fact clearly erroneous? Do you see that in the majority opinion? No. Again, I express that the majority opinion obtained a result by passing over a basic rule of appellate review in this Court. Narrowing this analysis, I point out: Sullivans maintain that the trial court’s finding is clearly erroneous because they parted with consideration by incurring obligations in reliance upon the settlement offer. Sullivans claim these obligations were (1) payment of the 1985 real estate taxes, (2) time expended in obtaining a release of the FmHA mortgage, (3) removal of a grain bin from the *704property, and (4) time expended to obtain a grain bin lien release from the Agricultural Soil Conservation Service.
Let us scope these, mentally, to see if what Sullivans say is true. One, Sullivans admitted at trial that they were ultimately liable to pay the 1985 real estate taxes. Two, Sullivans (by the record) did not obtain the release of the FmHA mortgage until about three months after FLB refused to honor the settlement negotiated by its attorney. Three, Sullivans failed to obtain any bin lien release until eighteen days after the FLB refused to honor the settlement agreement. Four, no evidence appears in .the record to establish that the Sullivans ever removed the grain bin. The last argument is particularly hollow since the Sullivans had to remove the grain bin, in any event, because the FLB had no ownership interest in the bin.
Primary thrust of appellants’ position is simply this: Appellee should be equitably estopped from being entitled to a judgment against the defendants, or from foreclosing its mortgages upon the mortgaged property, because of a settlement of the controversy. To prevail in their appeal, the Sulli-vans must establish equitable estoppel. This record does not establish equitable estoppel. Sullivans, as I have pointed out in the four matters above, failed to suffer prejudice or injury. I quote from Cromwell v. Hosbrook, 81 S.D. 324, 329, 134 N.W.2d 777, 780-81 (1965), wherein this Court, in a landmark case, expressed:
In order to constitute an equitable es-toppel, or estoppel in pais, false representations or concealment of material facts must exist; the party to whom it was made must have been without knowledge of the real facts; that representations or concealment must have been made with the intention that it should be acted upon; and the party to whom it was made must have relied thereon to his prejudice or injury.
In addition, the Cromwell Court held: “There can be no estoppel if any of these essential elements are lacking, or if any of them have not been proved by clear and convincing evidence.” Cromwell, 81 S.D. at 329, 134 N.W.2d at 781. Note that the degree of proof is “clear and convincing evidence.” The majority opinion skirts all precedent in this Court to achieve a result by disregarding the rule in Hobelsberger, Cromwell, and Northwest Realty. Therefore, I cannot join the majority opinion and I also express that my academic sentiments are with Justice Morgan, who has likewise dissented in this case.

=== CASE 2208313 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.898013+00 ===

253 Cal. App. 2d 229 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
WILLIAM CHARLES JONES, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 12768.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 4, 1967.
Gilbert F. Nelson, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney Geenral, and Stanton Price, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction of possessing marijuana.
In an information filed in Los Angeles on April 7, 1966, defendant was charged with having possessed marijuana on the 19th day of March, 1966. It was charged further that defendant twice previously had been convicted of a felony, namely, a violation of section 288, Penal Code, in 1963, and a narcotics offense in 1964.
Defendant pleaded not guilty and denied the charge of the prior convictions. A jury trial was duly waived and in a trial before the judge defendant was found guilty as charged and the charged prior convictions were found to be true. Defendant was sentenced to the state prison. A timely notice of appeal of that judgment was filed.
A resume of some of the facts is as follows: A police radio broadcast by the Pasadena Police Department reported about 2:30 a.m. March 19, 1966, that three or four male Negroes were engaged in stripping cars on the Jack Symes' Used Cadillac Lot at the southwest corner of Colorado Boulevard and Berkeley Avenue, and that the strippers had an automobile parked on Berkeley Avenue not far from the car lot in question.
Sergeant McEwen, of the Pasadena Police Department, was on patrol duty and received the report. Inspector Ridenour of the same police department also received the report and went to the scene, and on going south on Berkeley Avenue saw a 1960 Cadillac parked at the curb in front of 60 South Berkeley Avenue. Defendant was in the car, lying at about a 45-degree angle, his head slumped down toward the steering *231 wheel. Defendant appeared to be dazed, intoxicated, asleep or in a stupor. Inspector Ridenour rapped on the closed window of the car, but was unable to arouse the defendant. The officer then opened the car door and shook the defendant's arm, thereby awakening him. Inspector Ridenour asked defendant if he had any identification. Defendant replied that he was waiting for a friend. Defendant was again asked if he had any identification, whereupon he opened the glove compartment of the car, looked into it and then replied that he had no identification. Defendant was then asked to step out of the car and he complied. Defendant was asked if he had a driver's license and he replied, after reaching toward his pocket, that he did not have it with him, but that he had one. Inspector Ridenour then advised defendant of his constitutional rights, such as a right to an attorney, to remain silent, that anything he said could be used against him, and so forth. Defendant stated, in effect, that he understood his rights and what had been said to him. Just prior to the time Inspector Ridenour advised defendant of his rights, Sergeant McEwen arrived upon the scene. Defendant was asked why he happened to be there and at first he stated that he had been asked to drive four Negroes (later defendant changed the number to three) to that location and that he expected them to return, but that as yet they had not returned.
Defendant was asked if it would be all right if they (the officers) looked through the car and defendant replied, "It is all right. Go ahead." Sergeant McEwen looked in the glove compartment and found a brown paper sack containing about $270 in currency. Defendant said that that was where he carried his money. Sergeant McEwen then glanced at the floor area in front of the driver's seat and saw a corn chip bag, inside of which were some newspaper wrappings and smaller packages. These were opened and it appeared that the packages contained marijuana. Defendant was then advised that he was under arrest. Defendant stated, in effect, that the marijuana must have been placed there by the men to whom he had given a ride.
Under the left front wheel, slightly under the car, there was found a metal foil-wrapped package of white pills, three $1.00 bills, a newspaper package containing a plant-like substance and two cigarettes. Defendant stated that he had never seen such items before, although they were located about one foot from where defendant had been standing. The cigarettes contained marijuana. *232
It was stipulated that a chemist be deemed called, sworn and testified that the corn chip packets and the cigarettes contained marijuana.
Defendant testified in his own behalf. He testified that he did not know of any marijuana in his car, that he kept his money in a sack because he had holes in his pockets, that he worked as a car washer and received about $55 per week for his labor. Further, that he did not know the names of the men he had driven to the area where his car was parked, that he had withdrawn some money from a bank account, but he could not remember the address of the bank where he had the account.
[1] Appellant now asserts that the search of the car was unwarranted. There is no merit to appellant's contentions. The police were answering a call with reference to some car stripping on Berkeley Avenue. At a point about 120 yards from the place where the stripping supposedly was taking place the police saw appellant's car parked on the street. The police, upon investigating the car, saw a man at the driver's position who appeared to be ill, drunk, under the influence of drugs, in a stupor or dead. The officers, for any number of reasons, were duty bound to make inquiry about the situation. To any reasonable man the circumstances were such that the police should have done just what they did. (See People v. Mickelson, 59 Cal. 2d 448, 450-451 [30 Cal. Rptr. 18, 380 P.2d 658]; People v. Perez, 243 Cal. App. 2d 528, 531 [52 Cal. Rptr. 514]; People v. Bird, 248 Cal. App. 2d 307, 309 [56 Cal. Rptr. 501]; People v. Garrett, 238 Cal. App. 2d 324, 327 [47 Cal. Rptr. 194]; People v. McVey, 243 Cal. App. 2d 215, 219 [52 Cal. Rptr. 269].)
When appellant could not produce a driver's license as required by Vehicle Code section 12951, or vehicle registration as required by Vehicle Code section 4000, or any identification for that matter, the police were reasonable in assuming that appellant did not own the car, and was not entitled to be in it.
Ordinarily a person does not carry his money in a paper sack in the glove compartment of his car. Be that as it may, the officer, in glancing at the floor of the car, saw a corn chip sack with smaller bags or wrappings inside. It is not necessary that an officer blind himself to that which is in plain sight, even though it may be that he is looking for something else. (People v. Guerrero, 247 Cal. App. 2d 687, 688 [56 Cal. Rptr. 7].) In any event, appellant gave a valid consent to look through the car. *233
We have considered all of appellant's contentions and find no merit therein.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2208323 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.98694+00 ===

820 A.2d 740 (2003)
Samuel H. BARLEY, Appellee,
v.
CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORPORATION, Appellant.
Superior Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued December 3, 2002.
Filed March 21, 2003.
*741 T.H. Lyda, Pittsburgh, for appellant.
John P. Lacher, Natrona Heights, for appellee.
Before JOYCE, BENDER, and BECK, JJ.
OPINION BY BENDER, J.:
¶ 1 Consolidated Rail Corporation (Appellant) appeals from a discovery order in Samuel H. Barley's (Appellee) personal injury action against Appellant. The order directs Appellant to produce for deposition two of its former legal counsel, and also deems admitted one of Appellee's Request for Admissions. Appellant claims that this Court has jurisdiction to review the order because it constitutes a collateral order under Pa.R.A.P. 313. We conclude that *742 portions of the order satisfy the collateral order test, and that furthermore, these portions of the order constitute trial court error. However, there are portions of the order that we have refrained from reviewing, either because of the undeveloped state of the record or because the issue does not satisfy the collateral order test, and therefore, we quash those issues. Thus, for the following reasons, we reverse in part and quash in part.
¶ 2 Appellee filed suit against Appellant on January 17, 2001. The trial court issued a case management order on April 27, 2001, directing the parties to complete their discovery by March 4, 2002. At issue in this appeal is the court's order, dated March 19, 2002, which granted in part Appellee's Amended Motion to Compel and Motion for Sanctions. The order directed Appellant to produce Lucy Amerman, Esq., and Ellen Goering, Esq.,[1] for oral deposition along with documents within their control and which were identified in the notices of deposition attached to Appellee's Amended Motion to Compel and Motion for Sanctions. Furthermore, the order deemed admitted Admission Number 31 of Appellee's Request for Admissions and Request for Production of Documents, which stated:
Request for Admission No. 31 Directed to Conrail:
Admit that Exhibit "A" is a true and correct copy of the address [of] Marsha Comstock, M.D., Conrail's ex-Medical Director, delivered to the American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, on or about April 26-30, 1999, in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Appellant filed a motion for reconsideration, which the court denied. Pending the outcome of that motion, Appellant brought the instant appeal raising four questions for our review:
1. Whether the Trial Court committed an error of law when it permitted Plaintiff to seek deposition testimony and production of documents protected by the attorney client privilege and work product doctrine from former in-house counsel for defendant.
2. Whether the Trial Court committed an error of law when it improperly compelled Defendant to produce deposition testimony and production of documents from non-parties over whom Defendant has no control.
3. Whether the Trial court committed an error of law when it deemed Admission No. 31 of Plaintiff's Request for Admissions and Request for Production of DocumentsSet A admitted.
4. Whether the Trial Court committed an error of law when it permitted Plaintiff to seek the depositions of former in-house counsel for Defendant after they were untimely noticed for [sic] in violation of the Case Management Order.
Brief for Appellant at 4.
¶ 3 "The appealability of an order goes directly to the jurisdiction of the court asked to review the order." Morgan Trailer Mfg., Co. v. Hydraroll Ltd., 804 A.2d 26, 29-30 (Pa.Super.2002). Therefore, we must preliminarily address whether the order in this case constitutes a collateral order appealable as of right under Pa.R.A.P. 313. The test for determining whether an order constitutes a collateral order requires a three-prong analysis to determine whether: (1)"the order was separable from the main cause of action;" (2)"the right involved was too important to be denied review;" and (3)"the claim would be irreparably lost should review be denied." Dibble v. Penn State Geisinger *743 Clinic, Inc., 806 A.2d 866, 869 (Pa.Super.2002). See also Pa.R.A.P. 313 (stating that "[a]n appeal may be taken as of right from a collateral order of an administrative agency or lower court" and that a collateral order is one that is "separable from and collateral to the main cause of action where the right involved is too important to be denied review and the question presented is such that if review is postponed until final judgment in the case, the claim will be irreparably lost").
¶ 4 In cases such as this where the order under review contains several discrete portions, we find it prudent to limit our scope of review to those portions that satisfy the foregoing test for collateral orders. Employing this scope of review, we conclude that questions three and four do not meet the collateral order test because the issues raised therein are not too important to be denied review at this stage of the proceedings and consequently, we shall not reach the merits of those issues. Regarding Appellant's first question, we conclude that although it may meet the requirements of the collateral order test, the record before us is not sufficiently developed for us to pass on the merits of Appellant's claims that the deposition testimony and documents sought are protected by the attorney client privilege and the work product doctrine. Accordingly, we do not reach the merits of this issue either. Although we have declined to review the aforementioned issues, we do so without prejudice to Appellant's right to raise these claims at some future stage of the proceedings. We are then left with the claim in question two, which, for the following reasons, we conclude satisfies the collateral order test and leads us to the conclusion that the trial court committed legal error. For sake of clarity, we shall first address the merits of the issue and then address why we conclude it satisfies the collateral order test.
¶ 5 In this question, Appellant presents the issue of whether the trial court acted beyond its authority when it ordered Appellant to produce Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering for deposition along with the documents identified in Appellee's notices of deposition. Appellant claims that the trial court exceeded its authority in so ordering Appellant for two reasons. First, neither individual was within Appellant's control, as they are both ex-employees. And second, neither individual is a party to this action.[2] Consequently, Appellant argues that it was powerless to comply with the court's order, which Appellant claims violated the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
¶ 6 Pennsylvania Rule of Civil Procedure 4009.21 sets forth the proper procedure for the discovery and production of documents within the control of a nonparty. In pertinent part, the rule states the following:
Rule 4009.21. Subpoena Upon a Person Not a Party for Production of Documents and Things. Prior Notice. Objections
(a) A party seeking production from a person not a party to the action shall give written notice to every other party of the intent to serve a subpoena at least twenty days before the date of service. A copy of the subpoena proposed to be served shall be attached to the notice.
Pa.R.C.P. 4009.21(a).
The rule clearly requires that if the production of documents is sought from a nonparty, it must be accomplished by *744 means of a subpoena served on the nonparty. We discussed this particular issue in Leonard v. Latrobe Area Hosp., 379 Pa.Super. 243, 549 A.2d 997 (1988), where we stated:
Appellees erred procedurally in attempting to obtain from the hospital documents which are in the hands of a third person non-party to the lawsuit. We agree with appellees that relevant documents in the hands of third persons are discoverable. However, the Civil Rules of Procedure delineate the proper discovery procedure to be used when discoverable documents are in the hands of a person not a party to the suit. Rather than request that the appellants retrieve those records in the hands of the non-parties, appellees should have attempted to have the non-parties themselves produce the records. A subpoena duces tecum or an independent action in equity against the non-parties are the methods prescribed by the Rules for obtaining such documents from nonparties.
Id. at 999.
¶ 7 In this case, the trial court deviated from this procedure by ordering Appellant to comply with the notices of deposition for the nonparties, Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering. These notices "required" Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering to appear with certain documents, a list of approximately thirty in each notice. The notices further state that the documents are to be produced pursuant to Pa.R.C.P. 4009.1. However, Rule 4009.1 governs the production of documents for parties to the suit, and as stated above, neither Ms. Amerman nor Ms. Goering is a party to this suit. Finally, we note that although Pa.R.C.P. 4007.1, which details the procedure for depositions, permits a notice of deposition to contain a request for production of documents, this provision applies exclusively to "a party." Pa.R.C.P. 4007.1(d)(1). Therefore, in regards to the production of documents, the trial court erred in ordering Appellant to comply with the notices of deposition.
¶ 8 Next we examine whether the trial court erred in ordering Appellant to produce Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering for depositions. In pertinent part, Rule 4007.1 states:
A party desiring to take the deposition of any person upon oral examination shall give reasonable notice in writing to every other party to the action, except that no notice need be given a defendant who was served by publication and has not appeared in the action. A party noticed to be deposed shall be required to appear without subpoena.
Pa.R.C.P. 4007.1(a) (emphasis added). The final sentence clearly requires that a party who is noticed to appear for a deposition must do so without a subpoena. Thus, although the rule does not expressly state it, the implication of the final sentence is that when a party seeks to depose a nonparty, this must be achieved by means of a subpoena. Consequently, we also conclude that the trial court erred in ordering Appellant to produce Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering for depositions.
¶ 9 Indeed, the procedural error in the instant case is demonstrated by Appellant's inability to compel the nonparties to appear and produce documents even though the court issued an order so directing Appellant. The discovery order directed Appellant to produce the nonparties; it did not order the nonparties themselves to comply. Thus, one may rhetorically ask, what is to stop the nonparties from ignoring the discovery order with impunity? Conversely, had Appellee followed the correct procedure and secured subpoenas, then by virtue of the subpoenas to the nonparties, the nonparties themselves would be required to appear for deposition *745 along with the requested documents. See Pa.R.C.P. 234.1 (stating that a "subpoena is an order of the court commanding a person to attend and testify at a particular time and place. It may also require the person to produce documents or things which are under the possession, custody or control of that person.").
¶ 10 We next address the issue of whether the order in this case constitutes a collateral order under Pa.R.A.P. 313. The first prong of the collateral order test requires that the order be "separable from and collateral to the main cause of action." Pa.R.A.P. 313(b). An order will be considered separable from the main cause of action if the issue contained therein may be addressed without analysis of the alleged underlying cause of action. See Dibble, 806 A.2d at 869. In this case, the issue is whether the trial court could order Appellant to produce its ex-employees, who were nonparties, for depositions and the production of documents when it has no control over them. The resolution of this question of law has been achieved without analysis of the underlying cause of action for personal injury. Therefore, the first prong of the collateral order test is satisfied.
¶ 11 The second prong requires that the right involved is too important to be denied review. The trial court's order requires that Appellant do something that it is powerless to accomplish. As discussed in the foregoing analysis, subpoenas rather than notices of deposition would have been the proper procedure to compel Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering to appear for deposition and the production of documents. In this context, we conclude that the trial court's order, which directs Appellant to proceed on a basis entirely outside of the procedure for discovery established in the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure, must be reviewed.
¶ 12 The third prong requires that the claim would be irreparably lost should review be denied. In this case, after the nonparties have been deposed, the issue of whether the court has the authority to order Appellant to produce the nonparties would essentially become moot. Thus, we conclude that the order in this case satisfies the requirements of the collateral order test.
¶ 13 Order REVERSED IN PART and APPEAL QUASHED IN PART.
NOTES
[1]  Both of these individuals were former legal counsel for Appellant.
[2]  We note that Appellee advances no argument to counter Appellant's claim that Ms. Amerman and Ms. Goering were not subject to its control because they were ex-employees. Nor does Appellee, at any point in its brief, endeavor to rebut the argument advanced by Appellant in its second question.

=== CASE 2208333 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:29.080238+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 471 (1988)
Wayne L. DENZER, et al., Appellants,
v.
Donald FRISCH, et al., Respondents.
No. C7-88-871.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
October 18, 1988.
Ronald W. Benson, Benson & Merchlewitz, Winona, for appellants.
James H. Turk, Blethen, Gage & Krause, Mankato, for respondents.
Heard, considered and decided by HUSPENI, P.J., and NORTON and HACHEY,[*] JJ.
OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
Appeal is taken from an award of summary judgment wherein the trial court found appellants Denzer collaterally estopped from bringing suit against respondents Frisch. Appellants entered a Pierringer agreement with the plaintiff in a prior action which had been brought against both appellants and respondents. When appellants subsequently sued respondents for damages, the trial court found appellants had been in privity with the plaintiff during the former action and collaterally estopped appellants' present action. We reverse and remand for trial.
FACTS
Wayne L. Denzer was the driver of a motorcycle which collided with a horse owned by respondents, Donald and Mary *472 Frisch. The collision occurred on May 27, 1981 at approximately 1:10 a.m. and killed Ricky A. Stewart, a passenger on the motorcycle. Subsequently, Stewart's estate brought suit against both appellant Denzer and the respondents Frisch. In that action, Denzer and the Frischs filed similar cross-claims, each alleging the other's negligence caused the accident and that they should be entitled to contribution or indemnification from the other for any award either would have to pay Stewart's estate. Prior to trial, the estate settled its claim with Denzer for $17,500. The settling parties signed a Pierringer release which reserved the estate's right to further pursue its claim against the Frischs. In the release, the estate also agreed to indemnify Denzer "against any and all amounts he [Denzer] may be held liable by consequence of the injuries and damages sustained by the next-of-kin of Ricky A. Stewart * * *." The Pierringer release which was signed October 13, 1982, did not mention Denzer's right to proceed against the Frischs.
In 1985, before trial of the prior action, Denzer sought dismissal from that suit. The court granted his motion and further ordered that his cross-claim against the Frischs be dismissed. The trial proceeded before a jury on the estate's claim that the Frischs negligently allowed the horse to escape and that such negligence was the cause of Stewart's death.
On April 23, 1985, the jury returned a special verdict awarding the estate $52,416.00 in damages. The jury also found that the Frischs negligently allowed their horse to escape, but that such negligence was not a direct cause of Stewart's death. According to the jury, Stewart's death was 80% attributable to Denzer's negligence and 20% attributable to Stewart's own negligence. We affirmed in Stewart v. Frisch, 381 N.W.2d 1 (Minn.Ct.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Mar. 27, 1986).
On May 22, 1987, Denzer served a summons and complaint on the Frischs alleging their horse was "negligently allowed to escape," and that such negligence was the proximate cause of the collision. The Frischs answered stating:
[T]he negligence of [Denzer] for this incident has already been determined by a verdict in the [previous] case * * *.
Subsequently, the Frischs moved for summary judgment arguing that Denzer should be collaterally estopped from relitigating the issue of the Frischs' negligence. In an order granting summary judgment to the Frischs, the trial court stated:
[I]n Stewart v. Frisch, [Denzer's] interests were represented by the plaintiff. This is because the Pierringer release effectively merged the interests of Denzer and Stewart. Although the negligence of Denzer would still go to the jury and the cross-claim of Frisch would not be dismissed, the release assured Denzer that any judgment against him would be satisfied by Stewart. * * * In this instance, Denzer contracted away his interest for a guarantee of indemnification.
* * * * * *
If the Stewart litigation had continued as an action against the Frischs and Denzer, the present suit might not be barred. However, because the Pierringer release effectively aligned Denzer with Stewart, a Denzer/Frisch adversarial relationship did emerge.
ISSUE
Is appellant's claim for damages against respondents barred by collateral estoppel where appellant and plaintiff in a former action entered a Pierringer agreement?
ANALYSIS
Application of collateral estoppel is appropriate where:
(1) the issue was identical to one in a prior adjudication; (2) there was a final judgment on the merits; (3) the estopped party was a party or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication; and (4) the estopped party was given a full and fair opportunity to be heard on the adjudicated issue.
Ellis v. Minneapolis Commission on Civil Rights, 319 N.W.2d 702, 704 (Minn.1982). The parties contest neither that the negligence *473 sought to be litigated by Denzer in a suit against Frisch would be identical to that already litigated by the estate nor the finality of the earlier judgment. However, disagreement exists regarding the characterization of Denzer's involvement in the prior suit.
The Frischs argue that because Denzer was originally a party to the Stewart suit and because he subsequently executed a Pierringer release with Stewart's estate, he was in privity with the estate. The Frischs maintain there was privity because the release contained the estate's promise to reimburse Denzer for any contribution or indemnification that Denzer would have to pay Frisch as a result of Stewart's suit. Therefore, upon the execution of the agreement it became in the estate's best interests to minimize Denzer's liability. The Frischs argue that because minimization of Denzer's liability would have been Denzer's objective had he remained a party to the prior suit, the estate's interests coincided with Denzer's and he was, as a result, represented in Stewart to a degree sufficient to establish privity and thus preclude the present suit by collateral estoppel.
We do not find the Frischs' privity argument persuasive. "There is no prevailing definition of privity which can automatically be applied * * *." Margo-Kraft Distributors, Inc. v. Minneapolis Gas Company, 294 Minn. 274, 278, 200 N.W.2d 45, 47 (1972). Generally,
[Privity] expresses the idea that certain nonparties may be so connected with the litigation that the judgment should also determine their interests.
Brunsoman v. Seltz, 414 N.W.2d 547, 550 (Minn.Ct.App.1987), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 15, 1988). "Privity is usually a question of fact requiring case-by-case determination." Miller v. Northwestern National Insurance Company, 354 N.W.2d 58, 62 (Minn.Ct.App.1984).
We find no case supporting the Frischs' claim that the Pierringer release between Denzer and Stewart's estate puts them in privity with each other. A privy to a party may be identified by the privy's controlling participation and active self-interest in the original litigation. Miller, 354 N.W.2d at 62. Those in privity would include (a) those who control an action although not parties to it, (b) those whose interests are represented by a party to the action, and (c) successors in interest to those having derivative claims. Margo-Kraft, 294 Minn. at 278, 200 N.W.2d at 47-48.
(a) A nonparty to a prior suit can be bound to the results of that suit where the nonparty
so controls an action in advancing her own interests that the nonparty has had her day in court.
Bogenholm v. House, 388 N.W.2d 402, 406 (Minn.Ct.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Aug. 13, 1986). To have control of litigation, a person must have an effective choice as to legal theories to be advanced on behalf of the party and have control over the opportunity to obtain review. Id.
We find no support for an argument that Denzer controlled the prior litigation. The Pierringer agreement did not grant control of the former action to Denzer and there is no allegation that Denzer chose the legal theories advanced in the prior trial. He did not have a vicarious "day in court." Therefore, collateral estoppel cannot be imposed on such a theory.
(b) We also find insufficient evidence to permit us to conclude that Denzer's interests were so adequately represented in Stewart as to allow collateral estoppel in this action. It is true that upon execution of the Pierringer agreement the interests of Stewart's estate coincided with what would have been Denzer's interests had he remained a party to the earlier suit. However, coincidental interests alone are not sufficient to establish privity. In Bogenholm, multiple plaintiffs, including the Bogenholms, wanted multiple trials on the same or similar causes of action arising from the same car accident. The Bogenholms did not join the first action and it was asserted they should be collaterally estopped from bringing a separate suit against the same defendants. On appeal, this court observed:
*474 The Bogenholms * * * were not obligated to intervene in the [first action] simply because they were interested in proving the same set of facts.
Id. at 406. We find Bogenholm controlling on this issue.
The Frischs attempt to distinguish Bogenholm by observing that the Bogenholms were not parties to the prior lawsuit and took no affirmative action therein while, originally, Denzer was a party to an earlier suit and therefore had such an opportunity. The Frischs ignore the fact that the Bogenholms had to fend off two separate consolidation attempts to get their separate trial. Thus in Bogenholm, as here, there was an opportunity for participation in, and contribution to, an earlier action.
The Frischs also attempt to distinguish Bogenholm on the basis that in the first action, Denzer received "consideration" from Stewart's estate in the form of a release and the estate's promise of indemnification, while in Bogenholm the plaintiffs received nothing in the first action. Assuming for the purposes of this analysis that the release and promise of indemnification were "consideration," the Frischs still equivocate on the nature of Denzer's present claim. Any "consideration" Denzer received in Stewart was for the money paid to the estate and the foregone cross-claim. Central to our analysis is that the foregone cross-claim was for contribution/indemnification, not for Denzer's damages. Any damages Denzer might have received from the Frischs were not in issue when the Pierringer agreement was executed. It is those damages which are the subject of the present action; therefore, we are unable to distinguish Bogenholm as the Frischs urge.
(c) There is no argument that Denzer is a successor in interest to someone having a derivative claim.
Aside from their privity argument, the Frischs additionally maintain that Denzer should have preserved his claim against them in the Pierringer agreement. For this proposition they cite Hentschel v. Smith, 278 Minn. 86, 153 N.W.2d 199 (1967). We find the Frischs' reliance on Hentschel misplaced. The Hentschel court noted:
The extent to which a judgment or decree entered by consent is conclusive in a subsequent action should be governed by the intention of the parties as expressed in the agreement * * *.
Id. at 91, 153 N.W.2d at 203.
An intention to be bound * * * should not be found * * * unless the language [of the agreement] or admissible evidence affirmatively points to it.
Id. at 94, 153 N.W.2d at 205. Our examination of the Pierringer agreement reveals no affirmative intention on Denzer's part to forego a damages action against the Frischs. In addition, a requirement that claims be preserved is not consistent with Minnesota law regarding Pierringer agreements. Generally, such agreements have three essential elements:
1. The release of the settling defendants from the action and the discharge of a part of the cause of action equal to that part attributable to the settling defendants' causal negligence;
2. the reservation of the remainder of the plaintiff's causes of action against the nonsettling defendants; and
3. plaintiff's agreement to indemnify the settling defendants from any claims of contribution made by the nonsettling parties and to satisfy any judgment obtained from the nonsettling defendants to the extent the settling defendants have been released.
Frey v. Snelgrove, 269 N.W.2d 918, 920 n. 1 (Minn.1978) (citing Simonett, Release of Joint Tortfeasors: Use of the Pierringer Release in Minnesota, 3 Wm.Mitchell L.Rev. 1, 3, 8, notes 32, 33 (1977)). Thus, while plaintiff parties to Pierringer agreements are required to reserve their causes of action against nonsettling defendants, there is no parallel requirement for settling defendants such as Denzer. Because the Frischs would have had no right to insist that Denzer make such a reservation in the original action, his failure to do so cannot be fatal to the present action.
Finally, if this court were to affirm the trial court's privity and collateral estoppel *475 determinations, we would be ruling, in effect, that Denzer was required to bring any damage claims he had against the Frischs by cross-claim in the original action or forever lose the right to bring them at all. Placing a party in a position where a claim must be made or it is lost makes that claim mandatory or compulsory. Cross-claims are not mandatory or compulsory in Minnesota. The language of Minn.R.Civ.P. 13.07 is permissive and conditional:
A pleading may state as a cross-claim any claim by one party against a co-party arising out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter either of the original action or of a counterclaim therein or relating to any property that is the subject matter of the original action.
Id. (emphasis added).
DECISION
The trial court erred in determining that the Pierringer agreement between Stewart's estate and Denzer was sufficient to put them in privity in the first suit and collaterally estop Denzer's subsequent action for damages against the Frischs.
Reversed and remanded for trial on the merits.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. 6, § 2.

=== CASE 2208269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:28.320711+00 ===

253 Cal.App.2d 848 (1967)
GEORGE YOUNG, JR., Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY, Respondent; THE PEOPLE, Real Party in Interest.
Civ. No. 11606.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Aug. 24, 1967.
Kim & Rishwain and Frank Kim for Petitioner.
No appearance for Respondent.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, Jack R. Winkler and Edsel W. Haws, Deputy Attorneys General, for Real Party in Interest.
PIERCE, P. J.
Petitioner, George Young, Jr., seeks a writ of prohibition to prohibit the trial of a count in an information charging him with an attempt to receive stolen goods.
Two questions are presented: (1) Should the information have been set aside under Penal Code section 995 upon the ground that Young had not been legally committed by a magistrate inasmuch as entrapment (so it is contended) was shown as a matter of law? (2) Since the goods attempted to be "received" were not in fact stolen (although Young thought they were) can he be guilty of a criminal attempt?
The record of the preliminary hearing shows the following:
On January 25, 1967, Baker, a deputy district attorney and Roop, a police officer, placed two television sets and a portable record player, all three items the property of the City of Stockton, none of them having ever been shown to have been *850 stolen, into Baker's station wagon and covered them with a blanket.
By prearrangement it was planned that McNeer, a special investigator for the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and one Vino, a police informer, were to contact Young, identify the property as stolen and see if Young would purchase it. The two men, pursuant to that plan, did seek out Young at a bar owned by the latter, did inform Young in the vernacular that they possessed stolen goods and asked Young if he could help them. Young, first in doubt as to his acquaintanceship with Vino, later asked to see what they had and was shown the three items. He then asked what they wanted and whether it was a local job. He was told the goods were from an Oakland job. Young left, returned later with a woman who got into his automobile with him, the two drove off and McNeer and Vino followed. After driving around for awhile Young stated he thought they were being followed by police. A rendezvous close by was suggested by Young but the appointment was not kept. Later McNeer and Vino again went to Young's bar. There Young was again importuned to make the purchase, a second meeting a block away was arranged, that appointment was kept, the property was transferred into the trunk of Young's car, Young paid McNeer $65. Young was arrested a short time thereafter. A complaint was filed, a preliminary hearing was held and petitioner was held to answer.
At the preliminary hearing and again on the Penal Code section 995 motion both contentions (stated as the questions before us above) were raised. Although the magistrate held Young to answer he made the following statement:
"The Court: This is a case pre-conceived by the Police Department in order to go out and get this man to buy this merchandise. Now, this whole thing originated in the mind of the Police Department and the District Attorney as far as I'm concerned. I'm not trying this case. ... I'm not satisfied that the law is you can go out and you come into a--people can go out and buy something legitimately, go out here and say now here, this is stolen and I want you to buy it and you can put a man in jail for it and find him guilty of it, I don't buy that. Now, if the court says I'm wrong, I'm wrong, but right now if I ever sat on the Appellate Court I would never hold that, that's not the policy of the law, is to trap people into doing something. That's what you've done in this case. ... If this case of entrapment was tried before *851 me I would so hold as a matter of law but I mean that's not before me at this level, I'm not trying it."
Re the Entrapment Issue
[1a] It is obvious from the foregoing that the committing magistrate believed (1) that entrapment had been proved as a matter of law but that (2) it was not his function to consider that defense at the preliminary hearing. His conclusion was incorrect.penal Code section 995 provides that an information must be set aside by the court in which the defendant is arraigned if it appears either (1) that the defendant has not been legally committed by a magistrate or (2) if the defendant has been committed without reasonable or probable cause.
In Jennings v. Superior Court (1967) 66 Cal.2d 867 [59 Cal.Rptr. 440, 428 P.2d 304], our Supreme Court issued a writ of prohibition under that section where the preliminary hearing had disclosed the following facts: Defendant was charged with possession of narcotics. The testimony of the police officers considered alone established probable cause without question. Defendant-petitioner, however, showed that a material witness, not present but almost certain to be available if a short continuance were granted would impeach the officers' testimony and prove a "frame." The magistrate made it clear that he disbelieved the police officers' testimony in material respects, but he said: " 'Now whether the man was, in fact, framed ... I don't see how that would affect this preliminary at this stage.' " He denied the motion for continuance and held defendant to answer. The trial court denied the Penal Code section 995 motion.
The Supreme Court held that, although informations would not be set aside for "some irregularity or minor error in procedure," it had been the magistrate's duty to grant the short continuance, under the facts disclosed, hear the proffered evidence and then determine the question of probable cause; that there has been a denial of petitioner's substantial right and a denial of procedural due process.
The Jennings case is similar to this case. In both, the committing magistrates mistook their powers and obligations of evidence evaluation. The similitude is, however, incomplete. In Jennings, the defendant was necessarily prejudiced, and procedural due process violated, because the defendant was prohibited from having an opportunity to prove his defense. Here defendant has been prejudiced only if the committing magistrate's opinion as to the fact of entrapment was correct. *852
[2] Entrapment exists where the crime is actually planned (instigated) by the police rather than originating in the mind of the defendant and defendant is lured into the commission of the crime. "[W]here a defendant has a preexisting criminal intent, the fact that when solicited by a decoy he commits a crime does not show entrapment. ..." (People v. Benford, 53 Cal.2d 1, 10 [345 P.2d 928].)
The question in the instant case is a close one. [3] But we remember first that to raise that which is usually a question of fact to become a matter of law for judicial determination the summation of facts must be such that reasonable minds cannot differ--the conclusion must, to the reasonable mind, be inevitable. [1b] Here reasonable minds could not differ that the police lured the defendant (that is conceded) but was he just a susceptible person or one already possessed of a mens rea just awaiting an opportunity to receive stolen goods under mistakenly "safe" conditions from one with whom he had dealt before--in short, was he a "fence?"
We have concluded, not without dubiety, that reasonable minds could, under this record, reach the latter conclusion. That conclusion seems fortified when we remember secondly that a committing magistrate searches not for proof beyond a reasonable doubt but for probable cause. And that conclusion precludes our holding there was entrapment as a matter of law. But that does not close the book in the decision of this matter.
Re the Stolen Goods Issue
[4] The law considers an attempt to be a specific intent to commit a substantive crime plus a direct, equivocal act toward that end. Intent alone is not enough. (People v. Camodeca (1959) 52 Cal.2d 142, 145 [338 P.2d 903].) The substantive crime involved here is receiving stolen goods. Defendant urges he could not have committed the substantive crime (and therefore could not be guilty of an attempt), because the goods he bought were not stolen. [5] The Attorney General replies that under settled California law, particularly under People v. Rojas (1961) 55 Cal.2d 252 [10 Cal.Rptr. 465, 358 P.2d 921, 85 A.L.R.2d 252], the goods need not be actually stolen if the defendant thinks that they are and buys them under that belief. In Rojas, one of the defendants had what amounted to a standing order with one Hall to buy stolen electrical equipment from him. Hall stole certain conduits to fill that order. He was arrested with the conduits in his possession before he could consummate the transaction with the defendants. He *853 then implicated defendants, and the police induced him to continue negotiations with defendants and effect a "sale" of the conduits. He did so, defendants were caught and convicted both of receiving stolen goods and, separately, of an attempt. The latter conviction was affirmed on appeal, the former reversed.
In both the Rojas case and this one the goods at the moment of their receipt were in one sense not "stolen." In Rojas, however, they were stolen-but-recovered; and in a very material way they had not only been stolen but defendants had been instrumental in the fact they were stolen. In the case before us the goods had never been stolen. The police department, in effect, used its own property as bait. That makes a difference.
We have pointed out that intent alone is not in legal contemplation an "attempt." A substantive crime must be involved with a direct act towards its commission. There was no substantive crime at all here. The police merely sold their own property.people v. Camodeca, supra, 52 Cal.2d 142, 145, was the case upon which our Supreme Court in Rojas placed principal reliance. Camodeca was an extortion case. The court there states (on p. 147): "Although the law does not impose punishment for guilty intent alone, it does impose punishment when guilty intent is coupled with action that would result in a crime but for the intervention of some fact or circumstance unknown to the defendant. (Citations.) In the present case [Camodeca] there was not a legal but only a factual impossibility of consummating the intended offense, i.e., the intended victim was not deceived." (Italics supplied.)
Also quoted in Rojas (on p. 257) is Smith, Two Problems in Criminal Attempts (1957), 70 Harv. L.Rev. 422, 439. That article makes clear the distinction we make here between the Rojas and Camodeca cases on the one hand and this case. Definitively (on p. 436) it quotes from Rex v. Percy Dalton Ltd., 33 Crim. R. 102, as follows:
" 'Steps on the way to the commission of what would be a crime, if the acts were completed, may amount to attempts to commit that crime, to which, unless interrupted, they would have led; but steps on the way to the doing of something, which is thereafter done, and which is no crime, cannot be regarded as attempts to commit a crime.' "
By way of illustration of the quoted rule the author borrows from 1 Wharton, Criminal Law, sec. 225 n. 9 (12th ed. 1932) the case of Lady Eldon who, returning to England *854 sought to smuggle in what she believed to be duty-payable French lace of great value but which was actually duty- free English lace bought at a price greatly in excess of its value. And by way of contrast the author cites Regina v. Hensler, 11 Cox Cr. Cases 570 (also cited by our Supreme Court in People v. Camodeca, supra, at page 146 of 52 Cal.2d) which, like Camodeca, was an extortion case. He distinguishes the Dalton and Hensler cases, as we distinguish the instant case from Rojas.
The decision in Rojas was directly contrary to People v. Jaffe 185 N.Y. 497 (1906) [78 N.E. 169, 9 L.R.A.N.S. 263], which it disapproved. The facts in Jaffe were indistinguishable from Rojas. As the California Supreme Court in Rojas stated (on pp. 256-257 of 55 Cal.2d) the Jaffe decision has been almost uniformly criticized. It is also criticized by Mr. Smith, but that author says (op.cit., pp. 440- 441):
"But if that result was an absurd one, it was so, it is submitted, not because of any principle, relating to attempts that was applied by the court in that case, but because of the rule that stolen goods cease to be stolen when once they have been restored to the possession of the owner. Given that principle, Jaffe must be taken to be the same as the case of D who is offered a car at a very low price by one whom D knows to be a car thief. D believes the car to be stolen but accepts the offer, asking no questions. In fact the car has not been stolen. Surely it is not absurd to suggest that, even if D's state of mind could be proved, he could not be convicted of an attempt." (Italics supplied.)
The illustration quoted is precisely the same as the case before us. We accept Mr. Smith's reasoning.
Let the writ of prohibition issue as prayed for.
Friedman, J., and Regan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737000 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:31.472738+00 ===

JUSTICE REINHARD delivered the'opinion of the court: Defendant, Renee Kerger, was charged by indictment in the circuit court of Du Page County with failure to report an accident involving death or personal injury. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—401(b).) Following a bench trial, defendant was found guilty and was sentenced to a one-year term of conditional discharge and a $400 fine. On appeal, defendant raises two issues: (1) whether the evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was “involved” in a motor vehicle accident within the meaning of section 11—401 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—401); and (2) whether, if defendant was involved in a motor vehicle accident, she complied with sections 11—401(b) and 11—403 of the Code. The following relevant facts were adduced at defendant’s bench trial. On September 27, 1987, at approximately 11:30 p.m., defendant was driving east on Lake Street in Addison, Illinois. In the passenger seat was her boyfriend, Tim Jones. Defendant was followed by a friend, Richard Barsanti, who was approximately one car length behind defendant’s vehicle. Defendant, Jones, and Barsanti had previously been at a wedding reception. Barsanti was following defendant to Hillside, Illinois. Immediately behind Barsanti’s vehicle was a third vehicle with five occupants, one of whom was Lisa DeNittis, who was seated in the left rear passenger seat, and another was Rosemary Tucker, who was seated in the middle rear passenger seat. Lake Street is a four-lane road at the location of the accident with two lanes in each direction. There is some street lighting along Lake Street at this location. Although there is some discrepancy between several witnesses as to whether the three vehicles were in the inside lane or the curb lane as they proceeded east on Lake Street, it is clear that the Barsanti vehicle was immediately behind defendant’s vehicle and followed closely by the vehicle containing DeNittis and Tucker. While the various witnesses disagree as to certain details, the collective testimony establishes that a pedestrian attempted to cross Lake Street from north to south. Both DeNittis and Tucker testified that as the pedestrian attempted to cross the eastbound lanes of Lake Street, he was struck by the left side of defendant’s vehicle, appeared to tumble or fall, and was hit head on by Barsanti’s vehicle. The pedestrian, Richard Herman, died as a result of the injuries sustained in this incident. Defendant testified that as she was driving east on Lake Street, she observed the pedestrian crossing Lake Street toward her vehicle. Defendant was forced to swerve sharply to the right to avoid hitting the pedestrian, and as she swerved, she heard a “thump” toward the rear of her vehicle. She immediately pulled over to the curb and stopped. She stated that she did not know if the pedestrian came in contact with her vehicle. Jones, who had been sleeping, exited defendant’s vehicle and went back to Barsanti’s vehicle. Defendant also exited her vehicle and walked around it to see if it had sustained any damage, which, according to defendant, it had not. She then sat in the front passenger seat previously occupied by Jones. The vehicle in which DeNittis and Tucker were passengers also pulled over and stopped. Rosemary Tucker testified that she went up to defendant, who was standing beside the passenger door of her vehicle, and observed defendant to be upset, crying, and hysterical. According to Tucker, defendant said “[M]y God, I hit him; I can’t believe I hit him.” Although defendant’s and Jones’ testimony differs somewhat as to the subsequent events, it appears that defendant remained on or near the scene of the accident for between 45 minutes and two hours. Defendant apparently sat on a nearby porch for part of that time, and eventually Jones returned to her and told her to get into her vehicle, and he drove her home. The evidence establishes that there were five or six police officers at the scene from time to time while defendant and Jones were present. Defendant did not talk to any police officers at the scene, nor did she contact the police within three hours after the accident. Jones testified that he attempted to approach the Barsanti vehicle and inquire as to Barsanti’s whereabouts and was told to “get out of here” by a police officer. Sometime after driving defendant home, Jones went to the Addison police department, where he eventually gave a written statement to the police indicating that he had been driving defendant’s vehicle at the time of the accident. Jones admitted at trial that he falsified the statement to police as to who was driving defendant’s vehicle. In finding defendant guilty, the court found that defendant did not actually contact the pedestrian with her vehicle. The court further ruled that contact was unnecessary to constitute involvement in an accident and that based on the other evidence defendant was involved in an accident within the meaning of section 11—401 of the Code. Defendant contends that because there was no physical contact between her vehicle and the pedestrian nor “substantial implication or connection” between her vehicle and the pedestrian who was run over by another vehicle, she was not “involved” in a motor vehicle accident and had no responsibilities under sections 11—401 and 11—403 of the Code. As defendant notes, the Code does not define the term “involved.” Section 11—401 of the Code provides in pertinent part: “(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until the requirements of Section 11—403 have been fulfilled.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—401(a).  In construing a statute, the court must discover the intent of the legislature in order to give it effect. (People v. Parker (1988), 123 Ill. 2d 204, 209, 526 N.E.2d 135.) To do so, the court must consider the language of the statute, the purpose of the legislation, and the reason for its enactment. (People v. Haywood (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 263, 271, 515 N.E.2d 45.) Although criminal statutes must be strictly construed in favor of the defendant and may not be extended in their application to cases which do not, by the strictest construction, come under their provisions (People v. Parvin (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 519, 525, 533 N.E.2d 813, 815), they must not be so rigidly construed as to defeat the intent of the legislature. Haywood, 118 Ill. 2d at 271, 515 N.E.2d at 49.  Neither party cites, nor do we find, any Dlinois case interpreting the meaning of “involved in a motor vehicle accident.” We begin, therefore, by noting that the purpose of the statute is to inform those who have been injured or damaged by another driver or the proper authorities if necessary of that driver’s identity. (People v. Young (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 236, 240, 441 N.E.2d 641; People v. Lucus (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 370, 373, 243 N.E.2d 228.) In serving this purpose, the statute requires the driver of a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident to comply with the reporting requirements of section 11—403. We do not agree with defendant’s narrow interpretation that the language requires that there be actual contact before a driver will be considered to have been involved in a motor vehicle accident. We can readily identify numerous situations where the driver of a motor vehicle would be involved in a motor vehicle accident and yet not have contact with another vehicle or pedestrian. Such a narrow interpretation as urged by defendant would defeat the purpose of the statute in many situations where the statute’s purpose should otherwise be served. In opinion No. S—1430 of the Illinois Attorney General (1979 Ill. Att’y Gen. Op. 57), the question addressed was whether there must be actual physical contact between vehicles before a driver is deemed to be “involved” pursuant to section 11—403. The example cited in the request for an opinion was where the first driver commits a driving error and the second driver reacts in a manner which avoids a collision with the first driver but still results in injury or damage to the second driver. It was asked whether the first driver is “involved” in an accident. The Attorney General stated that there does not have to be actual physical contact between the vehicles before a driver is deemed to be “involved.” The words “involved in an accident” within the statute were construed by the Attorney General to mean “implicated in an accident or connected with the accident in a substantial manner.” (1979 Ill. Att’y Gen. Op. at 59.) The Attorney General further concluded that, in the example cited, the first driver would be “involved,” but each case would depend upon its own facts. Although an opinion of the Attorney General is not binding on this court, a well-reasoned opinion of the Attorney General is entitled to considerable weight in resolving a question of first impression in this State regarding the construction of an Illinois statute. (City of Springfield v. Allphin (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 117, 130-31, 384 N.E.2d 310.) In this instance, the opinion of the Attorney General supports our conclusion that there need not be physical contact between a vehicle and, in this case, a pedestrian before a driver is deemed to be “involved in a motor vehicle accident.”  While we recognize that a variety of factual situations might arise absent any contact, some of which might not require a driver to comply with section 11—403, we need only concern ourselves with the facts of this case. Any future cases requiring interpretation of this language must necessarily depend upon the particular facts of the case in light of the purpose behind the statute. To hold otherwise would allow drivers of automobiles who do not come in contact with a pedestrian or another vehicle or who are otherwise arguably involved in a motor vehicle accident to escape detection and effectively circumvent the purpose behind the statute. Here, the evidence establishes that defendant observed the pedestrian walking across the roadway toward her- vehicle. She swerved sharply to the right and heard a “thump” near the rear of her vehicle as she did so. While the trial court found that defendant’s vehicle did not contact the pedestrian, a finding not challenged on appeal, the two witnesses, DeNittis and Tucker, testified that the pedestrian was struck by defendant’s vehicle. At the very least, this testimony establishes that defendant’s vehicle came very close to the pedestrian. The pedestrian then either stumbled or fell, and Barsanti’s vehicle struck him immediately thereafter. Additionally, defendant stated to Tucker after the accident that she hit the pedestrian. Under these circumstances, we conclude that defendant was “involved in a motor vehicle accident.” We emphasize that it is not necessary to determine, for purposes of deciding whether defendant was involved in a motor vehicle accident, whether defendant caused or was at fault for the accident as further urged by defendant. Such an inquiry is one for the police and the courts to undertake at a later time. This inquiry will of course be better undertaken if those who are involved in a motor vehicle accident are required to come forward and identify themselves so that the police may properly investigate the accident. Of course, to show a violation of section 11—401 the prosecution is required to prove that the accused had knowledge that the vehicle he was driving was involved in an accident or collision. (People v. Nunn (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 243, 252, 396 N.E.2d 27.) That issue is not presented in this appeal.  We next address defendant’s contention that she substantially complied with the requirements of sections 11—401 and 11—403. Section 11—401(b) requires that any driver “who has failed to stop or to comply with” the requirements of section 11 — 403 “shall, within 3 hours after such motor vehicle accident *** report the place of the accident, the date, the approximate time, the driver’s name and address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and the names of all other occupants of such vehicle, at a police station or sheriff’s office near the place where such accident occurred.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—401(b).) Section 11—401(a) requires the driver of a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident to stop and “remain at the scene of the accident until the requirements of Section 11—403 have been fulfilled.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—401(a).) Consequently, to avoid prosecution under 11—401(b), a driver involved in a motor vehicle accident must either comply with the requirements under 11—403 or comply with the requirements of 11—401(b). The evidence in this case establishes that defendant did neither. Section 11—403 states in pertinent part: “§11—403. Duty to give information and render aid. The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver’s name, address, registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating and shall upon request and if available exhibit such driver’s license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with ***. If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this Section is in condition to receive and understand such information and no police officer is present, such driver after rendering reasonable assistance shall forthwith report such motor vehicle accident at the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority, disclosing the information required by this Section.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 95½, par. 11—403.) While it is undisputed that defendant stopped and remained at the scene of the accident for at least 45 minutes, it is equally clear that she did not provide nor attempt to provide the information required by section 11—403. While the person entitled to the information was in no condition to receive and understand it, there were at least five police officers present, any one of whom could have received the required information had defendant attempted to do so in conformance with section 11—403. Furthermore, defendant did not, after leaving the scene without complying with the requirements of section 11—403, provide the required information within three hours under section 11—401(b). We are not persuaded by defendant’s argument that she was excused from compliance because she knew that her boyfriend, Tim Jones, went to the Addison police department, particularly where there is no evidence that he went there to provide the required information and, in fact, provided false information. The evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant failed to comply with section 11—401(b). The judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County is affirmed. Affirmed. DUNN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737001 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:31.47724+00 ===

JUSTICE McLAREN, dissenting: Because I believe the majority opinion has interpreted section 11—401 too broadly, I must respectfully dissent. I agree with the majority that contact need not be made in order to be involved in an auto accident under section 11—401. However, I believe the interpretation given by the majority makes liable not only people who are “involved” in an accident but also people who are not “involved” in the accident but who are material witnesses. There are sufficient facts in this case to support a finding that contact was made between the defendant’s vehicle and the deceased. However, since the trial court found that there was no contact between the defendant’s vehicle and the deceased, I believe the remaining facts presented by all the witnesses clearly establish that the car in which the plaintiff was driving was not the proximate cause nor a proximate cause of the accident which took the life of the pedestrian. Thus, the defendant is, at best, a material witness who is not involved in the auto accident. The court committed error when it found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was “involved” in the accident. Both defendant and the State argue that the reasoning of one of the cases cited by the Attorney General, People v. Bammes (1968), 265 Cal. App. 2d 626, 71 Cal. Rptr. 415, should apply to the instant case. In Bammes, the defendant’s car turned into the path of a station wagon. To avoid hitting the defendant’s car, the station wagon swerved to the left into the path of an oncoming truck. The station wagon and the truck collided head on. The station wagon was demolished and five of its occupants killed. The defendant saw the crash in her rearview mirror, but continued driving. Based on these facts, the California appellate court reasoned that the defendant’s action of turning in front of the oncoming station wagon “was an efficient cause of the latter’s colliding with the truck and that therefore defendant was ‘involved’ in the accident.” (Bammes, 265 Cal. App. 2d at 631, 71 Cal. Rptr. at 418.) The court noted that even if the “real cause” of the accident had been the station wagon driver’s error in attempting to pass instead of sharply braking, “nevertheless defendant was involved in the accident because it was her pulling out into the intersection in front of the oncoming station wagon which precipitated the necessity for some immediate action” by the driver of the station wagon. (Emphasis in original.) (Bammes, 265 Cal. App. 2d at 631, 71 Cal. Rptr. at 419.) The court concluded that one may be involved in an accident, yet not be at fault. (Bammes, 265 Cal. App. 2d at 632, 71 Cal. Rptr. at 419.) The Bammes definition of “involved” is that the driver precipitated or caused the vehicle or pedestrian to come into contact with something, even if the driver was not at fault. (Bammes, 265 Cal. App. 2d at 632, 71 Cal. Rptr. at 419.) The majority’s interpretation is in conflict with the rule that penal statutes should be strictly construed in favor of defendant. To define “involved” as covering a driver who was not responsible for an accident nor made contact with anything would impermissibly extend the statute to a situation which by strict construction, does not come under its provisions. One purpose of this statute in question is to facilitate victims or their families in identifying and seeking redress from tortious drivers. This interpretation is not furthered by the majority’s interpretation punishing material witnesses who did not precipitate or cause an accident. If a driver’s car has collided with something or someone, or another car has collided with that of the driver, a reasonable person would know that he or she had been involved in an accident. However, if there is no contact such as the trial court found in this case, there must be something which would indicate to a reasonable person that he or she had been involved in an accident. Under Bammes, when there is no contact between a person or car and the defendant’s car, defendant is “involved” in the accident if he or she did something to cause or precipitate the accident. The trial court based its decision on the fact that the defendant believed she hit the pedestrian. However, her subjective belief is irrelevant, because if the evidence showed that the defendant was not involved in the accident, her belief that she was does not establish her involvement. If a defendant did not commit an offense, he cannot be convicted, even if he believed that he committed the offense. The majority has stated, “We emphasize that it is not necessary to determine, for purposes of deciding whether defendant was involved in a motor vehicle accident, whether defendant caused or was at fault for the accident as further urged by defendant. Such an inquiry is one for the police and the courts to undertake at a later time. This inquiry will of course be better undertaken if those who are involved in a motor vehicle accident are required to come forward and identify themselves so that the police may properly investigate the accident.” (191 Ill. App. 3d at 410-11.) Such a declaration by the majority is tantamount to a statement that if one witnesses an accident one better stop and report and let the courts and the police at some other point in time determine whether or not one is “involved” in the accident regardless of cause or fault. Such an interpretation is overly broad and goes far beyond the intent of the legislature as it makes material witnesses, not parties who may or may not be subject to liability, subject to punishment for a felony. I believe the intent of the legislature was that any individual who drove a motor vehicle and who may have been the proximate cause or a proximate cause, or who made contact with any other vehicle, person, or other instrumentality which was involved in the auto accident is required to stop and give information as required under sections 11—401(b) and 11—403 of the Code. Since I have determined that the defendant was not involved in the auto accident, I have not not addressed the aspect of the opinion relating to whether compliance with sections 11—401(b) and 11—403 was effectuated. Based upon the above, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9737002 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:34.205437+00 ===

Per Curiam.
In this wrongful discharge case, plaintiff, Stella Lopus, appeals from the grant of summary disposition in favor of defendant, L & L Shop-Rite, Inc., by the Ingham Circuit Court in an order dated November 10, 1986. We affirm.
The record reveals that plaintiff was hired as a cashier by defendant in December, 1980. Sometime thereafter, plaintiff was diagnosed as having rheumatoid arthritis in both wrists, and by July or August, 1983, the pain she experienced was becoming "unbearable.” She also began to have arthritic pain in her knees, elbows and shoulders. In September, 1983, plaintiff, an at-will employee, was fired for having accepted an improper personal check. Plaintiff testified in her deposition, however, that her discharge violated defendant’s disciplinary policy, which required giving a reprimand to an employee before discharging the employee. Plaintiff opined that the real reason for her termination was that defendant discovered that she was suffering from arthritis. According to plaintiff, at the time of her discharge from employment in September, 1983, she was "so sick” that her rheumatologist was "ready to put me in the hospital for three weeks.” She also explained that, after her discharge, her intermittent arthritic pain precluded her from working or from performing the duties of a cashier.
Plaintiff subsequently filed a claim with the Bureau of Workers’ Disability Compensation, which she settled with defendant on November 20, 1984. Under the terms of the parties’ redemption agreement, plaintiff released defendant from liabil*489ity for all past, present and future compensation benefits and signed a resignation from employment in exchange for the payment of $12,500.
On January 18, 1985, plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant in the Ingham Circuit Court, alleging wrongful discharge and discrimination. Defendant’s motion for summary disposition, filed under MCR 2.116(C)(7), was denied by the trial court in an order dated June 27, 1985. Thereafter, plaintiff filed an amended complaint alleging retaliatory discharge from employment in violation of public policy, asserting that she was fired "because defendant suspected that she was going to file a workers’ compensation claim against defendant.” The amended complaint prompted defendant to file a second motion for summary disposition, this time under MCR 2.116(0(10)—no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The trial court granted defendant’s motion after conducting a hearing on October 29, 1986, concluding that plaintiff’s case sounded in contract, not tort, and that plaintiff had failed to set forth any damages or loss compensable in contract. We agree.
Plaintiff argues that her claim for retaliatory discharge sounds in tort, not contract, and entitles her to seek damages for the embarrassment, humiliation, pain, suffering, and emotional distress she experienced after her discharge from employment in September, 1983, and before her voluntary resignation from employment on November 29, 1984. In support of her assertion that her retaliatory-discharge claim sounds in tort, plaintiff relies on Sventko v The Kroger Co, 69 Mich App 644; 245 NW2d 151 (1976), and Goins v Ford Motor Co, 131 Mich App 185; 347 NW2d 184 (1983), lv gtd 422 Mich 857 (1985), order granting lv vacated and lv den 424 Mich 879 (1986). In Sventko, the *490plaintiff, an at-will employee, filed a workers’ compensation claim and, while on a disability leave, was notified that she would not be allowed to return to work. She subsequently filed an action for retaliatory discharge, and this Court—while mindful of the common-law right of an employer to discharge an at-will employee for any reason or for no reason at all—held that "an employer at will is not free to discharge an employee when the reason for the discharge is an intention on the part of the employer to contravene the public policy of this state.” Sventko, supra, p 647. In that case, the employer’s retaliatory discharge of the plaintiff could have been prompted by plaintiff’s filing for workers’ compensation benefits. In dissent, Chief Judge Danhof asserted that the majority was engaging in "judicial legislation” since "[t]here is no provision [in Michigan’s workers’ compensation statute] that precludes an employer from discharging an employee at will after that employee has been compensated” in accordance with the statute. In Goins, a panel of this Court ruled that an action for wrongful discharge in retaliation for having filed a workers’ compensation claim sounds in tort, not contract. In support of its conclusion, the Goins panel cited Sventko and an Indiana case, Scott v Union Tank Car Co, 75 Ind App 150; 402 NE2d 992 (1980).
We note, first, that Sventko and Goins are factually distinguishable from the instant case because plaintiff’s discharge was not technically in retaliation for the filing of a claim for workers’ compensation; she was, in fact, fired before her claim for compensation was filed. Second, we agree with another panel of this Court—contrary to the ruling in Goins—that an action for wrongful discharge from employment in retaliation for having filed a workers’ compensation claim sounds in *491contract, not tort. Thus, we cite with agreement the following language from Watassek v Dep’t of Mental Health, 143 Mich App 556, 564-565; 372 NW2d 617 (1985), lv den 424 Mich 878 (1986):
As the Supreme Court discussed in Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), reh den 409 Mich 1101 (1980), cf., Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256; 362 NW2d 628 (1984), an action for wrongful discharge is one mainly ex contractu. An action claiming retaliatory discharge is an action asserting a specific type of wrongful discharge and thus constitutes a contract action. Although we are mindful of the case of Goins v Ford Motor Co, 131 Mich App 185, 198; 347 NW2d 184 (1983), lv gtd 422 Mich 857 (1985), wherein this Court ruled that an action for retaliatory discharge was one in tort, we can find no rational basis to label one wrongful discharge a contract and the other a tort. Moreover, we find that the Goins panel’s reliance on Sventko, supra, is misplaced; that case did not in fact determine that the action was one in tort. Although the Goins panel also relied on Scott v Union Tank Car Co, 75 Ind App 150; 402 NE2d 992 (1980), a case in which the Indiana Appeals court ruled, on facts similar to those in Sventko, that the claim sounded in tort, we note with approval the lengthy dissent which reasons that the claim is better characterized as one in contract. Finally, the Trombetta [v Detroit, T & I R Co, 81 Mich App 489; 265 NW2d 385 (1978), lv den 403 Mich 855 (1978)] and Sventko, supra, cases consider the issue of wrongful discharge in terms of an employment contract and not as a tort.
Since plaintiffs claim sounds in contract, her damages due to mental distress are not recoverable. Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256, 259; 362 NW2d 628 (1984). Moreover, plaintiff is unable to recover exemplary dam*492ages since she has not pled or proven tortious conduct independent of the breach of contract. Kewin v Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins Co, 409 Mich 401, 419; 295 NW2d 50 (1980); Hetes v Schefman & Miller Law Office, 152 Mich App 117, 121-122; 393 NW2d 577 (1986). Her argument on appeal that defendant negligently failed to follow the disciplinary and discharge procedures outlined in its employees’ handbook was raised neither in her original nor amended complaint. This issue, therefore, is beyond the scope of appellate review. Balogh v City of Flat Rock, 152 Mich App 517, 520; 394 NW2d 1 (1985). We note, however, that Michigan law, as clarified in recent opinions issued by this Court, does not recognize a cause of action for negligent performance of a contract and provides that a breach of an employment contract does not give rise to a tort claim where the breach of duty is indistinguishable from the breach of contract. See Struble v Lacks Industries, Inc, 157 Mich App 169, 176; 403 NW2d 71 (1986), Hetes, supra, and Brewster v Martin Marietta Aluminum Sales, Inc, 145 Mich App 641, 667-668; 378 NW2d 558 (1985).
At the October 29, 1986, summary disposition hearing, the trial court succinctly phrased "the heart of the issue” as: "Are there any contract damages here for this at will employment?” (Emphasis added.) It then concluded that no contract damages existed because any loss or damage suffered by plaintiff was attributable—as recounted by plaintiff herself in her deposition testimony—to plaintiff’s inability, due to rheumatoid arthritis, to perform her cashier duties at and after the time of her discharge from employment. Our review of all the evidence in this case, giving the benefit of any reasonable doubt to plaintiff, convinces us that it would be impossible for plaintiff’s contract claim to be supported at trial. Stebbins v Concord Wrig*493ley Drugs, Inc, 164 Mich App 204; 416 NW2d 381 (1987). Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of defendant under MCR 2.116(C)(10).
Affirmed.