=== CASE 2221857 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.982789+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 34 (1999)
238 Mich. App. 486
In the Matter of Chanel Marie NEWTON, Minor.
Eric Wayne Moore and Marilyn Moore, Petitioners-Appellants,
v.
McKinley Newton, III, Family Division Respondent-Appellee.
Docket No. 218354.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted September 13, 1999, at Grand Rapids.
Decided November 5, 1999, at 9:40 a.m.
Released for Publication February 23, 2000.
*35 Robert J. Riley, Grand Rapids, for the petitioners.
McKinley Newton, III, in pro per.
Before BANDSTRA, C.J., and MARKMAN and METER, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Petitioners appeal as of right the family court's order dismissing their petition for adoption following a hearing on Marilyn Moore's petition to terminate the parental rights of her child's biological father, McKinley Newton, III. We affirm.
On June 22, 1989, petitioner Marilyn Moore (then Marilyn Baker) gave birth to Chanel Marie Newton. The child's birth certificate designated respondent McKinley Newton as the natural father. The parents were not then, and have never been, married to one another. On August 29, 1991, a judgment for support was entered, finding respondent to be the child's biological father and ordering him to pay child support in the amount of $98 a week. By his own admission, respondent substantially failed to comply with the 1991 order of support and over the next several years accumulated an arrearage of approximately $23,000. In 1996, respondent's support obligation was modified and approximately $8,000 of the arrears were discharged with the mother's consent. The circumstances surrounding the modification are not clear from the record, but it appears that respondent's obligation was reduced to a payment of $49 a week with an additional $15 to be paid and applied to the arrearage, for a total weekly payment of $64. According to petitioners, this amount was ordered to be withheld from respondent's *36 wages from his employment at the Arrow Door Company; however, because of the eight percent surcharge on overdue support payments imposed by M.C.L. § 552.603a; MSA 25.164(3a), the entirety of the $15 a week intended to be applied to the arrearage has been consumed by the surcharge and thus the arrearage has not been reduced since the support modification. However, it is undisputed that respondent has consistently made the ordered support payments since the 1996 modification.
On December 6, 1997, Eric Moore and Marilyn Baker were married. One year later, they filed a petition for a stepparent adoption. In conjunction with the adoption, petitioners sought to terminate the parental rights of respondent. A hearing on the petition to terminate respondent's parental rights was held on February 24, 1999. At the close of proofs, the family court held that because respondent had been providing support as ordered under the modified judgment of support, it was unable to terminate respondent's rights pursuant to M.C.L. § 710.51(6); MSA 27.3178(555.51)(6). Thus, it dismissed the adoption petition. Petitioners appeal as of right, alleging that the family court erred as a matter of law by dismissing the petition.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which this Court reviews de novo on appeal. In re Schnell, 214 Mich.App. 304, 310, 543 N.W.2d 11 (1995). The primary goal of judicial interpretation of statutes is to ascertain the intent of the Legislature. Id. at 309, 543 N.W.2d 11. The first step in determining intent is to review the specific language of the statute. Barr v. Mt. Brighton Inc., 215 Mich.App. 512, 516-517, 546 N.W.2d 273 (1996). If statutory language is clear, it must be enforced as written, but if it is susceptible to more than one interpretation, we must determine what the Legislature meant by the language. People v. Denio, 454 Mich. 691, 699, 564 N.W.2d 13 (1997). "Statutory language should be construed reasonably and the purpose of the statute should be kept in mind." Barr, supra at 516, 546 N.W.2d 273. However, if a statute is ambiguous and reasonable minds can differ with regard to the meaning of the statute, "the Court will look to the object of the statute, and will apply a reasonable construction which best accomplishes the statute's purpose." In re Colon, 144 Mich. App. 805, 810, 377 N.W.2d 321 (1985).
The Adoption Code, M.C.L. § 710.21 et seq.; MSA 27.3178(555.21) et seq., provides for termination of a natural parent's rights under the following conditions:
(6) If the parents of a child are divorced, or if the parents are unmarried but the father has acknowledged paternity or is a putative father who meets the conditions in section 39(2) of this chapter, and if the parent having legal custody of the child subsequently marries and that parent's spouse petitions to adopt the child, the court upon notice and hearing may issue an order terminating the rights of the other parent if both of the following occur:
(a) The other parent, having the ability to support, or assist in supporting, the child, has failed or neglected to provide regular and substantial support for the child or if a support order has been entered, has failed to substantially comply with the order, for a period of 2 years or more before the filing of the petition.
(b) The other parent, having the ability to visit, contact, or communicate with the child, has regularly and substantially failed or neglected to do so for a period of 2 years or more before the filing of the petition. [MCL 710.51; MSA 27.3178(555.51).]
At issue in the present case is whether, in a case in which a support order exists, the court must look past the noncustodial parent's compliance with such order and examine the ability of the noncustodial parent to pay more than is required under the order. Petitioners argue *37 that because subsection 6(a) is phrased disjunctively, termination of rights is permitted where it can be shown that the noncustodial parent has failed to either provide support within that parent's ability or comply with the terms of an existing support order. As such, petitioners argue, the mere fact that the noncustodial parent has complied with an existing support order is insufficient to prevent termination where the compliance is not consistent with the actual ability to pay.
In Colon, supra at 809-812, 377 N.W.2d 321, this Court noted the ambiguous nature of subsection 6(a), but, after careful statutory analysis, explained that this subsection addresses two independent situations: (1) where a parent, when able to do so, fails or neglects to provide regular and substantial support, and (2) where a support order has been issued and the parent fails to substantially comply with it. At issue in Colon was whether, in a case where the noncustodial parent is subject to a child support order, the petitioner is also required to prove that the noncustodial parent had the ability to pay support. In finding no such requirement, this Court reasoned that "ability to pay is already factored into a child support order, and it would be redundant to require a petitioner under the Adoption Code to prove the natural parent's ability to pay as well as that parent's noncompliance with a support order." Id. at 812, 377 N.W.2d 321.
The holding in Colon does not directly address the argument in the case at hand, since the holding that a petitioner need not prove both circumstances (ability to pay and noncompliance with an order) does not negate petitioners' argument here that they could choose to prove either circumstance. However, Colon does provide guidance. As stated in Colon, id. at 812, 377 N.W.2d 321, the support order in place has already taken "ability to pay" into consideration. In other words, there are effectively two questions inherent in the first clause in subsection 6(a): (1) What is the ability to support the child?; and (2) Was there a failure of such support? However, the second clause in subsection 6(a) asks only if there was a failure of support, since the existing support order already answers the first question. The court deciding the termination and adoption must follow the determination made regarding the respondent's ability to support the child in the support order as a matter already settled by a judgment. Moreover, the Legislature is presumed to know of and legislate in harmony with existing law. Colon, supra at 811, 377 N.W.2d 321. In cases where the order of support no longer accurately reflects such ability, either parent may petition the court for modification of the order. MCL 722.720; MSA 25.500, M.C.L. § 552.17; MSA 25.97; Kosch v. Kosch, 233 Mich. App. 346, 350, 592 N.W.2d 434 (1999). Any discrepancies between the circumstances of the parties and the order of support may be appropriately reviewed and corrected by the filing of such a petition. See Colon, supra at 812, 377 N.W.2d 321. To require the court to inquire into ability to pay in cases such as this would be a repetitious and inefficient use of judicial resources and would essentially allow a collateral attack of the support order. Instead, the court order takes the place of any inquiry into the circumstances of the parents. Only in cases in which there is no support order in place is an inquiry into ability to pay necessary or even allowed. Any other interpretation in this case would allow a circumvention of the official order of the court. If the level of child support required of a parent by a court order is inadequate, then a modified order must be sought by the same processes by which the existing order has been obtained.
Such a reading of the statute is also consistent with the purpose of the statute as announced in Colon. The primary purpose of M.C.L. § 710.51(6); MSA 27.3178(555.51)(6) is to "foster stepparent adoptions in families where the natural parent had regularly and substantially failed to support or communicate and visit with the child," yet refuses or is unavailable to consent to the adoption. Colon, *38 supra at 810, 377 N.W.2d 321 (emphasis added). To allow termination of the parental rights of a noncustodial parent who provides such support, as outlined in an existing order of support, would not be consistent with this purpose. Indeed, the clear purpose of the statute is to allow the creation of a two-parent family where one did not exist before, not to break up an existing parent-child relationship. Although we cannot comment on the qualities of respondent's parenting abilities overall, we do know that he has complied with the court order in providing financial support for his child.
Thus, we conclude that the family court correctly interpreted M.C.L. § 710.51(6)(a); MSA 27.3178(555.51)(6)(a) to prohibit termination of parental rights where the noncustodial parent has substantially complied with an existing order of support. The only logical interpretation of the statute is that the first clause of subsection 6(a) applies where there is no support order and the second clause applies when there is an existing order; not that the petitioner has the option of proving either circumstance. Otherwise, a parent could be "blindsided" by termination, even though the parent was paying support and complying to the full extent of the law. Because it is clear that respondent here did comply with the existing court support order, termination of his parental rights is not allowed under the statute.
Petitioners next argue that the trial court improperly failed to recognize that despite respondent's compliance with the existing support order, the court could terminate respondent's parental rights if it found that termination was in the best interests of the child. This argument is equally without merit. In In re Hill, 221 Mich.App. 683, 562 N.W.2d 254 (1997), this Court held that because M.C.L. § 710.51(6); MSA 27.3178(555.51)(6) is permissive rather than mandatory, a court may consider the best interests of the child in deciding whether to grant a petition to terminate the noncustodial parent's rights. Id. at 696, 562 N.W.2d 254. Thus, even if the petitioner proves the enumerated circumstances that allow for termination, a court need not grant termination if it finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child. However, contrary to petitioners' assertions, the permissive nature of the statute does not allow for a termination of rights based solely on consideration of the child's best interests. A petitioner must still show by clear and convincing evidence that the requirements of both subsections 6(a) and 6(b) have been met. Hill, supra at 692, 562 N.W.2d 254; Colon, supra at 813, 377 N.W.2d 321. The holding in Hill, supra, merely clarifies that such a showing does not mandate a termination of rights where the court, in its discretion, finds that termination would be inconsistent with the best interests of the child. Thus, the best interests of the child, as defined under the statute, were not at issue in this case because petitioners could not first establish the two necessary circumstances for termination.
For these reasons, we affirm the family court's order dismissing petitioners' petition for adoption and termination of the parental rights of respondent.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2221858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:21.991693+00 ===

53 Ill. App.2d 207 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 649
City of West Frankfort, a Municipal Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry, Local No. 551, and Harold Crain, Louis Youchoff, Bob McCord, Raymond Good and Phil Koclanes, Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 64-34.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
November 9, 1964.
Rehearing denied November 28, 1964.
*208 Elmer Jenkins, of Benton for appellants.
Don R. Lucas, of West Frankfort, for appellee.
WRIGHT, JUSTICE.
The plaintiff, City of West Frankfort, filed a complaint in chancery in the Circuit Court of Franklin County against the defendant, United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and *209 Pipe Fitting Industry, Local No. 551 and its business agent, Harold Crain, and four members of the Union, Louis Youchoff, Bob McCord, Raymond Good and Phil Koclanes. The complaint prayed for a temporary and permanent injunction to enjoin the defendants from picketing a certain project being carried on by the plaintiff within the City of West Frankfort, Illinois.
Following a hearing on the complaint January 29, 1964, the court entered its order: "That a Writ of Permanent Injunction be issued restraining the defendant from engaging in and picketing or establishing or continuing picket lines and pickets or displaying signs saying, in effect, that the City of West Frankfort is unfair to labor or from preventing or interfering with the free and lawful ingress and egress from any area, wherein the employees of said water utility and the City are maintaining, operating, or otherwise engaged in work which has been duly authorized by said plaintiff for the benefit of the citizens of the City." From this order defendants appeal.
At the time of the occurrence in question, the City of West Frankfort operated a water utility consisting of two lakes, a filtration plant, water tank and filtration system, which supplied water to the City of West Frankfort. The City maintained all water supply mains and repaired the valves and pipe connections.
The record reveals that prior to the inauguration of the present administration of the City of West Frankfort, in May 1963, the City had employed licensed, skilled, union plumbers to perform plumbing work in connection with maintenance of the water utility system. After the present administration assumed office in May 1963, the City began using its regular employees *210 of the water and sewer utility system, none of whom belonged to the defendant local, but instead were members of the Hod Carriers Union and were not licensed plumbers or pipe fitters.
On December 2, 1963, defendant, Harold Crain, business agent for the defendant union, appeared before the City Council of the City of West Frankfort, and also spoke with the Mayor and with the City Clerk and Superintendent of the water utility system of the City of West Frankfort. He advised the plaintiff's city officials to use licensed union plumbers and if they did not that any work in the future would be picketed. The City administration refused this request.
On December 5, 1963, the plaintiff City was in the process of installing one thousand feet of six-inch cast iron water line at a cost of approximately $10,000. At the intersection of Sommers and Madison Streets, employees of the City were in the process of laying a water line in a ditch on the City street right-of-way, which particular line was being laid to service one of the Franklin County Housing Authorities areas and to service some residences which were at that time connected to a two-inch line which was in bad condition. This work was being done by four employees of the plaintiff City, none of whom were licensed plumbers or belonged to the defendant local, but instead were members of the Hod Carriers Union. On the morning of December 5, 1963, defendants, Louis Youchoff and Harold Crain and four members of the defendant local union went to the site of the water line construction in question and when the city employees arrived to work on the water line, the defendants began walking along the pipeline ditch carrying signs bearing the following legend:
*211 CITY OF WEST FRANKFORT
ARE NOT EMPLOYING
UNION
Plumbers or Pipe fitters
ON THIS JOB
U.A. Local No. 551
A.F. of L.-C.I.O.
This picket is for the purpose of organization and invite employees to join their A.F. of L. CRAFT UNION.
When plaintiff's employees observed the pickets and signs they voluntarily decided not to cross the picket line or work. The evidence is undisputed that the picketing of the plaintiff's work was peaceable and that there were no acts of physical violence or threats of violence, loud noises, unusual clothing or firearms displayed.
After the employees of the plaintiff City left this job, the present suit for injunction against the defendants was filed. Subsequent to the filing of the complaint, the City and the defendant, Union No. 551, agreed that pending the outcome of this litigation in the trial court, the City would not attempt to accomplish further work on the installation of the water main and the Union members would refrain from further carrying of signs.
It is the contention of the plaintiff City of West Frankfort that in the operation of its water utility, it does not stand in the same category or on the same ground as a private corporation and argues from that *212 premise that defendants have no right to picket the City. With this contention, we cannot agree.
[1] A municipal corporation selling water for private consumption does so in its proprietary rather than governmental capacity. No distinction is to be drawn between such business of selling when indulged in by a municipality and when engaged in by a private corporation. City of Chicago v. Ames, 365 Ill. 529, 7 NE2d 294. In Baltis v. Village of Westchester, 3 Ill.2d 388, 121 NE2d 495, the rule is well stated as follows:
"... a municipal corporation owning and operating a water system and selling water to individuals, although engaged in a public service, does so in its business or proprietary capacity, not in any governmental capacity, and no distinction is to be drawn between such business whether engaged in by a municipality or by a private corporation."
[2] In view of the foregoing principles of law, we conclude that the City of West Frankfort in the operation of its water utility does so in the same category as a private corporation and is no more immune from peaceful picketing than is a private corporation.
[3, 4] The Illinois Supreme Court and the Supreme Court of the United States have held that the Constitutional guarantee of freedom of speech justifies and insures to working men the right of peaceful picketing as a means of communicating their complaints. Ellingsen v. Milk Wagon Drivers' Union Local No. 753, 377 Ill. 76, 35 NE2d 349; American Federation of Labor v. Swing, 312 U.S. 321; Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 U.S. 88; Dinoffria v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters & Chauffeurs Local Union No. 179, 331 Ill. App. 129, 72 NE2d 635. It is equally well settled that the right to picket peacefully in labor *213 disputes is not to be restricted to cases involving the relationship of employer-employees, and that any attempt to restrict peaceful picketing where the subject matter of the dispute contains elements of common interest is in violation of the right of free speech as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Baker v. Retail Clerks' International Protective Ass'n, 313 Ill. App. 432, 40 NE2d 571.
It was admitted by the plaintiff and accepted by the trial court as a fact that the defendants were picketing in a perfectly peaceable manner. The record is completely clear that at no time did the pickets attempt to stop the work or stop the City employees from working on the project. In Plaintiff's brief, filed herein, it is admitted, "in the picketing of the plaintiff's work it is agreed that there was no act of physical violence or threats of violence, loud noises, unusual clothing, or firearms."
[5] The signs carried by the pickets notified the public that the City of West Frankfort was not using Union plumbers or pipe fitters on that particular job and invited the City employees to join defendant's Union. The picketing obviously was for the purpose of informing the people of the City of West Frankfort that the plaintiff City in the operation of its water utility system was not employing union plumbers or pipe fitters on the job in question, and for the further purpose of persuading employees to join their Union and such purposes are not illegal and against the public policy of the State of Illinois. Simmons v. Retail Clerks International Ass'n, 5 Ill. App.2d 429, 125 NE2d 700.
An injunction to restrain picketing such as in the instant case, we believe, does violence to defendants' constitutional safeguards of freedom of speech.
*214 It is not necessary to consider or pass on the other points raised.
For the reasons herein stated, the judgment order of the Circuit Court of Franklin County is reversed and remanded with directions to dissolve the injunction.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
DOVE, P.J. and REYNOLDS, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221866 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.230606+00 ===

348 Mass. 198 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 771
JOHN F. LUZ
vs.
STOP & SHOP, INC. OF PEABODY (and three companion cases[1]).
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
October 8, 1964.
December 7, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, KIRK, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
John T. Ronan (Philip L. Sisk with him) for the defendant.
Joseph J. Hurley & John A. McNiff (Samuel Pearl, Anthony Serra, J. Newton Esdaile & Thomas E. Cargill, Jr., with them) for the plaintiffs.
REARDON, J.
These four actions of tort arose out of the same happening and were tried together with companion actions brought by the same plaintiffs against Ethel J. and Carmen Bianco. The declarations, which are similar in the four cases now before us, allege that on June 26, 1958, the defendant's negligence in the operation and maintenance of premises under its control resulted in injuries to the plaintiffs. In each case, Stop & Shop, Inc. (Stop & Shop) answered with a general denial and an allegation of contributory negligence. In all except the Hardy case the further defence of assumption of the risk was pleaded. The jury returned a verdict in each of the four cases for the plaintiff. We consider the defendant's exceptions (1) to the denial of a motion for a directed verdict in each case, (2) to rulings of the trial judge regarding the admissibility of certain evidence, *200 (3) to the closing argument for the plaintiff Luz, (4) to the denial of a motion for a new trial in each case, and (5) to the denial of requests for rulings which accompanied the motion for a new trial in the Luz case. In summary, the evidence most favorable to the plaintiffs is as follows.
The defendant opened a new super market in the North Shore Shopping Center in Peabody on June 25, 1958. The store was approximately 170 feet square. On the opening day there were 7,100 cash transactions. The sidewalk in front of the store was approximately sixteen feet in width from the front of the store to a six inch curbing. Above this sidewalk was a permanent canopy supported by seven stanchions or columns approximately twenty-three feet apart. Adjacent to the sidewalk was an access roadway between sixteen and twenty feet wide separated from the main roadway and parking area beyond by a raised island. Traffic in the access roadway ran one way in an easterly direction. At the east end of the front of the building were doors for entrance and exit.
In the operation of this self-service super market Stop & Shop provided about 500 carriages or carts each of which weighed twelve to fourteen pounds and had rear wheels larger than those in front. These carriages were used by customers to facilitate the transport of purchases.
The defendant operated a "pickup" service on the sidewalk in front of the store. Stationed there on June 26, 1958, were some twelve to fifteen "bundle boys" employed by the defendant. When a customer came through the exit door he would receive from an employee stationed in that vicinity one half of a numbered "split tag" to be placed by the customer on the windshield of his car. The other half, bearing the same number, would be attached to the carriage containing his purchases. The customer would then drive his automobile from the parking area to the access way. Meanwhile, his carriage would be pushed to the pickup area which commenced at the third stanchion and extended westerly along the sidewalk to the seventh stanchion. As the *201 customer entered the access way, Stop & Shop employees would note his number; it would be announced over a microphone, and the bundle boys would "look for a like number on a carriage and have it ready when the customer pulled up." If customers chose not to utilize the pickup service, they could "walk their cart down to the parking lot, put their groceries in their cars and leave the carriages." These carriages were returned to the store by a bundle boy who nested from ten to twenty or more of them together and pushed them across the access way to the sidewalk.
By 9 A.M. on June 25, 1958, the bundle boys had placed against the curb a plywood ramp which enabled them to push the nested carts from the access road up onto the sidewalk, two of the boys pushing from the rear and two in front guiding the carts. Later that day a heavier ramp approximately three feet wide and four feet long and sloping from the sidewalk to the street was placed in the access road. This second ramp was located opposite the exit door some six or eight feet from the second stanchion. Frequently, cars using the access way in departing the pickup area went over the ramps, causing them to shift away from the curbstone. The plaintiffs Luz and Kwiecinski observed this on numerous occasions. On both days the ramps were moved back against the curb by one or more of the bundle boys and by the plaintiff Kwiecinski "a couple of times."
A detail of seventeen Peabody police headed by Lieutenant Luz, and including Officer Kwiecinski, both of whom were on their day off from regular police duty, had been dispatched to the defendant's store at its request. Members of the detail learned of their assignment from a notice posted on the police station bulletin board. On the morning of June 25, the detail in uniform proceeded from the police station to the defendant's store, and Luz sought out the store manager for "assistance" and "authority." Luz was told by the manager what was expected of the detail, and he then assigned his men to various positions for the ceremonies attendant on the opening of the store. After the manager had indicated what he "thought should be done *202 prior to the opening," the police were "pretty much on their own." Luz was in general supervisory charge of the activities of the officers. Compensation for the service rendered by the police was transmitted by the defendant to the police station where it was subsequently distributed to each member of the detail.
At approximately 2 P.M. on June 26, 1958, a car struck the heavier ramp and moved it eight to twelve inches away from the curbing. The ramp remained in this position. At about 2:25 P.M. the plaintiff Kwiecinski was stationed inside the store near the entrance, about two feet from the front wall, while the plaintiff Luz was standing outside and to the "side of the doorway."
Ethel J. Bianco had come on that day to the Stop & Shop for groceries. The day was fair and clear, the road was dry, and visibility was good. Having completed her shopping she left the store with a carriage containing her bundles. She was given a split tag bearing the number eleven. She placed the tag on her car in the parking area and then drove to the pickup area. The car was equipped with a fluid drive type of transmission and power brakes and possessed no clutch. On the floor, about two inches apart and at the same level, were the brake and accelerator pedals. The rubber covering on the brake pedal was worn on the end closer to the accelerator pedal. At the end of the brake pedal was a small steel bar that extended out about three quarters of an inch on both sides. Between January and June, 1958, Mrs. Bianco had experienced no mechanical trouble with her car which had been driven 3,000 to 4,000 miles.
As Mrs. Bianco approached the access way she stopped at the end of a line of cars heading east with two or three cars ahead of her. A boy at the microphone who was wearing a white uniform said, "Number 11, come to station one." In response to this request she moved her car past the car in front of her and stopped alongside the car at station #2, near the third stanchion. At this time station #1 was vacant. A bundle boy had gone to the rear of her *203 station wagon and opened the tail gate. Two other bundle boys on the sidewalk then told her to pull into the curb and not block traffic. They were "hollering" at her. One boy was shouting, "Go back, go back." Other boys were saying, "Pull in, pull in, don't stand there." She was confused. Touching her foot lightly on the gas, she started forward, then cut her wheels towards the curb at an angle of forty-five degrees and came into the area near the ramps. She "put ... [her] foot on the brake to come in very slowly, and all of a sudden there was a bump." Mrs. Bianco's foot slipped off the brake onto the accelerator. The car "bounced over the ramp and ... onto the sidewalk." It picked up speed as it went across the sidewalk and continued into the end of the store, striking all four plaintiffs and inflicting a variety of personal injuries. These included the loss of a leg by the plaintiff Luz through a high amputation. The car came to rest with a part of it inside the store.
1. It is contended by Stop & Shop that the placement of the ramp in the access roadway and its presence there for a prolonged period violated no duty to the plaintiffs. The defendant emphasizes that the ramp was a proper accessory related to business purposes; that it was open and obvious to the plaintiffs; that the plaintiff police officers saw cars strike the ramp, causing it to shift away from the curb on numerous occasions but took no action; and that the plaintiff Kwiecinski moved the ramp back against the curb "a couple of times." The thrust of the defendant's argument is that no risk of harm from the conditions described was reasonably foreseeable by it; hence the trial judge should have granted the motion for a directed verdict in each case.
As to any invitee Stop & Shop owed the duty of ordinary care and diligence to maintain its premises in a reasonably safe condition. Brooks v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. 302 Mass. 184, 186. What constitutes the required care and diligence is a question of fact. Campbell v. Boston, 189 Mass. 7, 10. Only where no view of the evidence could warrant a jury in finding the defendant negligent can it be held as a matter *204 of law that the plaintiffs cannot recover. See, e.g., Mudge v. Stop & Shop, Inc. 339 Mass. 763. The jury could reasonably find that the placement of the ramp, coupled with the behavior of the bundle boys, constituted negligence.
Liability of the defendant is necessarily predicated on its negligence as the proximate cause of the plaintiffs' injuries. Stop & Shop contends that the negligent operation of a motor vehicle by Mrs. Bianco was not a foreseeable circumstance for which it is responsible, and that Mrs. Bianco's action constituted a "superseding intervening cause" for the results of which the defendant is not chargeable. The defendant's reliance on such cases as Falk v. Finkelman, 268 Mass. 524, Andrews v. Jordan Marsh Co. 283 Mass. 158, Bellows v. Worcester Storage Co. 297 Mass. 188, Waugh v. Great Atl. & Pac. Tea Co. 317 Mass. 230, and Burgess v. Chicopee Sav. Bank, 336 Mass. 331, is misplaced. In each of these cases the injuries sustained arose out of independent acts of third parties. Similarly distinguishable is Addison v. Green Cafe, Inc. 323 Mass. 620, where in the midst of a fracas between two soldiers, the prolongation of which was caused by the defendant's negligence, a third party unaccountably began firing a revolver, injuring the plaintiff. There was no evidence tending to connect the act of the third party with the defendant's negligence. In the instant case, however, the jury could find that the defendant's negligence, as related herein, caused Mrs. Bianco to lose control of her automobile. See Restatement: Torts, § 441, comment c (1934). See also Restatement 2d: Torts (Tent. draft No. 9, 1963) § 443. The jury could further find that the injuries sustained were within the relation of cause and effect and were legally attributable to the defendant's negligence. Lane v. Atlantic Works, 111 Mass. 136, 140. Leahy v. Standard Oil Co. of N.Y. 224 Mass. 352, 362-363. To be held liable the defendant need not have foreseen the precise manner in which the injuries occurred. Hill v. Winsor, 118 Mass. 251, 259. Ryder v. Robinson, 329 Mass. 285, 287. Altman v. Barron's, Inc. 343 Mass. 43, 47. Restatement: Torts, § 435 (1948 Supp.). That Mrs. Bianco *205 may also have been negligent does not improve the defendant's position. See Restatement 2d: Torts (Tent. draft No. 9, 1963) § 442B. The jury could find "that such negligence was foreseeable and did not supersede that of the defendant as an effective factor in causing harm to the plaintiff[s]." Bannon v. Peerless Weighing & Vending Mach. Corp. 318 Mass. 607, 609. McDonald v. Snelling, 14 Allen, 290. Turner v. Page, 186 Mass. 600. Restatement: Torts, § 447 (1934). Cf. Bellows v. Worcester Storage Co. 297 Mass. 188.
2. The defendant contends that the conditions which existed in front of the store were more obvious to the policemen plaintiffs than to the defendant; thus there was no duty to warn. This argument refers, however, only to the use of the ramp. It ignores the negligent behavior of the bundle boys. For their negligence within the scope of employment the defendant is liable. Fanciullo v. B.G. & S. Theatre Corp. 297 Mass. 44, 46, and cases cited. Curran v. Dorchester Theatre Co. 308 Mass. 469, 472.
3. The defences of assumption of risk and contributory negligence, which were raised by the defendant, are ordinarily questions for the jury, the burden of proof in each instance being upon the defendant. Cambra v. Santos, 233 Mass. 131. Gray v. Boston, Revere Beach & Lynn R.R. 261 Mass. 479. Parsons v. Dwightstate Co. 301 Mass. 324. Sullivan v. Hamacher, 339 Mass. 190.
"There is no absolute safety in life, and the most ordinary acts involve possible danger. Mere knowledge that some danger exists is not conclusive of the negligence of one who fails to avoid it.... One is not negligent unless he takes greater risks than a man of ordinary prudence would take in a like situation." Barnes v. Berkshire St. Ry. 281 Mass. 47, 50. Accord: Powers v. Boston, 154 Mass. 60, 63. Given the concurrence of negligent acts attributable to the defendant, we cannot say that a finding of either contributory negligence or assumption of risk was required. See Mello v. Peabody, 305 Mass. 373.
4. The defendant argues that the plaintiff policemen *206 were its employees and are barred from recovery by reason of the fellow servant rule. It is further argued that no recovery is available under the Employers' Liability Act because of failure to give notice under G.L.c. 153, § 6. Without commenting on the merits of these contentions as applied to employees, we hold that policemen Luz and Kwiecinski were independent contractors. They were not fellow servants of the bundle boys in respect to the risk created by the negligence of the latter employees. Engel v. Boston Ice Co. 295 Mass. 428, 433.
While most of the police officers performed their duties on the property of Stop & Shop, at least one officer was "stationed at the Andover Street entrance." See Kidder v. Whitney, 336 Mass. 307 (special police officer positioned at entrance to drive-in theatre). For purposes of characterization of the status of the policemen, we see no reason to differentiate between those stationed on public property adjacent to the defendant's premises and the policemen plaintiffs who spent most of their time on the premises. Our conclusion that, as to Stop & Shop, the policemen were independent contractors rather than employees rests primarily on the evidence relating to the right to control the manner in which the police officers performed their duties. See Shea v. Bryant Chucking & Grinder Co. 336 Mass. 312, 314. In this respect the case differs sharply from cases such as Cowan v. Eastern Racing Assn. Inc. 330 Mass. 135, which deals with the misconduct of police officers acting under orders given by the defendant.
Lieutenant Luz conversed with Waldron, the store manager, and dispersed the men "pursuant to this conversation." Luz stated in answer to an interrogatory that "I received my instructions from Mr. Ed Waldron ... where to place my men, and I did as instructed. My job was to see that the men were at their stations and to discharge their responsibilities to the satisfaction of Stop & Shop, Inc." This does not reveal an employment relationship, for, it could be found, the conversation was but a narration of material facts to Luz, who retained the power to decide *207 how best to govern the activities of the police detail. See Kidder v. Whitney, 336 Mass. 307, 309. Seavey, Agency, § 84G (1964). Waldron testified that after his conversation with Luz "the police were pretty much on their own." The fact that the police officers were on their day off and were paid by the defendant is not controlling. Yates v. Salem, 342 Mass. 460.
5. We perceive no prejudicial error, in view of the defendant's offer of proof, in the ruling of the trial judge that Mrs. Bianco need not answer any question as to which she claimed a constitutional privilege.
6. The defendant contends that the closing argument of counsel for Luz was highly prejudicial (an issue properly before this court, see London v. Bay State St. Ry. 231 Mass. 480, at 486). Counsel made reference to the ad damnum and asked the jury to award $200,000. He repeatedly used the term "ad damnum" and asked the jury to place the ad damnum on "the crushed body of John Luz." "This was improper argument and it was incumbent upon the judge to counteract its effect. Whether he stop counsel at the moment of the offence, or deal with the subject later in his charge is a matter largely within his discretion." Gardner v. State Taxi, Inc. 336 Mass. 28, 31. See also Commonwealth v. Cabot, 241 Mass. 131, 150-151 (duty of trial judge "to instruct the jury to cast aside in their deliberations the improper considerations that had been presented to them, using such clear and cogent language as would correct the obviously harmful effect of the argument"). In his instructions to the jury the trial judge emphasized that "what counsel say is not evidence" and that the case must be decided on the evidence. He stated that "all this discussion about the ad damnum actually has no relative value, because you are to assess damages ... without any consideration as to the amount of the writ." The jury were further instructed, in detail, as to the factors properly bearing upon the determination of damages. We are satisfied that this charge was sufficiently strong to counteract the adverse effect of the improper argument. It is to be *208 expected that jurors will comply with instructions of this nature. Commonwealth v. Crehan, 345 Mass. 609, 613.
The defendant filed certain requests for rulings in connection with its motion for a new trial in the case of John F. Luz. These requests were addressed to the remarks made by counsel for the plaintiff Luz during his closing argument. There was no error in the denial of these requests, which relate to matters of law which were raised at the trial. See Vengrow v. Grimes, 274 Mass. 278, 280. Nor was there error in the denial of the motion for a new trial in each case.
7. Finally, we reject the defendant's contention that the trial judge committed prejudicial error by allowing Mrs. Bianco to state that she was "confused" while operating her motor vehicle just prior to the accident. The challenged testimony was not opinion evidence. Cf. Renwick v. Eastern Mass. St. Ry. 275 Mass. 145; Birch v. Strout, 303 Mass. 28. Rather it was evidence of a state of mind and therefore admissible. See Carriere v. Merrick Lumber Co. 203 Mass. 322, 327; Goldman, petitioner, 331 Mass. 647, 651; Wigmore, Evidence (3d ed.) § 1974. We might add that in response to an interrogatory propounded by the defendant, the plaintiff Luz stated that Mrs. Bianco "appeared confused" at the time in question. This evidence, to which no objection was taken, tended also to prove by the use of a word of summary description the state of mind of Mrs. Bianco and was admissible. See Mielke v. Dobrydnio, 244 Mass. 89, 91-92; Kane v. Fields Corner Grille, Inc. 341 Mass. 640, 647, and Commonwealth v. Harrison, 342 Mass. 279, 285.
Exceptions overruled.
NOTES
[1]  The companion cases are by Millicent H. Greene, Robert B. Hardy, and Walter J. Kwiecinski against the same defendant.

=== CASE 2221868 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.291541+00 ===

31 Ill.2d 447 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 13
LOUIS BRUNO et al., Appellants,
v.
THE INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION et al.  (FLORENCE L. SCHWARTZ et al., Appellees.)
No. 38504.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed September 29, 1964.
Rehearing denied November 23, 1964.
DIRECTOR, LIEBENSON, RASZUS & SACHS, of Chicago, (SIDNEY Z. KARASIK, of counsel,) for appellants.
RONAN AND CUNNINGHAM, of Chicago, (E.T. CUNNINGHAM, of counsel,) for appellees.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SOLFISBURG delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal is by the employers, plaintiffs, from judgment of the circuit court of Cook County affirming the decision of the Industrial Commission which previously had affirmed an award of the arbitrator for fatal injuries in favor of the defendant, the claimant widow. The appeal is directly to this court pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 28-1.
Helge Schwartz a part-time janitor for the apartment owner-employers, left his apartment in the building to perform janitorial duties shortly after 8:00 A.M. on November *448 30, 1959. He was found dead on top of the coal in the coal bin of said apartment building between 9:00 and 9:30 A.M. by Lucille Bruno. Although there was no eyewitness to any janitorial duties performed by Helge Schwartz that morning, his usual duties consisted of taking clinkers out of the furnace, keeping the steam up, loosening the coal with a hoe, and shoveling coal when the stoker apparatus did not function. He also took garbage cans to the basement and burned garbage and timbers. The claimant testified that prior to his death, the decedent appeared to be listless, tired, pale and breathed "funny". At the time of trial decedent's treating physician was in Africa. The only doctor to testify was a nontreating physician called by the claimant, who stated that the performance of the duties listed in a hypothetical question might or could have caused or have been responsible for the death from a cardiac condition.
The arbitrator had made the award on the basis that the death resulted from a compensable heart attack under the Workmen's Compensation Act. It is the contention of the employers that there was a total failure of proof that decedent's death arose out of his employment; that the award is against the manifest weight of the evidence; and that the hypothetical question to a nontreating physician included facts not in evidence.
The questions to be decided are fact questions and in their briefs both parties have traced the case evolution of cardiac cases in Illinois and have attempted to distinguish or to point out the analogies of the facts in other Illinois heart cases. As was pointed out in Clifford-Jacobs Forging Co. v. Industrial Com. 19 Ill.2d 236, at page 245, "The Industrial Commission determines the facts. It is within its sphere to draw reasonable inferences and conclusions from competent evidence, both direct and circumstantial. This court will not weigh conflicting evidence and substitute its judgment for that of the commission. Our function is to determine whether the finding of the commission *449 is clearly against the manifest weight of the evidence. This court will not discard permissible inferences drawn by the commission merely because it might have drawn other inferences from the facts. Fluor Corp. v. Industrial Com. 398 Ill. 616."
After careful examination of the record we cannot agree with the contentions of the employers and, although the evidence is contradictory, there is sufficient evidence upon which to base the award. Likewise we cannot say that the award is against the manifest weight of the evidence. It is unnecessary in order to recover that the claimant negate every possible cause of death other than an injury arising out of the employment, where a legitimate inference from the evidence is that death was from injury that arose out of employment. (Town of Cicero v. Industrial Com. 404 Ill. 487.) We have also examined the hypothetical testimony of the claimant's medical expert in response to the hypothetical question and find that it was proper.
The judgment of the circuit court of Cook County, affirming the award of the Industrial Commission, is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9740036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:23.280515+00 ===

JUSTICE DOYLE, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that the claimant was not a member of the “immediate personal staff” of the State’s Attorney. In doing so, I readily concede that the Act has a broad remedial purpose and that the exemption at issue should be given narrow application. Nevertheless, it is evident that the legislature recognized that individuals occupying certain positions should not be afforded relief under the Act. Just as we are careful to effectuate the broad remedial purpose of the Act, so must we be deliberate in giving meaningful application to those expressly crafted exceptions to that purpose. Section 2 — 101(A)(2)(c) of the Act exempts members of the immediate personal staff of an elected public official. Unfortunately, there is no statutory definition of the phrase “immediate personal staff.” The majority emphasizes the difference between the language of the Act and a similar exemption in title VII wherein the term “personal staff” is used. The opinion characterizes the word “immediate” as a restrictive qualifier and concludes that the word implies a legislative intent to exempt only those employees who “interact directly with the elected official without some intervening layer of supervisors.” I cannot attribute such a narrow, mechanical meaning to the term “immediate.” The question of whether someone is a member of the immediate personal staff cannot and should not be determined by such a limited, although superficially tempting, litmus test. The mere intervention of a supervisor, or lack thereof, will not, in many cases, dietate the true relationship between the claimant and the State’s Attorney, which relationship I believe to be critical in deciding whether to deny certain individuals the protection of the Act. I am also troubled by the implication present in the majority opinion that the office of State’s Attorney is commonly structured in a hierarchical fashion. While that may be true in some more populated counties in our State, by and large, the majority of counties have much smaller and more intimate State’s Attorney’s offices which lack the structure of their larger counterparts. More importantly, there is a broad range of size and organization present in the various State’s Attorney’s offices statewide. In some there are many intermediate supervisors; in some there are a few; and in some there are none. This brings me to my second concern with the approach espoused by the majority. It does not establish a rule that is applicable across the board. Those assistant State’s Attorneys who serve in a small office with no supervisor between them and the State’s Attorney will be excluded from the protection of the Act while assistant State’s Attorneys performing essentially the same functions in larger offices will be able to obtain relief under the Act. I cannot believe that was a result intended by the legislature in creating the exemption at issue here. Furthermore, pursuant to the majority’s holding, we may now be generating a potential field of litigation for the purpose of determining whether someone is a supervisor or subject to supervision in a variety of different organizational settings throughout the various State’s Attorney’s offices. I believe the better approach is to resolve the question in terms of the general relationship of assistant State’s Attorneys to State’s Attorneys as defined by statute and the practical realities of the State’s Attorney’s office. Section 4 — 2003 of the Counties Code provides that assistant State’s Attorneys are “to be named by the State’s attorney of the county, and when so appointed shall take oath of office in like manner as State’s attorneys, and shall be under the supervision of the State’s attorney.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 34, par. 4 — 2003.) The legislative purpose in creating the office of assistant State’s Attorney was to provide an official who should have full power to act in the case of the absence or sickness of the State’s Attorney, or in the case of his being otherwise engaged in the discharge of the duties of office, in the same manner and to the same extent that the State’s Attorney could act. (People v. Nahas (1973), 9 Ill. App. 3d 570, 576.) An assistant State’s Attorney is generally clothed with all the powers and privileges of the State’s Attorney, and all acts done by him or her in that capacity must be regarded as if done by the State’s Attorney. People v. Audi (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 483, 485; Nahas, 9 Ill. App. 3d at 575-76. Our supreme court has held that an assistant State’s Attorney is not a mere agent to perform a particular act or duty but is an officer for the performance of the general duties of the office of State’s Attorney. (People ex rel. Landers v. Toledo, St. Louis & Western R.R. Co. (1915), 267 Ill. 142, 146.) The position of assistant State’s Attorney is an office and not a mere employment. (People ex rel. Landers, 267 Ill. at 145.) Assistant State’s Attorneys exercise some portion of the sovereign power of the State, and the duties of the position are continuous without regard to the particular person who holds the office. People ex rel. Landers, 267 Ill. at 145-46. I believe this foregoing language properly characterizes the position of assistant State’s Attorney as an integral part of the State’s Attorney’s office and one that occupies a status comparable to the State’s Attorney in many respects. Assistant State’s Attorneys represent the State in criminal and civil matters, exercise discretion in various aspects of a criminal prosecution, maintain contact with the public and work directly with other branches of local government such as law enforcement, the court system and county officials. It is apparent that the position of assistant State’s Attorney, whether in a rural or metropolitan county, is one uniquely tied to the office of State’s Attorney. The State’s Attorney depends upon the assistant State’s Attorneys to carry out under public scrutiny many functions that would otherwise be undertaken by himself or herself. In my view, it is this closely dependent partnership which transcends the usual concept of an employer-employee arrangement and sets the position of assistant State’s Attorney apart from other employees in the State’s Attorney’s office. In light of the nature of the position of assistant State’s Attorney and the unique relationship of that position to the State’s Attorney, I would conclude that an assistant State’s Attorney is a part of the State’s Attorney’s immediate personal staff and thus exempt from the provisions of the Act. Finally, I disagree with the majority’s partial reliance on Federal court decisions construing a similar exemption under title VII. Because the two acts are not the same and, as the majority recognizes, are only “loosely analogous,” I would not primarily be guided by the Federal decisions construing title VII. This is so notwithstanding the fact that of those cases addressing the question all have held that an assistant State’s Attorney is part of the “personal staff” and thus exempt from title VII coverage. See Teneyuca v. Bexar County (5th Cir. 1985), 767 F.2d 148; Ramirez v. San Mateo County District Attorney’s Office (9th Cir. 1981), 639 F.2d 509; Wall v. Coleman (S.D. Ga. 1975), 393 F. Supp. 826. For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm the order of the circuit court granting summary judgment in favor of the State’s Attorney of Lake County.

=== CASE 2221869 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.327186+00 ===

31 Ill.2d 527 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 485
L. COULTAS, d/b/a SCOTT GRAIN AND LAND COMPANY, Appellant,
v.
THE INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION et al.  (HAROLD K. HAYES, Appellee.)
No. 38508.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 24, 1964.
BROWN, HAY & STEPHENS, of Springfield, (ROBERT A. STUART, of counsel,) for appellant.
HARRY G. STORY, of Jacksonville, and ROBERTS & KEPNER, of Springfield, for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE HOUSE delivered the opinion of the court:
On October 17, 1962, the Industrial Commission entered an award in favor of Harold K. Hayes against L. Coultas d/b/a Scott Grain and Land Company. The circuit court of Morgan County affirmed the award and the case is here on direct appeal pursuant to Rule 28-1.
The claimant directs our attention to the bond filed for review of the compensation award and argues that since the bond does not conform with section 19(f) (2) of the Workmen's Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 48, par. 138.19), this appeal should be dismissed. That section provides that there shall be no judicial review of an award unless the one against whom the Commission shall have *528 rendered an award for the payment of money shall upon his request for such review file with the clerk of the court a bond conditioned that if he shall not successfully prosecute said review, he will pay the said award and the costs of the proceedings in the courts.
Although the award in this case was against L. Coultas d/b/a Scott Grain and Land Company, the bond was executed by the Scott Grain and Land Company, a corporation, as principal and Lillian G. Coultas, as surety. It was stated on oral argument that L. Coultas did not sign as principal on the bond because she was not the employer of the claimant and she was not doing business under the name of Scott Grain and Land Company.
Implicit in the Commission's decision were the findings that Scott Grain and Land Company, a corporation, was not the claimant's employer because it was not incorporated or authorized to do business in this State at the time of the injury and that L. Coultas, doing business as Scott Grain and Land Company, was the employer. This decision by the Commission, which had jurisdiction of the subject matter and of the parties, was binding and conclusive unless and until it was reversed on review. (Lewin Metals Corp. v. Industrial Com. 360 Ill. 371.) L. Coultas was the person against whom the Commission entered the award for money and it is she who must file her bond at the time she requests judicial review before such review may be had.
The trial court was without jurisdiction to hear the case on its merits inasmuch as the person against whom the award for money was made did not file her bond. The judgment of the circuit court is reversed and the cause remanded, with directions to quash the writ of certiorari.
Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 2221876 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.482668+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 9 (1992)
Larry A. MARSHALL, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Diana L. MARSHALL, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 48A02-9111-CV-527.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
October 22, 1992.
*10 Steven C. Smith, Anderson, for appellant-respondent.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Leneigha S. Downs, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-petitioner.
SULLIVAN, Judge.
On August 6, 1991, the Madison Superior Court, Division II ordered Larry A. Marshall to assist with the educational expenses for his daughter and to continue paying child support for his son.[1] Marshall presents two issues which we restate as follows:
I. Whether the trial court properly ordered Marshall to assist with the educational expenses for his daughter; and
II. whether the trial court properly ordered Marshall to pay child support for his son?
We affirm.
The marriage of Diana L. Marshall (Mother) and Larry A. Marshall (Father) was dissolved on September 25, 1972. The court ordered Father to pay child support for the four minor children of the parties. On May 14, 1991, Mother filed a petition to modify the decree of dissolution requesting *11 that Father contribute to the higher education expenses of Tammy Marshall, daughter of the parties. On July 1, 1991, Father filed a motion seeking abatement from any and all support because all of the parties' children were now emancipated. A consolidated hearing upon all matters was conducted on August 1, 1991. The trial court approved the Master Commissioner's findings and recommendations on August 6, 1991.
Tammy was twenty years of age when the respective pleadings were filed. At the time, Tammy lived with Mother and worked full-time while attending Ball State University at night. Tammy was enrolled as a full-time student in the university's Registered Nurse Curriculum.
At the consolidated hearing, Tammy asked Father to assist in meeting her higher education expenses by contributing an amount not to exceed $250.00 per semester for books and laboratory fees.
At the same hearing, Larry Marshall, the parties' son, stated that he was nineteen years old, lived with Mother, worked intermittently, and intended to pursue a post-secondary education. At the time Father moved to abate support, Larry worked at odd jobs to pay for his car loan and his automobile insurance. Mother provided Larry's housing, utilities, and food. Although Larry had dropped out of high school, he completed his G.E.D. (high school equivalency diploma) in July, 1991 and applied for admission to Ball State University and Ivy Tech.
I.
Father contends that he is not obligated to pay for educational expenses accrued subsequent to Tammy's emancipation. Father understandably relies upon Martin v. Martin (1986) Ind., 495 N.E.2d 523 for the proposition that a trial court may not order educational expenses be paid after a child's emancipation unless a prior order contemplating such expenses exists. However, a recent clarification of the Martin decision weighs heavily upon the instant case. Donegan v. Donegan (1992) Ind., 586 N.E.2d 844. Justice Dickson, writing for the majority, explained that Martin does not "prevent a trial court from adjudicating a petition timely filed prior to emancipation." Id. at 846.
In Donegan, the father filed a petition declaring that his daughter, although not yet twenty-one years old, was emancipated. Donegan, supra, 586 N.E.2d at 845. Three months later, but before the court addressed the emancipation issue, the mother cross-petitioned the court to order the father's contribution for college expenses. Id. After the daughter's twenty-first birthday, the court held an evidentiary hearing and ruled that the daughter was "emancipated for purposes of child support," but ordered the father to pay "one-third of [the daughter's] tuition, books, lab fees and other expenses of full-time undergraduate college attendance... ." Id. at 845. In affirming the educational support order, our Supreme Court stated:
"When a modification petition presenting a custodial parent's initial request for a child's college expenses is filed shortly before the child's emancipation for support purposes, we refuse to adopt an interpretation that forces the trial court to choose between either a precipitous adjudication or no resolution whatsoever. This would substantially impair the capacity of the court and the parties to discover and fairly consider the relevant facts, and it could encourage attempts to postpone the hearing until after emancipation for improper reasons of obstructive strategy." Id. at 846.
This clarification applies to the instant case.
Based upon Donegan, the trial court properly considered Mother's petition for educational expenses because it was filed before emancipation. When Mother filed her petition, the issue of Tammy's emancipation was not yet before the court. Father sought to gain a judicial determination of Tammy's status only after the court received the petition to initiate educational support.
Pursuant to I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(d)(1) or (e), the court was required to make a factual determination concerning Tammy's *12 emancipation. In so doing, the trial court is not precluded from making a contemporaneous finding that Tammy is entitled to receive educational support from Father when the contribution request was initiated before the emancipation determination. This parallels the trial court's authority to extend support for educational needs beyond a child's twenty-first birthday even though the obligation for child support ends. I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(d)(1).
Similarly, it is not inconsistent for the trial court to declare Tammy emancipated for purposes of child support yet order Father to pay a share of Tammy's educational expenses. Donegan, supra, 586 N.E.2d at 845. The trial court considered that Tammy worked full-time during the day to support herself while she embarked upon a nursing curriculum through the night school program. At the time of the hearing, Tammy had completed a winter and summer semester, was registered for fall classes as a full-time student, and was receiving passing grades. Tammy intended to finance her higher education with grants and financial aid, her own income, Mother's contributions, and, if so ordered by the court, Father's contributions.
The findings of the trial court concerning the appropriateness of an award of educational expenses will not be disturbed absent an abuse of discretion. Thiele v. Thiele (1985) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 479 N.E.2d 1324, 1329. We find none and therefore hold that the trial court properly entered an order requiring Father to contribute educational support for Tammy's books and laboratory fees.
II.
Father disputes the trial court's finding that Larry was not emancipated. Indiana's Supreme Court has long held that "what constitutes emancipation of a minor child is a question of law, but whether there has been an emancipation is a question of fact." Stitle v. Stitle (1964) Ind., 245 Ind. 168, 197 N.E.2d 174, 182.
Father focuses upon two statutory provisions which permit termination of child support obligations. First, Father argues that the application of I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(d)(3) requires that Larry be adjudged emancipated.[2] Father bears the burden of proving the relevant factors including age, schooling, and capacity of self-support. Brancheau, supra, 555 N.E.2d at 1318 (father's failure to present evidence of available employment sustained conclusion that child support continue).
In the instant case, the facts reveal that Larry, a nineteen year old, recently completed his high school equivalency requirement in preparation for a post-secondary education. Larry indicated he had applied for a job with the City of Anderson, but had not registered with a job placement program because he was attending school and was able only to work part-time. Larry worked sporadically performing odd jobs and earned between fifty and one hundred and fifty dollars per week. Larry testified that he was able to meet the yearly expenses for his car loan and car insurance, but could not pay for his own rent, utilities, or food without help from Mother. Larry's 1990 taxable income, based upon wages from a summer job, was approximately $2,200.00.
*13 The facts sufficiently support either the conclusion that Larry was unable to support himself through employment or that he was capable only of partially supporting himself. Larry's reliance upon Mother to subsidize his basic needs for food and shelter supports a conclusion that continued child support is appropriate. Based upon the specific facts of this case, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in denying Father's petition to abate support. See, Brancheau, supra, 555 N.E.2d at 1317-18 (child earning slightly more than minimum wage yielding an annual gross income of less than $6,000.00 is entitled to continued child support); Moody v. Moody (1991) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 565 N.E.2d 388, 391 (facts supported termination of support where high school graduate, who wanted nothing to do with father, held at least two full-time jobs since graduation and was capable of earning a living); In Re Marriage of Seeba (1985) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 480 N.E.2d 960, 962 (support termination not clearly erroneous where high school drop out, who was not interested in completing her education, made no effort to seek employment, and had not lived in either parent's home for at least eight months).
Father also argues that Larry was emancipated because he is beyond the "control" of Mother. This argument focuses upon a provision which requires that the trial court terminate child support if the court finds a child under the age of twenty-one "[i]s not under the care or control" of either parent. I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(e)(3)(A) (emphasis supplied.) As previously noted, emancipation determinations rest upon the particular facts of each case. It is the trial court which is best equipped to weigh the evidence and judge the credibility of the witnesses. Moody, supra, 565 N.E.2d at 390. We will uphold the trial court's determination if there are facts and inferences in the record to support the findings. Id.
The facts reveal that Larry continues to reside in a home maintained by Mother and depends upon Mother for financial assistance. Larry admits that he "listens" to Mother but, like most nineteen-year-olds, exercises a certain amount of independence and is free to visit with friends outside of the home. Although a different fact-finder might have reasonably concluded otherwise, based upon these facts, the trial court here did not abuse its discretion in concluding that Larry remains under the care or control of Mother. Thus, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying Father's petition to abate support or in ordering child support in the amount of thirty dollars per week.
The judgment is affirmed.
BUCHANAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The relevant child support provisions are codified at I.C. 31-1-11.5-12 (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1992).
[2]  Subsection (d)(3) provides that the duty to support a child ends if the child:
"(A) Is at least eighteen (18) years of age; (B) Has not attended a secondary or postsecondary school for the prior four (4) months and is not enrolled in such a school; and (C) Is or is capable of supporting himself through employment; in which case the child support terminates upon the court's finding that the conditions prescribed in this subdivision exist; however, if the court finds that the conditions set forth in clause (A) through (C) are met but that the child is only partially supporting himself or capable of only partially supporting himself, the court may order that support be modified instead of terminated."
I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(d)(3).
Father mischaracterizes the effect of this provision. It does not define emancipation. Rather, it terminates the parental obligation of support as a matter of law whether or not the court enters a finding of emancipation. Brancheau v. Weddle (1990) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1315, 1317. Father's misnomer, however, does not impede our analysis.

=== CASE 2221879 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.597983+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 381 (1992)
In re the Marriage of Donald P. HUGHES, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Mary L. HUGHES, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 48A05-9111-CV-389.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
October 26, 1992.
Transfer Denied December 30, 1992.
*382 Franklin I. Miroff, Monty K. Woolsey, Miroff Cross & Ruppert, Indianapolis, for appellant-respondent.
James A. Reed, Indianapolis, Brenda S. Farrell, Anderson, for appellee-petitioner.
HOFFMAN, Judge.
Appellant-Respondent Donald P. Hughes appeals the trial court's division of marital property. Donald questions the inclusion of an early retirement benefit as marital property.
The evidence relevant to the appeal discloses that the parties were married in June 1959. Mary filed for a dissolution of marriage on October 31, 1990.
During the marriage, Mary worked for a period of five years prior to the birth of the parties' only child, a son. Mary did not return to the work force until their son began school. Mary worked at a bank for twelve years, until their son began college in North Carolina. Because their son was active in theatrical productions for the school, Mary terminated her employment with the bank so that she and Donald could attend their son's productions.
Next, she obtained a job with a savings and loan which was taken over by FSLIC. Mary was offered a position in Chicago after the takeover. Mary declined the position because of Donald's long-term employment with General Motors. Mary returned to a secretarial position which she had previously held at a heating and cooling company. Because of the seasonal nature of the company's work, Mary often worked only four days per week.
At the time of the dissolution proceedings, Mary had no work-related benefits other than a disability policy for which she paid $8.80 per month. Mary was ineligible for her employer's health insurance coverage because she was diagnosed with malignant melanoma in 1988. Under Donald's General Motors Health Insurance, Mary's medication cost $18.00 per month. Without the benefit of insurance, Mary's medication will cost $179.00 per month.
During the proceedings, Donald described his job at General Motors, insuring acceptable standards in the production of manufactured parts, as one growing within the manufacturing industry. At the time of the final hearing on April 26, 1991, Donald was 55 years old. He had accrued 36.2 years of credited service with General Motors entitling him to General Motors Hourly Pension Plan benefits which were included as marital property and which are not at issue on appeal. At issue are benefits available to Donald pursuant to an early retirement supplement which is an incentive to retire prior to age 62.
Pursuant to Donald's request, the court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law on July 31, 1991. The following findings are pertinent to Donald's pension benefits:
"6. Respondent, as a result of his employment with General Motors, has a vested interest in the General Motors Hourly Pension Plan. If Respondent had terminated his employment as of the date of filing in this matter, he would have been entitled to draw $1,600.00 per month (lifetime and early retirement benefits) until October 1, 1991, then $1,700.00 per month until October 1, 1992, the[n] $1,800.00 per month until his age sixty-two. Thereafter, he would draw $1,026.74 per month (which may change in the future as a result of contract changes providing for cost of living or other changes).
* * * * * *
PENSION
The Court concludes that as of the time of filing, Respondent had a right to receive pension or retirement benefits as a result of his employment with General *383 Motors through the General Motors Hourly Pension Plan that are not forfeited upon termination of his employment. The Court also concludes that Respondent cannot be required to retire at the present time nor, in fact, is there any assurance that he will retire by age sixty-two or any other age. Respondent's retirement benefits have been accrued during the marriage by the efforts of both parties, including the contribution of Petitioner through her subordination of her employment opportunities to the employment of Respondent, and also through her child-rearing and family responsibilities. As a result, it would be unfair for Respondent to have total control of whether, if ever, Petitioner would enjoy any portion of this retirement benefit, which was earned during the marriage.
The Court, therefore, concludes that the entire early retirement supplement portion of Respondent's General Motors Hourly Pension Plan Retirement Benefit should be set over to Respondent as his sole and separate property, said benefit having a value of $65,499.21. The Court also concludes that so long as Respondent continues to be employed, he shall pay to Petitioner the sum of $800 each month, effective the first of the month following the entry of Decree in this matter. This sum represents one-half of the basic or lifetime benefit presently available to Respondent until his age sixty-two, together with one-half of his early retirement supplement.
If the Respondent continues employment after age sixty-two, he shall pay Petitioner $513.37 per month, effective the first of the month following his sixty-second birthday. It is the Court's intention by this order that each month Respondent purchase from Petitioner her interest in this asset... ."
Due to the relative disparity in earning potential, the fact that Mary has always subordinated her employment to Donald's for familial reasons, Mary's lack of employment-related benefits, and Mary's health, the trial court determined that an unequal division of assets would be just and reasonable. This appeal ensued.
As restated, Donald raises two issues for review:
(1) whether the early retirement supplement constitutes marital property subject to division where Donald has not expressed any intention to retire; and
(2) whether the trial court erred by entering, as an alternative, an order assigning a portion of the pension benefits to Mary by a Qualified Domestic Relations Order.
IND. CODE § 31-1-11.5-2 (1988 Ed.) defines "property" in the dissolution context. In pertinent part, the statute states:
"(d) The term `property' means all the assets of either party or both parties, including: ...
(2) the right to receive pension or retirement benefits that are not forfeited upon termination of employment[.] ..."
Donald complains that the early retirement supplement does not meet the definition of "property" because it has no value if he does not retire prior to age 62. Here, the supplement meets the strict definition of "property." The supplement is a pension or retirement benefit which, at the time of the dissolution, Donald had a right to receive and which would not be forfeited upon termination of his employment. The fact that attaining the age of 62 without retiring would cause forfeiture of the supplement requires its exclusion according to Donald. However, Donald overlooks the fact that the supplement is a benefit which he has a right to receive at any time during a seven-year period from age 55 to age 62, including the time of the pendency of the dissolution proceeding.
The statutory definition of property is broad and inclusive, "providing that `all' assets `including' various pension interests are to be considered marital property subject to division." Huber v. Huber (1992), Ind. App., 586 N.E.2d 887, 889. Pursuant to IND. CODE § 31-1-11.5-11 (1988 Ed.), governing the disposition of marital assets, *384 the trial court may dispose of property owned by either spouse prior to the marriage, property acquired by either spouse in his or her own right after the marriage and prior to final separation, and property acquired by the joint efforts of the parties. Id. "Moreover, the `one pot' theory of [the statute] specifically prohibits the exclusion of any asset from the scope of the trial court's power to divide and award". Id. Thus, the trial court must determine the distribution of assets available to the parties at the time of the dissolution proceeding.
As noted by the trial court in the present case and discussed in In re Marriage of Blake (1990), Colo. App., 807 P.2d 1211, 1213-1214:
"[R]equiring husband to pay wife her share of the monthly pension before actual retirement does not force husband to retire; nor does it penalize him for his decision to continue working. Rather, husband remains able solely to decide when he wishes to retire... .
Moreover, the court's order providing wife with installment payments of her share of the pension is not unlike the situation in which one spouse is awarded the family home or business, and the other is given a note payable over a period of time... . [Citations omitted.]"
Id.
Here, the trial court was presented with stipulated evidence of the value of the supplement. The court awarded the asset to Donald, and then as in the case of a residence or other illiquid asset, Mary was awarded installment payments to satisfy her interest in the asset. The trial court's order does not force Donald to retire. Rather the order recognizes that such assets, acquired by the joint efforts of both parties, must be included in the "marital pot" and cannot be subject to distribution by the whim of the employed spouse.
As a subissue, Donald complains that the court implicitly intended that Mary receive 55% of the assets but that inclusion of four years and three months of employment and additional pension benefits accumulated prior to the parties' marriage was improper. According to Donald, the inclusion skewed the overall distribution of the assets in favor of Mary because the court implicitly intended that Mary receive 55% of the assets. As noted above, IND. CODE § 31-1-11.5-11 allows a court to dispose of property owned by either spouse prior to the marriage. See Huber, supra, 586 N.E.2d at 889. Further, the court specified, with accompanying findings, that the presumption in favor of equal distribution of assets would not be just and reasonable in the present case. However, the court did not state an intention to award Mary only 55% of the marital assets.
Also, Donald contends that even if the supplement was subject to distribution, ordering installment payments of $800.00 per month is not just or proper in light of Donald's financial circumstances. Donald argues that his $40,000.00 per year income will be largely consumed by the court's assignment to him of $17,000.00 of the parties' $18,500.00 in debts incurred during the marriage. Donald overlooks the fact that the bulk of the debt is attributable to one asset which was awarded to him, a trailer valued at $14,700.00 subject to a $12,000.00 debt. It is within the parties' discretion to retain the assets they were awarded or to liquidate them in order to meet their financial obligations.
The party challenging the court's division of the marital assets is charged with overcoming the presumption that the trial court considered all evidence and properly applied the statutory factors. Livingston v. Livingston (1992), Ind. App., 583 N.E.2d 1225, 1227-1228. Donald has failed to overcome the presumption in the present case.
Next, Donald contends that the trial court erred in entering an alternative consisting of a Qualified Domestic Relations Order. According to the briefs of the parties, after the record of proceedings was filed, the QDRO was rejected by the plan administrator for Donald's pension plan. As such, the parties admit that any contention of error is now moot. Thus, the issue shall not be addressed.
*385 There being no finding of error, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
GARRARD and CHEZEM, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740019 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:54.213189+00 ===

GIVAN, Judge.
A jury trial resulted in the conviction of appellant of Attempted Murder, a Class A felony, and the finding that he was a habitual offender. Appellant received a sentence of thirty (80) years enhanced by thirty (80) years by reason of his status as a habitual offender.
The facts are: On November 28, 1989, appellant entered a filling station in Posey County and stabbed the victim. The defense interposed a plea of insanity and the trial judge appointed Dr. David Cerling, a psychologist, and Dr. David Holajter, a psychiatrist, to examine appellant to determine whether he was competent to stand trial. Dr. Cerling examined appellant on March 12, 1990 and found that he was not competent to stand trial. Dr. Holajter examined appellant on April 16, 1990 and came to the same conclusion.
On June 24, 1991, Dr. Cerling again examined appellant and determined that he was now competent to stand trial although he was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. On July 10, 1991, Dr. Holajter again examined appellant and also came to the conclusion that although he was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia he was competent to stand trial.
At appellant's trial, both doctors testified; however, neither doctor could state positively whether appellant was insane under the statutory definition so as to render him incapable of forming the intent to commit the crime on November 28, 1989. However, Dr. Holajter did observe that if appellant was in the same condition on November 28, 1989 as he was when first examined on April 16, 1990, he not only would have been incapable of forming the intent, but he would have been incapable of performing the act. Thus, the testimony of the doctor left the jury with the implication that appellant in fact was capable of forming the intent to commit the crime.
*343The sole issue presented by appellant on appeal is that it is eruel and unusual punishment to find him to be a habitual offender after first finding that he is guilty but mentally ill. Thus, appellant claims imposing the enhanced sentence of sixty (60) years is in violation of the Eighth Amendment. Appellant takes the position that inasmuch as the habitual offender statute is for the purpose of the deterrence of crime, the wrongdoers must understand and appreciate the consequences of their unlawful act in order for it to be a deterrent.
Appellant first argues that the jury was correct in finding him mentally ill. He then concludes that because he had been found mentally ill he met the definition of "mental disease or defect" found in Ind. Code § 85-41-8-6. However, appellant is in error in this regard. Mental illness is not a defense to crime in Indiana. An appellant is not excused of a crime unless his mental illness is so severe as to render him "unable to appreciate the wrongfulness" of the act. Truman v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 1089; Ind.Code § 85-41-8-6. The fact that the jury found appellant to be mentally ill does not automatically bring him within the definition of mental disease found in the above statute.
Appellant argues that inasmuch as the jury was not required to make any determination as to whether he appreciated or understood the consequences of his criminal conduct, they were in no position to determine whether he should be adjudged a habitual offender. Appellant cites no authority for this but depends on what he terms "Hoosier common sense." However, neither in Ind.Code § 85-50-2-8, the habitual offender statute, Ind.Code § 85-86-2-5, the guilty but mentally ill statute, nor Ind. Code § 35-41-3-6, the mental disease or defect statute, do we find any mention of "the ability to understand the consequences of his criminal conduct."
The record in this case establishes that appellant had on previous occasions been found guilty of various felonies in both Indiana and Kentucky. There is no evidence whatever that at the time of the perpetration of any of these crimes, appellant was suffering from a mental disease so severe as to preclude his appreciation of the wrongfulness of his conduct as defined in Ind.Code § 35-41-8-6. There is no requirement that the State must show that appellant understood the consequences of his conduct when he committed his prior and present felonies before his sentence can be enhanced by reason of his status as a habitual offender.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DICKSON and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740020 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:54.217265+00 ===

DeBRULER, Judge,
dissenting.
When the jury returned its verdict that appellant Higgins was guilty but mentally ill, it necessarily concluded that he was at the time of the crime suffering from a psychiatric disorder which, while leaving him able to know right from wrong, substantially disturbed his thinking, feeling, or behavior and impaired his ability to function. LC. 35-86-1-1. Upon this verdict the sentence was to be rendered as though the verdict had been simply, guilty, but however, was to impose a special duty upon the State to evaluate and treat him for mental illness, even in the confines of our State mental hospitals. LC. 85-86-2-5. This sentence was also to be special in that it was to carry a thirty year enhancement under the separate habitual offender statute because of prior convictions.
The question presented here, is whether or not it is the intention of the legislature that a defendant convicted upon a verdict of guilty but mentally ill, that is, the defendant was at the time of the crime substantially disturbed as a result of mental illness and thereby impaired in function, should be placed in the class of convicted defendants subject to thirty year sentence enhancement because of prior convictions. Again, as I concluded in dissent in Harris v. State (1986), Ind., 499 N.E.2d 723, the statutes are ambiguous in this respect, and until the legislature clearly announces its judgment *344that such seriously ill and impaired persons like Higgins, warrant and deserve the greatly more severe habitual offender punishment, the habitual offender statute should not be enforced against them. If the legislature intends so severe a result, where the deterrent effect of past convictions and penalties is at low ebb, it must clearly so state.

=== CASE 9740021 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:55.404265+00 ===

*431OPINION
LANCASTER, Justice.
After a jury trial in Ramsey County District Court, appellant, American La-Verne Morris, was convicted of one count of murder in the first degree, criminal sexual conduct, Minn.Stat. § 609.185(2) (1998).1 Appellant argues that the circumstantial evidence presented at trial was insufficient to prove that he committed the murder of the victim, Marilyn Ford, during a sexual assault. Appellant also argues that the trial court erred in excluding evidence about the victim’s reputation. We affirm.
On March 26, 1998, forty-five-year-old Marilyn Ford resided in the lower duplex of 758 East Maryland Avenue in St. Paul. Ford lived with her brother Willy Chambers and Chamber’s girlfriend Rochelle Banks. Banks was temporarily away from the residence at that time.
Appellant American Morris, Banks’ stepfather, also lived in the duplex. Appellant awoke at about 5:20 a.m. on March 27, 1998, and went to work as a day laborer. Chambers awoke at 11:00 a.m. when James Whitelow, Ford’s boyfriend, arrived at the apartment.
At about noon Lillian Beard, who lived in the upper half of the duplex, came home and discovered Ford lying face-up in the grass alongside the house. Beard brought Chambers and Whitelow out to the front yard. A passerby, Carolyn Fick, stopped and dialed 911 on her cellular telephone and handed it to Chambers. Fick, a nurse, checked for a pulse in Ford’s neck, but there was none. Paramedics arrived shortly thereafter and pronounced Ford dead.
The police received the 911 call at around noon, and officers arrived just after the paramedics. Detective Sgt. Findley interviewed Beard about past arguments between Ford and appellant. Beard told the police she had last seen Ford early that morning. Beard said Chambers was upstairs in Beard’s apartment, and sometime around 1:30 a.m. Ford joined them on the, back landing and said she was going outside to “get some air.”
Chambers told one officer he last saw his sister at 2:00 that morning, awake and alone in her bedroom. Chambers said he went to Beard’s apartment after he saw his sister in bed. To a different officer, Chambers said that Ford was with appellant in her bedroom when he last saw her. Chambers said he interrupted the two while they were engaged in sexual intercourse. Chambers said he asked who was there and Marilyn Ford answered either, ‘We’re here” or ‘We are.”
During these police interviews, Dr. Michael McGee, the Ramsey County Medical Examiner, arrived at the scene and viewed Ford’s body. Dr. McGee noted that Ford was lying on her back with her arms stretched over her head. Her body was partially obscured by hedges and in a full state of rigidity. When he rolled the body over, Dr. McGee found dirt inside Ford’s pants. The doctor concluded that Ford was killed elsewhere and dragged to the yard. He estimated that Ford died ten to twelve hours before her body was found at noon.
Dr. McGee, along with Sgts. Findley and Luna, then went inside the lower level of the Maryland Avenue duplex. They observed small traces of blood on a kitchen cabinet, kitchen floor, living room carpet, *432front entry wallpaper, and the inside' of the front screen door. There was also blood on the sheet and mattress cover from Ford’s bed. The comforter from the bed was rolled up on the floor of the back bedroom. Sgt. Luna found a pillowcase, sheet, and a woman’s scarf inside the comforter. The comforter had bloodstains soaked through on both sides. Sgt. Luna concluded that the victim’s body had been placed on the other bed in the back bedroom because there were thick irregular blood patterns that went through a quilt, two sheets, and directly into the mattress.
The police went to appellant’s workplace and brought appellant to the St. Paul Police Department at about 3:45 p.m. for questioning. When Sgt. Findley told appellant that Ford was dead, appellant did not show emotion but said simply “When?”
Appellant stated that he had worked until 5:00 p.m. the previous day, and then cashed his paycheck and bought some alcohol. Appellant walked to the home of his stepdaughter, Kathryn Banks. Banks and appellant next stopped at Susan Tolliver’s before walking to the Maryland Avenue duplex. Inside, appellant found Ford and Chambers watching television. Appellant and Kathryn Banks left shortly thereafter to go to Nancy Banks’ house. Appellant said he returned to find Chambers, and Ford still watching television.
Appellant told police that Chambers left about midnight. Appellant said Ford then asked him if he wanted to have sex with her in exchange for his providing crack cocaine. Appellant told police they went into Ford’s bedroom to have sex. Chambers soon interrupted them by opening Ford’s door. Appellant gave two versions about how the interruption occurred, first stating that Chambers knocked and entered when appellant was standing next to the bed. Appellant later told police that Chambers did not knock and instead discovered appellant in bed with Ford. After the interruption, appellant stated he cleaned up in the bathroom and went out through the back bedroom to join Chambers for a cigarette. Appellant told Sgt. Findley that Ford left at about 12:45 a.m., telling the m.en she was going to meet a man named Al.
Appellant said that at 3:00 a.m. Lillian Beard knocked on the door and asked Chambers to join her upstairs. Chambers left but, then returned a few minutes later. Both appellant and Chambers then went to bed, and appellant awoke at 5:20 a.m. and left for work.
The police arrested appellant at the end of the interrogation. They then obtained and executed a search warrant for his home. The police found appellant’s machete under Ford’s bed, but they did not believe the machete was used in Ford’s murder.
At trial James Whitelow testified that Ford was afraid of appellant because he had once pulled a knife on her. Whitelow identified the machete found under Ford’s bed as belonging to appellant. Whitélow stated that Ford was not sexually interested in appellant.- ■
Appellant’s ex-girlfriend Nancy Banks also linked the machete to appellant and answered affirmatively when asked whether appellant always carried the machete with him. Banks also testified that Ford and appellant had several arguments. Banks stated that appellant said “a number of times” he was going to kill Ford. Banks testified she was with appellant and Ford at their apartment from 10:00 p.m. on March 26 until appellant walked her home at about 11:45 p.m.
Susan Tolliver testified that she and her husband were outside their home at about 11:00 or 11:30 p.m. on March 26 when they ran into appellant, Ford, and Lillian Beard. Tolliver said Ford and Beard walked away to buy crack cocaine for appellant. Appellant spoke with Tolliver and her husband for a few minutes and then appellant walked home.
Lillian Beard testified that Chambers was in her apartment at about 1:00 a.m. on *433March 27 when Ford came up to say she was going out. Chambers asked why she was going out so late, and Ford responded that she wanted to get some air. Chambers stayed with Beard before going downstairs at about 2:00 a.m. Beard testified that she once intervened in an argument between Ford and appellant. Beard said appellant had a knife in his hand and Beard heard appellant say to Ford, “I’ll kill you, bitch.”
Ford’s daughter Iquittia Carruthers testified that during November 1997 Ford stated that appellant wanted to have sex with her. Ford said she did not want to have sex with appellant and was afraid of appellant because he once slapped her. Carruthers testified that Ford told her that “if like something happened to her [Ford] that he [appellant] would be the one to do it.”
Willy Chambers testified that during the evening of March 26, he and Ford visited Lillian Beard in Beard’s apartment. Ford left before he did. When Chambers went downstairs at about 2:00 or 2:30 a.m., he found the back door locked. Chambers saw that Ford’s bedroom door was shut and, upon entering, saw appellant on top of Ford. Ford was lying nude on her back and appellant was holding Ford’s legs up over his shoulders with his arms. A white comforter was under them on the bed. Chambers asked, ‘Who’s in here?” and appellant replied, ‘We are.” Chambers told police on March 27 that Ford answered him but at trial Chambers said it was appellant who spoke. Chambers testified that Ford neither moved nor said anything, but Chambers -thought he had walked in on the two having consensual sex.
Chambers returned to the living room and appellant emerged about fifteen or twenty minutes later, using a less direct route that passed through the bathroom, a back bedroom, and then the kitchen. Appellant offered Chambers a cigarette and soon Beard knocked on the door. Chambers accepted her offer to go upstairs for a beer. Chambers returned about an hour later and found the back door locked. Appellant was sitting on the couch watching television, but Ford’s bedroom door was now open. When Chambers asked about his sister, appellant said she had left for some guy’s house. Chambers testified that he'went into both bedrooms looking for Ford but did not find her. He did notice, however, that the comforter was now “balled up” on the floor of the Banks’ bedroom.
. Appellant’s co-worker Murray Timber-lake testified that on March 25, 1998, appellant said he wanted to get an apartment with a woman, but she did not want to. Timberlake testified that appellant said the woman was “messing around” with somebody else. Timberlake stated that two days later, at work on the morning of March 27, appellant told him a woman ran off with two hundred dollars of his money. According to Timberlake, appellant said, “I caught her with it: I killed the bitch.”
Dr. McGee testified about the autopsy of Marilyn Ford. She had blood on her face and. her shirt that Dr. McGee believed came from Ford’s nose and mouth as a result of blunt trauma. Ford had significant . bruises and scrapes on her face, hands, arms, shoulder, neck, and inside her lips. According to • Dr. McGee, the bruises inside Ford’s lips were consistent with someone having placed an arm or other object over Ford’s mouth. The bruises on her arms were consistent with being held down. Ford also had pinpoint bleeding in her eyes and fluid in her lungs, which indicated she had been strangled. The bruises on her neck were consistent with manual strangulation. The medical examiner could not screen Ford for cocaine in her system because there was no urine in her bladder at the time of the autopsy. In Dr. McGee’s opinion, Ford had defensive wounds on her left upper extremities.
Dr. McGee observed that Ford’s underwear was found inside out with only one *434leg through the waistband. Dr. McGee concluded that Ford had been redressed after death. A note with the name “Tommy Jr.” and a phone number was also found in the pocket of her shorts. None of the people the police talked to recognized the name or the phone number and there is no evidence in the record that the police called the number.
Dr. McGee conducted a sexual assault examination and found sperm in Ford’s vagina and around her anal region that possibly was drainage from the vagina. Dr. McGee testified that the drainage may have been post-mortem. A DNA test linked the sperm to appellant with a random match probability of 1 in 396,000 African Americans. There was no evidence of any traumatic injury to Ford’s genital area. Dr. McGee testified that an unconscious person may not show signs of sexual assault trauma because of their muscle flaccidity or a lack of resistance. Dr. McGee noted a conscicms person may also show no signs of genital trauma after an assault and that an absence of trauma does not mean no assault occurred.
Ford had an elevated acid phosphate level in her vagina that led Dr. McGee to conclude the sperm was deposited close to the time of Ford’s death. Dr. McGee concluded that Ford died from a lack of oxygen due to manual strangulation during the course of a sexual assault:
Q: What was happening to her when she died, based on your training and experience?
A: Based on the scene investigation and the examination of Mrs. Ford’s body, I think she was sexually assaulted and during the course of the sexual assault 1 think she was manually strangled and received a beating. I’m not exactly sure at what sequence this occurred. The beating consisted of blows to her facial area, pressure applied to her mouth to either stop her from breathing or trying to quiet her, as well as blunt trauma being applied to the neck region in the form of a hand, strangling her, either to quiet her or kill her. This all occurred during the performance, I believe, of a sexual assault.
The following exchange occurred on cross-examination of Dr. McGee by defense counsel:
Q. Doctor, you had said that you believed this was possibly a death in the course of a sexual assault; isn’t that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. But, doctor, you cannot say to any degree of medical certainty that in fact Marilyn Ford died in the course of a sexual assault, can you?
A. All I can tell you is - all I can tell you is what the results of the analysis in the lab and the examination of the body suggest.
Q. And so, to note, you cannot say to a degree of medical certainty that in fact she died in the course of criminal sexual conduct?
A. I think she did.
Q. Your final - Your final anatomic diagnosis is death by manual strangulation?
A. That’s true.
A forensic scientist testified about DNA testing on bloodstains found on the T-shirt appellant wore when he was arrested. The scientist concluded that the blood on appellant’s shirt came from Ford with a random match possibility of 1 out of 35,200 for African Americans, a number the scientist considered “quite uncommon.” The scientist excluded appellant as the source of the blood found on his shirt.
The scientist also tested blood found on appellant’s ring and a sock worn at the time of arrest. The scientist concluded that at least two people contributed to a DNA mixture in blood found on appellant’s sock and ring. She concluded the blood was a mixture consistent with both Ford’s and appellant’s blood.
*435The blood found on a wallpaper sample from the kitchen was ■ also tested. The wallpaper sample had the same statistical certainty for Ford’s blood as the sample on appellant’s T-shirt.
Ford’s comforter had several large bloodstains that were diluted by what one scientist suspected was urine. Dr. McGee noted that strangulation victims often release their urine. The scientist found a mixture of DNA on the comforter and concluded both Ford and appellant were possible sources, but someone else’s DNA contributed to the mixture.2
Appellant did not testify at his trial.
I.
Appellant argues that the trial court erred in excluding testimony concerning a statement that Chambers made to police on March 27, 1998, to the effect that Ford was a prostitute who sold sex to obtain drugs. The trial court did not allow that testimony, but ruled that if there was evidence of drug use or prostitution on the night in question, that would be admitted.
“Absent a clear abuse of discretion, evidentiary rulings generally rest within the trial court’s discretion.” State v. Kennedy, 585 N.W.2d 385, 389 (Minn.1998). In a prosecution for criminal sexual conduct, evidence of a victim’s previous sexual conduct is not admitted except by court order. See Minn.Stat. § 609.347, subd. 3 (1998).3 Both Minn. R. Evid. 412 and Minn.Stat. § 609.347, subd. 3, apply the rape shield law to prosecutions for criminal sexual conduct. See State v. Friend, 493 N.W.2d 540, 545 (Minn.1992) (applying rape shield law protections to a murder victim because the state must also prove the elements of sexual assault to convict for first-degree-murder committed during a sexual assault).
Appellant claims that testimony about Ford’s prostitution was admissible for reasons analogous to those examined in State v. Grayson, 546 N.W.2d 731 (Minn.1996). In Grayson we concluded that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting evidence that the defendant hated white women in a case where his defense involved consensual contact with a white woman. See id. at 736. Appellant claims that the evidence should have been admitted to support his position, as set forth in his.own statements to police, that Ford’s sexual intercourse with him was consensual. He essentially argues (although the argument was not articulated at trial) that because the state introduced evidence that Ford disliked, feared, and had no sexual interest in him, he was entitled to offer evidence' tending to show that she was in the habit of prostituting herself, presumably 'even with men she disliked, feared, and had ho interest in, in exchange for drugs. Thus, he claims, the evidence was not offered for the prohibited purpose of character assassination, but for the legitimate purpose of rebutting a portion of the state’s case.
We have conducted a thorough examination of the trial transcript to determine what evidence was offered, what objections and arguments were made, and the timing, basis, and parameters of the trial court’s evidentiary rulings.
The state filed a motion in limine to exclude references to alleged drug use or *436prostitution by the victim. The morning of trial, the court repeatedly declined to rule on the motion, saying, for example: “But I just don’t think it’s fair to preclude it at this time if I don’t see how the case is lining up,” and “I can’t judge that [relevance] ahead, either. It may not be, it may be. Depends.” The argument touched both on whether there would be proper foundation and also whether the evidence was relevant. At that hearing, it appears to have been anticipated that some of the evidence both with respect to the defense theory and the victim’s prior conduct would be offered through testimony of appellant himself:
The Court: If this is introduced you’re saying it’s going to come in through Mr. Morris.
[Defense Counsel]: Those statements would come in through Mr. Morris.
That exchange was followed by a discussion of whether there would be foundation for Morris’ opinion. The state argued that even if there was foundation, there would have to be a showing of relevance:
[Counsel for the State]: But wouldn’t the defense have to make some sort of offer of proof as to how it’s relevant? It’s going to be out of Mr. Morris’ mouth and then it’s too late. The grand jury did ask the question if she was a prostitute. She’s not.
The Court: They can lay the foundation. If they can’t lay the foundation it’s moot. But if they do, then in the context of all of the issues at the trial, does it become something the jury should know or not know in making the decision? And I don’t know that yet.
Thus, it is apparent that the trial judge was committed to making the relevancy ruling in the context of the trial as a whole, and only if foundation was established. In the end, Morris did not testify, and the only remaining evidence at issue was the statement to police by Chambers.
After Chambers’ direct examination, defense counsel, the prosecutor, and the court revisited the question of his testimony on the point here at issue. The court made clear that its rulings did not exclude testimony about Ford’s “whereabouts or her movements on the night in question at all.” The judge and counsel then had the following exchange:
The Court: Well, let me say this and maybe we can clear this up. Unless you show some nexus between this night, the activities of this night, and some dates previously, you don’t get, because she did it this night, then to go through a whole history of when she may have done it previously.
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, the only nexus that I have is that Miss Tolliver said that earlier in the evening Marilyn Ford was out buying crack.
The Court: And you have a free hand on this evening in this early morning of the 26th and 27th to pursue that line of questioning.
[Defense Counsel]: May I also ask Mr. Chambers if his sister smoked crack?
The Court: This evening?
[Defense Counsel]: On the evening in question.
The Court: Yes.
It appears to us that the trial court considered all of the evidence and struck a careful balance in admitting evidence of conduct on the evening in question but not evidence of sexual conduct or drug use in general. Through the state’s direct examination of one of the police officers, the jury learned of appellant’s out-of-court statements to the effect that Ford engaged in consensual sex with him in order to receive cocaine.4 The jury also heard evidence that Ford possessed cocaine the night she was killed. The excluded evidence consist*437ed of one statement by Ford’s brother. Even assuming that Chambers would have testified consistent with his statement, there was no offer of proof with respect to the foundation for his opinion, or what he would have said about the frequency or recency of the alleged prostitution, or whether Chambers would have said that Ford had ever brought customers to her own home.
In State v. Friend, 493 N.W.2d 540 (Minn.1992), we stated that in “certain cases the due process clause, the right to confront accusers, or the right to present evidence will require admission of evidence otherwise excluded by the rape shield law.” Id. at 545. In Friend, we upheld the trial court’s exclusion of evidence offered by the defendant of the victim’s “similar pattern” sexual activity. See id. In Friend, the evidence demonstrated that the victim had a broken nose, had a wound under her eye, and did not get up between the time of the sexual intercourse and the murder. See id. We concluded there that the trial court was free to exclude the victim’s prior sexual conduct evidence under Minn. R. Evid. 403 without regard to whether exclusion was required by Minn. R. Evid. 412 or the. rape shield statute. See id. The facts here are similar to those in Friend. Ford had significant bruises and scrapes on her face, hands, arms, shoulder, neck and lips, and was killed so close in time to the sexual intercourse that in the medical examiner’s opinion the intercourse could even have been post-mor-tem.
In the context of all the evidence, we conclude that the trial court’s exclusion of testimony that Chambers had told police that Ford was a prostitute who sold sex for drugs or drug money was not a clear abuse of discretion.
II.
Appellant contends the circumstantial evidence in the record was legally insufficient to sustain his conviction for first-degree murder committed during a sexual assault.
“In a criminal case, the court makes a painstaking review of the record to determine if the evidence was sufficient to permit the jury to reach the conclusion that it did.” State v. Scruggs, 421 N.W.2d 707, 713 (Minn.1988). “A conviction based on circumstantial evidence merits stricter scrutiny. The evidence is entitled to the same weight as any evidence so long as the circumstances proved are consistent with the hypothesis that the accused is guilty and inconsistent with any rational hypothesis except that of guilt.” State v. Bias, 419 N.W.2d 480, 484 (Minn.1988).
“When reviewing a conviction based on circumstantial evidence, this court recognizes that a jury normally is in the best position to evaluate, circumstantial evidence, and that -their verdict is entitled to due deference. Also, the jury determines the credibility and weight given to the testimony of individual witnesses.” State v. DeWald, 463 N.W.2d 741, 749 (Minn.1990) (citations- and internal quotations omitted).
Appellant focuses his challenge to the sexual assault allegation on the sufficiency of the evidence. Appellant told the police that he and the victim had consensual sex shortly before the time of her murder. The defense theory at trial was that someone else killed Ford when she left the house after having sex with appellant. On appeal he challenges the sufficiency of the evidence against him on that theory and alternatively that even if he killed Ford, the evidence is not sufficient to show he did so during a sexual assault.
The state?s trial theory was that appellant killed Ford and then had sex with her corpse. In State v. Nielsen, this court examined a conviction for first-degree murder -committed during a sexual assault. 467 N.W.2d 615 (Minn.1991). The defendant in Nielsen contended he had sex with his victim’s corpse thirty minutes after he murdered her, and therefore could not be *438guilty of killing during a sexual assault. See id. at 617-18. We looked to whether the murder and assault were a “continuous transaction” to decide whether the conviction should be upheld. See id. at 618. The Nielsen court’s recitation of events is somewhat similar to the evidence in this record:
The defendant correctly points out the absence of scientific evidence that the sexual assault took place while the victim was alive: the autopsy did not reveal whether penetration occurred before or after [the victim’s] death. Nevertheless, there was a great deal of evidence from which the jury could conclude that death occurred during or as the result of a sexual assault. Many of the victim’s wounds, the disarray of her clothing, and the way in which the clothing had been torn from her upper body were suggestive of, or at least consistent with, a sexually motivated assault. * * * Even if the rape occurred after death, the jury could have believed that the assault was sexually motivated and that the criminal sexual conduct and the homicide were one continuous transaction, making the crime first degree felony murder.
See id.
Appellant’s argument does not fit the timeline of events elicited at trial. Chambers and Beard testified they saw Ford go out around 1:00 a.m., but Chambers testified he later interrupted appellant and Ford in her bedroom at approximately 2:00 a.m. No one testified to seeing Ford leave the apartment after 2:00. Appellant’s unknown killer theory lacks a basis in the record.
Ford’s comforter contained blood consistent with her DNA and the blood was diluted by urine. Urine is commonly released during strangulation. There were bloodstains on Rochelle Banks’ bed in the back bedroom that suggested to police that someone moved the body to that bed. This indicated that Ford was killed in her (and appellant’s) apartment. Blood consistent with the victim was found in the kitchen, along the wall, and on an outside screen door. The victim’s blood (or a mixture of the victim’s and appellant’s blood) was found on appellant’s shirt, ring and sock worn at the time of arrest.
Semen consistent with appellant’s DNA was recovered from the victim. The coroner testified that the elevated acid phosphate levels found in the victim’s vagina indicated that the semen was deposited close to the time of death. Semen deposited in the victim near the time of death may be consistent with appellant’s theory of consensual sex, assuming the murder occurred shortly thereafter and that the murder was motivated by impulses not related to the sexual assault. However, the physical evidence strongly suggests that Ford died while she was still naked on the comforter. The comforter had blood, urine and semen on it. Ford’s clothing did not contain urine, and the coroner testified that the semen likely dripped from the vagina to the rectum. There was no testimony that semen dripped anywhere but to the rectum, consistent with a horizontal post-coital posture.
When Ford was found, her clothing was in disarray and she appeared to have been re-dressed after death. She had bruising in and around her mouth, eyes, face and shoulders. She had traumatic bruising of her neck and blunt force trauma injuries to her face that produced heavy bleeding from her nose.
There were small cuts and bruises on Ford’s hands and arms. The coroner interpreted these as defensive wounds consistent with his conclusion that Ford died from manual strangulation. Finally, the coroner testified that he believed Ford was sexually assaulted at the time of death.
Appellant, on at least one occasion, threatened the victim with a knife. At least two witnesses testified they heard appellant in the past threaten to kill Ford. Appellant stated to a co-worker on the morning of the murder that he had “killed *439the bitch,” although he did not refer specifically to Ford. Police found appellant’s machete under the victim’s bed. Chambers testified he saw appellant with the victim on her bed during the time period surrounding her murder. No one saw Ford leave the house after this encounter. Lastly, appellant had between twenty minutes to one hour alone in the house to dispose of Ford’s body.
When evaluating an insufficient evidence claim, we examine the evidence by viewing it in the fight most favorable to the guilty verdict, and will assume that the jury disbelieved any testimony in conflict with the result it reached. See State v. Oevering, 268 N.W.2d 68, 71 (Minn.1978). After a thorough.review of the record, we find the evidence to be overwhelming that appellant killed Ford and sufficient to prove that he killed her during a sexual assault. The evidence is therefore sufficient to affirm appellant’s conviction for first-degree murder committed during a sexual assault.
Affirmed.
. Minnesota Statutes § 609.185 provides:
Murder in the first degree.
Whoever does any of the following is guilty of murder in the first degree and shall be sentenced to imprisonment for life:
⅜ ‡ ⅜ ⅜
(2) causes the death of a human being while committing or attempting to commit criminal sexual conduct in the first or second degree with force or violence, either upon or affecting the person or another!.]
. James Whitelow testified that on March 26 he had sex with Ford in her bedroom before leaving the apartment at about 3:00 p.m. Ford was killed sometime around 12 a.m. on March 27.
. Minnesota Statutes § 609.347, subd. 3(a) provides:
(a) When consent of the victim is a defense in the case, the following evidence is admissible:
(i) evidence of the victim’s previous sexual conduct tending to establish a common scheme or plan of similar sexual conduct under circumstances similar to the case at issue. In order to find a common scheme or plan, the judge must find that the victim made prior allegations of sexual assault which were fabricated; and
(ii) evidence of the victim's previous sexual conduct with the accused.
. In addition, the jury heard evidence that appellant had also told police that Ford had been "hitting on him.”

=== CASE 9740022 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:55.409822+00 ===

PAGE, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I believe that the district court abused its discretion when it refused to admit evidence concerning the victim’s alleged practice of trading sex for money to get drugs. A key element of this case is the question of whether Ford consented to having sex with Morris. Morris claims that Ford agreed to have sex with him in exchange for money to buy crack cocaine. The state offered evidence that Ford disliked, feared, and was not attracted to Morris and that she would not have voluntarily had sex with him. Morris wanted to offer the evidence of Ford’s practice of exchanging sex for drug money as an explanation of why she would have engaged in consensual sexual intercourse with him, a man she allegedly disliked, feared, and was not attracted to. Although not specifically stated, this court seems to rely on Minnesota’s rape shield law, Minn.Stat. § 609.347, subd. 3 (1998), and Minn. R. Evid. 412 to hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it excluded evidence of Ford’s sex-for-drugs transactions. Minnesota’s rape shield law does, not, however, prohibit all evidence of the victim’s previous sexual conduct. We held in State v. Friend, 493 N.W.2d 540, 545 (Minn.1992) that “[i]n certain cases the due process clause, the right to confront accusers, or the right to present evidence will require admission of evidence otherwise excluded by the rape shield law.” (citing State v. Benedict, 397 N.W.2d 337, 341 (Minn.1986)).
Moreover, a criminal defendant must be “afforded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.” State v. Richards, 495 N.W.2d 187, 191 (Minn.1992). That includes the right to present relevant evidence, except when the “probative value [of that evidence] is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury * * Minn. R. Evid. 403, 402. Evidence of a victim’s past sexual conduct is generally not admissible unless its probative value is not substantially outweighed by its inflammatory or prejudicial nature, the victim’s consent is an issue in the case, and the evidence tends to establish a “common scheme * * * of similar sexual conduct under circumstances similar to the case at issue * * *.” Minn. R. Evid. 412.
In excluding evidence of Ford’s alleged practice of trading sex for drug money, the district court deprived Morris of his right to due process and the right to present a defense. In this case, Ford’s consent was clearly at issue. The jury heard testimony from Lillian Beard, one of Ford’s neighbors, that she • witnessed Ford purchase crack cocaine for Morris two hours before her murder. The jury also heard, through another witness, Morris’ claim that Ford engaged in consensual sex with him in order to receive cocaine. Without the excluded evidence of Ford’s practice of trading sex for drug money, the value of the admitted evidence is limited and results in *440Morris being deprived of a “meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.”
Further, evidence of Ford’s alleged practice of trading sex for money for drugs is not barred by the rape shield law. The excluded testimony is relevant and material and when limited to that specific evidence, its probative value would not be substantially outweighed by its possible inflammatory or prejudicial nature. Therefore, its exclusion was an abuse of discretion.

=== CASE 2221884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.721186+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 1238 (1992)
235 Ill. App.3d 860
176 Ill.Dec. 540
Jacqueline McSHANE, Administrator of the Estate of Craig McShane, Deceased, Louis Outlaw and Gerald Cathcart, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
CHICAGO INVESTMENT CORPORATION, Defendant-Appellant.
Concetta HITZ, Administrator of the Estate of Joseph R. Hitz, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHICAGO INVESTMENT CORPORATION and Madison Maintenance Corporation, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 1-90-3249.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fifth Division.
September 25, 1992.
*1241 James B. Davidson, Roderick T. Dunne, Ivan P. Jecklin, Peterson & Ross, Chicago, for defendants-appellants, Chicago Inv. Corp. and Madison Maintenance Corp.
Patricia C. Bobb, Marina Ammendola, Michael W. Rathsack, of counsel, Michael W. Rathsack, Chicago, for plaintiffs-appellees, Jacqueline McShane, Louis Outlaw and Gerald Cathcart.
Herbert F. Stride, William J. Harte, Joan M. Mannix, of counsel, William J. Harte, Ltd., Herbert F. Stride, Ltd., Chicago, for plaintiff-appellee, Concetta Hitz.
Justice MURRAY delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from a general verdict in favor of plaintiffs, Jacqueline McShane, Administrator of the Estate of Craig McShane, Louis Outlaw, Gerald Cathcart and Concetta Hitz, Administrator of the Estate of Joseph R. Hitz, in a negligence action brought against defendants, Chicago Investment Corporation and Madison Maintenance Corporation, for injuries sustained after responding to a fire alarm. The facts are as follows:
On the evening of September 22, 1981, several Chicago firefighters, including Craig McShane (McShane), Louis Outlaw (Outlaw), Gerald Cathcart (Cathcart) and Joseph Hitz (Hitz), responded to a fire alarm at 8 South Michigan Avenue, a 38-floor high-rise building in Chicago. McShane and Outlaw were part of Engine Company 42, Cathcart and Hitz were with Truck Company 1. Although McShane was a probationary fireman, Outlaw had three years' experience, Cathcart had four years' experience and Hitz had 17 years' experience. During the course of the fire, McShane and Hitz died, and Outlaw and Cathcart received extensive burns and other injuries.
Jacqueline McShane, administrator of McShane's estate, along with Outlaw and Cathcart, filed a negligence action against Chicago Investment Corporation (CIC), the sublessee of the building at 8 South Michigan, seeking compensation for the wrongful death of McShane and injuries suffered by Outlaw and Cathcart. Concetta Hitz, administrator of Hitz's estate, filed a separate negligence action against both CIC and their agent, Madison Maintenance Corporation (MMC), which managed and maintained the premises for CIC, seeking to recover for the wrongful death of Hitz. The two actions were consolidated.
After a jury trial, substantial verdicts were rendered in favor of the above-named plaintiffs. The judgments for each of the plaintiffs were reduced by 50%, however, based on the plaintiffs' contributory negligence. CIC and MMC then filed this timely appeal.
On appeal CIC and MMC argue that the verdicts rendered in favor of plaintiffs should be reversed and that this court should enter judgment in their favor because (1) the "fireman's rule" precludes plaintiffs from any recovery, or (2) plaintiffs' negligence was the superceding proximate cause (or their actions an unforeseeable, intervening cause) of their injuries and death. In the alternative, CIC and MMC ask this court to remand for a new trial because (1) the trial court erred in *1242 instructing the jury, (2) the trial court erred in making certain evidentiary rulings, or (3) the cumulative effect of various errors warrants the grant of a new trial.
For reasons that follow, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
Perhaps the chief issue presented to this court is the application of the so-called "fireman's rule." The fireman's rule is a doctrine which limits the extent to which firefighters or other public officers may be allowed to recover for injuries incurred when, in an emergency, they enter onto privately-owned property in discharge of their duty.
Historically, under common law, a fireman was considered a "licensee" to whom a landowner owed no duty except to refrain from inflicting wilful or wanton injury. Over time, however, courts began to recognize many exceptions to this harsh rule, finding that various circumstances raised the status of the injured fireman to that of an "invitee" or "business invitee." Finally, courts discarded these "legal fictions" altogether and merely held that landowners owed firemen and other public officials a duty of reasonable care to keep their premises safe. See Dini v. Naiditch (1960), 20 Ill.2d 406, 413-15, 170 N.E.2d 881.
This more enlightened approach, giving firemen the right to bring suit for unreasonably unsafe conditions, was adopted by our Illinois Supreme Court in Dini. In Dini, one fireman was killed and another injured when the wooden staircase they were climbing inside a burning building unexpectedly collapsed. The record showed that the staircase, unaffected by the fire, had been defectively constructed. The court also noted that, unknown to the firemen, a storage room located near the stairwell contained highly flammable products, including paint and benzene. After reviewing the history and case law concerning the duty owed by landowners to firemen, the Dini court held that a cause of action could be brought against a landowner or occupier for failure to exercise reasonable care in the maintenance of their property resulting in injury or death to firemen rightfully on the premises, fighting a fire in a place where they might reasonably be expected to be. The Dini court also recognized, as an additional basis of liability, the alleged violations of certain fire safety ordinances.
Although Dini recognized that a duty was owed to firemen, Dini`s progeny defined the scope of that duty, giving greater clarity to the firemen's rule. The cases that followed Dini interpreted the fireman's rule as limiting recovery to those instances where the landowner or occupier breached his duty of care by failing to keep the premises safe so as to prevent injury to firemen resulting from causes independent of the fire. A landowner was deemed not liable, however, for any negligence giving rise to the fire or other emergency which brought the firefighter or public official onto the private property.
In other words, a fireman has no right of recovery for injuries arising out of the fire itself. See Court v. Grzelinski (1978), 72 Ill.2d 141, 147-48, 19 Ill.Dec. 617, 379 N.E.2d 281, and cases cited therein, Young v. Toledo, Peoria & Western R.R. Co. (1977), 46 Ill.App.3d 167, 4 Ill.Dec. 715, 360 N.E.2d 978; Washington v. Atlantic Richfield Co. (1976), 66 Ill.2d 103, 5 Ill.Dec. 143, 361 N.E.2d 282; Erickson v. Toledo, Peoria & Western R.R. Co. (1974), 21 Ill. App.3d 546, 315 N.E.2d 912.
As stated in Court v. Grzelinski:
"This distinction evolved for two mutually supportive reasons. First, since most fires occur because of the negligence of the landowner or occupier, it was believed that the imposition of a duty to prevent fires from occurring or spreading on a person's premises would place an unreasonable burden upon the person who owned or occupied improved land. [Citation omitted.] This public policy consideration, however, tended to undermine the general duty imposed upon landowners or occupiers to exercise reasonable care to keep their premises safe. A compromise was reached with regard to firemen, recognizing that the risk of harm from fire is inherent in a fireman's *1243 occupation." 72 Ill.2d at 148, 19 Ill.Dec. 617, 379 N.E.2d 281.
In light of the above-stated case law, the fireman's rule has been refined to mean that when a fireman enters upon a person's property to fight a fire, he assumes the risk of being injured by causes related to the fire. He does not assume, however, the risk of being injured by causes unrelated to the fire, i.e., causes that might be faced by an ordinary citizen entering upon the property. Hedberg v. Mendino (1991), 218 Ill.App.3d 1087, 161 Ill.Dec. 850, 579 N.E.2d 398.
While at first blush this would seem to be a reasonably easy principle to apply, it has become apparent that there is often a fine line between those circumstances that are independent of the fire and those that are not. Consequently, the proposition is best illustrated by the cases interpreting it.
In Hedberg, cited above, the reviewing court reversed the dismissal of plaintiff's complaint, finding that the plaintiff, a policeman, stated a cause of action when he alleged that while responding to a call about a prowler on the premises he was injured when he tripped on a depressed and defective portion of the sidewalk leading to the premises. The court found that a cause of action had been stated because the complaint alleged that the officer was injured by a cause independent of the emergency he was investigating.
So, too, was the recent decision in the case Harris v. Chicago Housing Authority (1992), 235 Ill.App.3d 276, 176 Ill.Dec. 313, 601 N.E.2d 1011. In Harris firemen, responding to a fire alarm, hooked up their fire hoses to standpipes located within the burning building but found that there was no water pressure because the standpipes did not function. Without water to douse the fire, there was a buildup of heat and gases which precipitated an explosion and the plaintiff/fireman was injured as a result of that explosion. The trial court, relying on the fireman's rule, dismissed the complaint but the dismissal was reversed on appeal. Noting that it would still be necessary to prove causation and damages, the reviewing court held that a cause of action had been stated and that to hold otherwise would invite flagrant violation of public safety ordinances.
However, it was held that no cause of action was stated in Coglianese v. Mark Twain Ltd. Partnership (1988), 171 Ill. App.3d 1,120 Ill.Dec. 849, 524 N.E.2d 1031, or Luetje v. Corsini (1984), 126 Ill.App.3d 74, 81 Ill.Dec. 502, 466 N.E.2d 1304. In Coglianese the reviewing court affirmed the dismissal of the complaint wherein the plaintiff, a firefighter, alleged that he was overcome by smoke, soot and noxious gases emitted by the burning building's interior walls which were constructed with materials which were not fire retardant and, consequently, failed to meet city codes. Dismissal of the complaint was also affirmed in Luetje, where the plaintiff firefighter was injured when part of the chimney fell from the burning building because of the fire. In both cases the courts found that the injuries suffered were not caused by circumstances independent of the fire, but rather were part of the risk normally associated with the firefighting profession.
In two other cases, Horn v. Urban Investment & Development Co. (1988), 166 Ill.App.3d 62, 116 Ill.Dec. 597, 519 N.E.2d 489, and Briones v. Mobil Oil Corp. (1986), 150 Ill.App.3d 41, 103 Ill.Dec. 504, 501 N.E.2d 821, summary judgment was granted in favor of the defendants. In each of these cases a firefighter was injured due to a fall. In Horn the fireman slipped on a wet floor while inspecting the sprinkler system to determine the cause for a leak which had triggered the fire alarm. In Briones, firefighters responded to an alarm at a building that was being demolished. The owner informed the firefighters that holes had been cut in the floors because of the demolition. Nevertheless, one firefighter, while inspecting the fire scene, fell into a hole in the floor. On appeal summary judgment was affirmed in both Horn and Briones. The reviewing courts found that a landowner's liability should not extend to those situations where the injury-causing hazard is open and obvious *1244 or where the firefighters had been warned of the hazard, as in Briones.
Keeping in mind the basic premise of the fireman's rule and the cases which have interpreted and applied it, we now turn to the facts of the present case to determine whether the fireman's rule should have precluded recovery for plaintiffs.
In the present case, at about 7:40 p.m. on September 22, 1981, Engine Company 1 was notified over the firehouse public address system that there was a fire alarm at 8 South Michigan Avenue. Battalion Chief Higgins, along with an engine unit and a hook and ladder unit, responded to the alarm. Within minutes they arrived at the building, which was a 38-floor high-rise. Higgins and the hook and ladder personnel were directed to a freight elevator, which was manned by a maintenance person, and taken to the 23rd floor, the top floor serviced by that elevator. From there the firefighters proceeded to walk to the 25th floor where the fire was reportedly located. At the 25th floor they encountered a locked stairwell door and were unable to access that floor. Since there was also no sign of fire at this location, the firefighters proceeded up to the 26th floor, where the stairwell door was not locked. Upon entering the 26th floor, Higgins noticed heavy smoke and a "glow" indicating the presence of fire. A hose was then hooked up to a standpipe located in the stairwell on the 25th floor and the firefighters attempted to attack the source of the fire. After directing water at the glow, the smoke diminished and Higgins was able to determine that the fire was in the shaft of elevator 8. Shortly thereafter Higgins heard a "whooshing sound" and realized that elevator 8 had dropped.
In the meantime, more firefighters appeared on the scene responding to the alarm. Lieutenant Matthew Thomas of Engine Company 42 and his personnel, Kestler, McShane and Outlaw, along with Hitz and Cathcart of Truck Company 1, entered the lobby of the building at 8 South Michigan. Thomas noticed a man standing just inside an elevator, holding it at the ground floor level through the use of a key. As Thomas and the other firefighters approached this elevator (later identified as elevator 7) the man turned the key, taking it off manual and placing it on automatic. Although Thomas attempted to speak with the man, the man appeared to not understand, spoke in a foreign language and "ran off." The six firefighters then entered elevator 7 and proceeded up to the 24th floor, one floor below the floor where the fire had been reported.
The elevator operated without any apparent difficulty and the firemen exited elevator 7 at the 24th floor. One man stayed behind, however, to hold the elevator at that floor since they did not have the key. The remaining firemen walked up to the 25th floor, where they encountered other firemen attempting to break down the locked stairwell door on that floor. Since there was no sign of fire at this location, the firefighters did not persist in their efforts to break down the door but, instead, decided to take other action. The firemen who had been attempting to force the door open proceeded up to the 26th floor, while Lieutenant Thomas and the men with him returned to the elevator to reach the 25th floor by that avenue.
The six firefighters, each possessing breathing apparatus and other equipment, re-entered elevator 7 at the 24th floor. The button for the 25th floor was pushed and the elevator began to move. After that, however, the elevator did not operate properly. It lurched to a stop and the elevator doors would not open. The elevator remained stuck regardless of the buttons that were pressed by the firemen.
While the firemen attempted to get the elevator to operate or the doors to open, it was discovered that the emergency phone in the elevator did not work and the alarm bell did not ring. Shortly thereafter the lights in the elevator went out and smoke began to fill the elevator. The firemen put on their breathing apparatus and continued to attempt to escape the elevator. They used their equipment to try to break through the elevator access hatch at the top of the elevator, but found that it was *1245 securely fastened from outside the elevator and could not be forced open.
All at once and for no apparent reason, the doors to the elevator opened and the firemen were hit with a blast of intense heat and smoke. The smoke was so thick that visibility was reduced to a couple of inches at best. The men exited the elevator trying to locate a means of escape from the heat and smoke. By this time their airpacks were nearly empty and the men were being forced to breathe the hot, smoky air. As the men groped their way through the smoke-filled floor two men fell down the open elevator shaft of elevator 8, which was located directly across the hall from elevator 7. The other four firemen were able to find their way to safety despite the fact that their route was obstructed by a glass partition and door which was locked shut. McShane and Hitz, who fell down the elevator shaft, died from the fall. Outlaw and Cathcart were injured as they sought safety after escaping elevator 7.
In their third-amended complaint plaintiffs alleged that they were injured as a proximate result of defects in the elevator and defects on the 25th floor which were unrelated to the fire. Specifically, plaintiffs contended that defendants were negligent (1) by maintaining the building so that the usual emergency and escape routes from the elevator lobby of the 25th floor were blocked by a glass partition, (2) by allowing the stairwell doors on the 25th floor to be locked, (3) by failing to repair elevators 7 and 8 when it was known that they were malfunctioning, (4) by bolting the access hatch of elevator 7, (5) by failing to provide a working telephone and/or alarm bell in elevator 7, (6) by failing to provide or maintain electrically illuminated signs to indicate the location of exits, stairwells, and fire escapes, and (7) by failing to warn of these latent and hidden defects.
After all the evidence was presented, a jury returned a general verdict in plaintiffs' favor, reduced by 50%, due to plaintiffs' own contributory negligence. Now on appeal defendants contend that they were not negligent because no duty was owed to the plaintiffs pursuant to the fireman's rule. They concede that the fireman's rule would not shield them from liability for injuries or deaths which resulted from conduct or conditions present at the fire scene which created undue risks of injury "beyond those inevitably involved in firefighting." (Defendants' brief at p. 23, quoting Erickson v. Toledo, Peoria and Western R.R. Co. (1974), 21 Ill.App.3d 546, 315 N.E.2d 912.) They argue, however, that the allegedly negligent conditions asserted by plaintiffs in this case were not outside the realm of risks normally encountered by firefighters. Additionally, they argue that plaintiffs did not show (1) the existence of any hidden, unusual or unexpectedly dangerous conditions, (2) that defendants were aware of or should have been aware of any dangerous conditions, or (3) that the allegedly dangerous conditions proximately caused plaintiffs' injuries. Finally, defendants argue that any possible negligence on their part was negated by the negligence of the plaintiffs' conduct.
Thus, the issue for this court to determine on appeal is whether there was sufficient evidence presented at trial to show that circumstances existed at the fire scene which were independent of the fire and which caused or contributed to the deaths and injuries suffered by plaintiffs and their decedents.
The elevators
The elevators are a major issue in this case and both plaintiffs and defendants raise several points concerning elevators and their use by firefighters. First, it is defendants' contention that plaintiffs failed to show that any elevator-related defects asserted by plaintiffs were independent of the fire. Therefore, they contend that any injuries related to the use of the elevator are "related to the fire" for the purposes of applying the fireman's rule. Secondly, defendants argue that plaintiffs should not be allowed to recover because it was plaintiffs' own negligence in taking the elevator to the reported fire floor, in contravention of their own rules and regulations, which proximately caused their injuries and superseded any defects alleged by plaintiffs.
*1246 Initially, we note that the fireman's rule has never been applied in Illinois in the context of a high-rise building and we are aware of only one Maryland case, Flowers v. Rock Creek Terrace Ltd. Partnership (1987), 308 Md. 432, 520 A.2d 361, where the fireman's rule was applied in this context. The high-rise situation is somewhat unique because elevators must be utilized by firemen to reach the fire scene with their equipment despite the fact that elevators are inherently dangerous during a fire and ordinary citizens are usually directed to refrain from using elevators during a fire. Consequently, an elevator is a place where a firefighter might reasonably be expected to be while fighting a fire in a high-rise.
Nevertheless, a firefighter-plaintiff has a major hurdle to overcome when trying to impose liability upon a landowner/occupier for injuries related to his use of an elevator at a fire scene. First of all, in order to avoid the preclusive effects of the fireman's rule, he must prove that any alleged defects in the elevator were unrelated to the fire. Even if a firefighter is injured because an elevator does not operate correctly, if the elevator's failure to operate correctly is shown to be caused by the fire, then the fireman's rule applies. This is because an elevator's failure to operate correctly during a fire is one of the risks inevitably faced by a firefighter in a high-rise situation. Such was the decision in Flowers.
In Flowers the plaintiff-firefighter (Flowers) fell down an open elevator shaft from the lobby of the 12th floor as he was directing tenants being evacuated from the burning building. Flowers was unaware of the open shaft because it was obscured by smoke. Flowers alleged, among other things, that he was not warned of the open elevator shaft and that the elevator had malfunctioned because it was not sufficiently fireproof and, therefore, was defective. The trial court held, and the Maryland Court of Appeals agreed, that Flowers was injured in the course of firefighting and that an open elevator shaft was not a hidden danger of which firemen must be warned. Rather, an elevator malfunction which caused the doors to remain open and thereby exposed an open shaft, was deemed within the range of risks typically faced by firefighters. Therefore, the Maryland court concluded that the fireman's rule precluded recovery.
In the present case plaintiffs presented evidence at trial in support of their allegations that their injuries were proximately caused by certain defects in elevator 7. Specifically, plaintiffs attempted to show that elevator 7 did not stop level with the floor and its doors failed to operate properly, that the alarm systems within the elevator did not conform with city codes and that the escape hatch was improperly fastened. Plaintiffs also attempted to show that these defects were unrelated to the fire. It is the sufficiency of this evidence that we must now consider.
With regard to the first point, there is no question that elevator 7 failed to operate properly. Several of the firemen testified about the way the elevator jerked to a stop, how it failed to stop level with the 25th floor and how the doors failed to open. The problem is whether plaintiffs presented sufficient evidence from which one could conclude that these malfunctions were not fire-related.
In support of their proposition that the malfunctions of elevator 7 were not fire-related, plaintiffs relied upon the testimony of one witness who claimed that elevator 8 had malfunctioned earlier in the day and that the buildings' maintenance staff had been notified of the elevator's performance. This witness indicated that the doors of elevator 8 had "bounced" and had not stopped level with the floor. Plaintiffs then postulated that because elevator 7 and elevator 8 shared the same machine room, evidence that elevator 8 exhibited problems prior to the fire was some evidence that both of the tower elevators (7 & 8) were malfunctioning prior to the fire so that a jury could have concluded that the problems experienced by the firefighters in elevator 7 during the fire were unrelated to the fire.
*1247 This evidence, which itself was rather speculative, was contradicted by a wealth of evidence that elevator 7's doors malfunctioned due to an interruption of the electrical service to the elevator caused by the smoke, soot and high heat generated by the fire. For one thing, elevator 7 operated properly when the firefighters took it up to the 24th floor and it was only when it was used to go up to the 25th floor, where the fire was located in the shaft of elevator 8, only a few feet away from elevator 7, that it malfunctioned. In addition there was evidence that the elevator functioned properly after the fire. Therefore, we would have to agree that there was no real evidence that a pre-existing condition caused elevator 7 to malfunction. We must conclude that plaintiffs' evidence on this point, standing alone, would have been insufficient to have sustained the jury verdict in plaintiffs' favor.
However, this was not the only evidence of negligence related to the elevators relied upon by plaintiffs. Plaintiffs also presented evidence that, once trapped in the elevator, they were thwarted in their efforts to escape or be rescued by (a) the inoperative alarm systems and (b) the tightly-secured access hatch on top of the elevator.
At trial plaintiffs showed that although elevator 7 appeared to contain two means of emergency communication, i.e., an alarm bell and an emergency telephone, it was actually equipped with only one, an alarm bell, which failed to operate. The phone had been disconnected in 1979 so that it could not possibly have provided a means of communicating with the elevator and this was certainly unrelated to the fire. Plaintiffs contended that defendants were negligent for failing to provide two means of communication and in support of this argument showed that 1970 ANSI standards so required.
Defendants countered by arguing that the applicable Chicago Municipal Code required only one means of communication and that, because the elevator contained an alarm bell which had worked properly prior to the fire, the elevator conformed with the applicable code. Defendants further argued that if the alarm bell failed to operate (and there was conflicting evidence on this point), it was due to the fire and, therefore, outside the scope of their liability under the fireman's rule.
In rebuttal to this plaintiffs contended that the alarm bell was an indicator of defendants' negligence even if the alarm bell failed to operate because the fire had inactivated the electrical circuitry to the elevator. It was plaintiffs' position that it was customary and more appropriate for the alarm bell to be on a separate circuit from the electrical circuit that operates the elevator. This, however, was apparently not done in this case.
While we agree that there was sufficient evidence that the alarm bell did not work, the pivotal point is, once again, whether there was sufficient evidence that the malfunction was not fire-related. We believe that there is little question that, if the alarm bell did not work, the bell's malfunction was due to the interruption of electrical service to the elevator. Therefore, the failure of the alarm bell was, in fact, fire-related. The fact that plaintiffs presented evidence that it was customary and, of course, wiser to wire the alarm system so that it was on a separate circuit, does not alter the result since there was no evidence that an alarm bell would have functioned if it had been independently wired. The fire apparently would have interrupted all electrical service running to the elevator.
Nevertheless, we believe that plaintiffs were entitled to argue that, although defendants were not required to provide two means of communication, their failure to provide a second emergency signaling device, coupled with the fact that the alarm bell was wired into the elevator's circuitry, was evidence of defendants' negligence, which made the building unreasonably unsafe.
The next alleged defect involves the access hatch on the top of elevator 7. Plaintiffs presented evidence that after elevator 7 malfunctioned and came to a halt, the firemen attempted to escape through the hatch on the top of the elevator, using their pike poles to try to force the hatch open. *1248 The hatch did not open and, for this reason, plaintiffs conclude that it was not properly fastened.
The parties agree that the intended use of the access hatch is for emergency personnel to access the elevator from the outside. Consequently, city codes required that the access cover be so attached that it could be opened only from the top of the car without a tool. Plaintiffs attempted to show that elevator 7 did not comply with this provision of the code through their expert's testimony. However, a review of the testimony of their expert (Hurley) shows that he only testified that the bolt on the top of the elevator "appeared snug" and "possibly" would require a tool. The expert admitted that he never attempted to actually move the bolt on the top of the elevator. Therefore, plaintiffs failed to meet their burden of establishing a code violation with respect to the elevator access hatch.
Furthermore, even if there had been proof of a code violation with regard to the access hatch, there would still be the issue of proximate cause. It is not clear to this court how the fact that the access hatch was tightly secured caused plaintiffs' injuries. Plaintiffs merely speculate that, had the hatch been opened by the firemen, they would have safely escaped or been rescued. There was no evidence presented to support the notion that the firemen could have reached safety via the hatch and, in fact, no rescue operation was hampered due to the condition of the bolt on the access hatch. Therefore, plaintiffs failed to show how the condition of the hatch, even if defective, proximately caused the injuries. (See Coglianese v. Mark Twain Ltd. Partnership, 171 Ill.App.3d at 6, 120 Ill.Dec. 849, 524 N.E.2d 1031.) Without this necessary link, we would be unable to impose liability upon the defendants based upon this alleged defect.
The building
Apart from the elevator, there were other conditions of the premises at 8 South Michigan Avenue which, plaintiffs argued, were indicative of defendants' negligence and which proximately caused or contributed to the plaintiffs' injuries. First, plaintiffs argued that the locked stairwell door on the 25th floor was a safety hazard and that because the door was locked the firefighters were forced to seek other means of investigating the fire. Therefore, the locked stairwell door put all of the subsequent events into motion, thereby causing the injuries to occur.
Second, plaintiffs attributed negligence to the physical configuration of the 25th floor. Specifically, plaintiffs argued that because a locked glass door and partition separated the lobby from the stairwell door there was no means of egress from the lobby (except the elevator) and that this situation was unsafe as well as a violation of city codes. Furthermore, because of the configuration of the 25th floor lobby, the firefighters who had been trapped in the elevator essentially became trapped again in the 25th floor lobby and were forced to break the glass partition in order to escape.
Third, plaintiffs complained that the elevator lobby was devoid of any emergency signage to indicate the location of exits or stairwells. Because of this omission, which was shown to be another violation of city codes, the firefighters were given no direction to follow upon exiting the elevator.
Plaintiffs argued that, due to the lack of signage, the firefighters expended precious time and were forced to breathe in hot gases and smoke as well as remain in the extreme heat generated by the fire for a longer period of time while they aimlessly searched for an exit.
According to certain physical evidence presented at trial, it appeared that McShane and Hitz turned right upon leaving elevator 7, where they encountered locked steel doors of a machine room, which made up one side of the lobby. As they proceeded along in their search for an exit, they came upon elevator 8, where they fell down the open shaft. The remaining firefighters apparently exited the elevator and turned left, where they were blocked by the locked glass door and partition.
*1249 After reviewing the record and considering all of the arguments on these issues, this court has concluded that these conditions did indeed make the building unreasonably unsafe and that the cited defects form a proper basis for finding the defendants negligent. There is no question that the above-cited conditions of the premises were not caused by the fire and, therefore, are not fire-related so as to be dismissed under the fireman's rule. Therefore, we believe that it was for the jury to determine whether the self-contained lobby and the lack of signage were evidence of defendants' negligence which caused, contributed to or exacerbated the injuries suffered by plaintiffs and their decedents. The jury having determined that defendants were negligent, we find no reason to overrule their judgment. Furthermore, as stated in Harris v. Chicago Housing Authority (1992), 235 Ill.App.3d 276, 176 Ill.Dec. 313, 601 N.E.2d 1011, to ignore city code violations which were adopted to promote public safety would encourage their continued violation.
Contributory Negligence of the Firemen
Defendants argue that any negligence attributable to them should be negated by the overriding or superceding negligence of the firemen in taking elevator 7 to the 25th floor.
As stated earlier, firefighters must utilize elevators to reach the fire scene in high-rise situations. Consequently, if a firefighter is injured and his injury is related to his use of an elevator, the mere fact that an elevator was used should not be indicative of the firefighter's negligence and should not preclude recovery.
Nevertheless, it is obvious, even to a lay person, that elevators, being electrically-operated, mechanical conveyances, carry certain inherent risks, especially in fire situations. Furthermore, as defendants so aptly presented at trial, a cardinal rule of firemen, taught to them during their training and reinforced through department rules and regulations, is "never to take an elevator to the fire floor." For this reason we believe that when applying the fireman's rule in a situation where a firefighter is injured in conjunction with the use of an elevator in a high-rise situation, it is appropriate to consider whether the firefighter's use of the elevator was proper under the circumstances.
Certainly, if a fireman's improper use of an elevator is deemed the sole cause of his injury, no recovery would be available. If, however, the use of the elevator, although deemed improper, is not found to be the sole cause of the injury, then it may be used to limit the recovery that might be due because of defendants' negligence. Such was the case here.
In the present case the jury apparently found that the firefighters' own negligence in utilizing the elevator under the attendant circumstances made them contributory negligent and, accordingly, the jury reduced plaintiffs' recovery by 50%. Defendants would like this court to overrule the jury and find that the firemen's use of the elevator was the sole cause of their injury. We cannot agree.
Proximate cause is a fact question for the jury to resolve. There can be more than one proximate cause of an injury and in such cases, each party may be held responsible for their own negligent conduct, whether it contributed in whole or in part to the injury, as long as it was one of the proximate causes. (See Lee v. Grand Trunk Western R.R. Co. (1986), 143 Ill. App.3d 500, 97 Ill.Dec. 491, 492 N.E.2d 1364.) Additionally, the comparison of the parties' negligence and the allocation of chargeability is another matter peculiarly within the province of the jury which should not be disturbed unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Junker v. Ziegler (1986), 113 Ill.2d 332, 101 Ill.Dec. 627, 498 N.E.2d 1135.) We see no reason to upset the jury's apportionment of liability between the parties in this case.
We now consider the remaining issues presented by the defendants, i.e., whether the trial court erred in instructing the jury or in making certain evidentiary rulings and whether any errors, if found, warrant the granting of a new trial.
*1250 Other Issues
Defendants contend that the trial court erred in allowing the jury to be instructed on Chicago Municipal Code sections relating to signs, access to egress, elevator access openings and locked doors even though there was insufficient evidence to prove that the codes had been violated or that the purported violations proximately caused the plaintiffs' injuries. We find no error by the trial court.
A party is entitled to instruction upon each theory of the case for which some evidence has been presented. (Galotvich v. Beech Aircraft Corp. (1991), 209 Ill.App.3d 128, 154 Ill.Dec. 46, 568 N.E.2d 46.) In this case the plaintiffs did produce some evidence that the stated code violations occurred and, as stated earlier, whether the violations were a proximate cause of the injuries was a question to be resolved by the jury. If the trial court had instructed the jury as defendants suggested, informing the jury that firemen assume all risks associated with firefighting, the court would have been expanding the fireman's rule beyond its normal parameters in contravention with our Illinois Supreme Court's pronouncements in Court v. Grzelinski.
The defendants next argue that the trial court abused its discretion when it barred the testimony of David Schuman, an expert who was tendered by defendants as a rebuttal witness, as a sanction under Rule 220 of the Illinois Supreme Court Rules (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110A, par. 220) for their failure to timely disclose this witness. First, it appears that defendants have waived this issue due to the fact that they failed to include this issue in their post trial motion and their notice of appeal.
Furthermore, a trial court is imbued with broad discretion when it decides to exclude an expert's testimony as a sanction and the decision will not be interfered with unless it appears that the trial court abused that discretion. (Applegren v. Walsh (1985), 136 Ill.App.3d 700, 91 Ill.Dec. 340, 483 N.E.2d 686.) Here the trial court ordered that Schumann's deposition be taken and then ruled that his proffered testimony would have been duplicative of the testimony given by defendants' other expert, Hazard. Since defendants have not disclosed what testimony of Schumann's was pertinent to their position, we are unable to determine what prejudice, if any, defendants have suffered as a result of the trial court's ruling. Therefore, we find no basis for finding that the trial court abused its discretion and the ruling need not be reversed.
Defendants next complain that the trial court erred in certain evidentiary rulings, i.e., permitting plaintiffs' expert, McGinley, to testify to opinions not disclosed in discovery and permitting McGinley to testify to inapplicable standards.
The testimony that defendants find offensive is McGinley's opinion testimony that the absence of directional signs violated the Chicago Municipal Code. First of all, we note that, once again, defendants fail to state exactly how they were prejudiced by the allegedly improper testimony of McGinley. Secondly, the ordinance itself was submitted to the jury. In light of these facts, we believe that any error in the court's exercise of its discretion in allowing McGinley to testify would be harmless error. (See Gale v. Hoekstra (1978), 59 Ill. App.3d 400, 375 N.E.2d 456, 16 Ill.Dec. 583, 375 N.E.2d 456.) In any event, our review of the evidence convinces us that the trial court properly ruled that McGinley's testimony was within the subject matter of his opinions already disclosed during discovery.
Defendants' next point is that McGinley's testimony concerning the 1971 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards in relation to elevators was improper because the tower elevators were renovated in 1967 or 1968, at a time when the 1960 ANSI standards were applicable. Again we must disagree. In Davis v. Marathon Oil Co. (1976), 64 Ill.2d 380, 1 Ill.Dec. 93, 356 N.E.2d 93, the court held that it was proper to allow testimony on regulations even though they were inapplicable because they were adopted at a later date. This was because the regulations were used, not to prove a violation, but as *1251 evidence of general negligence and disregard for public safety. We find the same rationale applies in the present case. McGinley was able to express the opinion that the failure to make certain improvements, although not a violation of existing codes, was indicative of defendants' negligent disregard for the safety of the public.
Furthermore, the jury was well advised that the 1960 ANSI standards, and not the 1971 ANSI standards, were applicable to the elevators. Therefore, any possible error in allowing the testimony concerning 1971 ANSI standards was harmless at best.
In their next issue, defendants argue that the trial court improperly excluded expert testimony which allegedly would have explained how an exhibit photograph was misleading. Defendants contended that, because of the angle that the photograph was taken, the exhibit failed to show a fire exit sign over the stairwell door. The trial court concluded, however, that the expert was unnecessary.
As stated earlier, the trial court has broad discretion when deciding whether to permit or exclude expert testimony. An expert need testify only if he has some special knowledge that will aid the jury in their understanding of the evidence. (Binge v. J.J. Borders Construction Co. (1981), 95 Ill.App.3d 238, 50 Ill.Dec. 788, 419 N.E.2d 1237.) We do not feel that the trial court erred in excluding the proffered expert testimony since defendants were free to argue that the angle of the photograph eliminated the sign and we agree that jurors would not need any specialized assistance in understanding such an argument.
Lastly, defendants argue that it was error for the trial court to have allowed the jury to hear testimony concerning the origin of the fire. They contend that this evidence improperly suggested that defendants were liable for the fire.
It is true that, according to the fireman's rule, defendants are not liable for any negligence pertaining to the manner in which the fire occurred. In this case, however, one witness testified briefly that he first learned of the fire when he observed some trash burning on elevator 8 after he pressed the elevator button and elevator 8 arrived on the 25th floor. This evidence merely formed the foundation or background for his other testimony. It was not presented to show the defendants' negligence. We believe that any error that might be associated with the admission of this evidence was harmless in light of all of the other evidence and because defendants have not demonstrated that they were prejudiced in any way by its admission.
As a final argument defendants contend that they are entitled to a new trial based upon the accumulation of the errors, as outlined above. As we already indicated, none of the alleged errors were prejudicial to the defendants. Neither is their cumulative effect. Parties are entitled to a fair trial, not a perfect one. Technical errors or misrulings which are not found to be prejudicial provide no basis for upsetting a jury's verdict. (Roberts v. Sisters of St. Francis Health Services, Inc. (1990), 198 Ill.App.3d 891, 145 Ill.Dec. 44, 556 N.E.2d 662.) We believe that the parties received a fair trial, ably presided over by a conscientious judge, resulting in a jury verdict which was not favorable to either party. We see nothing to suggest that a new trial would change the result.
For all of the reasons stated above, we affirm the judgment and verdict rendered in the trial court.
AFFIRMED.
McNULTY, P.J., and LORENZ, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.862957+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 712 (1992)
151 Ill.2d 126
176 Ill.Dec. 14
In re Phillip ROBINSON (The People of the State of Illinois, Appellant,
v.
Phillip Robinson, Appellee).
In re Paul Murphy, (The People of the State of Illinois, Appellant,
v.
Paul Murphy, Appellee).
Docket Nos. 72165, 72320.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
October 1, 1992.
*713 Roland W. Burris, Atty. Gen., Springfield, and Gary V. Johnson, State's Atty., Geneva (Rosalyn B. Kaplan, Sol. Gen., and *714 Terence M. Madsen, and Thomas L. Ciecko, Asst. Attys. Gen., Chicago, Kenneth R. Boyle, William L. Browers and Marshall M. Stevens of the Office of the State's Attys. App. Pros., Elgin, of counsel), for the People.
William E. Coffin, Elgin, and John B. Lower, Jeff M. Plesko and Penelope S. Karnes, Carbondale, all of the Guardianship and Advocacy Commission, for appellees.
Chief Justice MILLER delivered the opinion of the court:
Following separate hearings in the circuit court of Kane County, a trial judge ordered Phillip Robinson and Paul Murphy involuntarily admitted to the Elgin Mental Health Center. The appellate court reversed the involuntary admission orders in both cases, citing the State's failure to comply with certain requirements of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 91%, par. 1-100 et seq.) (the Code). We granted the State's petitions for leave to appeal (134 Ill.2d R. 315), and consolidated the cases for review.
The appellate court held that the order for Paul Murphy's continued involuntary admission to the mental health center must be reversed because of the State's failure to file a "current treatment plan" as required by section 3-813(a) of the Code. (214 Ill.App.3d 8, 14, 157 Ill.Dec. 770, 572 N.E.2d 1234.) Under section 3-813(a), the plan is to include "an evaluation of the patient's progress and the extent to which he is benefiting from treatment." Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 91½, par. 3-813(a).
In Robinson's case, the appellate court held that the trial judge's involuntary admission order must be reversed because the record in the case did not establish that a "dispositional report" was prepared in strict compliance with section 3-810 of the Code. (214 Ill.App.3d 165, 169, 157 Ill.Dec. 819, 573 N.E.2d 237.) Section 3-810 provides that "the facility director or such other person as the court may direct shall prepare a report including information on the appropriateness and availability of alternative treatment settings, a social investigation of the respondent [and] a preliminary treatment plan * * *." Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 91½, par. 3-810.
The State acknowledges that a current treatment plan had not been filed with the trial court at the time of Murphy's hearing on December 8, 1989. Likewise, the State admits that no predispositional report was of record at the time of Robinson's hearing on April 12, 1990. Neither respondent objected to the absence of these documents at the hearings, however. The State argues that the information required by sections 3-813(a) and 3-810 was presented to the trial judge through testimony, and, relying on In re Splett (1991), 143 Ill.2d 225, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883, urges this court to recognize its substantial compliance with these statutes.
In Splett, this court first construed the notice provision of the Code (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 91½, par. 3-706). Although the record in that case did not show that the respondent was formally served with notice of involuntary admission proceedings, he was present at the hearing and represented by counsel who had adequate time to prepare. The respondent did not raise any challenge to the sufficiency of notice. The court concluded that where the purposes of the statute were fulfilled by respondent's actual knowledge of the proceedings, the failure of the record to affirmatively indicate that he had been served with formal notice was harmless error. (Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 231-32, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.) The court thus construed the statute not to require "the performance of an empty formality when the legislative intent has been otherwise achieved." Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 232, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.
Nevertheless, this court ultimately held that the order for involuntary admission issued in Splett must be reversed because the record did not sufficiently establish that the respondent, who had previously admitted himself voluntarily to a mental health facility, had submitted a written request for discharge as expressly required by section 3-403 of the Code. (Splett, 143 *715 I11.2d at 234-35, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883; Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 91%, par. 3-403.) The court found that, because the purpose of the statute was to encourage voluntary admissions, evidence of the respondent's oral request for discharge was not sufficient to trigger involuntary admission proceedings against him. (Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 233-34, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.) Despite the respondent's failure to object on this point, the court reasoned that strict compliance with the statute was necessary to avoid discouraging the mentally ill from seeking treatment. Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 235-36, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.
Robinson and Murphy (respondents) argue that the plain language of sections 3-810 and 3-813(a) should not be ignored, and that any recognition of substantial compliance in the context of involuntary admission procedures is contrary to a "long line" of appellate court decisions holding that strict compliance with these procedures is required. (See, e.g., In re Blume (1990), 197 Ill.App.3d 552, 144 Ill.Dec. 61, 554 N.E.2d 1100 (section 3-810); In re Lamb (1990), 202 Ill.App.3d 725, 148 Ill.Dec. 120, 560 N.E.2d 422 (section 3-813(a)).) They maintain that strict compliance is necessary to justify the intrusive nature of the Code (In re Long (1990), 203 Ill.App.3d 357, 361-62, 149 Ill.Dec. 12, 561 N.E.2d 290), and that it is the only tool available to enforce the statutory requirements.
We see no need to reconsider this court's recent decision in Splett, nor any reason to limit the application of its principles to the statutory provisions at issue there. We also decline, however, the State's invitation to find that substantial compliance with the Code is sufficient in all cases, or even that it is always sufficient under sections 3-810 and 3-813(a). We decide only the issues presented by the facts of these particular cases. The question whether a respondent may compel strict compliance with these provisions by objection at an involuntary admission hearing is not before us.
Involuntary admission procedures implicate substantial liberty interests. (Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 230, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.) These interests, however, must be balanced against the dual objectives of involuntary admissions generally, which are to provide care for those who are unable to care for themselves, and to protect society from the dangerously mentally ill. (People v. Lang (1986), 113 Ill.2d 407, 440, 101 Ill.Dec. 597, 498 N.E.2d 1105.) Society's interest in providing treatment to the mentally ill while protecting its citizens from harmful conduct need not be jeopardized where the record in an involuntary admission hearing establishes that the purposes of statutory requirements are met and the respondent did not object to claimed errors in the proceeding. See In re Stephenson (1977), 67 Ill.2d 544, 554, 10 Ill.Dec. 507, 367 N.E.2d 1273 (the margin of error in denying the mentally ill protection and care should be held to a minimum).
The court recognized in Splett that, under certain circumstances, the State's failure to strictly comply with provisions of the Code may be excused if the record establishes that the purposes of the statute have been achieved. Those circumstancesfailure to object to alleged deficiencies in the record and no showing of prejudiceexist here. Thus, the sole issue presented is whether the State's efforts to comply with requirements of sections 3-810 and 3-813(a) were sufficient to accomplish the purposes of these statutory provisions. As Splett makes clear, this determination rests on an examination of the specific statutes in question. Because these cases require us to construe two sections of the Code, as well as two different records, we shall discuss them separately.
I. In re Robinson, No. 72165
Section 3-810 of Code, which applies to involuntary admissions, provides:
"Before disposition is determined, the facility director or such other person as the court may direct shall prepare a report including information on the appropriateness and availability of alternative treatment settings, a social investigation of the respondent, a preliminary treatment plan, and any other information which the court may order. The treatment plan shall describe the respondent's *716 problems and needs, the treatment goals, the proposed treatment methods, and a projected timetable for their attainment. If the respondent is found subject to involuntary admission, the court shall consider the report in determining an appropriate disposition." Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 91½, par. 3-810.
A threshold issue in this case is whether, strictly construed, section 3-810 necessitates the filing of a written report. Apart from the appellate court district in the present case, other districts have also discussed the requirements of section 3-810. For example, the appellate court, third district, has held that psychiatric testimony alone is insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the statute, at least when there is no evidence that a written report has been prepared. (In re Venegas (1991), 218 Ill.App.3d 423, 160 Ill.Dec. 864, 578 N.E.2d 43.) The appellate court, fourth district, has ruled that the requirements of section 3-810 are met if the contents of a previously prepared, but unfiled, predispositional report are presented to the trial court through oral testimony. In re James (1990), 199 Ill.App.3d 316, 319, 145 Ill.Dec. 221, 556 N.E.2d 839.
The State correctly notes that section 3810 does not expressly require that a predispositional report be in writing, or that it be filed with the trial court. The language of the statute is ambiguous. It refers only to the preparation and consideration of a predispositional report. Transcripts of the legislative debates concerning the revision of the Code in 1979, when section 3-810 was adopted, shed no light on this issue.
Nevertheless, we believe the statute contemplates a written document. The language of section 3-810, read as a whole, indicates that the legislature intended for a predispositional report to be more than testimony at a hearing. (Venegas, 218 Ill. App.3d at 426, 160 Ill.Dec. 864, 578 N.E.2d 43.) The statute requires a relatively detailed report, and we believe the legislature intended the report to be in written form.
The State acknowledges that a written predispositional report, prepared by the facility director or some court-appointed person, was not formally presented to the trial court. However, because the respondent did not object to the State's failure to strictly comply with the requirements of section 3-810, our duty here is to determine whether the State's efforts in introducing into evidence, through the testimony of witnesses, the information required by the statute are sufficient to serve its purposes.
The State argues that substantial compliance with section 3-810 should be recognized under these circumstances because all the information that is to be included in a predispositional report was presented at Robinson's hearing through testimony, and because the trial judge relied on this testimony in making his determination. The State therefore claims that the respondent was not prejudiced, that the purposes of section 3-810 were met, and that any failure to strictly comply with the requirements of the statute constitutes harmless error.
Although Robinson failed to make this argument at his hearing, he now argues that the record in this case does not establish that a written predispositional report was prepared, presented, and considered in the trial court. He maintains that the purposes of the statute cannot be met with anything less than strict compliance.
It is clear from a reading of section 3-810 as a whole that its purpose is to provide trial judges certain information necessary for determining whether an individual is subject to involuntary admission to a mental health facility. Other purposes of the statute are to protect against unreasonable commitments and patient neglect, and to ensure adequate treatment for mental health care recipients.
The respondent has cited no reason why these goals cannot be met in the absence of an affirmative showing that the trial judge was presented a written predispositional report prepared by a particular person either in advance of or at the time of the hearing. Instead, respondent concludes that strict compliance is "the only way to ensure that a predispositional report is actually prepared."
*717 Where a respondent fails to object to the absence of a predispositional report, strict compliance with section 3-810 is required only when the legislative intent cannot otherwise be achieved. (See Splett, 143 Ill.2d at 233-34, 157 Ill.Dec. 419, 572 N.E.2d 883.) Under these circumstances, we believe that oral testimony containing the information required by the statute can be an adequate substitute for the presentation of a formal, written report prepared by the facility director or some other person authorized by the court.
Robinson argues, however, that the testimony presented at his hearing is insufficient to satisfy the purposes of section 3-810. He claims that adequate consideration was not given to the appropriateness and availability of alternative treatment settings, such as the possibility of out-patient counseling. He also argues that the trial judge in making his decision relied on nothing more than testimony about a treatment plan, which is only part of a predispositional report.
Dr. Teresita Arcinas, the psychiatrist employed by the Elgin Mental Health Center who examined Robinson, testified that a treatment plan had been developed for him "on paper." Robinson's "problem" was alcoholism and a mental illness known as "adjustment disorder with disturbance of conduct and emotion." Dr. Arcinas said Robinson's symptoms included mild depression and an inability to cope with family problems and stress. She said Robinson had been suicidal, that he had threatened his wife, that he had gotten into fights at taverns and that he needed to "learn to control himself."
According to Dr. Arcinas' testimony, the treatment goals were to help Robinson deal with family problems and his reactions to stress without becoming violent and without resorting to alcohol. This was to be accomplished through substance abuse treatment, by encouraging Robinson to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings offered at the Elgin Mental Health Center, and by involving him in counseling with his wife. Dr. Arcinas said she thought it would take "at least three weeks" to accomplish these goals. This testimony supplied the information that would normally be included in the preliminary treatment plan portion of a predispositional report.
As for information about the appropriateness and availability of alternative treatment settings, Dr. Arcinas testified that the Elgin Mental Health Center would be the least restrictive environment for Robinson. She said that his admission to the center would ensure that he would not go out drinking whenever he became angry and frustrated about "trying to work things out" with his wife. Information about Robinson's social situation was supplied not only by Dr. Arcinas, but by Robinson's own testimony and that of his brother as well.
We find that the testimony of the State's expert witness made reference to all of the information required in a predispositional report, and that, in the absence of an objection by the respondent, the purposes of section 3-810 were met in this case. Accordingly, the State's failure to present a formal predispositional report prepared by the facility director or someone directed to do so by the court is harmless error.
We note that the appellate court in this case relied on its earlier opinion in In re Blume (1990), 197 Ill.App.3d 552, 144 Ill. Dec. 61, 554 N.E.2d 1100. The Blume court, without discussing whether section 3810 requires the filing of a written document, found insufficient evidence in the record that a predispositional report had been prepared or presented to the trial judge. (Blume, 197 Ill.App.3d at 557, 144 Ill.Dec. 61, 554 N.E.2d 1100.) We read that case as holding that the oral testimony there was simply too cursory to serve the purposes of section 3-810, even where the respondent had failed to object to the State's failure to strictly comply with the statute. To the extent that Blume stands for the proposition that the doctrine of substantial compliance is never to be applied to section 3810, and that strict compliance with the mandates of the statute is always required (see Blume, 197 Ill.App.3d at 559, 144 Ill.Dec. 61, 554 N.E.2d 1100), it is overruled.
*718 II. In re Murphy, No. 72320
Respondent Murphy contends that the commitment order entered in his case is invalid because the State failed to file with the trial court a current treatment plan, as provided by section 3-813(a) of the Code. Section 3-813(a) provides in part that, if the State seeks to continue an involuntary admission to a mental health center, "the facility director shall file with the court a current treatment plan which includes an evaluation of the patient's progress and the extent to which he is benefiting from treatment." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 91frac12;, par. 3-813(a).
The State argues that the record in this case clearly shows that the purposes of section 3-813(a) were met with oral testimony pertaining to a treatment plan. Therefore, the State claims that its failure to strictly comply with the requirements of the statute by filing a current treatment plan with the trial court constitutes harmless error, and that, according to the rationale of Splett, the readmission order should be affirmed. We agree.
The appellate court in this case found that one of the purposes of section 3-813(a) is to ensure that patients who are repeatedly admitted to mental health centers against their wills receive appropriate treatment and care. (214 Ill.App.3d at 13, 157 Ill.Dec. 770, 572 N.E.2d 1234.) The statute aids the court's ongoing supervision of the treatment and care of involuntarily admitted patients, and assures that their progress is monitored and evaluated. In this way, the statute represents an attempt to prevent the "warehousing" of mental health care patients. 214 Ill.App.3d at 13-14, 157 Ill.Dec. 770, 572 N.E.2d 1234.
We agree with the appellate court's assessment of the purposes behind section 3-813(a). We disagree, however, with the court's conclusion that oral testimony cannot serve these purposes, or that a trial judge is unable to monitor a patient's progress unless the treatment plan called for by the statute is formally filed with the court and made part of the record each time a patient is readmitted to a mental health facility.
There is no requirement in section 3-813(a) that the trial judge consider previously filed treatment plans when determining whether an individual continues to be subject to involuntary admission. Indeed, the statute requires the filing of a "current" treatment plan. This treatment plan, for purposes of the hearing at hand, is to include an evaluation of the patient's "progress and the extent to which he is benefiting from treatment." Should a trial judge believe information about the patient's progresswhether it be in the form of a filed treatment plan or oral testimonyinadequate, the judge can examine the record from an earlier proceeding, ask for further testimony, or deny the State's petition for continued involuntary admission.
Where a respondent does not object to the lack of a written treatment plan, and where there is no prejudice because the trial judge is presented all of the information required by section 3-813(a), we believe that substantial compliance with the statute is sufficient. Murphy, however, argues that even if the purposes of the statute may be met by testimony in some cases, there was "absolutely no information" presented at his hearing regarding his progress and the extent to which he was benefiting from treatment. The record in this case indicates otherwise.
Dr. Elaine Nicola, the psychiatrist who examined Murphy, testified that a treatment plan had been developed for the respondent. Medication constituted a "large part" of this plan, which also included the use of restraints when necessary to prevent harm to other patients. She testified that Murphy's condition, diagnosed as schizoaffective disorder, had not been stabilized since his admission to the mental health center more than a year before the hearing, and that he remained psychotic. Dr. Nicola also said that it was difficult to project a timetable for achieving the goal of involving Murphy in more activities at the center because he is "explosive."
This testimony clearly indicates that Murphy was not making progress and that he had yet to benefit from treatment. We *719 therefore find that the oral testimony given in this case by the State's expert witness satisfied the purposes of the treatment plan required by section 3-813(a). The State's failure to strictly comply with the statute by filing a current treatment plan with the trial judge is therefore harmless error.
III. Other Issues
The appellate court's disposition of these cases did not require it to reach several additional arguments raised by the respondents. These issues have been briefed and argued before this court, and we will consider them now.
Murphy argues that section 3-810 also applies to continued involuntary admissions and that the order issued in his case must be reversed because the State failed to present, and the trial judge did not consider, a predispositional report. The State counters that section 3-810 is applicable only to initial involuntary admissions. We note that Murphy did not object in the trial court to the State's failure to prepare a formal predispositional report. Thus, whether or not section 3-810 applies in cases of continued admissions, we need only consider whether its purposes were met by the presentation of oral testimony at the respondent's hearing.
The record in this case contains extensive testimony by Dr. Nicola as to why the Elgin Mental Health Center was the least restrictive environment for Murphy. It also contains sufficient information about his social situation. As for the requirement of a preliminary treatment plan, Dr. Nicola adequately described Murphy's problems and the proposed treatment goals (stabilization and more involvement in activities), treatment methods (medication and restraints) and a timetable for their attainment (uncertain). Moreover, the trial judge stated that he relied on this testimony when making his decision. We therefore find that the record in this case establishes the State's substantial compliance with the requirements of section 3-810.
Robinson argues that the trial court's involuntary admission order must be reversed because it did not specify the duration of treatment. At the time of the hearing conducted in this case, section 3-813(a) of the Code provided in part that "[a]n initial order for hospitalization or alternative treatment shall be for a period not to exceed 60 days." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 91frac12;, par. 3-813(a); cf. Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 91frac12;, par. 3-813(a) (allowing 180-day period of hospitalization).) In this case, information printed on the back of the trial judge's order stated that the order was valid for no more than 60 days.
The plain language of section 3-813(a) does not require a trial judge to specify a fixed period of hospitalization when ordering an involuntary commitment. Nevertheless, Robinson argues that the statutory and constitutional mandate that patients be treated in the least restrictive environment, "[w]hen applied to the concept of time," requires that the duration of treatment be the shortest appropriate period.
This argument is without merit. The fact that hospitalization should be no longer than necessary to provide effective treatment has no bearing on the issue of whether, under section 3-813(a), a trial judge must specify a fixed period of commitment in an initial order. Section 3-813(a) sets a maximum period of initial commitment. An order authorizing in-patient treatment for up to 60 days does not mean that an individual will be hospitalized for that entire period. Patients may petition for discharge at any time, and mental health officials must discharge those who are no longer mentally ill and therefore not subject to involuntary commitment. Ill. Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 91frac12;, pars. 3-900, 3-902.
At Robinson's involuntary commitment hearing, the State's expert witness testified that his treatment would take "at least three weeks." Robinson was committed to the Elgin Mental Health Center for a maximum of 60 days, but the facility director authorized his released after just eight days. Because section 3-813(a) does not require that a specific duration of treatment be stated, we find that the trial judge's order complied with the statute. *720 See In re Grimes (1990), 193 Ill.App.3d 119, 123, 139 Ill.Dec. 890, 549 N.E.2d 616.
Finally, Robinson argues that the trial court's order must be reversed because the State failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that he suffered from a mental illness. (See Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 91frac12;, par. 1-119.) We find this argument unpersuasive.
Robinson correctly notes that the State, in order to prove mental illness for the involuntary commitment purposes of section 1-119, must show that the illness substantially impairs an individual's functioning. (People v. Lang (1986), 113 Ill.2d 407, 453, 101 Ill.Dec. 597, 498 N.E.2d 1105 (mental illness is an "organic, mental or emotional disorder which substantially impairs the person's thought, perception of reality, emotional process, judgment, behavior, or ability to cope with the ordinary demands of life").) To constitute "substantial impairment," mental illness must be serious enough to create a reasonable expectation that the person will inflict serious harm upon himself or another in the near future, or that the person will be unable to provide for his own care and protection. Lang, 113 Ill.2d at 453-54, 101 Ill.Dec. 597, 498 N.E.2d 1105.
In this case, the State presented sufficient evidence from which the trial judge could conclude that Robinson was mentally ill, and that this illness substantially impaired his functioning. A psychiatrist testified that Robinson suffered from mild depression, alcoholism and "adjustment disorder with disturbance of conduct and emotion." She described this disorder as a maladaptive reaction to "psychosocial stressors," such as family problems or the loss of a job. Robinson, she said, could not cope with family discord or setbacks in his business.
The psychiatrist also testified that, after several years of sobriety, Robinson had begun drinking to intoxication again, and that when he was drunk he would threaten his wife and get into fights in bars. She said he had talked of suicide and admitted to having run into traffic on a busy street. In her medical opinion, Robinson could reasonably be expected to inflict serious physical harm upon himself or another in the near future. We therefore find that the order committing Robinson to the Elgin Mental Health Center because of mental illness was supported by the evidence.
For the reasons stated, in each of these consolidated cases the judgment of the appellate court is reversed, and the judgment of the circuit court of Kane County is affirmed.
Appellate court judgments reversed; circuit court judgments affirmed.

=== CASE 2221891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:22.981832+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 846 (1992)
235 Ill. App. 3d 202
176 Ill. Dec. 148
O'HARE EXPRESS, INC., an Illinois corporation, and O'Hare Express/Jimray Corporation, a Joint Venture, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
CITY OF CHICAGO, an Illinois municipal corporation; J.R. Franke, Commissioner of Aviation, Department of Aviation, City of Chicago; Mary Rose Loney, First Deputy Commissioner, Department of Aviation, City of Chicago; Alexander Grzyb, Purchasing Agent, Department of Purchases, Contracts and Supplies, City of Chicago; Keeshin Charter Services, Inc., an Illinois corporation, Defendants-Appellees.
Nos. 1-90-1461, 1-90-2300.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
August 31, 1992.
Rehearing Denied October 15, 1992.
As Modified on Denial of Rehearing October 19, 1992.
*847 Brydges, Riseborough, Morris, Franke and Miller, Chicago (Thomas A. Morris, Jr., and Gary E. Cooke, II, of counsel), for plaintiffs-appellants.
Katten Muchin & Zavis, Chicago, for defendant-appellee Keeshin Charter Services, Inc.
Kelly R. Welsh, Corp. Counsel of City of Chicago, Lawrence Rosenthal, Deputy Corp. Counsel, and Jean Dobrer, Asst. Corp. Counsel, for all other defendants-appellees.
MODIFIED ON DENIAL OF REHEARING
Justice CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs, O'Hare Express, Inc., and O'Hare Express/Jimray Corp. (O'Hare Express) appeal from the April 16, 1990, finding of the trial court that the City of Chicago (City) was not required to use a competitive bidding process pursuant to Section 8-10-3 of the Illinois Municipal Purchasing Act (purchasing act) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 24, par. 8-10-3) to procure an airport bus shuttle service. Plaintiffs further appeal from the March 30,1990, and July 26,1990, orders of the trial court dismissing count II of their complaint and amended complaint, respectively, for failure to state a cause of action. For the following reasons, we reverse and remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings. The following facts are relevant to this appeal.
In 1984, the City solicited sealed bids for a bus transportation service contract at the O'Hare International Airport (O'Hare) Interim Terminal No. 4 (Terminal No. 4). The City awarded a five-year contract to O'Hare Express. The contract called for O'Hare Express to provide a shuttle bus service for passengers and crew between Terminal No. 4 and the hardstand area where airplanes arrived at and departed from O'Hare. The expiration date of the contract was March 16, 1990.
In August 1989, prior to the conclusion of O'Hare Express' contract, the City determined that the new terminal would not be completed until 1993, and that bus service would be necessary for three additional years. At that time, the City Department of Purchasing chose to re-let the O'Hare bus service contract as a "cost-reimbursement contract," using a procurement process called a Request for Proposal (RFP) instead of inviting submission of sealed bids. In a RFP, the contractor develops a proposal describing the services it will provide and what the costs will be, and the public purchasing agent selects the contractor based on a consideration of price and the product or service proposed. Under a cost-reimbursement contract, the contractor is reimbursed for costs on a monthly rather than annual basis.
The City advertised for submission of proposals and received three, including offers from O'Hare Express and co-defendant, Keeshin Charter Services (Keeshin). The record indicates that O'Hare Express' proposed cost for one year was $2,723,087, while Keeshin's proposed cost for one year was $3,785,481.
On February 22, 1990, plaintiffs filed a complaint in chancery seeking a temporary restraining order (TRO) and permanent injunction, to prevent the City from entering into a contract for bus services with Keeshin. In count I, plaintiffs alleged that the City was required by the purchasing act *848 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 24, par. 8-10-3) to engage in competitive bidding for the continuation of the bus service contract, and that the RFP solicitation was contrary to the law and not in the interest of the taxpaying public. In count II, plaintiffs alleged that the City's request for plaintiffs to participate in the transition to Keeshin by making the buses and personnel available for inspection and training of Keeshin's employees required plaintiffs to work past the contract expiration and thus constituted breach of contract. In count III, plaintiffs alleged that the City intentionally interfered with the union contracts of O'Hare Express drivers by coercing them to deal with a non-union contractor. In response, the City filed a motion to dismiss plaintiffs' complaint.
The trial court conducted a hearing on February 23, 1990, denied both plaintiffs' motion for TRO and the City's motion to dismiss, and set the matter for trial on count I of plaintiffs' complaint. Plaintiffs voluntarily withdrew counts II and III of their complaint without prejudice to reinstate.
On March 9, 1990, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint in chancery for declaratory and injunctive relief. In count II, plaintiffs alleged that the following actions of the City showed favoritism to Keeshin: (1) The contract between O'Hare Express and the City did not contain any language relating to a transition at the end of the contractual period; (2) On February 2, 1990, O'Hare Express received a letter from the City stating that the City had selected another firm for services, but that the O'Hare Express proposal had not been rejected. On the afternoon of February 2, O'Hare Express received a phone call from the Department of Aviation requesting that O'Hare Express representatives meet with the Department of Aviation to discuss transition to a new contractor; (3) A letter from Mary Rose Loney, the First Deputy Commissioner of Aviation, dated February 7, set forth the procedures which would be followed during the transition period; (4) On February 15, the Department of Aviation called O'Hare Express and demanded that O'Hare Express post a notice at the O'Hare Express time clock that applications for employment would be taken by the new contractor. On or about February 19, Keeshin advertised in the Chicago Sun-Times for drivers because they did not have enough qualified drivers for services at Terminal No. 4. On February 21, Cecilia Ice-Gibson, the O'Hare Terminal Manager, told Danny Cargin, a representative of O'Hare Express, that Keeshin was having trouble finding drivers and asked him to pass out Keeshin's number to O'Hare Express employees; and (5) The City attempted to require O'Hare Express to make buses and personnel available for the training of Keeshin's employees, to arrange access for auditing of inventory, and to require O'Hare Express to work past contract expiration.
Plaintiffs further alleged in count II that the City arbitrarily utilized an improper selection process and exhibited improper bias toward Keeshin, noting that: (1) Keeshin had no hardstand apron experience; (2) Keeshin's bid was $1,050,000 higher than O'Hare Express' bid; (3) Keeshin did not have the required participation of Women or Minority Business Enterprises; and (4) Keeshin is a non-union employer. Plaintiffs also alleged that the City showed an improper bias toward Keeshin and that such bias grew out of questions regarding O'Hare Express' service history. Plaintiffs filed a motion for temporary restraining order based upon the allegations of count II.
On March 15, the trial court conducted a hearing and denied plaintiffs' motion, and both the City and Keeshin filed a motion to dismiss count II of plaintiffs' amended complaint under section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure for failure to state a cause of action. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-615.) On March 30, the trial court granted defendants' motion to dismiss and gave plaintiffs 28 days to replead count II.
Trial on count I of plaintiffs' amended complaint commenced on April 10. At trial, Francis Ferrone, co-owner of O'Hare Express testified that the nature of the 1984 contract was to run a shuttle bus service along a 1.210 mile route between *849 Terminal No. 4 and the hardstand where the airplanes were located. He stated that the City specified the type and number of buses and provided schedules of flight arrivals and departures.
Berry Morris, assistant manager of Terminal No. 4 and manager of vehicle maintenance, stated that the bus route would be the same for anybody submitting a proposal under the RFP. He further stated that there was no difference between what Keeshin was going to be providing and what O'Hare Express provided.
Mary Rose Loney testified on behalf of the City that the O'Hare Express buses were not meeting the arriving planes in a timely manner and that O'Hare Express was unable to respond adequately to the extreme time pressures created by an increasing volume of traffic and changing flight schedules. She stated that when she began her position with the City on December 4, 1989, the City had already decided to use the RFP process instead of the sealed bid process, and that negotiations with Keeshin began in early January 1990. On March 14, 1990, the City concluded negotiations with Keeshin. Loney further stated that taxpayer money was not involved in the shuttle-bus contract because the airlines paid for the service.
Lawrence Calhoun, an auditor for the City of Chicago, testified that in January of 1989, the City began to re-evaluate the bus contract and to discuss ways in which ontime performance could be improved and in which safety could be enhanced. He testified that O'Hare Express miscalculated their proposed costs for annual service and that the actual cost for O'Hare Express would have been $3,463,623 rather than $2,723,087, approximately $320,000 lower than Keeshin's cost.
Paul Spieles, assistant purchasing agent for the City, testified that the City and the Department of Aviation held meetings in July and August 1989 and determined that the most important features of the shuttle-bus contract were superior performance and the quality of the provider. Thus, Spieles concluded, competitive bidding would not be required, and the City was therefore exempt from engaging in competitive bidding under section 8-10-4 of the purchasing act. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 24, par. 8-10-4.) Spieles stated that the shuttle-bus contract had features similar to "professional services" which are excluded from competitive bidding under section 8-10-4. Spieles recommended that the City utilize the RFP process for the new contract instead of sealed bidding because cost-reimbursement was not available under a sealed bid contract. Spieles stated that cost-reimbursement would enable the City to pay for the "actual costs" of the service as they arose, and that under such a payment procedure, the City could obtain the most qualified and capable contractor.
McNare Grant, Jr., former First Deputy purchasing agent for the City, testified as a rebuttal witness for the plaintiffs. He stated that during his tenure with the City, he knew of no other situation where a bid contract was changed to a RFP. He further stated that under a sealed bid, a contractor can be paid through a cost-reimbursement type of procedure.
On April 16, the trial judge ruled in favor of the defendants. The trial court found the City exempt from engaging in competitive bidding for the shuttle-bus contract pursuant to section 8-10-4 of the purchasing act.
On May 11, plaintiffs amended count II, and added count III for breach of contract. In response, both the City and Keeshin filed motions to dismiss count II and to transfer count III to the Law Division. On July 26, the trial court dismissed count II, finding that plaintiffs failed to state a cause of action, and transferred count III to the Law Division. Plaintiffs originally filed two separate, timely notices of appeal of the trial court's finding and orders, and the appeals have been consolidated by this court.
The central issue in this case is whether the City properly complied with the purchasing act in awarding the shuttle-bus contract to Keeshin. Plaintiffs contend that the trial court erred in finding the City exempt from competitive bidding. We agree.
*850 The Illinois General Assembly has mandated that the City of Chicago is required to follow certain procedures when awarding contracts. These procedures are described in Division 10 of the purchasing act which describes the requirements for "Purchasing and Public Works Contracts in Cities of more than 500,000." (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 24, pars. 8-10-1 to 8-10-25.) Among other requirements, the City must engage in competitive bidding in awarding contracts. Section 8-10-3 of the purchasing act states:
"Except as otherwise herein provided, all purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature, for labor, services or work, the purchase, lease, or sale of personal property, materials, equipment or supplies, involving amounts in excess of $10,000 made by or on behalf of any such municipality, shall be let by free and open competitive bidding after advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder * * *." (Emphasis added.) (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 24, par. 8-10-3.)
Section 8-10-4 provides an exception to section 8-10-3 as follows:
"Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to award by competitive bidding, such as but not limited to contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part, contracts for supplies, materials, parts or equipment which are available only from a single source * * * shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of this Article." (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 24, par. 8-10-4.
Our supreme court has consistently stated that the fundamental rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the true intent and meaning of the legislature. (Hernon v. E.W. Corrigan Construction Company (1992), 149 Ill. 2d 190, 194-95,172 Ill.Dec. 200, 201-02, 595 N.E.2d 561, 562-63; State of Illinois v. Mikusch (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 242, 247, 562 N.E.2d 168, 170; County of DuPage v. Graham, Anderson, Probst & White, Inc. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 143, 92 Ill. Dec. 833, 485 N.E.2d 1076.) If the meaning of a statute is plain and unambiguous, the courts cannot imply any other meaning. (Hernon, 149 Ill.2d at 194-95, 172 Ill. Dec. at 201-02, 595 N.E.2d at 562-63; Triple A Services, Inc. v. Rice (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 217, 229, 137 Ill. Dec. 53, 57-58, 545 N.E.2d 706, 710-711; City of Decatur v. German (1923), 310 Ill. 591, 595,142 N.E. 252, 253.) There is no rule of construction which authorizes a court to declare that the legislature did not mean what the plain language of the statute imports. Graham, 109 Ill.2d at 151-52, 92 Ill. Dec. at 836-37, 485 N.E.2d at 1079-80, (quoting People ex rel. Scott v. Schwulst Building Center, Inc. (1982), 89 Ill. 2d 365, 371, 59 Ill. Dec. 911, 374, 432 N.E.2d 855, 858).
In this case, the statutory language in section 8-10-3, i.e., "Except as otherwise herein provided all purchase orders or contracts* * * shall be let by free and open competitive bidding," (emphasis added), clearly indicates the intent of the legislature: that the City is to engage in competitive bidding for all contracts. Section 8-10-4 is similarly clear in describing what contracts do not require competitive bidding, i.e., "contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part." (Emphasis added.)
The purposes behind requiring governmental units to engage in competitive bidding are to "invite competition, to guard against favoritism, improvidence, extravagance, fraud and corruption, and to secure the best work or supplies at the lowest price practicable." (Smith v. F. W.D. Corp. (1982), 106 Ill.App.3d 429, 431, 62 Ill. Dec. 453, 454, 436 N.E.2d 35, 36 (quoting 10 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations § 29.29, at 302 (3rd ed. 1981).) Historically, competitive bidding statutes in Illinois have not authorized the unbridled discretion of the municipality in awarding contracts. For example, in City of Chicago v. Hanreddy (1904), 211 Ill. 24, 71 N.E. 834 (affirming 102 Ill.App. 1), the successful contractor in a competitively bid sewer construction contract abandoned the work before completion, and the City chose to complete the *851 construction using hired day laborers. (Hanreddy, 102 Ill.App. at 5.) The Illinois Supreme Court held that the City was required to engage in competitive bidding under section 50 of article 9 of the City and Villages Act of 1872, which required competitive bidding for all municipal contracts in excess of the statutory amount of $500:
"The language of the section is, `any work or other public improvement, when the expense thereof shall exceed $500, shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder.' No discretion is thereby conferred upon the city or any of its officers as to whether the work or improvement shall be constructed under contract or by day labor * * * To hold that the statute does not apply to an unfinished public improvement * * * would be to permit contracts for public improvements to be let to irresponsible parties, which * * * would open wide the door to fraud and destroy competition, and enable city officials to do indirectly what in express terms they are prohibited from doing by the statute* * * The statute * * * does not authorize the municipality to complete the improvement by day labor * * * To hold otherwise would be to nullify the statute." (Emphasis added.) (Hanreddy, 211 Ill. at 32-33, 71 N.E. at 837.)
The teachings of Hanreddy are still with us. See, e.g., Inskip v. Board of Trustees of University of Illinois (1962), 26 Ill. 2d 501, 514, 187 N.E.2d 201, 208 (City has no discretion where a statute requires that contracts for "work or other public improvement" be let by competitive bidding); M.A.T.H., Inc. v. Housing Authority of East St. Louis (1976), 34 Ill.App.3d 884, 341 N.E.2d 51 (Statute does not authorize housing commission to renegotiate a contract without competitive bidding).
In support of the contention that the City had the discretion to choose between the two sections of the purchasing act in awarding the shuttle bus contract, the City relies upon the only two cases interpreting section 8-10-4, Hassett Storage Warehouse, Inc. v. Board of Election Commissioners (1979), 69 Ill.App.3d 972, 25 Ill. Dec. 909, 387 N.E.2d 785, and People ex rel. Adamowski v. Daley (1959), 22 Ill.App.2d 87, 159 N.E.2d 18. Neither of these cases is persuasive, however, as both cases are distinguishable from the present case.
In Hassett, the contract at issue concerned the storage and cartage of election equipment. The contractor admitted, and the Board agreed, that the storage and cartage of election equipment required a high degree of professional skill. (Hassett, 69 Ill.App.3d at 982, 25 Ill. Dec. at 915, 387 N.E.2d at 791.) The contract required, inter alia, the safe storage of 1300 voting machines, the safe delivery of voting machines and other election equipment to polling places for use on election days. (Hassett, 69 Ill.App.3d at 981, 25 Ill. Dec. at 915-16, 387 N.E.2d at 791-92.) These services were to be performed six times for the six elections scheduled during the term of the contract. (Hassett, 69 Ill.App.3d at 981, 25 Ill. Dec. at 915-16, 387 N.E.2d at 791-92.) The court held that the contract was of a nature "not adapted to award by competitive bidding," because it required, among other things, "near perfect performance under extreme time pressures." The court noted that:
"the failure of a contractor to perform his obligations properly could disenfranchise registered voters in an area and do irreparable damage to an election." Hassett, 69 Ill.App.3d at 982, 25 Ill. Dec. at 916, 387 N.E.2d at 792.
In the present case, there has been no agreement by the parties, nor is there any evidence in the record, that a shuttle bus service requires any particular degree of professional skill. Mary Rose Loney testified at trial that the contractor must respond adequately to the extreme time pressures created by an increasing volume of traffic and changing flight schedules, and that the City was dissatisfied with the past performance of O'Hare Express. Paul Spieles testified that the shuttle-bus service required the "most qualified" and "most capable" contractor, and that such quality control could not be assured through competitive bidding.
The record reveals that the contract in the present case requires the contractor to *852 transport arriving passengers from the plane to Terminal No. 4 without delay. The record does not reveal, however, any facts which show how the transportation of passengers one-and-two-tenths miles by bus requires the "high degree of professional skill" which would exempt the contract from competitive bidding under section 8-10-4. Violation of airline passengers' constitutional rights is not a risk apparent here.
The City's further attempt to show that the shuttle-bus service was similar to the "professional services" exempt from competitive bidding in several cases outside of the jurisdiction is unavailing. (See, e.g., Autotote Ltd. v. New Jersey Sports & Exposition Authority (1981), 85 N.J. 363, 427 A.2d 55 (highly technical and scientific computer services); General Engineering Corp. v. Virgin Islands Water & Power Authority (3d Cir.1986), 805 F.2d 88, 95 (financial advising services); Curtis Ambulance of Florida, Inc. v. Board of Commissioners (10th Cir.1987), 811 F.2d 1371 (ambulance services).) The City has not indicated how any of the service contracts described in these cases are similar in any way to the shuttle-bus contract at issue here.[1]
Adamowski is similarly distinguishable. There, the plaintiff sought to declare void a contract for a rental car concession at Midway Airport because the City did not award the concession by competitive bidding. (Adamowski, 22 Ill.App.2d at 90, 159 N.E.2d at 19.) Although section 22A-3 of the Municipal Purchasing Act, (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1949, ch. 24, par. 22A-3) required competitive bidding in municipal contracts, the court held the contract valid because paragraph 22A-4 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1949, ch. 24, par. 22A-4), explicitly authorized the City to grant concessions without engaging in competitive bidding. The court found that interpreting the statute to require competitive bids where an exception is clearly stated would be "restrictive." Adamowski, 22 Ill.App.2d at 91-92, 159 N.E.2d at 19-20.
In the present case, there is no specific statute providing that an airport shuttle bus service contract may be let without competitive bidding. Although the City argues that the contract is not payable by the taxpayers' monies, the City does not contend that the contract was improperly let under the City's authority. Moreover, the purchasing act does not exclude contracts which involve O'Hare airport expenses. Section 8-10-3 is clearly broad enough to include the municipal contract at issue here.
The City's further argument that cost-reimbursement compensation is only available through the RFP process is unconvincing. McNare Grant, Jr., the former first deputy of purchasing for the City, testified that cost reimbursement could be utilized in a sealed bid contract.
The City correctly states that the court must defer to the discretion of municipal officials except where fraud, corruption or gross injustice is shown. (Arnold v. Engelbrecht (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 704, 518 N.E.2d 237, 115 Ill. Dec. 712, 518 N.E.2d 237; Rocke v. County of Cook (1978), 60 Ill.App.3d 874, 18 Ill. Dec. 134, 377 N.E.2d 287.) However, the presumption of discretion is diminished here in the face of the City's failure to supply the court with sufficient facts to support its actions. It is not apparent from the record how a shuttle-bus service contract calls for the type of professional services defined as not adaptable to competitive bidding under section 8-10-4. Further, the statute does not grant municipal officials the authority to choose which provision to apply in letting a municipal contract as involved herein. We conclude that the City failed to properly comply with section 8-10-3 of the purchasing act in awarding the shuttle bus contract to Keeshin. Therefore, we reverse the trial court's finding that the City had the discretion to award the contract under section 810-4 *853 as contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Klaskin v. Klepak (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 376, 389, 128 Ill. Dec. 526, 531, 534 N.E.2d 971, 976.
In light of the foregoing, we find that the trial court erred in dismissing count II of plaintiffs' amended complaint for failure to state a cause of action. The trial court dismissed count II of both plaintiffs' complaint and amended complaint on the grounds that the contract was properly awarded without competitive bidding, thus favoritism could not be properly stated as a cause of action. See Hallett v. City of Elgin (1912), 254 Ill. 343, 346, 348, 98 N.E. 530, 532, 533 (courts cannot interfere, in the absence of fraud, with the exercise of the official discretion of a municipality in awarding contracts); but cf. Cardinal Glass Co. v. Board of Education (1983), 113 Ill.App.3d 442, 69 Ill. Dec. 329, 447 N.E.2d 546; Kermeen v. City of Peoria (1978), 65 Ill.App.3d 969, 972, 22 Ill. Dec. 619, 974, 382 N.E.2d 1374, 1376 ("If discretionary power is exercised with manifest injustice or if a palpable abuse of discretion is clearly shown, mandamus will issue").
The complaint must be viewed as a whole and construed liberally with a view toward doing substantial justice between the parties. (Wolcomcz v. Intercraft Industries Corp. (1985), 133 Ill.App.3d 157, 88 Ill. Dec. 431, 478 N.E.2d 1039.) On a motion to dismiss, all well-pleaded facts in the complaint will be regarded as true and all reasonable inferences from them will be considered as correct. (Krasinski v. United Parcel Service (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 483, 125 Ill. Dec. 310, 530 N.E.2d 468.) If the facts demonstrate any possibility of recovery under the theories alleged, the order dismissing the complaint will be reversed. Philip I. Mappa Interests, Ltd. v. Kendle (1990), 196 Ill.App.3d 703, 708, 143 Ill. Dec. 936, 939-40, 554 N.E.2d 1008, 1011-12.
In the present case, plaintiffs allege that the City showed favoritism and bias in electing to award the contract to Keeshin without competitive bidding, and cite numerous facts in support of their allegations. Such allegations are clearly sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss under section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-615.
For the reasons stated above, we reverse and remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded, as modified.
BUCKLEY, P.J., and O'CONNOR, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  But see Yellow Cab of Cleveland, Inc. v. Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority (1991), 72 Ohio App. 3d 558, 595 N.E.2d 508 (contract to provide special transportation services for the handicapped and elderly is not a personal services contract exempted from competitive bidding under Ohio law, and City transit authority did not have discretion to choose method of procurement of contract to provide such services).

=== CASE 9740025 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:59.843926+00 ===

TERNUS, Justice.
This case concerns the enforceability of an owned-but-not-insured exclusion in the uninsured motorists (UM) coverage of a motor vehicle liability policy. The trial court held that the exclusion was enforceable and precluded the plaintiffs’ recovery under the UM coverage. We agree and so affirm.
I. Background Facts and Proceedings.
The facts underlying this case were undisputed by the parties. The plaintiff, Craig S. Miller, Sr., was injured in an accident caused by an uninsured motorist. At the time of the accident, Miller was riding a motorcycle that he owned and had insured through Midwest Mutual Insurance Company. The Midwest policy did not include UM coverage, however, because Miller had expressly rejected, in writing, Midwest’s offer of such coverage.
Miller also owned a pickup that he had separately insured under a liability policy issued by the defendant, Westfield Insurance Company. The Westfield policy included UM coverage. This action was *303commenced by Miller, his wife, Karen Sue Miller, and his children, Dani Lee Miller and Craig S. Miller, Jr., to recover benefits under the UM coverage of the Westfield policy.
Westfield claimed that the following exclusion in its policy precluded any recovery by the plaintiffs:
We do not provide Uninsured Motorists Coverage for bodily injury sustained by any person:
I. While occupying, or when struck by, any motor vehicle owned by you or any family member which is- not insured for this coverage under this policy.
This exclusion is commonly referred to as an owned-but-not-insured exclusion. The plaintiffs did not dispute that the exclusion, if applied, would prevent them from recovering under the UM coverage of the Westfield policy. They argued instead that the exclusion was unenforceable under our decision in Lindahl v. Howe, 345 N.W.2d 548 (Iowa 1984), which held that under the facts of that case the owned-but-not-insured exclusion was contrary to Iowa’s uninsured motorist statute, Iowa Code chapter 516A, and therefore was unenforceable. The district court held that Lindahl was distinguishable because Miller, unlike the insured in Lindahl, had expressly rejected UM coverage in the policy insuring the vehicle involved in the accident. Accordingly, the court applied the exclusion and ruled that the plaintiffs were not entitled to recover under the Westfield policy.
The plaintiffs appealed the district court’s decision. Our review is for correction of errors of law. See Iowa R.App. P. 4.
II. General Principles Governing Statutory Interpretation.
As we have already mentioned, there is no disagreement that the owned-but-not-insured exclusion contained in Westfield’s insurance policy precludes Miller from recovering under the policy, if the exclusion is enforceable under chapter 516A, Iowa’s uninsured and underinsured motorist statute. The enforceability of the exclusion under chapter 516A becomes an issue because' we have repeatedly held that the terms of this statute “form a basic part of the policy.” Hollingsworth v. Schminkey, 553 N.W.2d 591, 595 (Iowa 1996); accord Hornick v. Owners Ins. Co., 511 N.W.2d 370, 372 (Iowa 1993). Consequently, the resolution of this case depends on the legislative intent encompassed in chapter 516A.
In determining legislative intent, we apply well-settled rules of statutory construction:
In construing statutes, our goal is to determine and give effect to the legislature’s intention. We seek a reasonable interpretation which will best effectuate the purpose of the statute and redress the wrongs the legislature sought to remedy. We will consider all parts of an enactment together and will not place undue importance on any single or isolated portion.
Mewes v. State Farm Auto. Ins. Co., 530 N.W.2d 718, 722 (Iowa 1995) (citations omitted). With these principles in mind, we now examine chapter 516A to ascertain the legislature’s intent.
' III. Legislative Intent as Shorn by the Uninsured Motorist Statute.
The fundamental goal of the UM statute is to provide insureds with insurance protection when injured as a result of the fault of an uninsured motorist. See Iowa Code § 516A.1 (1997) (stating that no motor vehicle liability insurance policy may be issued in this state unless uninsured motorist coverage is provided in such policy with limits at least equal to the liability limits' required under Iowa Code section 321A.1(10)); see also Douglass v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 508 N.W.2d 665, 667 (Iowa 1993) (stating that the purpose of UM coverage-is “to provide to the victim of an accident the same protection *304that the victim would have had if the negligent tortfeasor had had minimum insurance coverage”). The goal of providing UM coverage to Iowa insureds is not, however, without its limitations. Section 516A.1 specifically allows an insured to reject UM coverage, if done so in writing. See Iowa Code § 516A.1 (“However, the named insured may reject all of such coverage....”). In effect, then, Iowa’s UM statute does not implement mandatory UM coverage; it merely mandates that such coverage be offered to all insureds purchasing motor vehicle liability insurance.
Once an insured chooses to purchase UM coverage, Iowa Code section 516A.2(1) becomes relevant.1 That statute allows insurers to limit UM coverage to the minimum limits prescribed by section 321A.1(10). See Iowa Code § 516A.2(1). More important, it permits insurers to include in UM coverage “terms, exclusions, limitations, conditions, and offsets which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.” Id. We first had an opportunity to interpret this provision of chapter 516A in the Lindahl case, which we now discuss.
IV. Lindahl Decision.
In Lindahl, this- court considered the enforceability of an owned-but-not-insured exclusion contained in the insured’s UM coverage provided under his automobile policy. 345 N.W.2d at 549. As in the present case, at the time of the accident the insured was operating a motorcycle he owned, but had not insured under the auto policy. Id. We first determined that “[t]he conditions for mandatory coverage specified in section 516A.1 [were] present.” Id. at 550. We then examined whether the exclusion was, nonetheless, authorized under section 516A.2(1). Id. at 551. We specifically focused on the statutory language permitting exclusions “which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.” Id.
In interpreting this language, this court noted that the record before it lacked any evidence of the “insurance or benefits the exclusion is designed to avoid duplicating.” Id. The court concluded, therefore, that the ■ case was distinguishable from prior cases wherein the “potential duplication identified in the policy was found to exist.” Id.. This distinction was important to the court because it “believe[d] our legislature intended only to authorize insurers to exclude coverage for contingencies in which duplication actually occurs.” Id. (emphasis added). We explained:
The broad mandate of coverage under section 516A.1 would mean little if an insurer could • defend any exclusion of coverage by asserting it was designed to prevent a possible duplication of insurance or other benefits without regard to whether such duplication occurs.
Id.
The district court did not apply Lindahl to the case before us, concluding that it was distinguishable because here the insured expressly waived UM coverage under his motorcycle liability policy, a fact not apparent from the record before the court'in Lindahl. We find it unnecessary, however, to consider whether this fact renders the Lindahl decision inapplicable here. Upon our examination of Lindahl, we conclude it was erroneously decided and should be overruled.
*305Our first concern with Lindahl is our failure to apply a fundamental rule of statutory construction: “a statute [will not be construed] to make any part of it superfluous unless no other construction is reasonably possible.” Civil Serv. Comm’n v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 522 N.W.2d 82, 86 (Iowa 1994); accord Iowa Auto Dealers Ass’n v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 301 N.W.2d 760, 765 (Iowa 1981). Accordingly, “[w]e presume the legislature included every part of a statute for a purpose, and intended each part be given effect.” George H. Wentz, Inc. v. Sabasta, 337 N.W.2d 495, 500 (Iowa 1983), overruled on other grounds by Henriksen v. Younglove Constr., 540 N.W.2d 254, 258 (Iowa 1995); accord State v. Jennie Coulter Day Nursery, 218 N.W.2d 579, 582 (Iowa 1974). In addition, the Lindahl decision violates the rule of statutory construction quoted earlier in this opinion: the court “will not place undue importance on any single or isolated portion” of a statute. Mewes, 530 N.W.2d at 722.
The legislature stated in section 516A.2(1) that exclusions “which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits” are permissible. Iowa Code § 516A.2(1) (emphasis added). In Lindahl, this court simply read the words “are designed to” out of the statute. By holding that an exclusion is permissible under the statute only when actual duplication occurs, this court effectively rewrote the statutory language to read: “Such forms of coverage may include exclusions which avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.” If we presume that the legislature “included every part of a statute for a purpose, and intended each part be given effect,” Sabasta, 337 N.W.2d at 500, then we must give meaning to the words “are designed to.”
We assume the legislature intends the words it uses in a statute to be given their common and ordinary meaning when the words are not otherwise defined by the legislature. See State v. Walker, 574 N.W.2d 280, 289 (Iowa 1998). Here,.the common meaning of the word “design” is “to plan or have in mind as a purpose: INTEND, PURPOSE, CONTEMPLATE.” ■. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 611 (unabr. ed.1993). Using this common meaning of the language chosen by the legislature, there is no reasonable interpretation of the provision in question other than that the General Assembly meant to authorize exclusions that are intended to or have the purpose of avoiding duplication of benefits. Requiring the actual duplication of benefits is simply contrary to the language used by the legislature.
An apparent rationale for our decision in Lindahl was our observation that “the broad mandate of coverage under section 516A.1 would mean little if an insurer could [rely on an exclusion] designed to prevent a possible duplication of insurance ... without regard to whether such duplication actually occurs.” 345 N.W.2d at 551. This rationale is flawed for two reasons. First, coverage is not mandated by section 516A.1, only the offer of such coverage. If the legislature had truly wanted to mandate UM protection for all insureds, it simply would have eliminated the provisions of chapter 516A allowing insureds to reject such coverage and allowing insurers to include certain exclusions to and limitations bn such coverage. Thus, Lindahl is based on a faulty premise — that the sole intent of the legislature in chapter 516A whs to mandate UM coverage. Second, the quoted rationale gives overriding importance to one part of the statute, which is contrary to our estáblished rules of statutory construction. .The legislature’s desire to provide insureds with the opportunity to. purchase UM coverage must be read in .conjunction with section 516A.2(1), which permits exclusions “designed to” avoid duplication of benefits.
In summary, under a proper application of the rules of statutory interpretation, we conclude that actual duplication of benefits is not required by section 516A.2(1). Our imposition of such a requirement in Lin-dahl was clearly wrong. See generally *306State v. Burgs, 479 N.W.2d 323, 324 (Iowa 1992) (“When a statute’s terms are unambiguous and its meaning plain, there is no room for second-guessing legislative intent.”).
To make matters worse, we have not required an actual duplication of benefits when an owned-but-not-insured exclusion is contained in underinsured motorists (UIM) coverage. We have said that, in the context of UIM coverage, there is “no duplication of benefits until the victim has been fully compensated.” McClure v. Northland Ins. Co., 424 N.W.2d 448, 450 (Iowa 1988) (applying section 516A.2(1)’s duplieation-of-benefits provision). Yet in Kluiter v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 417 N.W.2d 74 (Iowa 1987), we upheld an owned-but-not-insured exclusion with no discussion of whether the insured had been fully compensated for his injuries. 417 N.W.2d at 76. Instead, we merely found “potential duplication.” Id.(emphasis added); see also Hornick, 511 N.W.2d at 374 (holding the UIM policy provision at issue “may be viewed as an attempt to avoid duplication of insurance coverage and is therefore permitted under Iowa Code section 516A.2” (emphasis added)).
Our inconsistent application of the statute’s duplication-of-benefits provision finds no support in the language of the statute; either section 516A.2(1) requires actual duplication, or it does not. As we have explained, based on the words used by the legislature, we hold that actual duplication is not required under section 516A.2(1).
We are sensitive to the possibility that the insurance industry and the public may have relied on our Lindahl decision in considering their insurance sales and purchases. Clearly, adherence to precedent has value. See Kersten Co. v. Department of Social Servs., 207 N.W.2d 117, 121 (Iowa 1973) (“Stare decisis is a valuable legal doctrine which lends stability to the law....”). On the other hand, stare decisis does not prevent the court from reconsidering, repairing, correcting or abandoning past judicial announcements when error is manifest, including error in the interpretation of statutory enactments. See Lehigh Clay Prods., Ltd. v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 545 N.W.2d 526, 528 (Iowa 1996); Young v. City of Des Moines, 262 N.W.2d 612, 615 (Iowa 1978), overruled on other grounds by Parks v. City of Marshalltown, 440 N.W.2d 377, 379 (Iowa 1989). Thus, stare decisis “should not be invoked to maintain a clearly erroneous result.” Kersten Co., 207 N.W.2d at 121; accord State v. Johnson, 257 Iowa 1052, 1056, 135 N.W.2d 518, 521 (1965) (holding the court has a duty to correct erroneous past decisions). It is especially critical that stare decisis not shield court-created error from correction when the error is related to a matter of continuing concern to the community. See People v. Anderson, 43 Cal.3d 1104, 240 Cal.Rptr. 585, 742 P.2d 1306, 1331 (Cal.1987). See also Henriksen, 540 N.W.2d at 258-61 (overruling fourteen-year-old case interpreting workers’ compensation statute governing the compensability of an injury occurring outside the territorial limits of Iowa).
This case presents such a situation. To paraphrase our discussion in Stuart v. Pilgrim, 247 Iowa 709, 74 N.W.2d 212 (1956), wherein we overruled long-established precedent, our holding in Lindahl “proceeded] upon a wrong principle, [was] built upon a false premise, and arriv[ed] at an erroneous conclusion.” 247 Iowa at 714, 74 N.W.2d at 216. Therefore, the doctrine of stare decisis does not protect that holding from correction. Accordingly, our decision in Lindahl is overruled.
V. Enforceability of Exclusion.
Having concluded that actual duplication is not required, we now examine whether the exclusion upon which West-field relies was “designed to avoid duplication of insurance.” See Iowa Code § 516A.2(1): The record shows that Miller purchased a liability policy on his motorcycle but rejected the insurer’s offer of UM *307coverage. Clearly, if Miller had purchased UM coverage under his motorcycle policy, there would have been a duplication of UM coverage. See LeMars Mut. Ins. Co. v. Joffer, 574 N.W.2d 303, 311 (Iowa 1998) (enforcing owned-but-not-insured exclusion in UM coverage in automobile policy in which same coverage was provided under insured’s motorcycle policy). It was this anticipated duplication that the exclusion was intended to avoid. Under these circumstances, we conclude the exclusion satisfies the statutory requirement that it be “designed to avoid the duplication of insurance.” See Iowa Code § 516A.2(1). Consequently, the exclusion is enforceable, and the trial court did not err in upholding the validity of the owned-but-not-insured exclusion in Westfield’s UM coverage.
AFFIRMED.
All justices concur except CADY, LARSON, and SNELL, JJ., who dissent.
. This statute states in pertinent part:
[N]othing contained in this chapter shall be construed as requiring forms of coverage provided pursuant hereto, whether alone or in combination with similar coverage afforded under other automobile liability or motor vehicle policies, to afford limits in excess of those that would be áfforded had the insured thereunder been involved in an accident with a motorist who was insured under a policy of liability insurance with the minimum limits for bodily injury or death prescribed in subsection 10 of section 321A.1. Such forms of coverage may include terms, exclusions, limitations, conditions, and offsets which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.
Iowa Code § 516A.2(1).

=== CASE 9740026 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:59.849276+00 ===

CADY, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The majority overrules Lindahl by concluding it failed to properly apply the rules of statutory construction to accurately discern the legislative intent of sections 516A.1 and 516A.2. I not only disagree with this conclusion, but find it problematic that the majority would overrule a case involving statutory interpretation that has been accepted as a part of our law for well over a decade.
Within the construct of our three branches of government, there exists a fundamental principle that it is the prerogative of the legislative branch to declare the law, and the obligation of the judicial branch to interpret the law. See Slockett v. Iowa Valley Community Sch. Dist., 359 N.W.2d 446, 448 (Iowa 1984). There is an equally fundamental principle that the goal of judicial statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature. Wellsburg-Steamboat Rock Community Sch. Dist. v. Iowa Dep’t of Educ., 523 N.W.2d 749, 751 (Iowa 1994). A judicial body which does anything more risks infringing upon the important balance of governmental power that lies at the heart of our democratic society. Courts, indeed, have broad powers but these powers must not intrude into matters properly left to the legislative or political arena. Charles D. Breitel, The Lawmakers,. 65 Colum. L.Rev. 749, 777 (1965). In overruling Lindahl, I believe the majority has improperly assumed the legislative lawmaking role.
Chapter 516A was originally enacted'in 1967. It required motor vehicle liability insurers in this state to provide coverage “for the protection of persons insured” under the policy for injuries caused by uninsured or hit and run motorists, unless such coverage was specifically rejected by the insured, Iowa Code § 516A.1. It further permitted the insurer to place exclusions from such coverage in the policy “which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.” Id. § 516A.2. Our legislature amended section 516A.1 in 1980 to expand the required coverage to include underinsured motorist coverage.
■ Lindahl was decided in 1984. In Lin-dahl, we held that an owned-but-not-insured exclusion in an automobile policy violated the mandatory coverage requirement in section 516A.1 when the insured under an automobile policy was injured while occupying a motorcycle which was owned by the insured but not insured under the policy. We recognized this holding to be the majority rule-of courts in other jurisdictions that had addressed the question under similar statutes. Lindahl, 345 N.W.2d at 550.
During the fifteen years that have come and gone since Lindahl, the statutory language interpreted in Lindahl has remained unchanged. During the same time, however, other language in the statute was amended and rewritten by our legislature following our interpretation. In 1990, for example, we refused to enforce antistacking provisions in a policy of insurance as violative of the protection giv*308en to insureds under section 516A.1. Hernandez v. Farmers Ins. Co., 460 N.W.2d 842, 845 (Iowa 1990). In direct response to our interpretation of section 516A.1 in Hernandez, our legislature promptly rewrote section 516A.2 to specifically abrogate our interpretation of the statute in Hernandez. It declared that “enforcement of the antistacking provisions contained in a motor vehicle insurance policy does not frustrate the protection given to an insured under section 516A.1.” See Iowa Code § 616A.2C1).
Our history is replete with examples, like Hernandez, of the legislative response to judicial interpretation of statutes, Outside a constitutional challenge, the legislative branch is not required to live with a judicial interpretation of its statute. If the legislature disagrees with our interpretation of law it enacted, it has the prerogative to change or rewrite the law to conform to its intention. Consequently, we recognize that judicial construction given to a statute which is left undisturbed by the legislature over a period of years gives rise to the inference that the legislative branch has accepted our judicial interpretation. State v. Anderson, 517 N.W.2d 208, 214 (Iowa 1994). Furthermore, we assume that when the legislature re-enacts a statute, as was done to section 516A.2 following Hernandez, it was aware of our prior decisions interpreting the statute and would have specifically altered our interpreted intention if it did not agree with it. State v. Stueve, 260 Iowa 1023, 1027, 150 N.W.2d 597, 599-600 (1967); see also Young v. City of Des Moines, 262 N.W.2d 612, 615 (Iowa 1978), overruled on other grounds by Parks v. City of Marshalltown, 440 N.W.2d 377, 379 (Iowa 1989) (legislature’s re-enactment of statute, without pertinent change, following judicial interpretation may be presumed adopted or approved by the legislature).
Although we follow a host of rules to aid in our efforts to define the legislative intent behind a statute, the best gauge of our attempt to accomplish this goal, in the final analysis, is the reaction to our interpretation by those who write the law. A statute that has remained unchanged for well more than a decade after our interpretation of the statute reveals our legislature has concurred with our interpretation. If we had missed the mark in Lindahl, as the majority now claims, our legislature would have told us long ago. Consequently, we have no business under the framework of our powers and the principles which guide the exercise of those powers to change our interpretation now. It does an injustice to the venerable and essential concept of stare decisis, and violates those corresponding principles that give stability, strength, and confidence to our judicial process.
The majority attempts to shield itself from this criticism by rallying behind another legal principle that courts have an obligation to abandon past judicial decisions when they are found to be wrong. Yet, this principle is better applied to cases involving judge-made law, not those which involve statutory interpretation. See Kersten Co. v. Dep’t of Social Servs., 207 N.W.2d 117, 118 (Iowa 1973). Moreover, it is a principle that only applies when our past decision is found to be clearly erroneous, not when an old debate is revived without an accompanying change in the grounds or circumstances which justified the original decision. Id. at 121; see also Young, 262 N.W.2d at 615 (stare decisis is no bar where error is manifest); Stuart v. Pilgrim, 247 Iowa 709, 714, 74 N.W.2d 212, 215-16 (1956) (interpretation, once made, should be overturned only for most cogent reasons). Lindahl involved a case of statutory interpretation, and cannot fairly be characterized as clearly erroneous. Not only is it the established law of this state and the majority rule nationwide, but it has been followed by other jurisdictions since the decision was made. See Hillman v. Nationwide Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 758 P.2d 1248, 1251 (Alaska 1988) (upholding exclusion violates public policy of protective *309UM/UIM statutory scheme); Calvert v. Farmers Ins. Co., 144 Ariz. 291, 697 P.2d 684, 687 (Ariz.1985) (same); Bray v. North Carolina Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 341 N.C. 678, 462 S.E.2d 650, 653 (N.C.1995) (same); Dullenty v. Rocky Mountain Fire & Cas. Co., 111 Idaho 98, 721 P.2d 198, 208 (Idaho 1986) (Bistline, J., dissenting) (same).
The majority has simply beefed-up the dissent originally voiced in Lindahl. It adds nothing new to the debate, and can identify no change in conditions to justify a departure from our precedent. Furthermore, the criticism lodged by the majority to the framework of Lindahl is unfair.
Lindahl did not read the word “designed” out of section 516A.2, nor did it mischaraeterize the policy of section 516A.1 by describing it as a “broad mandate of coverage.” Lindahl properly observed that the legislature had a purpose in enacting section 516A.1 which would be lost if insurers could use exclusions in the manner now articulated by the majority. Thus, Lindahl properly observed that there must be some actual, not fanciful, potential for duplication of insurance or benefits, which the exclusion is designed to avoid. See Kluiter v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 417 N.W.2d 74, 76-77 (Iowa 1987).
The majority also declares Lindahl was built on a faulty premise that section 516A.1 mandated uninsured coverage. The majority claims that insurers must only “offer” coverage under section 516A.1, which does not constitute a mandate. This, in my view, is only a matter of semantics and simply an artful diversion from the primary goal of statutory interpretation.
A mandate is a requirement, and section 516A.1 unmistakably requires motor vehicle insurance policies delivered or issued for delivery in this state to contain uninsured motorist protection. In the legalese of contract law, this may be viewed as ■a term of an offer, but it is a mandatory term. Furthermore, insurance policies are contracts of adhesion in which the terms of the policy are established by the insurer in conjunction with certain legislative requirements. The statute makes it clear that uninsured motorist coverage is required unless specifically rejected by the insured. There is no dispute about this, and it is wrong for the majority to transform it into a faulty premise. The statute mandates the insurer to include the coverage, and only the insured has the ability to elect not to accept it. This is what is meant by mandatory coverage, and Lin-dahl meant nothing more.
The statutory language at issue in this case is found in section 516A.2. This section allows insurers to exclude uninsured motorist coverage by including exclusions in the policy “which are designed to avoid duplication of insurance or other benefits.” The majority concludes this not only means exclusions designed to prevent the insured from obtaining duplicative uninsured motorist benefits, but also exclusions that deny coverage to the insured when there would have been duplicative coverage if the insured had purchased duplica-tive coverage. This interpretation guts the very policy behind section 516A.1 and permits the insurer to exclude the mandatory coverage if the insured is injured while operating an owned-bub-not-insured vehicle. The statute, however, does not contain such a limitation. To the contrary, section 516A.1 mandates coverage “for the protection of persons insured.” It does not limit this coverage depending on whether the insured person was occupying an insured or uninsured vehicle. The uninsured coverage mandated by section 516A.1 follows the person, not the covered vehicle. Thus, it is the majority, not Lin-dahl, which takes liberties with the rules of statutory interpretation.
The “owned-but-not-insured” exclusion in the insurance policy in this case is designed to exclude uninsured motorist coverage for injury to the insured while occupying an owned-but-not-insured vehicle. *310Such an exclusion is invalid under section 516A.1 unless “designed to avoid the duplication of insurance or other benefits” under section 516A.2.
On its face, the exclusion has nothing to do with avoiding the duplication of insurance or benefits. However, a duplication of insurance benefits could occur if the owned-but-not-insured vehicle was insured for uninsured motorist coverage under another policy of insurance. Under this situation, the design of the exclusion would include avoiding the “duplication of insurance or other benefits.” However, a duplication of uninsured motorist insurance could not arise if the owned-but-not-insured vehicle was not insured for uninsured motorist coverage.
Notwithstanding, the majority satisfies the statutory duplication of insurance requirement by concluding duplication would have occurred if the insured had purchased uninsured motorist coverage. In doing so, the statutory requirement is no longer about permitting an insurer to use an exclusion to avoid the duplication of insurance, but permitting an insurer to use the exclusion to create a duplication of insurance based on the failure of the insured to purchase duplicative insurance. This was not the design of the legislature. 'The legislature knew multiple insurance policies often come into play, and permitted the exclusion to avoid the duplication of uninsured motorist benefits that would otherwise occur when more than one policy of insurance provides uninsured motorist coverage. The majority has now not only eliminated the need for actual duplication of uninsured motorist coverage, but the very need for any duplication at all. This is in direct contravention of the legislative mandate for uninsured motorist coverage.
Stare decisis provides the needed stability in the law, which business and individuals alike rely upon to guide their decisions. See Pilgrim, 247 Iowa at 714, 74 N.W.2d at 216 (“Legal authority must be respected; not because it is venerable with age, but because it is important that courts, and lawyers and their clients, may know what the law is and order their affairs accordingly.”) I am confident the insurance industry, over the last fifteen years, has adjusted its premiums to accommodate the articulated policy of section 516A.1, as interpreted by Lindahl, and the premiums paid by insured persons reflect the possibility that an insured may be injured while occupying an owned-but-not-insured vehicle. Likewise, I must assume, as we do in other areas of the law, that the insured in this ease understood the law as interpreted by Lindahl. Miller obtained uninsured motorist coverage when he purchased the Westfield policy. This coverage, under Lindahl, followed him whether he was occupying an insured or uninsured vehicle. Thus, it would not have made economic sense for him to purchase duplicative uninsured motorist coverage, and pay an additional premium, when he subsequently obtained insurance from Midwest. Miller had a right to rely on the law in purchasing insurance, and we have done a disservice to him by changing that law. We have also done a disservice to the important principles which guide the very exercise of our powers. I am therefore compelled to depart from the majority, and voice my dissent.
LARSON and SNELL, JJ., join this dissent.

=== CASE 9740027 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:00.119483+00 ===

KRAHULIK, Justice.
Trevor T. Nunn (Defendant-Appellant) was found guilty by a jury of murder, a class A felony, Ind. Code § 85-42-1-1(1). He received a sentence of 51 years. In this direct appeal, Nunn raises the following issues:
(1) Whether the trial court erred in denying a new trial based upon newly-discovered evidence;
(2) Whether the trial court erred in denying the introduction of impeaching evidence of a State's witness;
(38) Whether there was sufficient evidence to sustain the conviction of murder where death of the victim was not a probable consequence of defendant's acts; and
(4) Whether the trial court erred in giving the State's tendered Instructions No. 4, 5, and 7 over defendant's objections.
Facts
On June 18, 1990, a group of children were playing in Geater Park in Anderson. Among these children were Amber and Josh Root, the children of Jean Aldridge. The children, while playing near the railroad tracks in the park, began to throw rocks. At one point, the children threw rocks at each other. A rock thrown by Eugenia Menefee struck Amber. After Amber was hit, she ran home to tell her mother. Aldridge went to the park to speak with the child who had thrown the rock at Amber.
Upon arriving at the park, Aldridge, who was upset, inquired about the child. The conversation took place between Aldridge and three people, Nunn, Zran Ashley, and Michelle Pearson, in a park shelter house. Some of the children who had been playing were nearby and heard the conversation. Eugenia Menefee identified herself to Al-dridge. Aldridge proceeded to yell and swear at Menefee. Ashley also argued with Aldridge.
At some point, Nunn walked away from the conversation and spoke with the other children. After speaking with the children, Nunn approached Aldridge from behind and, as he passed her, he struck her in the area of her head and neck. Nunn continued walking and left the shelter area.
Aldridge was found a short time later lying on her back near the shelter. Emergency help and the police were called. Al dridge was transported to St. John's Medical Center. When Aldridge arrived at the hospital, she had no pulse or blood pressure and her pupils were fixed. Aldridge was pronounced dead after she did not respond to stimulation attempts.
On June 19, 1990, Michael Allen Clark, M.D., performed an autopsy on Aldridge. Dr. Clark determined the cause of death as a severed vertebral artery in the neck of Aldridge which was caused by blunt force trauma to the neck. This type of injury is unusual and almost instantaneously fatal.
On June 21, 1990, Nunn was charged by information with one count of murder.
I. Newly-Discovered Evidence
Nunn argues that the trial court erred when it denied his request for a new trial. He asserts that newly-discovered evidence, more specifically that Ashley kicked Aldridge, would have a material effect on the result at a new trial.
In order to obtain a new trial based on newly-discovered evidence, appellant must prove that: (1) the evidence has been discovered since the trial; (2) it is material and relevant; (8) it is not cumulative; (4) it is not merely impeaching; (5) it is not privileged or incompetent; (6) due diligence was used to discover it in time for trial; (7) the *337evidence is worthy of credit; (8) it can be produced on a retrial of the case; and (9) it will probably produce a different result. Bustamante v. State (1990), Ind., 557 N.E.2d 1313, 1324; Hughes v. State (1989), Ind., 546 N.E.2d 1203, 1210. The trial court, in determining whether a piece of evidence would produce a different result upon a new trial, may consider the weight that a reasonable trier of fact would give it and may evaluate the probable impact the evidence would have in a new trial considering the facts and cireumstances shown at the original trial. Fox v. State (1991), Ind., 568 N.E.2d 1006, 1007. The newly-discovered evidence must raise a strong presumption that in all probability a different result would be achieved in a new trial. O'Connor v. State (1988), Ind., 529 N.E.2d 881, 888. Unless the newly-discovered evidence indicates a probable change in the result of the original trial, a new trial need not be granted. Id. On appeal, the denial of a motion based on newly-discovered evidence will be reversed only upon a showing that the trial court abused its discretion. Fox, 568 N.E.2d at 1007; O'Connor, 529 N.E.2d at 333; Blacknell v. State (1987), Ind., 502 N.E.2d 899, 902; Harden v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 215, 219, cert. denied (1983), 459 U.S. 1149, 103 S.Ct. 794, 74 L.Ed.2d 998. The defendant has the burden to show that the newly-discovered evidence meets the standard for a new trial. O'Connor, 529 N.E.2d at 333.
Here, Nunn supported his motion to correct error with testimony presented at the sentencing hearing. The evidence consisted of two witnesses, Trina Hopkins and Dee Dee Nunn. Both witnesses were present at the park on the evening of the incident. Hopkins, although not at the shelter house, was approximately ten feet away from it and saw Nunn strike Aldridge. At the sentencing hearing, Hopkins testified that she also saw Ashley kick Aldridge. Dee Dee Nunn, defendant's cousin, although she was in the vicinity of the shelter house, did not witness the incident. At the sentencing hearing, Dee Dee testified that while she was in the parking lot, Pearson approached her and told her that she should go to the shelter house because her cousin had hit a woman. Additionally, Dee Dee testified that Pearson telephoned her later that evening and told her that Ashley kicked Aldridge after Nunn hit Aldridge.
We find that the evidence fails to meet the standards for granting a new trial. Hopkins' testimony lacks credibility because she failed to say anything at the time of the investigation. This is evidenced by the fact that on the day of the incident she told the police she saw nothing. Dee Dee Nunn's testimony concerned alleged statements made by Pearson regarding the incident. The record already contained evidence of these statements so that the testimony of Dee Dee Nunn was merely cumulative. We have not been convinced by Nunn that the new evidence would probably produce a different result in a new trial. We hold that the trial court committed no error in denying Nunn a new trial based on newly-discovered evidence.
II. Impeachment by Conviction
Nunn argues that it was improper for the trial court to preclude the defense from using evidence of a prior conviction to impeach a State witness, even though there was a pardon for the crime.
This issue, whether a conviction for which a pardon has been granted may be used to impeach the witness, is one of first impression. As part of our decision, we examine what effect a pardon has on the conviction.
This Court in Kelley v. State (1933), 204 Ind. 612, 185 N.E. 453, concluded that a pardon relieves the person of the punish ment for the crime and obliterates the finding of guilt. The Court determined that the State could not use a prior conviction which had been pardoned to support an habitual offender charge. Id., 204 Ind. at 630-31, 185 N.E. at 460. In explaining the decision, the Court cited a United States Supreme Court decision which states:
A pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed for the offense and the guilt of the offender; and when the pardon is full, it releases the punishment and blots out of existence the guilt, so that in the eye of the law the offender is as innocent *338as if he had never committed the offense. If granted before conviction, it prevents any of the penalties and disabilities consequent upon conviction from attaching; if granted after conviction, it removes the penalties and disabilities, and restores him to all his civil rights; it makes him, as it were, a new man, and gives him a new credit and capacity.
Ex parte Garland (1866), 71 U.S., 4 Wall. 333, 379, 18 L.Ed. 366, 370, quoted in Kelley, 612 Ind. at 625, 185 N.E. at 458.
The Court of Appeals recently examined a similar issue in State v. Bergman (1990), Ind.App., 558 N.E.2d 1111. In Bergman, the Court of Appeals examined the ability of the court to expunge a conviction after a pardon. The court concluded that in order to "clear defendant's name" and to give effect to the pardon, it was appropriate to expunge the record of the conviction. Id. at 1114. The court determined its decision to be consistent with Kelley.
Additionally, the Federal Rules of Evidence provide only a limited right to use a conviction after a pardon. Federal Rule of Evidence 609(c) provides:
Evidence of a conviction is not admissible under this rule if (1) the conviction has been the subject of a pardon, annulment, certificate of rehabilitation, or other equivalent procedure based on a finding of the rehabilitation of the person convicted, and that person has not been convicted of a subsequent crime which was punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year, or (2) the conviction has been the subject of a pardon, annulment, or other equivalent procedure based on a finding of innocence.
As stated in Kelley, the purpose of a pardon is to give a person a new start by blocking out the existence of guilt. Kelley, 204 Ind. at 625, 185 N.E. at 458. When a pardoned conviction is used to impeach a person, the purpose for granting the pardon may be diminished. The Federal Rule, however, protects the purpose of a pardon by permitting impeachment by a pardoned conviction only in limited cireumstances. In doing this, we find that the Federal Rule furthers the purpose of a pardon. Accordingly, we adopt the Federal Rule which generally denies impeachment by a conviction after a pardon is granted.
The pardon granted in favor of the witness stated that he had led a crime-free life since his release from probation, he had earned the confidence and support from his peers in the community, and that the pardon was requested so that he could become a full-time police officer. This satisfies the requirements of the Federal Rule and thus the rule announced today. We hold that the trial court was correct in refusing to permit impeachment by a pardoned conviction.
III. Sufficiency of Evidence
Nunn argues that there is insufficient evidence to sustain a murder conviction. The trial court instructed the jury that "knowingly" refers to a state of mind with respect to every material element of the charged crime. Nunn asserts that the State failed to prove that he was aware of a high probability that he was killing when he struck the victim, due to the manner in which Aldridge was struck, and because the nature of the injury was unusual.
Our standard of reviewing claims relating to sufficiency of the evidence is well-established. On appeal, we do not weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of witnesses. We consider only that evidence most favorable to the verdict together with all reasonable and logical inferences to be drawn therefrom. If there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the conclusion of the trier of fact, the verdict will not be disturbed. Banks v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d 1126, 1129. The crime of murder is defined under Ind. Code § 35-42-1-1 and states in pertinent part: "A person who knowingly or intentionally kills another human being...." The information charged Nunn with knowingly killing another human being. "A person engages in conduct 'knowingly' if, when he engages in the conduct, he is aware of a high probability that he is doing so." - Ind.Code § 85-41-2-2(b).
*339The question here is whether Nunn acted with the requisite intent when he struck Aldridge. An intent to kill sufficient to sustain a murder conviction can be established in several ways. The intent to kill may be inferred from the use of a deadly weapon. Jones v. State (1988), Ind., 523 N.E.2d 750, 752; Bryan v. State (1983), Ind., 450 N.E.2d 58, 68. Intent may be inferred from the nature of the attack and the circumstances surrounding the crime. Corbin v. State (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 86, 88. The duration, brutality, and relative strengths of the defendant and vie tim may also indicate an intent to kill. Gibson v. State (1987), Ind., 515 N.E.2d 492, 496. Additionally, where blows of magnitude are repeated, a jury could conclude that the defendant had an intent to kill. Horne v. State (1983), Ind., 445 N.E.2d 976, 979.
The facts of record and the reasonable inferences most favorable to the verdict establish that on June 18, 1990, Jean Aldridge went to Geater Park to find the child who had hit her daughter with a rock. Upon arriving at the park, she spoke with three young adults, one of them being Nunn, in a park shelter and inquired about a girl. The girl who was nearby identified herself to Aldridge. Aldridge yelled and swore at the girl. Ashley spoke to Al-dridge. Nunn left the conversation, talked with another child, and then approached Aldridge from behind. As Nunn left the shelter area, he struck Aldridge once hard from behind and continued to walk away. No words were exchanged between Nunn and Aldridge. Medical attention was sought for Aldridge. A short time later, she was pronounced dead.
We believe the facts can only justify a conviction for involuntary manslaughter.
Involuntary manslaughter is defined as the killing of another human being while committing or attempting to commit a battery, Ind.Code § 85-42-1-4, and contemplates an incidental killing that occurs during a battery. Ingram v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 823, 831. Battery is defined as knowingly or intentionally touching another person in a rude, insolent, or angry manner. - Ind.Code § 85-42-2-1. Where the killing is accomplished by a touching, as here, involuntary manslaughter may be a lesser included offense of murder. - Ingram, 547 N.E.2d at 831.
The evidence reveals that Nunn and Al-dridge did not exchange words, that Nunn struck Aldridge once with his hands, and that the cause of death, a severed vertebral artery, is an unusual injury. The evidence reveals that Nunn committed a battery and that Aldridge died shortly after the battery. Although under other circumstances, an intent to kill may be inferred from a single blow, we do not believe that it is established here.
On appeal, this Court may order a modification of a conviction judgment to that of a lesser included offense because of an insufficiency of evidence on a particular element of the crime. Dickens v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 284, 293, 295 N.E.2d 613, 619; Lane v. State (1978), 175 Ind.App. 543, 547, 372 N.E.2d 1223, 1227; Ind. Appellate Rule 15(N).
Therefore, we hold that the evidence was insufficient to sustain a murder conviction and direct that the judgment of the trial court be modified to involuntary manslaughter in conformity with this opinion.
IV. Instruction
Nunn contends that the trial court erred in the giving of Instruction Nos. 4, 5 and 7 because each instruction is a misrepresentation of the law and together they place unfair and undue emphasis upon the facts of the case. All three instructions deal with the issue of the requisite state of mind to prove murder and the permissible inferences which may be drawn from the fact that the defendant struck the victim. Our resolution of Issue III, above, renders unnecessary a ruling on the propriety of these instructions.
Conclusion
Accordingly, we remand this case to the trial court with instructions to vacate the judgment and sentence to the offense of murder, to enter judgment upon the lesser included offense of involuntary manslaugh*340ter, and to impose sentence on the involuntary manslaughter conviction.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents, with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740037 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:25.676376+00 ===

DYKMAN, P.J.
¶ 1. Joseph D. Meyer appeals from a judgment of divorce awarding his wife, Julia M. Meyer, $1,700 per month in maintenance payments for eight years. Joseph asserts that the trial court erroneously exercised its discretion by considering Julia and his non-marital relationship when it made its maintenance determination. We agree. Therefore, we reverse and remand with instructions to exclude consideration of Julia and Joseph's premarital relationship from the maintenance decision. Joseph also argues that the trial court cannot, in the alternative, base its award on Julia's claim for unjust enrichment. Because a medical degree is not an asset for purposes of an unjust enrichment claim, we agree.
I. Background
¶ 2. Julia and Joseph met in March of 1985 in Green Bay. At the end of that summer, Joseph began attending college at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. He began spending the night at Julia's apartment in Green Bay in February 1986. While Joseph attended school, Julia worked, first as a nurse, and then, beginning in December 1988, as a claims examiner at an insurance company. Joseph worked during the summers while in college, but Julia testified that she paid all of the rent, telephone and utility expenses for her apartment.
¶ 3. In August 1989, Julia and Joseph moved to Milwaukee so that he could attend medical school. In their first year in Milwaukee, they rented an apart*195ment together, but in 1990 they moved into a house. Joseph testified that his mother purchased the house and that he and Julia made monthly payments to his mother out of their joint checking account. In 1992, Joseph and Julia purchased a duplex, and lived in one half while renting out the other half. While Joseph attended medical school, Julia continued to work in the insurance industry. She testified that she also did the majority of the housework and ran all of the household errands. Joseph paid for his college and medical school tuition and books with loans.
¶ 4. Julia and Joseph married in May 1993. Joseph graduated from medical school in 1994. In May of that year, he and Julia moved to La Crosse so that he could begin his residency program. After their first child was born, Julia began working for an insurance company in La Crosse. She also took primary responsibility for caring for their child. Joseph completed his residency in 1997 and began working as an urgent care doctor at a clinic in La Crosse.
¶ 5. In June 1997, Julia filed a petition for divorce. In September 1998, she filed an amended petition for divorce to include a claim for unjust enrichment based on her support of Joseph while he obtained his medical degree. The trial court concluded that if Julia proved the elements of unjust enrichment, it would address Julia's premarital support of Joseph and resolve the unjust enrichment claim within the divorce.
¶ 6. At trial, Julia testified that, before she met Joseph, she intended to go back to school to get a degree in business administration. After she became seriously involved with Joseph, she said her plans changed. She testified that she knew that they could not both go to school full time and that she understood that, based on *196the commitment they made to each other, they would both benefit once he began earning a doctor's .salary. Julia asked the trial court to award her $2,400 per month in maintenance for five years.
¶ 7. At the close of trial, the court granted the judgment of divorce. It did not make a specific ruling on Julia's unjust enrichment claim. The court stated that while
an unjust enrichment claim may be held because I do not believe that a piece of property is necessary ... I do believe that, standing by itself, the contribution of Mrs. Meyer to the education, training, and increased earning capacity of Dr. Meyer is sufficient without the unjust enrichment claim to provide her some compensation under a fairness and equity argument in this case.
¶ 8. The court awarded Julia $1,700 per month in maintenance for a period of eight years. It reasoned that $1,700 per month would allow Julia to support herself and her child, and to go to school. The court explained:
I'm satisfied that $1,700 is a reasonable sum to award for maintenance, taking into consideration all of the factors which this Court must consider, including the contribution which she has provided to his earning capacity.
The length of the support — Dr. Meyer is correct that this is only a four-year marriage for these parties. And under what would normally be looking at this strictly by the numbers type of situation, the child support — or the maintenance would not be for a long period of time.
But these parties, based upon my findings, have cohabited for the major part of 1987, '88, ’89, *197'90, '91, '92, '93, '94, '95 and '96. So that's approximately ten years. Some of that they were married. Some of that they were not. But, in taking into consideration the total consequences of how they came together and the length of period of time they were together and the contribution that she has made to this marriage, the Court is satisfied that a maintenance award in the amount of [$1,700] for a period of eight years is a reasonable award.
Joseph appeals.
II. Analysis
A. Maintenance Award
¶ 9. Joseph contends that the trial court erred by considering Julia and his non-marital relationship in making its maintenance decision. The determination of the amount and duration of maintenance rests within the discretion of the trial court. See Olski v. Olski, 197 Wis. 2d 237, 242 n.2, 540 N.W.2d 412, 414 n.2 (1995). We will not overturn a trial court's maintenance decision unless the court erroneously exercised its discretion by failing to consider relevant factors, basing its award on factual errors, making an error of law, or granting an excessive or inadequate award. See id.
¶ 10. In Watts v. Watts, the supreme court held that Wisconsin's property division statute, § 767.255, Stats., did not extend to unmarried cohabitants. Watts v. Watts, 137 Wis. 2d 506, 517-18, 405 N.W.2d 303, 308 (1987). The court noted that the legislature intended the Family Code to apply, "for the most part, to those couples who have been joined in marriage according to *198law." Id. at 519, 405 N.W.2d at 309. The court concluded:
Furthermore, the Family Code emphasizes marriage. The entire Family Code, of which ch. 767 is an integral part, is governed generally by the provisions of sec. 765.001(2), which states in part that "[i]t is the intent of chs. 765 to 768 to promote the stability and best interests of marriage and the family .... Marriage is the institution that is the foundation of family and of society. Its stability is basic to morality and civilization, and of vital interest to society and the state." (Emphasis supplied.) Section 765.001(3) further states that "[c]hapters 765 to 768 shall be liberally construed to effect the objectives of sub. (2)." The conclusion is almost inescapable from this language in sec. 765.001(2), (3) that the legislature not only intended chs. 765-768 to protect and promote the "family," but also intended "family" to be within the "marriage" context.10
*199¶ 11. Based on Watts, in Greenwald v. Green-wald, we concluded that one spouse's premarital contributions to the other spouse's estate was not relevant to a maintenance claim. Greenwald v. Greenwald, 154 Wis. 2d 767, 790, 454 N.W.2d 34, 42-43 (Ct. App. 1990). In Greenwald, a retired widower hired a housekeeper, who lived with him for ten years while taking care of his home before the two married. Id. at 776-77, 454 N.W.2d at 37. We decided that Watts precluded the trial court from considering the contributions the housekeeper made during the ten-year premarital relationship in its maintenance determination. See id. at 789-90, 454 N.W.2d at 42-43.
¶ 12. In Greenwald, we did not simply affirm a trial court's discretionary determination. We did not say in Greenwald, "The trial court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it did not consider Josephine's premarital contributions." Instead, we held as a matter of law that a trial court may not consider premarital contributions in its maintenance and property division determinations. We said:
Although Watts did not present a maintenance claim, we are persuaded that Watts also requires us to reject Josephine's claim that her premarital contribution to Darwin's estate is a relevant factor on her maintenance claim. After examining the Family Code's legislative history in Watts, the supreme court concluded that the code did not govern property divisions between unmarried cohabitants. We conclude that this same reasoning applies with equal force to Josephine's maintenance claim.
Id. at 790, 454 N.W.2d at 42-43 (emphasis added). We conclude that the trial court erroneously exercised its *200discretion by considering Julia and Joseph’s pre-mari-tal relationship when it made its maintenance determination, contrary to our holding in Greenwald.
¶ 13. Julia argues that the trial court's reasoning was correct because, under Wolski v. Wolski, 210 Wis. 2d 183, 565 N.W.2d 196 (Ct. App. 1997), if a couple has been together for a long period, it would be unfair not to consider the entire time they were together in making a maintenance award. However, in Wolski, the parties were married for nearly twenty years, got divorced, remarried for another three years, and then divorced again. Id. at 186, 565 N.W.2d at 197. We held that "[w]hen parties have been married to one another more than once, a trial court, in its exercise of discretion, can properly look at the total number of years of the marriage when considering maintenance for one of the parties." Id. at 192, 565 N.W.2d at 199. Wolski applies only to years of marriage. It does not allow a trial court to consider the time a couple cohabits.
B. Unjust Enrichment
¶ 14. The trial court did not base its decision on Julia's unjust enrichment claim. However, the parties have briefed whether the trial court could have done so and we will address the issue.
¶ 15. Joseph argues that the trial court incorrectly concluded that, in the absence of its maintenance decision, it could have based its award on Julia's unjust enrichment claim. In Wisconsin, "unmarried cohabitants may raise claims based upon unjust enrichment following the termination of their relationships where one of the parties attempts to retain an unreasonable amount of the property acquired through the efforts of both." Watts, 137 Wis. 2d at 532-33, 405 N.W.2d at 314. *201The elements of unjust enrichment are: "(1) a benefit conferred on the defendant by the plaintiff, (2) appreciation or knowledge by the defendant of the benefit, and (3) acceptance or retention of the benefit by the defendant under circumstances making it inequitable for the defendant to retain the benefit." Id. at 531, 405 N.W.2d at 313.
¶ 16. We have interpreted the theory of unjust enrichment to require "that the complaining party present proof of specific contributions that directly led to an increase in assets or an accumulation of wealth." Ward v. Jahnke, 220 Wis. 2d 539, 547-48, 583 N.W.2d 656, 660 (Ct. App. 1998). Thus, in a non-marital cohabitation situation, for the complaining party to recover under an unjust enrichment claim, he or she must demonstrate: "(1) an accumulation of assets, (2) acquired through the efforts of the claimant and the other party and (3) retained by the other party in an unreasonable amount." Waage v. Borer, 188 Wis. 2d 324, 329-330, 525 N.W.2d 96, 98 (Ct. App. 1994). Whether the facts of this case satisfy the legal standard for unjust enrichment is a question of law that we review de novo. See id. at 328, 525 N.W.2d at 98.
¶ 17. Joseph asserts that Julia's unjust enrichment claim cannot succeed because she has not shown an accumulation of assets. He points out that Julia's claim is based on her support while he obtained a medical degree. In Dewitt v. Dewitt, we concluded that a trial court could not value a law degree as an asset to be included in a marital estate. DeWitt v. DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d 44, 53, 296 N.W.2d 761, 765 (Ct. App. 1980). Joseph argues that, similarly, in an unjust enrichment case, an educational degree does not meet the requirement *202of showing an increase in assets or an accumulation of wealth.
¶ 18. Julia argues that DeWitt is inapplicable in this case. She points out that in Lundberg v. Lundberg, 107 Wis. 2d 1, 318 N.W.2d 918 (1982), and Roberto v. Brown, 107 Wis. 2d 17, 318 N.W.2d 358 (1982), the supreme court held "that DeWitt, which involved the [divorce] statutes as they existed prior to the 1977 Divorce Reform Act, was not controlling for cases arising after the Act." Id. at 22, 318 N.W.2d at 360. In Lundberg, the court stated that, in that case, a medical degree was "[i]n a sense ... the most significant asset of the marriage." Lundberg, 107 Wis. 2d at 14, 318 N.W.2d at 924. It concluded that, when one spouse supports the other spouse through school, the first spouse can be compensated through property division and maintenance. See id. at 10, 318 N.W.2d at 922.
¶ 19. We agree with Joseph that a degree is not an asset for purposes of unjust enrichment. Although DeWitt involved the valuation of a degree as an asset within a marital estate, our reasoning in that case also applies in cases of unjust enrichment. In DeWitt, we pointed to the difficulty of placing a value on a degree:
Whether a professional education is and will be of future value to its recipient is a matter resting on factors which are at best difficult to anticipate or measure. A person qualified by education for a given profession may choose not to practice it, may fail at it, or may practice in a specialty, location or manner which generates less than the average income enjoyed by fellow professionals. The potential worth of the education may never be realized for these or many other reasons.
*203DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d at 58, 296 N.W.2d at 768 (footnote omitted). It would be difficult for the trial court to fairly estimate the value of Joseph's medical degree in order to evaluate Julia's unjust enrichment claim. Although Joseph used his medical degree to obtain work as a doctor at a clinic with a fixed salary, it would be unfair to use that salary as a basis for valuing his degree because there is no guarantee that he will keep that job or its salary.
¶ 20. Our holding in DeWitt is exemplified in this case. The trial court made no determination that Joseph's degree was or was not property. It did not value the degree. Julia's expert witness illustrated our concern in DeWitt. Depending upon the method he used, the expert valued Julia's loss or Joseph's benefit as between $47,543 and $522,861. Though legally trained persons are comfortable with making or approving an award somewhere between these values, most members of the lay public would view such an award as something akin to a lottery.
¶ 21. We do not agree with Julia that Lundberg and Roberto have rendered our conclusion in DeWitt inapplicable in this case. In Lundberg and Roberto, the supreme court concluded that the changes to the divorce statutes brought by the 1977 Divorce Reform Act gave a trial court the flexibility to compensate a spouse who supported the other spouse through school. Lundberg, 107 Wis. 2d at 9-10, 318 N.W.2d at 922. Thus, the court concluded that our holding in DeWitt did not apply to cases arising after the Divorce Reform Act. See Roberto, 107 Wis. 2d at 22, 318 N.W.2d at 360. However, an unjust enrichment claim is an action in "quasi contract." See Watts, 137 Wis. 2d at 530, 405 N.W.2d at 313. It is not an action based on divorce laws. A change in the divorce statutes does not render *204our reasoning in DeWitt inapplicable to a claim based upon unjust enrichment. In Lundberg and Roberto, the supreme court did not address whether an educational degree could be considered an asset. DeWitt remains the only case to address that issue.
¶ 22. Cook v. Cook, 208 Wis. 2d 166, 189 — 90, 560 N.W.2d 246, 256 (1997), holds that the court of appeals lacks subject matter jurisdiction to overrule, modify or withdraw language from one of its published opinions.1 Only the supreme court has the power to overrule or modify DeWitt. Because placing a value on a degree would be as difficult here as it was in DeWitt, we conclude that Julia cannot state a claim for unjust enrichment based on her contributions to Joseph's medical degree.2
¶ 23. The court of appeals is primarily an error correcting court. See State ex rel. Swan v. Elections Board, 133 Wis. 2d 87, 94, 394 N.W.2d 732, 735 (1986). *205We are bound by both the prior decisions of this court, see Cook, 208 Wis. 2d at 190, 560 N.W.2d at 256, and of the supreme court, see State v. Olsen, 99 Wis. 2d 572, 583, 299 N.W.2d 632, 638 (Ct. App. 1980). The supreme court, see Swan, 133 Wis. 2d at 93-94, 394 N.W.2d at 735, and the legislature, see Rice v. City of Oshkosh, 148 Wis. 2d 78, 91, 435 N.W.2d 252, 257 (1989), are the governmental bodies designed and authorized to decide the public policy of the State of Wisconsin. There are few issues as policy laden as the proper place of cohabitants in Wisconsin law. The supreme court recognized the nature of this issue in Watts, 137 Wis. 2d at 517 n.6 and 519 nn. 10 — 11, 405 N.W.2d at 308 n.6 and 309 nn.10-11. Cohabitation, whether government should recognize cohabitants in the same way it recognizes married couples, whether the sexual orientation of cohabitants is relevant in a divorce setting, and whether cohabitants should be permitted to divorce each other are topics debated with fervor in today's society. This court is not the place to decide the public policy regarding these issues. We reject the entreaties of Julia and the dissent to do so.
¶ 24. For the reasons discussed above, we reverse. We remand with directions to exclude the time the parties cohabited from the trial court's maintenance determination, and for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed and cause remanded with directions.
When the legislature abolished criminal sanctions for cohabitation in 1983, it nevertheless added a section to the criminal code stating that while the state does not regulate private sexual activity of consenting adults, the state does not condone or encourage sexual conduct outside the institution of marriage. The legislature adopted the language of sec. 765.001 that "[mjarriage is the foundation of family and society. Its stability is basic to morality and civilization, and of vital interest to society and this state." Sec. 944.01, Stats. 1985-86.
Id. at 518-19, 405 N.W.2d at 308-09. We cannot conclude that, despite this holding in Watts, the Family Code somehow applies to the Meyers' cohabitation period.
Subject matter jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a particular case or controversy. See P.C. v. C.C., 161 Wis. 2d 277, 297, 468 N.W.2d 190, 198 (1991).
Our conclusion comports with other Wisconsin cases involving claims of unjust enrichment based on personal relationships. In those cases, when the claimant successfully stated a claim for unjust enrichment, it involved quantifiable assets. See Lawlis v. Thompson, 137 Wis. 2d 490, 492—93, 405 N.W.2d 317, 317 (1987) (cash transfers made to the other party); Watts v. Watts, 137 Wis. 2d 506, 514, 405 N.W.2d 303, 307 (1987) (increase in personal and business wealth); Ward v. Jahnke, 220 Wis. 2d 539, 550-51, 583 N.W.2d 656, 661 (Ct. App. 1998) ($11,000 down payment on a house). Cf. Waage v. Borer, 188 Wis. 2d 324, 330-31, 525 N.W.2d 96, 98-99 (Ct. App. 1994) (holding that a claim for unjust enrichment cannot be based on unfulfilled emotional expectations with no proof of accumulated assets).

=== CASE 9740038 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:25.681815+00 ===

DEININGER, J.
¶ 25. (dissenting). I cannot join in the disposition ordered by the majority. The result reached is not, in my view, required by existing precedent, and it replicates the unfairness the supreme *206court described and sought to avoid in Watts v. Watts, 137 Wis. 2d 506, 405 N.W.2d 303 (1987):
[A]llowing no relief at all to one party in a so-called "illicit" relationship effectively provides total relief to the other, by leaving that party owner of all the assets acquired through the efforts of both. Yet it cannot seriously be argued that the party retaining all the assets is less "guilty" than the other. Such a result is contrary to the principles of equity. Many courts have held, and we now so hold, that unmarried cohabitants may raise claims based upon unjust enrichment following the termination of their relationships where one of the parties attempts to retain an unreasonable amount of the property acquired through the efforts of both.
Id. at 532-33, 405 N.W.2d at 314 (footnote omitted).
¶ 26. I acknowledge our obligation to follow and apply the holdings of previously published opinions of this court. See Cook v. Cook, 208 Wis. 2d 166, 189-90, 560 N.W.2d 246, 256 (1997). I conclude, however, that neither Greenwald v. Greenwald, 154 Wis. 2d 767, 454 N.W.2d 34 (Ct. App. 1990), nor DeWitt v. DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d 44, 296 N.W.2d 761 (Ct. App. 1980), upon which the majority relies, requires the result the majority reaches.
¶ 27. There is no dispute that Julia Meyer contributed mightily to her husband's attainment of his medical degree, both financially and through the contribution of her homemaking services and moral support over the ten-year span encompassing Joseph's undergraduate and medical studies and his internal medicine residency. Then, just as the couple was poised to begin reaping the rewards of their decade of mutual hard work and sacrifice, in the form of Joseph's $125,000 salary as a physician, they divorced.
*207¶ 28. The majority's reading of the prior decisions of this court creates a cruel Catch-22 for Julia.1 Because the couple did not marry until 1993, the trial court is directed to give no consideration whatsoever in its maintenance determination to the first seven years of Julia's contributions to Joseph's education and increased earning capacity. But, the relief that would ordinarily be available to an unmarried person in Julia's position, recovery for her contributions under an unjust enrichment theory, must also be denied her because the fruit of her labors was Joseph's increased earning capacity represented by his medical degree, instead of the accumulation of more tangible assets. I disagree with both propositions.
¶ 29. I conclude that the trial court did not erroneously exercise its discretion in awarding Julia maintenance in the amount of $20,400 per year for eight years, given the facts before it. The trial court's award was explicitly based on both support and fairness considerations. The award is sustainable on the basis of numerous factors under § 767.26, Stats., including the educational level of the parties at the inception and end of their marriage; the disparity in their earning capacities; the time needed for Julia to increase her earning capacity and improve her prospects for a comparable standard of living; the parties' mutual agreement, express or implied, before and during the marriage, whereby Julia made financial and service contributions to Joseph "with the expectation of reciprocation or other compensation in the future"; and Julia's contributions to Joseph's education and *208increased earning power. See § 767.26(4)-(9). In my view, the fact that the trial court considered the seven years of contributions Julia made to Joseph's education and increased earning power prior to their marriage does not so taint the maintenance award that it must be reversed.
¶ 30. Reversal of the maintenance award is required by neither statute nor case law. I note first, as did the trial court, that several of the relevant statutory factors are not explicitly limited to occurrences during the marriage. In particular, the last two factors, § 767.26(9) and (10), Stats. ("[t]he contribution by one party to education... or increased earning power of the other," and "[s]uch other factors as the court may . . . determine to be relevant"), are not limited to post-marriage events. The majority believes, however, that we are compelled by our holding in Greenwald to limit a trial court's application of the statutory factors to events occurring only during the marriage. I disagree.
¶ 31. Our discussion of the issue in Greenwald appears to be dicta. The discussion was not necessary to our disposition of the appeal — the reversal and remand of the trial court's property division ruling, with a direction to also reconsider maintenance in view of the new property division. But even if the Greenwald discussion is binding precedent, it does not require us to reverse the present maintenance determination. Our conclusion in Greenwald was that the trial court did not err when it "refused to consider [the wife]'s premarital contributions in support of her . . . maintenance ... claim[ ]." Greenwald, 154 Wis. 2d at 789, 454 N.W.2d at 42.2 But our conclusion in Greenwald that *209the trial court properly declined to consider premarital contributions when setting maintenance, does not require us to now hold that a trial court, in the exercise of its discretion, and regardless of the facts before it, may never give any consideration to one spouse's premarital contributions to the other's education and increased earning capacity.
¶ 32. The factual differences between Greenwald and the present case are substantial. There, a seventy-year-old widower engaged the housekeeping services of a "twice divorced" woman "in her late 50's." Id. at 776, 454 N.W.2d at 37. She moved into the man's home and received free room and board in exchange for part-time housekeeping services, while she continued full-time employment outside the residence for some eight years. The woman "oftentimes proposed marriage," but the man declined, wishing to preserve his estate for his own children. Id. Ultimately, however, and under the terms of a premarital agreement that served to keep each party's property separate and free from the claims of the other, the parties married when they were sixty-seven and eighty-one, respectively. Three years later, the wife filed for divorce and asked that the marital property agreement be set aside. See id. at 776-78, 454 N.W.2d at 37-38.
¶ 33. There is nothing in our recitation of the facts in Greenwald to suggest that the wife contributed in any significant way, either before or during the marriage, to the accumulation of assets or to the increased earning power of the husband. In fact, the opposite is implied, given that the husband had retired and accumulated substantial assets before the relationship began. See id. One could also infer from our discussion *210of the facts in Greenwald, and from our conclusion that the marital property agreement was substantively fair, that we considered the wife to have received fair compensation under the agreement for the contributions she made to the household, both before and during the marriage. See id. at 783-88, 454 N.W.2d at 40-42. It is not surprising, then, that we also concluded that the trial court was not required to consider the wife's claimed premarital contributions to the marital estate, as she insisted the court should have done. See id. at 789-90, 454 N.W.2d at 42-43.
¶ 34. The present facts are vastly different. During the seven years prior to their marriage, while Joseph pursued his undergraduate and medical education, Julia provided the primary, if not the sole, financial support for the household.3 And, unlike the Greenwalds, when these parties married, they made no agreement limiting either's claims against the other in the event of the dissolution of their marriage. To the contrary, the trial court found that Julia "shared her bed, home, and income with [Joseph] with the expectation that some day she would be a doctor's wife, and that is what she did become."
*211¶ 35. In short, I do not read our discussion in Greenwald to stand for the proposition that a trial court, when determining maintenance in a divorce action, may never consider the premarital contributions of one spouse to the education and increased earning capacity of the other spouse, regardless of the facts before it. Thus, I would hold that Greenwald is distinguishable on the present facts, and that the trial court did not err in giving some consideration to Julia's substantial contributions to Joseph's education and earning power during the seven years of their relationship which predated their marriage. Affirming the trial court's exercise of discretion in this case would not revolutionize family law, devalue the institution of marriage or create disincentives for persons to marry. It would simply confirm that when determining maintenance in a divorce action, a trial court may, but need not, consider the contributions by one spouse to the education and increased earning power of the other spouse, over the entire relationship of the parties.4
*212¶ 36. I also conclude that Julia's claim is sustainable under her alternative rationale — unjust enrichment. Julia pled contractual and unjust enrichment claims for compensation for her premarital contributions to Joseph's education and increased earning power. The trial court permitted her to pursue the unjust enrichment claim along with her claims under ch. 767, Stats. In its decision on maintenance following the final hearing in the divorce, the court acknowledged that it could have rested its maintenance award in part on the unjust enrichment theory, but declined to do so, concluding that the additional rationale was unnecessary. I agree with the trial court in both regards: the maintenance award is a proper exercise of discretion by the trial court in view of the factors under § 767.26, Stats., but if other or additional justification for the award is necessary, the theory of unjust enrichment, as set forth in Watts, provides it.
¶ 37. The majority again relies, inappropriately I believe, on a prior opinion of this court in denying Julia relief under a theory of unjust enrichment for the contributions she made to Joseph's education and increased earning capacity prior to the marriage. The majority's reliance on DeWitt v. DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d 44, 296 N.W.2d 761 (Ct. App. 1980), is misplaced. The supreme court has made clear that our holding in DeWitt (that "a professional education or the increased earning capacity it confers" is not an asset of the marital estate, subject to division in a divorce action) must be limited to the facts and circumstances of that case:
*213We believe that our Divorce Reform Act, ch. 105, Laws of 1977, provides a flexible way for trial courts to compensate a spouse in cases of this kind. The DeWitt Case, on which the court of appeals relied in reversing the trial court, arose under ch. 247, STATS., 1975. However, the legislature subsequently made numerous changes in the divorce and separation statutes. This case is controlled by the amended statutes and we hold that the trial court properly applied them in awarding compensation to Judy Lundberg.
■ In amending these statutes, the legislature made clear its intent that "... a spouse who has been handicapped socially and economically by his or her contributions to a marriage shall be compensated for such contributions at the termination of the marriage. . . ." Ch. 105, sec. 1(2), Laws of 1977. Compensation for a person who supports his or her spouse while the spouse is in school can be achieved through both property division and maintenance payments.
Lundberg v. Lundberg, 107 Wis. 2d 1, 9-10, 318 N.W.2d 918, 922 (1982). Moreover, the court concluded in Lundberg that fairness requires a trial court to consider and compensate a wife for "her costs and foregone opportunities resulting from her support of [her husband] while he was in school," because the husband's "medical degree is the most significant asset of the marriage." See id. at 14, 318 N.W.2d at 924.
¶ 38. Thus, DeWitt is questionable as precedent following the enactment of ch. 105, Laws of 1977. Furthermore, we did not say in DeWitt that no consideration could be given to a wife's contributions to her husband's attainment of a professional degree, only that the degree itself was not an asset that could be *214valued and divided under the existing property division statute:
While we hold that the trial court erred in valuing the [husband]'s law degree as an asset of the marital estate, it is our opinion that both the [wife]'s financial contributions to the family while he obtained it and the present disparity in the parties' income earning capacities resulting from the postponement of the [wifej's own education are appropriate factors for consideration in arriving at a property division, and in determining whether alimony (now "maintenance") is appropriate.
DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d at 60, 296 N.W.2d at 769. Judge Dykman, in a concurrence, would have gone even further. He would have allowed the valuation of the law degree and its division as a marital asset, concluding that merely considering the wife's contribution to the attainment of the degree for purposes of property division or maintenance presents "difficulties" in certain cases. See DeWitt, 98 Wis. 2d at 63-65, 296 N.W.2d at 770-71 (Dykman, J., concurring).5
¶ 39. The circumstances which concerned Judge Dykman then are similar to those before us now:
It is common to find couples with no property or children, where one spouse is gainfully employed while the other obtains an education. If the divorce is obtained upon receipt of the degree, there are no significant assets which the court can award the supporting spouse as compensation. The supporting spouse would have a difficult time establishing need, for maintenance payments if he or she is employed *215and there are no children. Thus, the court's inability to consider the degree as a marital asset would result in a situation in which the income of one spouse is used for the benefit of the other spouse with no method of allowing compensation.
Id. at 65-66, 296 N.W.2d at 771 (Dykman, J., concurring).
¶ 40. Fortunately, in this case, the trial court was able to compensate Julia for her contributions to Joseph's medical education and increased earning capacity by awarding her maintenance. In so doing, the trial court in no way violated our holding in DeWitt — the court placed no dollar value on Joseph's medical degree, nor did it attempt to divide it as a marital asset. Awarding maintenance on the present facts is not only consistent with what the DeWitt majority cited as a proper alternative to the treatment of a professional degree as property, but it also comports with the supreme court's subsequent discussion of the issue in Lundberg. Thus, unlike the present majority, I conclude that if the trial court was precluded from considering Julia's premarital contributions to Joseph's education and increased earning capacity directly under § 767.26(9) and (10), Stats., the court could properly do so in the context of Julia's unjust enrichment claim. And, consistent with the supreme court's holdings in Watts and Lundberg, the court did not err in compensating Julia by awarding her maintenance for a limited term following the parties’ divorce, as a remedy for what would otherwise be Joseph's unjust enrichment.
¶ 41. Finally, I encourage the supreme court to accept this case for review, if Julia requests the court to do so. Whether I or other members of this court like it or not, cohabitation before marriage is no longer *216regarded by society as the rare exception to a general rule of proper behavior for young adults. Many couples today begin their lives together as the Meyers did, by establishing a household prior to formalizing their relationship through marriage. In the process, they often acquire and commingle significant assets, and they embark on arrangements such as that before us, where one party supports and assists the other in obtaining or completing an education. If such a couple chooses never to marry, the law is well-settled that the relief and remedies made available to the parties under Watts and its progeny remain separate and distinct from those set forth in ch. 767, Stats. However, when a couple chooses to marry, and in so doing becomes bound by ch. 767, the law is not quite so clear. The supreme court should clarify whether a trial court may consider the entire history of the parties' relationship when applying the factors under § 767.26, Stats., as I believe it may, or if the court must close its eyes to everything that occurred between the parties prior to their marriage, as the majority holds.
A "Catch-22" is "a frustrating situation in which one is trapped by contradictory regulations or conditions." The Random House Dictionary of the English Language 327 (2d ed. 1987).
"[T]he trial court refused to consider Josephine's premarital contributions in support of her and [sic] maintenance and property division claims. We affirm the court's ruling." Green-*209wald v. Greenwald, 154 Wis. 2d 767, 789, 454 N.W.2d 34, 42 (Ct. App. 1990).
The earnings histories of both parties, as compiled by the Social Security Administration, were introduced as trial exhibits. These exhibits show that from 1986 through 1993, Joseph had total earnings of $15,592, ranging from a low of zero to a high of some six thousand dollars in any one year. Julia, on the other hand, earned a total of $151,773 during those eight years, never less than eleven thousand dollars in any year, and over $24,000 in two of the years. These are the years prior to the parties' marriage in 1993 during which Joseph completed his undergraduate degree and attended medical school, and during which the trial court found that he and Julia shared a household.
If Greenwald's legacy is indeed what the majority concludes it is, I believe that we wrongly decided the issue. We acknowledged in Greenwald that the supreme court had not addressed the issue of maintenance in Watts, and further that the holding in Watts applied only to never-married cohabitants. Greenwald v. Greenwald, 154 Wis. 2d 767, 790, 454 N.W.2d 34, 43 (Ct. App. 1990). We were nonetheless not "persuaded that the parties' later marriage requires a different result." Id. I fail to see why this is so. It is one thing to conclude, as the supreme court did in Watts, that the legislature did not intend the property division provisions of the Family Code to apply to "unmarried cohabitants." See Watts v. Watts, 137 Wis. 2d 506, 519-20, 405 N.W.2d 303, 309 (1987). It is quite another, however, to conclude that a trial court, when considering an award of maintenance for a married person who is divorcing, may never give any consideration to the premarital contributions of *212that person to his or her spouse's education and increased earning power. As I have noted, many of the factors under § 767.26, STATS., contain no "during the marriage" limitation, and Watts does not require that we insert one.
The supreme court cited Judge Dykman's concurrence in DeWitt with approval in Lundberg v. Lundberg, 107 Wis. 2d 1,7, 318 N.W.2d 918, 921 (1982).

=== CASE 9740041 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:27.621016+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: In a jury trial, defendant Paul Hall was convicted on five counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse involving a foster child who resided in his home. Defendant was sentenced to four years in prison. On appeal, defendant alleges the trial court erred by (1) refusing to exclude the testimony of a witness, K.H., without an evidentiary hearing regarding the loss of an audiotape of the initial interviews with the witness that had last been in the prosecutor’s possession; (2) allowing two witnesses to testify to similar acts of sexual abuse that defendant performed upon them; (3) allowing testimony by police and a physician of prior consistent statements by complainant D.S.; and (4) permitting the State to present extrinsic evidence on rebuttal to impeach defendant on collateral matters inquired of him on cross-examination. We affirm defendant’s conviction. The complainant, D.S., was 13 years old in February 1986 when he was placed in defendant’s foster home by a Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) caseworker. Defendant is well known in his community, not only as the minister of his church, but for his active community involvement which includes his founding of the Paul Hall Boys Club, a gang hotline and a food distribution program for the needy. D.S. testified that his sleeping quarters were defendant’s bedroom, initially on a mattress on the floor, later with defendant in his bed. On several occasions during May 1986 defendant told D.S. to remain at home after dinner to answer the telephone while the other foster boys who lived with defendant went to the Paul Hall Boys Club. The boys who lived in defendant’s home went to the club for activities several evenings each week. During these evenings, defendant sought to become sexually intimate with D.S. and on the third evening, defendant performed fellatio on an unwilling D.S. When D.S. objected to this conduct, defendant told him that “no matter where you go or where you live, you are going to have to do something for someone” and “in order for me to do something for you, you’re going to have to do something for me.” On at least two occasions later in the month, defendant performed fellatio on D.S. and then performed anal intercourse upon the young boy. When D.S. screamed in pain, defendant stopped and told him “You did good.” On June 7 and June 14, 1986, defendant told D.S. and K.H., another minor residing with defendant, to stay home while the others left the house for church activities. Defendant ordered the boys into his bedroom and directed each of them to touch and fondle the other, then, on each of those days, required one boy to watch while defendant performed anal intercourse on the other boy. After that experience, D.S. testified that defendant performed anal intercourse, using a lubricant, every other week and performed oral intercourse every week. The sexual relations continued for 20 months until December 1987. The incidents occurred when the other boys were at the boys club and defendant told D.S. to remain at home to answer the phone, which defendant would take off the hook. In November 1986, on at least two occasions, defendant showed D.S. homosexual pornographic movies, told him to wear women’s lingerie which defendant provided, and gave him a drug called Rush, supposedly a muscle relaxant, prior to fellatio and anal intercourse. D.S. testified that defendant kept the movies, lingerie and Rush in a box in a crawl space accessed through defendant’s bedroom closet. D.S. testified that defendant gave him money every day, nice clothes, a watch, radio, cassette player and bicycle. Occasionally, after their sexual encounters, defendant would tell D.S., “You did good.” On the morning of January 18, 1988, D.S. left the boys club around noon, never intending to return to defendant’s home. Police found him sleeping at O’Hare airport at 1 a.m. the next morning. When the police informed him that they would return him to defendant’s foster home, D.S. told them about the sexual activity occurring there because he feared defendant and did not wish to return to the situation. K.H.’s testimony corroborated D.S.’s testimony regarding sexual acts that defendant performed on K.H. in D.S.’s presence and on D.S. in K.H.’s presence. K.H. testified that defendant told him that D.S. was going to replace K.H. and defendant was using K.H. as an example to D.S. K.H. stated that prior to D.S.’s arrival at defendant’s foster home, K.H. had slept in defendant’s bedroom and had been subjected to regular incidents of fellatio and anal intercourse with defendant. K.H. testified that during 1984, sexual encounters between K.H. and the defendant occurred several times per week and that defendant was generous in giving him cash and gifts. When defendant wanted K.H. to have sex with him, he would require him to remain home to answer the phone. K.H. testified that defendant also used a lubricant when he performed anal intercourse, that the sexual activity took place in defendant’s bedroom suite, that defendant asked K.H. to wear women’s lingerie, and that he kept the lingerie in a box in the crawl space. K.H. testified that when he tried to avoid the sexual encounters, defendant would repeatedly tell him that he had to endure them because nobody wanted to take care of him and he had nowhere else to turn. Finally, K.H. ran away from the house and subsequently enlisted in the Army. T.W., another foster child in defendant’s home, also testified that defendant performed sexual acts on him, beginning in October 1987, the month that he moved into defendant’s home. The incidents occurred when other household members were at the boys club and defendant ordered him to remain at home to answer the phone. The sexual activity occurred in defendant’s bedroom suite; a lubricant was used; and when T.W. told defendant that he was in pain, defendant told him “You did good.” T.W. testified that defendant gave him money every day and often bought him expensive gifts and clothing, such as a radio, camera, watch, books and a $400 suit. When T.W. voiced his objection to the sexual activity, defendant told him he would have to do what defendant wanted or defendant would not adopt him or allow him to live in the house. On January 19, 1988, the day after D.S. ran away from defendant’s home, T.W., as instructed, was cleaning defendant’s room when defendant entered and told him to go downstairs. T.W. then saw defendant and Darryl Hall, another resident, carrying belongings out of the house, a briefcase and a box with lingerie hanging out of it, which they placed in defendant’s car before driving away. T.W. stated that before he left defendant’s bedroom, the door to the attic was closed, and after defendant left the house with the box, the door was open. At a meeting that evening, defendant told household members that they were not to talk to the police about the adults who lived in the house and that they were not to tell police that D.S. slept in defendant’s room. T.W. stated that he lied to police that night because he feared defendant’s power and connections. During pretrial investigation, K.H., who was serving in the Army in California, was contacted and interviewed twice by a Salinas, California, police officer in early February 1988. On those occasions, the officer surreptitiously tape-recorded the interviews. Based upon their conversations, the officer wrote a five-page summary of K.H.’s statements and sent the written report and tape to the Cook County sheriff’s office in Chicago, which forwarded the evidence to the Cook County State’s Attorney. Three months prior to trial, prosecutors notified defense counsel that they were unable to locate the tape pursuant to discovery requests, although the written summary prepared by the California police officer was available and provided to defendant. The court heard pretrial arguments on defendant’s motion to bar the testimony of K.H. in which the State argued that the tape was inadvertently lost when the case was transferred to different prosecutors within the State’s Attorney’s office. The court denied the motion. Defendant first contends that the trial judge erred when it denied his motion to exclude K.H.’s testimony because (1) prosecutors failed to comply with the discovery rules required in production of a tape of his interviews; (2) there was no evidentiary hearing regarding the cause or explanation for the loss of the tape; and (3) failure to hold a more formal hearing denied defendant the opportunity to present a jury instruction on failure of a party to produce evidence. Defendant seeks a reversal and remandment for new trial where the testimony of K.H. would be excluded and a proper instruction given to the jury regarding the missing tape. During the hearing on defendant’s motion to bar K.H.’s testimony, the State acknowledged that the tape of the interviews had been received by the State’s Attorney’s office and thereafter lost or mislaid in the transfer and change in personnel handling the file. Neither of the assistant State’s Attorneys then assigned to the case had heard the tape or knew of its contents. When a search conducted within the State’s Attorney’s office proved unsuccessful, the State immediately contacted defense counsel to inform him of the lost tape. The State also timely advised defendant during pretrial investigation that the California police officer who prepared the tape was available for interviews, and the written report submitted by that officer was prepared from his direct conversations ■with K.H. rather than from the tape. The State further acknowledged that it had inquired of both the Salinas, California, police department and the Cook County sheriff’s office to determine whether duplicates of the tape had been made, although both responded that none had been prepared. The defense did not avail itself of the opportunity to interview the California police officer since counsel believed that such an interview would not cure the problem of the lost tape nor did they desire a pretrial interrogation of K.H., although defendant did earlier attempt to obtain such interview and the witness was then uncooperative. The defense also did not request a continuance to investigate the matter further, nor did it advance any other sanctions short of barring the testimony of K.H. After argument of counsel, the court denied defendant’s motion but advised him that it was open to consider any further motions at the time K.H.’s testimony was offered and would allow broad latitude in the cross-examination of K.H. We recognize that it is the State’s duty to zealously protect evidence in its possession, and the record must be carefully scrutinized for evidence of bad faith where relevant materials are alleged to be lost or destroyed. Arizona v. Youngblood (1988), 488 U.S. 51, 102 L. Ed. 2d 281, 109 S. Ct. 333; United States v. Augenblick (1969), 393 U.S. 348, 21 L. Ed. 2d 537, 89 S. Ct. 528; People v. Hammock (1984), 121 Ill. App. 3d 874, 480 N.E.2d 378; People v. Stamps (1977), 52 Ill. App. 3d 320, 325, 367 N.E.2d 543. While there may be a burden upon the State to explain its action or inaction and to establish its complete good faith (Stamps, 52 Ill. App. 3d at 325), the trial judge’s determination and treatment of a discovery violation is generally given great weight. People v. Weaver (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 545, 558-59, 442 N.E.2d 255. In Stamps, written statements of witnesses to a prison riot were lost or misplaced by the Attorney General’s office. While there was some speculation that the loss occurred when the Attorney General moved into a new building, there was nothing in the record to verify such a fact with any degree of certainty. There was, however, no evidence in the record to suggest that the loss of the statements was the result of “guile, stratagem or craftiness.” The court found the State acted in good faith, attempted to recover the statements and while it could only speculate what information the statements might contain, the evidence against defendant was so overwhelming that it was highly unlikely the statements might cast any reasonable doubt on defendant’s guilt. Stamps, 52 Ill. App. 3d at 325. Similarly, although the trial court in the present case could only speculate on what the tape might contain, there is a strong likelihood that the officer’s memorandum made contemporaneously with the tape is accurate since its author would not have known that the tape would not be available to compare against his five-page report. In Hammock, defendant was charged with murder and was improperly induced to give a statement that suggested murder or voluntary manslaughter or self-defense. The assistant State’s Attorney convinced defendant to participate in a videotaped reenactment of the events leading up to the homicide. The first of the reenactments was videotaped but apparently was not properly recorded, so a second reenactment was videotaped and the first tape discarded by the assistant State’s Attorney. In addition to other serious violations of defendant’s constitutional right's, the conviction was reversed because of the admission of the second videotape into evidence. The court believed because of the close and critical factual differences between involuntary manslaughter and self-defense or murder, the nuances of the first tape would be particularly important in allowing a seasoned defense counsel to evaluate defendant’s conduct. Hammock, 121 Ill. App. 3d at 881.1  The Hammock court was properly suspicious of the State’s explanation for the unavailability of the missing tape and noted that the State was charged with the safekeeping of the first tape and it was not for the assistant State’s Attorney who discarded the tape to determine whether there was anything on the first tape which would have been beneficial to the defendant. Hammock, 121 Ill. App. 3d at 882. However, in Hammock, the State intentionally discarded the first videotape while, in the case at bar, the State has represented that the tape had been accidentally lost, and during the hearing, defense counsel acknowledged he had no reason to doubt the assistant State’s Attorney in this regard. Additionally, in Hammock, defendant’s fifth amendment rights were violated by the resumption of custodial interrogation after defendant declined to make a statement. Therefore, subsequent confessions, exculpating statements and inculpatory video reenactments of the homicide which occurred before defendant had access to counsel were nullified. The intentional destruction of the first tape is irrevocably intertwined with the per se violation of defendant’s fifth amendment rights. No such issue was present in the instant case. The tapes involved in Hammock were statements of the defendant while K.H.’s testimony was that of a witness only. Moreover, the tape here was not used in any way against the defendant and we are left only to speculate what the tape might have contained. The State cites Arizona v. Youngblood (1988), 488 U.S. 51, 102 L. Ed. 2d 281, 109 S. Ct. 333, the most significant recent decision relating to the subject, where a 10-year-old boy was sexually assaulted and the State failed to preserve potentially useful evidence, including swab samples taken from the victim’s mouth and rectum. The Youngblood court found no violation of defendant’s due process rights since defendant failed to show bad faith by the State in connection with the loss or failure to preserve the evidence. (Youngblood, 488 U.S. at 57, 102 L. Ed. 2d at 289, 109 S. Ct. at 337.) The Court stated that the failure to preserve the evidence was, at worst, negligence on the part of the police, that defendant was notified of the situation and allowed all access to the remaining evidence. Youngblood, 488 U.S. at 57-58, 102 L. Ed. 2d at 289-90, 109 S. Ct. at 337-38. In Youngblood, the Supreme Court placed the burden of finding bad faith upon the defendant. (Youngblood, 488 U.S. at 57, 102 L. Ed. 2d at 289, 109 S. Ct. at 337.) The “bad faith” test has continued to be the rule in Illinois where the State fails to preserve potentially useful evidence. People v. Young (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 488, 581 N.E.2d 241; People v. Stallings (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 1032, 570 N.E.2d 820; People v. Lampkin (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 570, 550 N.E.2d 278. The State’s actions in Hammock and Youngblood were more violative of the rights of the defendant than in the case before us. In both of those cases, the destroyed material might have provided exculpatory evidence for the defendant, while in the instant case the best evidence for which defendant can reasonably hope is a prior inconsistent statement by one of the witnesses for use in impeachment. Our supreme court provided a thorough analysis of Youngblood in People v. Holmes (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 198, 552 N.E.2d 763, dealing with prosecutorial failure to disclose evidence, i.e., introduction of an informer. Holmes, like Youngblood, uses a “bad faith” standard in assessing the due process implications of the State’s failure to preserve what the cases describe as potentially exculpatory evidence. The test, therefore, is whether the defendant can show bad faith on the part of law enforcement officials. As we have previously noted, we doubt that the tape of the interview with K.H. rises to the definition of “potentially exculpatory evidence.” Courts also consider the defendant’s opportunity to seek the lost evidence by other means. Here, defendant’s opportunities were ample. K.H. testified before the grand jury, was available on the day of trial for an interview with the defense and was subjected to withering cross-examination. There is a plethora of Illinois decisions which affirm convictions notwithstanding the loss or destruction of evidence which defendants believed might have been helpful to their defense.2  The material lost or mislaid ranges from blood samples, medical or physical tests, X rays or tissue;3 audio tapes, video tapes or communication recordings;4 police reports;5 weapons;6 bullets;7 controlled substance;8 and various types of contraband;9 to photographs of defendant reenacting his encounter with the victim.10  Other jurisdictions (United States, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Idaho, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Texas, and Washington) have determined that where audio tapes have been lost or mislaid by the State, courts are not required to accept the defendant’s speculative version of the favorable nature of the lost tapes to the defense. These courts, in dealing with such missing tapes and affirming the convictions, have considered (1) the importance of the missing evidence to the whole case, (2) the degree of negligence, bad faith or culpability by the government, (3) the likelihood that the tapes were exculpatory, (4) prejudice suffered by the defendant by reason of the absence of the tapes, and (5) other evidence sufficient to amply provide for defendant’s conviction.11  We have already addressed the nature of the hearing held with respect to the loss of the tape. The court might have compelled assistant State’s Attorneys to testify as to who last held the tape in their possession or who last received it, and such a course of action is highly approved.  The defendant claims the failure to hold a more formal hearing denied him the opportunity to present a jury instruction on the inferences to be considered where a party fails to produce evidence within its control, and he sets out the full text of Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 5.01 (2d ed. 1971). It is difficult to imagine how a more formal hearing would have affected defendant’s right in that regard. The record does not reveal that defendant offered such an instruction or asked the court to advise the jury as to the tape during the cross-examination of K.H. or otherwise suggested that there might be inconsistent statements or failure to produce evidence, although the trial court had invited additional motions. In any event, the jury instruction cited by defendant has been prepared for use in civil cases and its use in criminal cases could result in plain error since it clearly could be interpreted to conflict with a defendant’s fifth amendment right to remain silent. Moreover, the Illinois Supreme Court Committee on Pattern Jury Instructions in Criminal Cases “took the position that no instruction would be included on particular types of evidence, unless some special guidance from the trial judge would be useful.” Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, Introduction, at VII (2d ed. 1981). In Youngblood, the jury was instructed that if it found the State had lost or destroyed evidence, it might infer “that the true fact is against the State’s interest.” No such instruction was offered by defendant in the instant case or requested at any hearing, and the failure of the court to provide such an instruction sua sponte is not a denial of due process. Youngblood, 488 U.S. at 54, 102 L. Ed. 2d at 287, 109 S. Ct. at 335. We conclude that both defendant’s right and prejudice in this regard are illusory; further, he cannot raise this issue regarding an instruction for the first time on appeal. Exclusion of evidence for a discovery violation is a harsh measure and other sanctions are initially preferred. People v. Aguilar (1991), 218 Ill. App. 3d 1, 9-10, 578 N.E.2d 109; People v. Washington (1989), 182 Ill. App. 3d 168, 174, 537 N.E.2d 1354. Supreme Court Rule 415(g) leaves it to the trial court to fashion sanctions if a party fails to comply with the discovery rule or order. (134 Ill. 2d R. 415(g).) Such sanctions may include the granting of a continuance, the inclusion or exclusion of disputed evidence or such other order as the court deems just under the circumstances. 134 Ill. 2d R. 415(g)(i). People v. Harris (1988), 123 Ill. 2d 113, 526 N.E.2d 335, is particularly instructive in this regard where the prosecution failed to supplement pretrial discovery with a witness’ oral corrections of a statement made to a Department of Corrections investigator. In Harris, the extensive cross-examination allowed of the witness was deemed sufficient to overcome the willful discovery violation by the State. Harris, 123 Ill. 2d at 152. K.H. was subjected to withering cross-examination for an extended period of time (more than 120 pages of transcript) by one of the legal community’s most prominent defense counsel. Inconsistencies and discrepancies were exploited freely during cross-examination and defense counsel was allowed to question the witness on some criminal activity. The failure to comply with discovery requirements does not in all instances necessitate a new trial. (Harris, 123 Ill. 2d at 151; People v. Nettnin (1991), 216 Ill. App. 3d 794, 799, 576 N.E.2d 417; People v. Siejke (1990), 195 Ill. App. 3d 135, 142, 551 N.E.2d 1361.) Generally, a new trial should be granted only if the defendant is prejudiced by the discovery violation and the trial court failed to eliminate the prejudice. Harris, 123 Ill. 2d at 151-52; People v. Cisewski (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 163, 172, 514 N.E.2d 970. In the case before us, the court has clearly taken steps to eliminate the prejudice. Moreover, defense counsel had the benefit of the five-page report prepared by the California police officer contemporaneously with the interviews of which the recordings were the subject matter, and which were not likely to differ greatly from the recordings since the officer could not have known that the tape would not be available to exploit any inconsistencies in his report.  While we do not in any sense condone the State’s negligence in misplacing the tape, we believe that reversal is unwarranted by reason of this violation because (i) the record discloses no evidence that the State acted willfully to destroy the tape; (ii) the State informed defense counsel months before trial that the tape had been lost and attempted to determine if other copies of the tape existed; (iii) a five-page memorandum of the interviews was made at the time by the police officer; (iv) defense counsel never requested or offered a jury instruction regarding the missing tape and the instruction cited in defendant’s brief has been fashioned for use in civil cases; (v) defense counsel never sought to interview the California police officer or take advantage of the opportunity to conduct a pretrial interview of K.H. on the day the trial started; and (vi) defense was offered great latitude in its lengthy cross-examination of K.H. Even without K.H.’s testimony, the evidence in this case is not closely balanced, especially since D.S. gave protracted testimony regarding specific acts that defendant repeatedly performed and T.W. gave corroborating testimony describing defendant’s modus operandi. Not only could the jury have found the essential elements of aggravated criminal assault beyond a reasonable doubt (People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 538 N.E.2d 461), but we find the weight of the evidence overwhelming. Defendant next argues that the trial court erred when it allowed K.H. and T.W. to testify concerning defendant’s sexual abuse of them at other times. Defendant contends that such other crimes evidence was offered only to show defendant’s propensity to commit the crime charged. Evidence of other crimes or wrongful conduct is not admissible simply to show defendant’s character or propensity to commit the crime charged, but may be admissible for other relevant purposes. (People v. Gaither (1991), 221 Ill. App. 3d 629, 636, 582 N.E.2d 735.) Here, the trial court carefully instructed the jury to limit its consideration of the other crimes evidence only to the issue of modus operandi or common design or scheme. Where evidence of prior bad acts is offered to prove modus operandi or that the crime charged was part of a common design or plan, there must be a high degree of identity between the facts of the crime charged and the other offense in which the defendant was involved; the offenses must share such distinctive common features as to earmark both acts as the handiwork of the same person. People v. Illgen (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 353, 372-73, 583 N.E.2d 515; People v. Jones (1991), 215 Ill. App. 3d 903, 911, 576 N.E.2d 162. Although a proper case may be made for the admission of other crimes evidence under the theory that defendant had a common design or scheme, we need not decide that issue since we find the evidence of other crimes is properly admitted as evidence of defendant’s modus operandi. While many Illinois courts have used the terms “common design or scheme” interchangeably with modus operandi, the terms have different meanings. People v. Tipton (1990), 207 Ill. App. 3d 688, 696, 566 N.E.2d 352. Modus operandi refers to a method of working, a pattern of criminal behavior that is so distinct that separate crimes or wrongful conduct is recognized as being the work of the same person while common design refers to a larger criminal scheme of which the crime charged is only a portion. Tipton, 207 Ill. App. 3d at 694; People v. Kimbrough (1985), 138 Ill. App. 3d 481, 486, 485 N.E.2d 1292. Modus operandi is relevant to prove either the identity of the perpetrator or that the perpetrator committed the charged offense by allowing the jury to reasonably infer that he committed one offense from the evidence of the other, showing the “method of work” of the perpetrator. (Tipton, 207 Ill. App. 3d at 694; People v. Maness (1989), 184 Ill. App. 3d 149, 153, 539 N.E.2d 1368.) To be admissible, there must be some unique features between the offenses that are not common to that type of offense. (People v. Tate (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 134, 142, 429 N.E.2d 470.) While there must be a strong and persuasive showing of the similarity, it is not necessary that the crimes be identical for the other crimes to be admissible. Tipton, 207 Ill. App. 3d at 695; Kimbrough, 138 Ill. App. 3d at 487. Defendant relies on People v. Esterline (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 164, 512 N.E.2d 358, a case in which the defendant was accused of taking indecent liberties with a neighborhood child and evidence of improper sexual incidents with other children was admitted and the conviction was reversed on appeal.  However, in Ester line, the State failed to establish the elements of the modus operandi exception since they failed to show that the offenses shared common distinctive features that would earmark the crimes as the handiwork of defendant. In that case, the offense charged was defendant’s lewd fondling of a seven-year-old girl’s thigh, exposing himself and using lewd language. The court found that the other acts admitted into evidence demonstrated many more differences than similarities, situations in which defendant: explained pornography to a child; performed fellatio on a child and had that child perform fellatio on him; performed oral sex on a female child; ordered a child to rub his penis; masturbated in front of a child; exposed himself through his shorts; and masturbated through the centerfold of a magazine. Further, the acts did not all occur in the same location. Considering the many differences in the testimony, the court found that the other offenses only showed defendant had a propensity for taking indecent liberties with a child. Esterline, 159 Ill. App. 3d at 168. However, in the present case, we find almost no differences between the charged offenses and the other crimes evidence admitted: all of the victims were young, African-American teenage males who came from distressed homes and lived at defendant’s foster home during the time they were abused; defendant always asked each boy to stay home alone with him, ostensibly to answer the phone, while the other boys went to the.boys club; defendant routinely took the telephone off the hook during that time; the incidents all took place in defendant’s bedroom suite; defendant always used a lubricant before anal penetration; defendant routinely performed fellatio on D.S. and K.H.; defendant asked K.H. and D.S. to model women’s lingerie, and both stated that he kept the lingerie in a box over his bedroom closet; defendant told the boys that they would have to do as he said since they had nowhere else to go; and defendant told each of the boys at least once after a sexual encounter, “You did good.” We find that there was a very strong and persuasive showing of similarities between the offenses described and that the similarities demonstrate unique features not necessarily common to all acts of aggravated sexual abuse, and therefore, establish defendant’s modus operandi, or method of working. Further, the trial court disallowed the testimony of another boy, A.M., who also alleged defendant performed criminal sexual acts upon him because it distinguished the offense as too remote in time. While this court has found that 15 years is not too remote in time for other crimes evidence to be admitted (People v. Jendras (1991), 216 Ill. App. 3d 149, 576 N.E.2d 229), we do not decide that issue here, but recognize, in the exclusion of A.M.’s testimony, the trial court’s careful consideration of possible prejudice to defendant from the other crimes evidence. Jendras similarly allowed other crimes evidence to be used where defendant was a teacher convicted of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. In that case, the court found the incidents similar enough to constitute a pattern that fits within the modus operandi exception: all of the victims were males in junior high school who lived with their single mothers; defendant was their teacher; they went alone to his apartment when defendant asked them to go swimming; they were provided bathing suits by defendant; the acts of touching and fondling were similar; and defendant ceased action when the boys said they had to leave. (Jendras, 216 Ill. App. 3d at 159.) We find that the case at bar presents even stronger similarities establishing modus operandi than does Jendras. Defendant next argues that testimony by Dr. Ahart and Officers Granberg and Swan included prior consistent statements of D.S. that should not have been admitted into evidence because they bolster D.S.’s testimony at trial. Defendant contends that it was reversible error when the trial court refused to limit their testimony to exclude statements made to them by D.S. regarding identification of defendant and details of the incidents.  Because defense counsel failed to raise objection at trial or include in his post-trial motions any issue as to the testimony of Officer Granberg, we find any error waived as to that witness. People v. Williams (1990), 139 Ill. 2d 1, 14, 563 N.E.2d 431. The State argues that such testimony by Dr. Ahart is a statutory exception to the hearsay rule allowing medical personnel to testify as to statements made to them by victims of sex offenses: “[Statements made by the victim to medical personnel for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment including descriptions of the cause of symptoms, pain or sensations, or the inception or general character of the cause or external source thereof insofar as reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or treatment shall be admitted as an exception to the hearsay rule.” Ill Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 115 — 13. Although medical personnel may testify as to statements made by a sexual assault victim pertinent to medical diagnosis or treatment, they may not identify the alleged perpetrator. (People v. Perkins (1991), 216 Ill. App. 3d 389, 397-98, 576 N.E.2d 355; People v. Sommerville (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 161, 176, 549 N.E.2d 1315.) Further, we reject the notion that the identification of the defendant to Dr. Ahart was proper merely because one of the options of treatment might have included removal of D.S. from defendant’s home. Although the testimony of Dr. Ahart includes improper prior consistent statements of D.S., any error in its admission is harmless where the evidence is not closely balanced, the testimony is merely cumulative of the sexual assault victim’s testimony and, more particularly, where defense counsel had an opportunity to cross-examine the victim. Williams, 139 Ill. 2d at 15-16; People v. Robinson (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 192, 200, 383 N.E.2d 164; People v. Enoch (1989), 189 Ill. App. 3d 535, 556, 545 N.E.2d 429. Officer Swan testified that after interviewing D.S., he notified DCFS and the State’s Attorney’s office and applied for a warrant to search defendant’s house for items described by D.S. Thereafter, the officer related the statements made by D.S. in response to questions regarding what his investigation “disclosed” that caused him to act as he did during the course of that investigation. The State argues that the testimony of Officer Swan which contains D.S.’s prior consistent statements should be admitted to show the course of his investigation as a youth officer and that a law enforcement officer may testify regarding investigatory procedures followed and the basis for such investigative activities. Testimony in a criminal prosecution regarding investigatory procedures including hearsay statements of third parties may be admissible where the purpose of such testimony is limited to show the basis or reasons why an officer acted in a particular manner. People v. Brown (1983), 113 Ill. App. 3d 625, 631, 447 N.E.2d 1011. In Brown, conversations between the officer and third parties which ultimately led to the apprehension of defendant were properly admitted where the statements were offered to show the course of the investigation rather than prove the truth of the matter asserted. No such reason exists in the instant case, although the State properly relies on People v. Clark (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 877, 513 N.E.2d 937, where a policeman’s testimony that a witness had earlier identified a defendant at a pretrial lineup was harmless error since the witness was present throughout the trial and available for examination. See also People v. Mitchell (1990), 200 Ill. App. 3d 969, 975, 558 N.E.2d 559. Prior consistent statements of testifying witnesses are generally inadmissible, although certain exceptions apply; most notably where the prior consistent statement is introduced to rebut a charge or inference that the witness is motivated to testify falsely or that his in-court testimony is of recent fabrication. People v. Hayes (1990), 139 Ill. 2d 89, 138, 564 N.E.2d 803; People v. Shum (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 317, 340-41, 512 N.E.2d 1183; People v. Deavers (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 1057, 1072, 580 N.E.2d 1367. The improper admission of prior consistent statements has, on occasion, been the basis of reversal. See, e.g., People v. Emerson (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 487, 455 N.E.2d 41 (a case which turned solely on the credibility of the complainant or the defendant, where the evidence was closely balanced, and where improperly admitted evidence might bolster one of the parties enough to impact upon the trier of fact); People v. Wheeler (1989), 186 Ill. App. 3d 422, 427-28, 542 N.E.2d 524 (in which prior consistent statements amounted to plain error where proof of defendant’s guilt depended almost entirely on the testimony of the prosecution’s witness which the statements tended to corroborate). While defendant failed to enumerate specifically, either by record page or testimony itself, which statements were alleged to be wrongfully admitted, we find that the record does establish that the testimony of Officer Swan and Dr. Ahart contains certain hearsay statements that were merely cumulative or corroborative of D.S’s testimony as to what occurred in the defendant’s home. Such testimony served no purpose except to bolster the credibility of the complainant over that of the defendant. However, these statements amounted to a small portion of the testimony of the two witnesses and an even smaller part of the testimony heard by the jury. We have determined that the evidence in this case is not closely balanced and accordingly find that the defendant was not unfairly prejudiced by the admission of prior consistent statements. We decline to reverse on these grounds. See Hayes, 139 Ill. 2d at 139. Finally, defendant argues that the trial court erred in permitting the State to present rebuttal evidence that impeached defendant on collateral matters inquired of him on cross-examination. Defendant contends that he was questioned about many collateral matters including the truthfulness of information supplied to DCFS caseworker Gwendolyn King, whether he had taken his foster children to a doctor for regular examinations as required by DCFS, and his vote for mayor in the 1987 Chicago elections.  Initially, we find defendant has waived any error regarding the testimony of Gwendolyn King since he failed to object at trial or raise this issue in his post-trial motion and we find no plain error. Williams, 139 Ill. 2d at 14. Further, defendant distorts the record when he contends he was cross-examined as to his 1987 mayoral vote. On direct exam, defendant stated that he lived in South Holland, Illinois. On cross-examination, the State inquired as to the address listed on his voter’s registration card, and he admitted that he falsely listed an address on South Wolcott Avenue in Chicago. The record is clear that it was only on redirect that defense counsel asked about defendant’s vote in the 1987 election, and that the prosecution never made such an inquiry. The only issue remaining is defendant’s contention that the State was improperly allowed to impeach him with rebuttal testimony regarding his cross-examination responses that he took the children to Dr. John Murphy for medical examinations required by DCFS. Following the cross-examination of defendant, the State called Dr. Murphy, who testified, contrary to defendant, that none of the persons who lived in defendant’s home was ever his patient, that he never recalled examining any of them, that he has no medical records for anyone living in defendant’s home, and that the signature on the DCFS medical forms was not his. The State argues that the rebuttal testimony of Dr. Murphy was proper because the issue of whether defendant’s foster children received medical examinations required by DCFS was not collateral since medical examinations could have revealed defendant’s sexual abuse. Latitude allowed on cross-examination and rebuttal is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court, and a reviewing court will not interfere unless there has been a clear abuse of discretion resulting in manifest prejudice to the defendant. People v. Sandoval (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 159, 194, 552 N.E.2d 726; People v. Collins (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 237, 269, 478 N.E.2d 267; People v. Johnson (1991), 218 Ill. App. 3d 967, 993, 578 N.E.2d 1274. One of the purposes of attempting impeachment on cross-examination is to test the credibility of the witnesses. (Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 269; People v. Fonza (1991), 217 Ill. App. 3d 883, 887, 578 N.E.2d 8.) However, a cross-examiner may not impeach a witness on a collateral matter but must accept the witness’ answer. Sandoval, 135 Ill. 2d at 194; Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 269; Fonza, 217 Ill. App. 3d at 887. Whether a matter is collateral is determined by asking whether the matter could be introduced for any purpose other than to contradict. Sandoval, 135 Ill. 2d 159, 552 N.E.2d 726; Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 269. In Collins, the supreme court found no abuse of discretion when the trial court allowed the State to impeach the defendant’s girl friend who supported defendant’s alibi that he was with her the night he was alleged to have been involved in three murders. She also gave detailed testimony that three days prior to the murders she and defendant went to see a kung fu movie at a certain theater. The State was allowed to call the manager of that theater to testify that there was no kung fu movie showing on that date. The rebuttal testimony was not collateral because it went to the witness’ ability to recall activities during the week that the murders occurred. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 270. In Sandoval, where the question before the jury was whether the defendant forced the complainant to have oral and anal sex against her will, the supreme court affirmed the trial court’s finding that the issue of whether the complainant had dated anyone since the incident was collateral and offered for no other purpose than to contradict a statement of the complainant. The supreme court determined that such information would present the jury with no additional information about the charges against defendant. Sandoval, 135 Ill. 2d at 195. See also People v. Stengel (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 337, 349, 570 N.E.2d 391. The question before the jury in this case is whether the defendant sexually assaulted and sexually abused D.S. While we affirmed the trial court’s ruling to allow other crimes evidence relating to defendant’s modus operandi, on this issue we find that Dr. Murphy’s rebuttal testimony was not collateral because it provides evidence of both defendant’s modus operandi and his common design or scheme. Common design refers to a larger criminal scheme of which the crime charged is only a portion. (Tipton, 207 Ill. App. 3d at 696; People v. Bryan (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 46, 511 N.E.2d 1289.) Here, the State charges that defendant’s scheme consisted of using his position as foster father, boys club founder and community minister to gain the confidence, friendship and respect of his young victims, then abusing that authority to coerce them into sexual acts for defendant’s own gratification. We agree that the record provides adequate evidence to support this theory. The evidence provided by Dr. Murphy on rebuttal arguably may go both to defendant’s method of working and to a common design, since the rules in his household included tight restrictions on the boys’ activities so that defendant’s abuse was kept secret: a prohibition on using the telephone; a prohibition on leaving the home without an adult from the home; requiring the boys to come straight home from school; and apparently discouraging contact with family members or adults outside the home who might somehow discover defendant’s illicit activities. Just as we have determined that defendant attempted to hide the abuse by restricting the boys’ activities, sending the other boys to the boys club and asking one boy to stay home to answer the phone, we find his failure to provide medical examinations for the boys could be inferred as another method of subterfuge in avoiding possible exposure of his crimes. A physician might uncover in an examination, through routine questions and physical observations, that a patient is being abused or is otherwise under physical or mental stress, and inquire as to the cause. Therefore, we find that the jury was presented additional information reasonably related to the charges against defendant by way of rebuttal testimony, and that the additional information may relate to defendant’s modus operandi or his common scheme attempts to cover up the crimes. For all of the foregoing reasons, defendant’s conviction is affirmed. Affirmed. CERDA, J., concurs.  The dissenting justice in the instant case has declined to reverse on other occasions by reason of lost evidence: People v. Kidd (1989), 180 Ill. App. 3d 1065, 536 N.E.2d 816, where defendant’s conviction was affirmed although a gunshot residue test performed on another suspect was destroyed by police notwithstanding defendant’s claim that the test results were “potentially exculpatory,” and People v. Davis (1981), 103 Ill. App. 3d 792, 431 N.E.2d 1210, where defendant claimed that the contents of a briefcase, lost by the police, would provide him with an alibi. The court observed that defendant did not in brief or oral argument specifically show how the contents would provide an alibi and that such was essential to secure reversal.   The dissent to the opinion originally filed cites 31 such cases, but neglects to indicate that none, except Hammock, was reversed by reason of the loss or destruction by the State of such evidence.   People v. Stallings (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 1032, 570 N.E.2d 820; People v. Lampkin (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 570, 550 N.E.2d 278; People v. Kidd, (1989), 180 Ill. App. 3d 1065, 536 N.E.2d 816; People v. Linscott (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 71, 511 N.E.2d 1303; People v. Emrich (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 343, 498 N.E.2d 1140; People v. Howard (1985), 130 Ill. App. 3d 967, 474 N.E.2d 1345; People v. Clark (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 14, 463 N.E.2d 981.   People v. Luallen (1989), 188 Ill. App. 3d 862, 544 N.E.2d 1206; People v. Nunn (1989) , 184 Ill. App. 3d 253, 541 N.E.2d 182; People v. Vargas (1983), 116 Ill. App. 3d 787, 452 N.E.2d 736.   People v. Lueente (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 133, 506 N.E.2d 1269; People v. White (1985), 134 Ill. App. 3d 262, 479 N.E.2d 1121; People v. Smith (1983), 114 Ill. App. 3d 1007, 449 N.E.2d 912.   People v. Stevenson (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 342, 562 N.E.2d 330; People v. Lann (1990) , 194 Ill. App. 3d 623, 551 N.E.2d 276; People v. Everette (1989), 187 Ill. App. 3d 1063, 543 N.E.2d 1040; People v. Zayas (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 554, 510 N.E.2d 1125, rev’d on other grounds (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 284, 546 N.E.2d 513; People v. Montague (1986), 149 Ill. App. 3d 332, 500 N.E.2d 592.   People v. Guest (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 72, 503 N.E.2d 255; People v. Colley (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 798, 528 N.E.2d 223.   People v. Young (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 488, 581 N.E.2d 241; People v. Ebener (1987) , 161 Ill. App. 3d 232, 514 N.E.2d 205; People v. Lopez (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 792, 438 N.E.2d 504.   People v. Jones (1991), 215 Ill. App. 3d 652, 575 N.E.2d 561; People v. Ambrose (1988) , 171 Ill. App. 3d 87, 525 N.E.2d 536; People v. Sims (1987), 166 Ill. App. 3d 289, 519 N.E.2d 921; People v. Madej (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 201, 478 N.E.2d 392.   People v. Balfour (1986), 148 Ill. App. 3d 215, 498 N.E.2d 547.   Convictions affirmed despite loss of tapes by prosecution: United States v. Arra (1st Cir. 1980), 630 F.2d 836 (negligent erasure of tape which defendants alleged would provide material from which to impeach government witness in drug prosecution); United States v. Rastelli (2d Cir. 1989), 870 F.2d 822 (government’s loss of three allegedly exculpatory tape recordings of witnesses’ conversations in bid-rigging scheme where the exculpatory nature of the evidence was not apparent before it was lost and defendant could have obtained comparable evidence by using contemporaneously prepared FBI summaries, yet failed to do so); United States v. Dye (4th Cir. 1991), 931 F.2d 55 (government’s failure to produce a tape of defendant’s initial interview with the government’s informant where there is no evidence that the tape was lost in bad faith, and defendant could cross-examine the informant at trial); United States v. Cochran (5th Cir. 1983), 697 F.2d 600 (government’s failure to produce an inaudible tape of a conversation between defendant and drug enforcement agent where defendant had an opportunity to cross-examine the agents who witnessed the conversation and the evidence of guilt was overwhelming); United States v. Monaco (10th Cir. 1983), 700 F.2d 577 (government’s failure to provide defendant with tape recording of statement given by a witness to police after trial testimony of the witness where there was no evidence of government misconduct, no prejudice by an inability to examine the lost recording, no evidence in the recording to exculpate defendants and other evidence against defendant was overwhelming); United States v. Gerena, (D. Conn. 1988), 695 F. Supp. 1369 (government’s disclosure on the first day of pretrial hearings that it taped and erased recordings of wiretapped conversations since the loss of tapes was inadvertent, tapes were not used as evidence, disclosure was made over one year before commencement of trial and defendants had a full opportunity to cross-examine); State v. Bruno (1991), 119 Idaho 199, 804 P.2d 928 (prosecution’s loss of one of three tapes recorded from body mike transmissions where the nature and materiality of the lost evidence was established through trial testimony and there was no showing of bad faith or disregard of defendant’s rights by police); Commonwealth v. Charles (1986), 397 Mass. 1, 489 N.E.2d 679 (loss of tape-recorded interview with the rape victim did not require reversal where there was no suggestion that loss of the tape was intentional or due to bad faith, and no demonstration of how it would have been exculpatory); People v. Amison (1976), 70 Mich. App. 70, 245 N.W.2d 405 (loss by police of a tape recording of a conversation between defendant and an undercover agent where the loss was not in bad faith or grossly negligent and witnesses testified that the recording was inculpatory in nature); People v. Taylor (1988), 142 A.D.2d 410, 536 N.Y.S.2d 825 (destruction of a tape of attempted rape victim where it was not clear whether the prosecution was culpable in bringing about the destruction and the resulting prejudice was minimal); State v. Bartlett (1990), 109 N.M. 679, 789 P.2d 627 (State failed to produce tape of its interview with rape victim but evidence turned over to defendant was sufficient to present inconsistencies in the victim’s description of her attacker and lesser sanctions were available to alleviate harm caused by the missing tape); City of Bismarck v. Bauer (N.D. 1987), 409 N.W.2d 90 (State inadvertently erased a videotape of defendant’s performance of physical tests after his DUI arrest where the tape did not possess exculpatory value apparent to the prosecution before it was erased); State v. Farrell (Minn. App. 1989), _ N.W.2d _ (State destroyed a tape of the police radio transmissions and a videotape of defendant’s DUI booking but there was no showing of bad faith and the exculpatory value of the destroyed evidence was unknown); State v. Davis (Tex. App. 1992), _ S.W.2d _ (taped interview with murder victim’s neighbor was erased but there was no evidence of misconduct to indicate bad faith); State v. Laureano (1984), 101 Wash. 2d 745, 682 P.2d 889 (prosecution failed to produce tape recording of interview with victim’s wife but defendant failed to show that the interview was ever recorded); State v. Shaw (Conn. 1981), 441 A.2d 561 (where defendant failed to show that his defense would have been materially aided by access to tape recording of first police interview with witness, there was no violation of defendant’s confrontation and due process rights since no bad faith was shown to explain the tape’s absence); cf. United States v. Fletcher (10th Cir. 1986), 801 F.2d 1222 (case remanded to determine whether exculpatory value of tape recordings of conversations between defendants and informant was apparent before they were lost and whether defendants would be unable to obtain comparable evidence by other reasonably available means); State v. Cortez (1990), 149 Misc. 2d 886, 564 N.Y.S.2d 963 (appropriate remedy for erasure of subpoenaed police communication tapes was dismissal where the tapes were erased after the court’s order and follow-up request to release the tapes were defied).

=== CASE 9740042 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:27.628838+00 ===

JUSTICE RIZZI, dissenting: After the original majority and dissenting opinions were filed, the defendant filed a petition for rehearing. The majority denied the petition for rehearing but has filed a replacement opinion entitled “Modified on Denial of Rehearing.” Except for what I have to say in the following three paragraphs, I do not find anything in the Modified on Denial of Rehearing opinion that warrants comment other than what was contained in my dissenting opinion as originally filed. In a footnote in the Modified on Denial of Rehearing opinion, the majority states that in two other cases I declined to reverse “by reason of lost evidence.” In another footnote, the majority states that in my dissent I cited 31 cases where the State has either lost or destroyed evidence but that I neglected “to indicate that none, except Hammock, was reversed by reason of the loss or destruction by the State of such evidence.” (235 Ill. App. 3d at 427 n.2.) These footnote references demonstrate what I believe is wrong with the majority’s thinking. The majority does not see the existence of the problem, which is that the lost or destroyed evidence by the State is not peculiar to this case but rather appears to be part of a pattern. If you do not see the problem, you cannot do anything about it — but the problem will continue! Now that the majority has denied the petition for rehearing and filed its Modified on Denial of Rehearing opinion, the State will never explain what happened to the missing tape or tapes and another case will have been affirmed where the State has inexplicably not produced evidence in its possession. Unfortunately, the judiciary has established a pattern of condonation which leads to perpetuation of the problem; that itself is a problem. Pity the next accused who will be faced with the State inexplicably not producing evidence in its possession — and there surely will be others. In our adversarial criminal justice system, the State will continue to do that which it can get away with doing. The remainder of my dissent remains as it was originally filed in response to the majority’s opinion as originally filed. I dissent because the trial judge erred in not either barring the testimony of K.H. or conducting an evidentiary hearing to determine what the State did with the tape or tapes of the two interviews that were taken of K.H. prior to trial. I would reverse and remand for a new trial. This case bears the head of Janus. One face looks at the defendant and the other face looks at the prosecution, i.e., the State. The face that looks at the defendant sees the acts which the defendant is accused of committing and the jury’s verdict of guilty. The other face looks at the intolerable conduct of the State in having evidence inexplicably vanish in a case of this nature. This puts me in a position comparable to Odysseus between Scylla and Charybdis. Whichever direction I choose to look, I see something that agitates and alarms. Unlike the majority, I choose to look in the direction of and assay the intolerable conduct of the State because that issue is so paramount that it transcends the case itself. This is plainly evident by the fact that the State’s loss of evidence is not peculiar to this case; rather, it appears to be part of a pattern. The issue of the State12 either losing or destroying evidence in its possession prior to trial has been raised on appeal in no fewer than the following cases: People v. Stevenson (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 342, 562 N.E.2d 330 (baseball bat used in attack and victim’s wallet recovered at the scene of the crime were lost); People v. Lann (1990), 194 Ill. App. 3d 623, 551 N.E.2d 276 (imitation police badge, bloodstained skullcap, bloodstained hammer and victim’s wallet found in defendant’s possession were destroyed); People v. Everette (1989), 187 Ill. App. 3d 1063, 543 N.E.2d 1040 (gun used in murder was destroyed by the State); People v. Davis (1981), 103 Ill. App. 3d 792 (defendant’s briefcase and its contents were lost while in the State’s possession); People v. Nunn (1989), 184 Ill. App. 3d 253, 541 N.E.2d 182 (audio tape of police officer’s dictation of his notes was destroyed after the trial court ordered that the tapes be preserved); People v. Young (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 488, 581 N.E.2d 241 (confiscated controlled substance was destroyed); People v. Stallings (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 1032, 570 N.E.2d 820 (X rays and tissue samples necessary to support defendant’s contention that victim’s death was not caused by defendant’s actions were destroyed prior to independent inspection and chemical analysis by defense counsel); People v. Kidd (1989), 180 Ill. App. 3d 1065, 536 N.E.2d 816 (gunshot residue test performed on another suspect was destroyed by police before it was tested or analyzed); People v. Colley (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 798, 528 N.E.2d 223 (bullet inventoried by police was lost prior to trial); People v. Ambrose (1988), 171 Ill. App. 3d 87, 525 N.E.2d 536 (tires recovered from stolen car were destroyed prior to defense counsel’s inspection of the tires); People v. Sims (1987), 166 Ill. App. 3d 289, 519 N.E.2d 921 (State failed to preserve a tire and beer cans to test for defendant’s fingerprints); People v. Zayas (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 554, 510 N.E.2d 1125 (gun used in murder was destroyed), rev’d (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 284, 546 N.E.2d 513; People v. Linseott (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 71, 511 N.E.2d 1303, rev’d (1991), 142 Ill. 2d 22, 566 N.E.2d 1355 (sole vaginal swab taken from deceased victim was destroyed during unilateral testing by State and therefore the swab was unavailable for independent analysis); People v. Lucente (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 133, 506 N.E.2d 1269 (police reports ordered to be produced by the trial court could not be located); People v. Guest (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 72, 503 N.E.2d 255 (bullet lost); People v. Emrich (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 343, 498 N.E.2d 1140 (State failed to properly preserve blood sample taken from defendant prior to independent analysis by defense counsel); People v. Balfour (1986), 148 Ill. App. 3d 215, 498 N.E.2d 547 (photographs of defendant reenacting his encounter with victim lost); People v. Madej (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 201, 478 N.E.2d 392 (a prescription pill bottle bearing victim’s name found in automobile driven by defendant lost); People v. White (1985), 134 Ill. App. 3d 262, 479 N.E.2d 1121 (supplemental police report prepared by arresting officer lost); People v. Clark (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 14, 463 N.E.2d 981 (State failed to preserve testing specimens taken from victim’s vagina precluding independent chemical analysis by defense counsel); People v. Hammock (1984), 121 Ill. App. 3d 874, 460 N.E.2d 378 (State failed to produce a videotape of defendant’s reenactment of a homicide); People v. Smith (1983), 114 Ill. App. 3d 1007, 449 N.E.2d 912 (relevant portions of the arresting officer’s police report lost); People v. Lopez (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 792, 438 N.E.2d 504 (confiscated controlled substance was destroyed and unavailable for independent chemical analysis by defense counsel); People v. Jones (1991), 215 Ill. App. 3d 652, 575 N.E.2d 561 (confiscated money disappeared prior to trial); People v. Lampkin (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 570, 550 N.E.2d 278 (victim’s blood samples were not properly preserved); People v. Luallen (1989), 188 Ill. App. 3d 862, 544 N.E.2d 1206 (videotape of defendant taken by police shortly after her arrest was lost); People v. Ebener (1987), 161 Ill. App. 3d 232, 514 N.E.2d 205 (after trial court ordered controlled substances preserved for independent chemical analysis by defense counsel, all confiscated controlled substance was consumed by police testing and unavailable for independent chemical analysis); People v. Montague (1986), 149 Ill. App. 3d 332, 500 N.E.2d 592 (knife used in murder disappeared); People v. Howard (1985), 130 Ill. App. 3d 967, 474 N.E.2d 1345 (blood samples taken from the scene of murder were disposed of prior to independent analysis by defense counsel); People v. Vargas (1983), 116 Ill. App. 3d 787, 452 N.E.2d 736 (communication recordings were destroyed after the trial court ordered that the recordings be preserved). All but seven of the cases cited were tried in Cook County. As a member of the criminal justice system, I cannot help but be riveted with deep concern and anguish at what is happening. There appears to be a black hole somewhere in the State’s evidence vault so condensed that evidence cannot be retrieved from its gravitational field. I would not only reach a different result than the majority in this case, but I also disagree with other conclusions of the majority. Under the circumstances involved in this case, it behooves me to point out these differences. Bearing in mind that there was no evidentiary hearing or verification as to what happened to the tape or tapes, I first note that the majority apparently assumes that the tape or tapes were lost in a good-faith measure merely because the prosecutors said in statements not under oath or verified that the tape or tapes cannot be found. It is as if the majority has misread the maxim vox populi, vox Dei to mean vox prosequitur, vox Dei. Of course, the correct maxim to be applied to statements made by the prosecutor is vox, et praeterea nihil. Mere statements by a prosecutor that are not under oath or verified cannot suffice to establish what happened to evidence that was lost while in the State’s possession since the prosecutor represents a party involved in an adversarial proceeding. When a person’s liberty is hanging in the balance there is simply too much at stake to allow the State .to lose evidence without verified detailed specifics as to what occurred. I next address the following conclusion of the majority: “During pretrial investigation, K.H., who was serving in the Army in California, was contacted and interviewed twice by a Salinas, California, police officer in early February 1988. On those occasions, the officer surreptitiously tape-recorded the interviews. Based upon their conversations, the officer wrote a five-page summary of K.H.’s statements and sent the written report and tape to the Cook County sheriff’s office in Chicago, which forwarded the evidence to the Cook County State’s Attorney.” (235 Ill. App. 3d at 423.) I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the two interviews of K.H. that were conducted by Detective James Brown were on one tape. There is no evidence that the majority’s conclusion is true, and Detective Brown’s written report indicates otherwise. This further demonstrates why an evidentiary hearing is necessary in this case: We do not even know whether one or two tapes are missing. In his written report, after referring to his first interview with K.H. on February 1, 1988, Detective Brown states: “My interview with K.H. was surreptitiously recorded utilizing a microcassette recorder. The original of that recording, along with a copy of this report, will be forwarded to Det. Farley.” Finally, at the conclusion of his written report, Detective Brown states: “A copy of this report, along with the tapes of the interviews conducted with K.H., will be forwarded to Det. Farley.” Surely, based on what Detective Brown wrote in his report, one can reasonably conclude that there were actually two tapes that are missing rather than one — but we don’t know! Two other aspects of the missing tape or tapes bear mention here. The first involves Detective Brown and the circumstances surrounding the taping of the interviews with K.H. The second is the plausibility of the prosecutors’13 statements that they never heard the tape or tapes and one prosecutor’s statement that “they were somehow lost in the transfer and change of personnel involved in the case.” Detective Brown’s written report is the only document in the record relating to the tape or tapes. The report is dated February 3, 1988. According to the written report, on January 28, 1988, Detective Brown received a telephone call from Detective Robert Farley of the Illinois Cook County sheriff’s office. The written report states that Detective Farley “is involved in the investigation of a major molestation case involving a Rev. Paul Hall.” According to the written report, in the telephone call Farley requested assistance in that “he needed K.H. contacted and an initial statement obtained.” The written report provides that Detective Brown agreed to aid in the investigation and made arrangements to see K.H., and that he spoke with K.H. “in his patrol vehicle in less than ideal conditions.” In his written report Detective Brown further states: “My interview with K.H. was surreptitiously recorded utilizing a microcassette recorder. The original of that recording, along with a copy of this report, will be forwarded to Detective Farley.” After the interview, Detective Brown arranged for a second interview with K.H. to take place on February 3, 1988. According to the written report, on February 2, 1988, Detective Brown spoke with Cook County Assistant State’s Attorney Diane Romza. Romza is the same person who was one of the prosecuting attorneys in the defendant’s trial. According to the written report, Assistant State’s Attorney Romza indicated to Detective Brown “the possibility of K.H. being flown back to the Chicago area for the purpose of being interviewed and/or giving a statement before the grand jury.” The written report also states that Romza asked Detective Brown to approach K.H. and make inquiry to see if he would be so amenable. In addition, the written report states that when Detective Brown met K.H. on February 3, 1988, he transported him to the Salinas police department office. While en route, Detective Brown told K.H. about the possibility of his being requested to fly to the Chicago area to meet with Assistant State’s Attorney Diane Romza, and K.H. agreed to comply with the request. Upon arrival at the Salinas police department office, Detective Brown telephoned Detective Farley and advised him of the conversation he had with K.H. Detective Farley then spoke with K.H. and obtained the necessary information to start the process to have K.H. released from military duty long enough to have him flown to Chicago to testify before the grand jury. The written report further states that Detective Farley then asked Detective Brown to interview K.H. and “specifically cover some questions for the Illinois State Attorney, such as was K.H. shown any pornographic homosexual videos, was K.H. ever asked to wear women’s clothing, that other persons were present in sexual three-somes with the reverend and what activity occurred in connection with the boys choir.” According to the written report, Detective Brown’s second interview with K.H. was conducted in the detective interview room and was recorded. The written report also provides: “Based upon the advice of my Detective Captain, I limited the scope of my interview to those areas specifically requested that inquiry be made into by the Illinois State Attorney. This was done to limit my susceptibility to having to answer to a subpoena originating from the state of Illinois.” Detective Brown’s written report also contains what one of the prosecuting trial attorneys described as a “synopsis” of the two interviews with K.H. The written report further states that the tapes of Detective Brown’s interviews with K.H. were forwarded to Detective Farley. When Detective Brown sent the written report14 to Detective Farley, he included the following note: “2/3/88 Dear Bob, Hope this is a help to you. If you need further help with this case from this end please call. Sounds like a great case— the kind legends are made from. Take Care Is/ James Brown” In addition, with respect to Detective Brown’s February 3, 1988, written report, on the first page it is stated: “Person No. 1 K.H. Person No. 2 FARLEY, ROBERT Person No. 3 ROMZA, DIANE” In the written report it is also stated that Detective Brown spoke with “Illinois State Attorney Romza” on February 2, 1988, and that Romza asked Detective Brown to ask K.H. if he would be willing to return to Chicago “for the purpose of being interviewed and/or giving a statement before the grand jury.” The telephone conversation between Detective Brown and Assistant State’s Attorney Romza took place the day after Detective Brown surreptitiously recorded the first interview with K.H. At trial, when the nonproduction of the tapes was being discussed, the following colloquy occurred: “MS. ROMZA-KUTZ: I think it’s very important that I have never heard of the content of this one tape. It is not two tape recordings to my knowledge, according to Det. Farley, neither Mr. Cahill’s. That tape was made without our knowledge during the investigation of Paul Hall. It was, in fact, sent to Det. Farley of the Cook County Sheriff’s Police, that was then turned over to an Assistant who was assigned to the case. THE COURT: It is one office, State’s Attorney’s Office. MS. ROMZA-KUTZ: I agree, Judge. However my understanding, the tape was presented to a police officer, so he is aware of the content of the tape as much as the State is. THE COURT: Is it verbatim? MS. ROMZA-KUTZ: No. I believe it would probably be a summary. I would be misleading the Court if I said it was verbatim. It’s a very explicit point of the conversation. At this time, Judge, we cannot present those tapes. We do not have them; we have not heard them. I cannot convey to the Court what the content, neither can the previous assistant that was assigned to the case.” It thus appears from the record that one of the prosecuting trial attorneys who was assigned to this case talked to Detective Brown about one of the two interviews that Detective Brown had with K.H. that was recorded on one of the tapes. Also, the first page of the written report bears the prosecutor’s name. At trial, the prosecutor denied any knowledge of the tape or tapes. Under the circumstances, there should have been an evidentiary hearing as to what the “Assistant who was assigned to the case” did with the tape or tapes and what happened thereafter. I note that no logs relating to the deposit or withdrawal of the tapes from the State’s Attorney’s evidence vault appear in the record. In addition, I disagree with the following conclusion of the majority: “Similarly, although the trial court in the present case could only speculate on what the tape might contain, there is a strong likelihood that the officer’s memorandum made contemporaneously with the tape is accurate since its author would not have known that the tape would not be available to compare against his five-page report.” (235 Ill. App. 3d at 425.) The statement that the officer’s memorandum was made contemporaneously with the tape is not borne out by the record. Indeed, the record suggests that the tape was not used in preparing the report. In the trial court, the following colloquy occurred: “THE COURT: Has either side made inquiry as to whether or not that report was made, or that report was prepared by the police department out there after they re-listened to the tape, or under what circumstances was the report prepared? That seems to be the only remnant left of that interview. MR. CAHILL: From my reading of the report, I did talk to the police officer, but it was my understanding that the report was prepared from the conversations. I don’t think the actual— although I don’t know, but it doesn’t appear that the tape was used in preparing the report.” Moreover, Detective Brown’s written report and his note to Detective Farley are telling. In his report he states proudly that he “surreptitiously” tape-recorded his interview with K.H. In his note he states: “Sounds like a great case — the kind legends are made from.” To me, Detective Brown’s actions are indicative of an overzealous law enforcement officer whose statements warrant doubt rather than believability. Under the circumstances, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that “there is a strong likelihood” that Detective Brown’s written synopsis is accurate. In addition, the majority states: “[W]e believe that reversal is unwarranted by reason of this violation because *** (v) defense counsel never sought to interview the California police officer or take advantage of the opportunity to conduct a pretrial interview of K.H. on the day the trial started.” (235 Ill. App. 3d at 432.) I have already discussed the fact that it is readily apparent that Detective Brown was an overzealous police officer in regards to this investigation, so it is unlikely that a pretrial interview without the benefit of the tape or .tapes would have been revealing. This conclusion is buttressed by Detective Brown’s own written statement in his report: “Based upon the advice of my Detective Captain, I limited the scope of my interview to those areas specifically requested that inquiry be made into by the Illinois State Attorney. This was done to limit my susceptibility to have to answer to a subpoena originating from the state of Illinois.” With respect to defense counsel not taking “advantage” of the opportunity to interview K.H., the record reflects that the following occurred: “MR. TUITE: Yes. As to a hearing, Mr. Stratton can be sworn and testify he did talk to K.H. and talked about the incident. K.H. said, I have to talk to Ms. Romza, and when Mr. Stratton got back, then he said, no, I don’t want to talk to you. Now, I’m not again casting aspersions, but maybe you want a hearing as to why K.H., after talking to Ms. Romza, did not want to talk to the Defense. But we did make an attempt to talk to him, on two occasions we talked, and so maybe he is lying, maybe he didn’t talk to Ms. Romza, and using that as an excuse, maybe he did talk to Ms. Romza, and she gave him legal advice that he could talk or not talk as he wished. But we made two attempts to talk to him. The first attempt was, I have to talk to Ms. Romza; the second attempt is, I talked to Ms. Romza. I don’t want to talk to you. So the initial interview becomes that much more important back in ’88, because the police got to interview him. We don’t get to interview him, and the record of that interview is only in a summary supposedly by a police officer that the tape is missing.” It is therefore plain from the record that there would have been no advantage to the defense to conduct a pretrial interview of K.H. on the day the trial started. In addition, in view of the majority’s discussion as to what defense counsel did not do -with respect to the missing tape or tapes, it should be pointed out that defense counsel vigorously contested the State’s contention as to the content of the tape or tapes and the whereabouts of the lost tape or tapes. Plainly, the record establishes that defense counsel assailed the representations of the prosecutors as to the State’s failure to come forward with the tape or tapes. The following colloquy occurred at trial: “MR. TUITE: We have basically outlined that to the Court before the recess, but perhaps the Court may want to hear from witnesses. But I think it is undisputed that K.H., whose testimony your Honor has said will be allowed in as proof of other crimes, was interviewed in January or February of 1988 out in California. The Salinas County Police were requested to find him with a Court Reporter and interview him with respect to any acts of sexual conduct between himself and Reverend Hall when he lived at Reverend Hall’s house. The report says that the interview was tape-recorded. The report further says that there was another interview February 3rd, and that was tape-recorded. Whether it was put on one tape, or two tapes were then reduced to one tape, we don’t know. But we know from the report at least that there were two tape recorded interviews with K.H. We know that under the law, we would be entitled to see those or hear those under discovery because it is probably even more appropriate than a summary of what we usually see in police reports, a summary of what the witness said. This is the exact words and voice of the witness. That tape recorder, at least in the report, and I think it is not disputed, was sent by the Salinas County Police to Detective Farley of the Cook County Sheriff’s Police here in Illinois, which was then given to an Assistant State’s Attorney, whether it be Reginald Baker who had this case originally, or Mr. Derback, who was part of this case originally. But somebody had that tape recorder in their possession while being a member of the State’s Attorney’s staff. Ms. Romza — and I have no doubt, no reason to doubt her word and I do not do so by comments — Mr. Cahill said, we don’t know where it is at. We can’t find it. Well, it was obviously in their office. Somebody had it, and.I would only venture to say that if I had a statement from a witness that I intend to put on as a Defense witness, and notified somebody I have a tape recorder — tape recorded statements of that witness, which I have to furnish under the discovery rules, before I put that witness on the stand, and I, at the eve of trial, said I can’t find it, the inference would be — and I think the inference is — that it is damaging. The inference is that when you have a piece of evidence and you don’t use it, the inference, whether it’s a true inference or not, the inference is that it will be damaging to the side who didn’t produce it.” It must also be borne in mind that the State itself considered K.H. to be an important witness at trial. The State therefore must have realized that the tape or tapes of his interviews were important to maintain and safeguard. This is demonstrated by the statement of the prosecutor at trial: “MR. CAHILL: I think it’s also very critical, Judge, Counsel indicated that K.H. is not a main witness, but I think that’s quite to the contrary. I think he is a witness to David’s incident of sexual abuse by Mr. Hall. Mr. K.H. was present when, I believe, two of the sexual encounters occurred between the Defendant, and I think he is an important witness. To argue that he is not an important witness, and is really collateral, and we can exclude him, Judge, I just don’t think will hold water.” When as in this case the State does not produce evidence that was in its possession for safekeeping, we must be mindful that ours is an adversarial criminal justice system. The stark realities are such that what occurs with evidence when it is in the possession of the State prior to trial is not always what the unsophisticated would suspect. Under the circumstances, it is obvious that this case has an issue that transcends the case itself and has an existence of its own. Where the State is involved in what has been described as “the investigation of a major molestation case” and it inexplicably cannot produce taped interviews of what the prosecutor himself described as “an important witness,” and no evidentiary hearing or investigation is conducted as to what happened to the taped interviews, something is wrong with our criminal justice system. Moreover, when we take into account that the loss or destruction of evidence by the State is not peculiar to this case, an evidentiary hearing or an open investigation is vital. The integrity of our criminal justice system is at stake. We, as judges, must therefore make it plain that there is no longer any room within the conscience of the criminal justice system in Illinois for approving, condoning or making judicial sanctimonious admonitions that go unheeded when the State cannot produce evidence that was in its possession prior to trial. Trial judges should conduct a thorough evidentiary hearing in situations where the State fails to produce evidence in its possession. If no evidentiary hearing is conducted, testimony having a nexus to the missing evidence should be barred. Accused citizens with their precious liberty at stake are entitled to nothing less. Moreover, the past demonstrates that it is unrealistic to believe that any lesser judicial command will have any meaningful effect. Accordingly, I would reverse the conviction and remand for a new trial consistent with what is stated herein.  The State referred to here includes the police since they are part of the prosecutorial team.   There were two trial prosecutors: Ms. Diane Romza-Kutz and Mr. Michael Cahill. There were two trial attorneys for defendant: Mr. Patrick Tuite and Mr. Brent Stratton.   The record is unclear as to whether the transmittal of the written report included the tape or tapes.

=== CASE 9740043 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:29.090559+00 ===

JUSTICE H. LEWIS delivered the opinion of the court: Claimant, Peter J. Lishamer, Sr., filed an application for adjustment of claim pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.), for a lower-back injury incurred while in the course of his employment with the respondent, Komatsu Dresser Company. Subsequently, the claimant filed a section 19(b — 1) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 48, par. 138.19(b — 1)) petition. Following the hearings on his section 19(b — 1) petition, the arbitrator held that the claimant failed to prove that his injury arose out of and in the course of his employment on March 22, 1989, and denied the claimant benefits. On appeal to the Industrial Commission (the Commission), the Commission reversed the decision of the arbitrator and held that the claimant had sustained an accidental injury arising out of and in the course of his employment and awarded the claimant temporary total disability (TTD) benefits for 37% weeks and medical expenses of $622. The circuit court confirmed the Commission’s decision, and the respondent appeals. On appeal, the respondent contends that the Commission’s decision that the claimant’s lower-back injury was causally connected to his employment was against the manifest weight of the evidence and that the Commission failed to give due deference to the arbitrator’s decision and, specifically, to the arbitrator’s determination of the witnesses’ credibility. We affirm for the reasons set forth below. At the arbitration hearing on May 11, 1990, the claimant testified that he had worked as a machinist since 1973, and on March 22, 1989, he was so employed by the respondent. His job duties as a machinist consisted of turning raw metal into usable parts for tractors built at the respondent’s plant. To accomplish this task, the claimant lifted parts weighing between 30 and 40 pounds from a box located next to his machine and placed the parts into the ma¿hiñe for processing. The box containing the parts was on a skid, which placed the box waist high and required the claimant to bend from his waist to lift the part out of the box. The claimant testified that on March 22, 1989, he was working ;he second shift, i.e., from 3:30 p.m. to midnight, and at about 10 D.m., he bent over to pick up a part out of the box, felt a sharp sain at the “bottom” of his back, and simultaneously sneezed, which caused the pain to spread throughout his entire lower back, it the time of the incident, the claimant explained that the box ;ontaining the parts was three-quarters empty as he had been at work for six hours. Following this incident, the claimant straight-med up and sat down at his workbench. Sometime between 10:30 p.m. and 11 p.m., the claimant’s fore-nan, Les Lagoo, came by the claimant’s machine to obtain a proluction count. At this time, the claimant advised the foreman that íe had felt a sharp pain in his back when he bent over to obtain a >art from the box and that he sneezed and felt the pain spread hroughout his back. When the foreman asked if he was all right, ;he claimant responded that he thought so, but that he would just ¡it until his shift ended, if his production for the day was sufficient. Che foreman agreed, so the claimant sat at his workbench the renaming hour of his shift. When the claimant left work to go home, he was still in pain, md he had difficulty getting in and out of the car. The following norning, the claimant was unable to get out of bed due to the pain n his back. The claimant’s wife arrived home from work around loon, helped him out of bed, and took him to St. Therese’s Medical Center. At St. Therese’s, he was given pain medication and muscle •elaxants and was advised to alternate heat and cold packs on his )ack. He was also told to stay off work for a week. That same day, the claimant called Jane Webber, the respond:nt’s nurse, and told her he had injured his back the previous eve-ling when he bent over and sneezed. Webber advised him to come n and see the company doctor, Dr. Loyd, on the following Tuesday, ¡ince the weekend was a holiday. The claimant saw Dr. Loyd as requested, and the doctor increased the dosage of his pain medication md his muscle relaxants. Dr. Loyd told him he could return to vork on March 31, 1989. The claimant returned to work on March 31, 1989, and the fore-nan assigned him to the floor sweeper that day. This work required he claimant to sit on the machine, but after a half hour, because he floor was rough and the sweeper had no suspension, the claimant stopped working due to the pain in his back. The claimant left work after four hours. The following day, April 1, 1989, the claimant went to see Dr. Maniquis. Dr. Maniquis took X rays, prescribed medication, and recommended that he start physical therapy in a week or so. Dr. Maniquis released him for light-duty work as of May 29, 1989, with the restriction of no bending, twisting or stooping and with a lifting restriction of 20 pounds. The doctor also advised him not to work on the floor sweeper. The claimant called the company nurse and advised her that the doctor had released him for light-duty work; however, Webber told the claimant the respondent had no work for him with those restrictions. In July 1989, both Dr. Maniquis and the company physician released the claimant for light-duty work, with a lifting restriction of 35 pounds and no bending, twisting or stretching. Again the claimant was advised that the respondent had no work for him with these restrictions. The claimant had not returned to work at the time of the arbitration hearing. In addition to Dr. Maniquis and Dr. Loyd, the claimant had been to Drs. Apfelbach and Pawl at the respondent’s request. The claimant testified that, currently, he has constant pain at the base of his spine and in his left thigh. He explained that sometimes the pain is worse than others, and that there is no explanation as to the cause of the pain. On cross-examination, the claimant admitted there were no witnesses to his accident. The claimant denied that he told the company nurse that he had hurt his back when he sneezed and before bending over to pick up a part. The claimant stated that at the time of his injury he weighed 330 pounds. Further, the claimant admitted that in November 1989 his back “went out” when he attempted to hang a picture frame at home. In addition, the claimant testified that he had had two prior back injuries, one in 1978 and one in 1987, but he had not missed any work and he had not filed a worker’s compensation claim for these injuries. Jane Webber, the respondent’s nurse, testified that she had talked to the claimant in March 1989 about his medical condition. It was her recollection that the claimant had told her, in a phone conversation on March 23, 1989, that he had hurt his back when he had sneezed on the previous night and that he was unable to come to work. She instructed the claimant to see Dr. Loyd on the following Tuesday. She stated that it was her method of making notes when she placed the word “sneezed” in parenthesis above her written notes in the claimant’s charts in March 1989. Leslie Lagoo, the claimant’s foreman, testified that on the evening of March 22, 1989, at about 11 p.m., the claimant told Lagoo that he had bent over the box to obtain a part, sneezed and felt a pain in his back. Lagoo corroborated the claimant’s testimony that the claimant asked to sit the remainder of his shift. Lagoo’s testimony also confirmed the claimant’s testimony that the parts used in the claimant’s machine were kept in a waist-high box and that the usual procedure to obtain a part was to bend over the box and pick up the part. Two evidence depositions and various medical reports were admitted into evidence. Dr. Maniquis testified in his evidence deposition that he had treated the claimant in the past, when he was the respondent’s physician from 1974 to 1987. He next saw the claimant on April 1, 1989, for a lower-back injury. At that time, the claimant told the doctor he had injured his back at work on March 22, 1989, when he bent over to pick up a part, sneezed and felt pain in his lower back. According to Dr. Maniquis, the claimant had attempted to return to work after a week but left when his back started hurting again. When Dr. Maniquis saw the claimant, the claimant had leg pains and some numbness over the lateral aspect of his thigh. Dr. Maniquis’ examination of the claimant revealed that he weighed 290 pounds, he had limited flexion in his back, he had tenderness on palpation of the left sacroiliac and in the lumbosacral area, and the muscles around the claimant’s spine were tight on palpation. Dr. Maniquis had X rays taken of the claimant’s lower back. The doctor took the claimant off work, and, subsequently, he ordered physical therapy for the claimant. The claimant’s back pain improved, and in May 1989, the doctor released the claimant for work with the restrictions of a lifting limit of 20 pounds, and no bending, twisting or stooping. The doctor also advised the claimant not to drive a sweeper. The doctor was aware that the claimant did not return to work at that time because there was no job available with those restrictions. The doctor again released the claimant for work in July 1989, but with a lifting restriction of 35 pounds and no bending, twisting or stooping, but again the respondent was unable to offer the claimant work with these restrictions. When the doctor saw the claimant in November 1989, the claimant told the doctor that his back started hurting again after he attempted to hang a picture frame at home, so the doctor imposed a 25-pound lifting restriction. The doctor last saw the claimant in December 1989, but the doctor testified he had not lifted the claimant’s work restrictions. Dr. Maniquis did not think the claimant could work without restrictions because of the numbness in the claimant’s leg and his back pain. The doctor believed these symptoms indicated the claimant had a pinched nerve. The doctor testified that the claimant had a preexisting condition of spondylolisthesis and spondylosis of the lower lumbar spine. However, his diagnosis of the claimant’s condition was low-back-pain syndrome in addition to the preexisting conditions. Dr. Maniquis admitted on cross-examination that it was possible that a sneeze alone could bring about an onset of the claimant’s symptoms because of his underlying condition, but he stated that bending and sneezing together placed more stress on the claimant’s back than either event would separately. Dr. Maniquis was aware that the claimant’s work required him to bend over and pick up parts on a daily basis. Dr. Apfelbach testified in his evidence deposition that he is an orthopedic surgeon. He had seen the claimant on October 16, 1989, at the request of the respondent’s insurance carrier. According to Dr. Apfelbach, his only objective finding of the claimant’s condition was that of obesity. He noted that the claimant had a limited range of motion in his back, but he did not find this evidence reliable, as he felt the claimant had control over whether he did these motions to the fullest extent. The doctor did not observe any muscle spasm when the claimant did the range-of-motion tests. Dr. Apfelbach corroborated that the claimant had preexisting conditions of spondylolisthesis and spondylosis. It was Dr. Apfelbach’s opinion that the claimant’s “backache” was secondary to his spondylolisthesis with his obesity chronically irritating this condition. It was also the doctor’s opinion that the claimant could perform his regular work. The doctor found no evidence of nerve irritation or radiculopathy. On cross-examination, the doctor admitted that the claimant’s preexisting condition could be temporarily aggravated by bending over to pick up a part and sneezing, but he was of the opinion the aggravation would not be permanent. The doctor did state, “You’re not supposed to be bending over all the time, you’re supposed to bend your knees when you move.” The medical reports from St. Therese Medical Center indicated that the claimant came to the emergency room on March 23, 1989, for treatment of his lower back. The medical report gave the history of the claimant’s accident at work. The diagnosis of the claimant’s condition made at the medical center on March 23, 1989, was acute lumbosacral strain. The notes from Dr. Loyd, the respondent’s company physician, indicated that he had treated the claimant after March 22, 1989, for chronic lumbosacral strain, for which he prescribed medication and physical therapy. The physical therapy notes included in Dr. Loyd’s records revealed that the claimant had limited range of motion in his lower back and that he had tenderness in the lumbosacral area upon palpation. In Dr. Ronald Pawl’s letter report of December 7, 1989, the doctor stated that he had examined the claimant on December 1, 1989. In this letter, Dr. Pawl’s history of the claimant’s accident was substantially similar to the claimant’s testimony of his accident at the arbitration hearing. The doctor noted that the claimant complained of low-back pain and numbness and pain in the lateral aspect of his thigh radiating down from his hip to his knee. The doctor found the claimant’s past medical and surgical history unremarkable, but the doctor noted the claimant was severely obese. Dr. Pawl reviewed the claimant’s X rays, from which the doctor determined the claimant had a preexisting condition in his lower back which was unrelated to his injury. Dr. Pawl stated that “[b]ecause he has symptoms that are significant in his lateral thigh, I think it is imperative to determine whether or not there is evidence for a nerve root entrapment.” The doctor stated in his letter that the claimant’s obesity would prevent investigation by either computerized tomographic scanning or magnetic resonance imaging, but that he recommended the claimant undergo a myelogram. Dr. Pawl concluded, “If there is no nerve root involvement, the only disorder in his spine are [sic] the pre-existing degenerative and congenital conditions.” In a letter from Dr. Barry L. Fischer dated June 23, 1989, Dr. Fischer indicated that he had seen the claimant on May 9, 1989. His history of the claimant’s back injury was the same as the claimant’s testimony of the accident. When Dr. Fischer saw the claimant, he complained of pain in his lower back with numbness in the left thigh. The doctor’s examination of the claimant revealed that the claimant was 5 feet 11 inches tall, weighed 300 pounds, had tenderness and spasm to palpation and pressure in the left lumbosacral and paravertebral area, and had spasm radiating on the left side and down the posterior aspect of the left leg, which was indicative of left sciatic radiation. He, too, found the claimant to have limited range of motion in flexion of his lower back, but, in addition, the doctor determined that the claimant had a positive Lasegue sign on the left. After reviewing the claimant’s X rays, Dr. Fischer determined that the claimant had a preexisting condition of spondylolisthesis. Dr. Fischer’s diagnosis of the claimant’s condition was a lumbosacral strain injury with sciatic radiation of spasm on the left and down the posterior of the left leg. He also stated there was a possible herniated-disc syndrome of the lumbar area. From the foregoing evidence, the arbitrator held that the claimant failed to prove he had sustained an accidental injury during the course of his employment on March 22, 1989. As was noted previously, the Commission reversed and held that the claimant’s injury did arise out of and in the course of his employment and awarded him TTD and medical expenses. The circuit court confirmed the Commission’s decision. On appeal, the respondent first contends that the Commission’s decision was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Specifically, the respondent argues that because the claimant was engaged in a normal, daily activity, i.e., bending over, and because the claimant was not exposed to a greater risk than the general public, his injury to his lower back was not an accidental injury for which compensation was payable. The respondent further argues that the claimant’s preexisting conditions of his obesity and his spondylolisthesis were the cause of the claimant’s current condition of ill-being. The respondent’s second issue raised on appeal is that where, as- here, the Commission did not consider additional evidence, the Commission failed to give due deference to the arbitrator’s decision and, in particular, the Commission did not give weight to the arbitrator’s assessment of the witnesses’ credibility.  In considering the respondent’s first contention, that the Commission’s determination that the claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of his employment was against the manifest weight of the evidence, we are cognizant that the law in this area is well established. For an injury to “arise out of” employment, the injury must have occurred from some risk connected with, or incidental to, the employment, in order to create a causal connection between the employment and the accidental injury. (Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665; Hopkins v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 196 Ill. App. 3d 347, 553 N.E.2d 732.) If the injury occurs when the employee was performing acts he was instructed to perform by his employer, acts he had a common-law or statutory duty to perform, or acts he might reasonably be expected to perform incident to his assigned duties, then the injury arose out of his employment. (Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665; Hopkins v. Industrial Comm’n, 196 Ill. App. 3d 347, 553 N.E.2d 732.) Also, if the employee is exposed to a risk to a greater degree than the general public, the injury is similarly considered to have arisen out of his employment. (Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665; Hopkins v. Industrial Comm’n, 196 Ill. App. 3d 347, 553 N.E.2d 732.) However, if the employee’s exposure to the risk is equal to that of the general public, his injury is not compensable. Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665; Hopkins v. Industrial Comm’n, 196 Ill. App. 3d 347, 553 N.E.2d 732. Additionally, under the law, an employer takes its employees as it finds them, and a preexisting condition does not bar compensation for an injury if the employment was also a causative factor. (Quality Wood Products Corp. v. Industrial Comm’n (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 417, 454 N.E.2d 668.) The only exception to this general rule is that if an employee’s health has so deteriorated that any normal daily activity is overexertion, compensation will be denied. Quality Wood Products Corp. v. Industrial Comm’n, 97 Ill. 2d 417, 454 N.E.2d 668.  In the instant case, the Commission stated its decision was based in pertinent part on the following: “The objective findings in this case show that Petitioner had a preexisting condition of spondylolisthesis and that he was obese. The doctors all agreed and acknowledged that bending could aggravate this preexisting condition. Respondent’s examining physician, Dr. Apfelbach, thought the back pain was secondary to the preexisting condition. Dr. Maniquis also acknowledged that the combination of lifting and sneezing would be stressful on the back and would be more stressful than just one or the other.” This paragraph of the Commission’s decision reflected that the Commission found that the claimant’s act of bending on March 22, 1989, aggravated his preexisting condition and caused his present condition of ill-being. This determination was not against the manifest weight of the evidence. The medical evidence presented revealed that the claimant did have the preexisting condition of spondylolisthesis and spondylosis in his lower back; however, as the Commission found, Dr. Maniquis testified that bending, combined with sneezing, presented a stressful situation for the claimant’s back. Dr. Apfelbach, the respondent’s physician, acknowledged that these activities could temporarily aggravate the claimant’s condition. None of the medical evidence presented established that the claimant’s condition had so deteriorated that any activity would cause injury, and, in fact, although the claimant’s preexisting conditions and his obesity were of a longstanding nature, the claimant had been able to do his work for years without difficulty. Further, it was a reasonable inference that the claimant’s acts of bending required by his work exposed the claimant to a greater degree of risk than that of the general public. Dr. Apfelbach testified that it is not a normal activity to bend from the waist, but that a person must bend his knees when he lifts a part. The claimant’s testimony and Lagoo’s testimony established that the claimant’s work required him to regularly bend from the waist and lift parts weighing between 15 and 40 pounds out of a box and that the location of the box did not enable the claimant to bend his knees while doing this activity. The frequency of this activity and the method in which the claimant had to bend and lift without bending his knees increased the claimant’s exposure to risk of injury from the bending than that of the general public, and, thus, the fact that bending is a normal activity did not preclude a finding that the claimant’s injury arose out of his employment. The foregoing evidence was sufficient to support the Commission’s decision.  The respondent’s second contention is that this court must give extra scrutiny to the Commission’s decision, since the Commission considered the case without hearing additional evidence. The respondent argues that because the Commission overturned the arbitrator’s decision, it is clear that the Commission did not give due deference to the arbitrator’s decision and, in particular, the Commission did not give due deference to the arbitrator’s determination of credibility. In support of this argument, the respondent cites to this court’s decision in Cook v. Industrial Comm’n (1988), 176 Ill. App. 3d 545, 531 N.E.2d 379. This argument is without merit. In a subsequent case, Dillon v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 195 Ill. App. 3d 599, 552 N.E.2d 1082, this court repudiated the statement in Cook that a court of review is required to give “extra scrutiny” to a Commission decision overturning the arbitrator’s determination without considering additional evidence and reiterated the standard to be applied on review. In Dillon, we stated as follows: “It is well settled that the Commission is the judge of the credibility of the witnesses. [Citation.] It is the peculiar province of the Commission not only to determine the credibility of witnesses but also to weigh the testimony and to determine the weight to be given to the evidence. [Citations.] Regardless of whether the Commission hears testimony in addition to that heard by the arbitrator, it exercises original jurisdiction and is in no way bound by the arbitrator’s findings.” (Dillon v. Industrial Comm’n, 195 Ill. App. 3d at 607, 552 N.E.2d at 1087.) This court further stated in Dillon that the Commission’s decision will only be overturned on review if its decision is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Dillon v. Industrial Comm’n, 195 Ill. App. 3d 599, 552 N.E.2d 1082. Here, the Commission set forth in its decision that it found the claimant to be credible, since the claimant’s testimony about his injury at work was corroborated by the medical evidence. The Commission noted that the only contradiction to the claimant’s testimony was provided by the respondent’s nurse, which the Commission held was not persuasive in determining the claimant incredible. We do not find that the Commission’s determination of credibility was against the manifest weight of the evidence. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Lake County, confirming the Industrial Commission’s decision, is affirmed. Affirmed. McCULLOUGH, P.J., and WOODWARD and RAKOWSKI, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740919 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:44:59.576807+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. On appeal of claims tried before the bench, we shall not set aside the judgment unless it is clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of the witnesses. Ind.Trial Rule 52(A). When the trial court makes no findings, we presume the judgment is based on findings supported by the evidence and will affirm if the trial court's judgment can be sustained on any legal theory supported by the evidence most favorable to the judgment, together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Klebes v. Forest Lake Corporation (1998), Ind.App., 607 N.E.2d 978, trans. denied. Moreover, when reviewing a general judgment, we presume that the trial court correctly followed the law: this presumption is one of the strongest presumptions applicable to our consideration of a case on appeal. Baker v. Baker (1986) Ind.App., 488 N.E.2d 361.
The evidence of record reveals that the Skiles' 1991 purchase of the house in Florida was made primarily as an investment on the advice of their financial advisor. Most of the other conduct the majority has relied upon to support its conclusion that the Skiles changed their domicile from Indiana to Florida was made in order to take advantage of the fact that Florida has no income tax, also on the advice of the financial advisor. The version of the facts relied on by the majority does not lead inescapably to the conclusion that the Skiles had acquired a new domicile in Florida as a matter of law.
The facts in the light most favorable to the trial court's judgment reveal that Seott and Libby were high school sweethearts in their hometown of Plymouth, Indiana. - Upon graduation from high school, Scott attended Michigan State University on a basketball scholarship. Libby attended Purdue University in Indiana and paid in-state tuition. During the summers, both Scott and Libby returned to Plymouth. Seott has conceded that he considered himself an Indiana resident when he was attending college and playing basketball in Michigan.
At the end of his four years of college eligibility, Seott was drafted by the Milwaukee Bucks and moved to Wisconsin to play basketball. In January of 1987, Libby quit her job in Indianapolis and moved to Milwaukee to be with Scott. Scott has conceded *357that he never considered himself a resident of Wisconsin but was there to play basketball. At the end of the 1987-88 basketball season, Seott and Libby moved back to Indiana.
Seott was then traded to the Indiana Pacers and the couple moved to Indianapolis. In 1989, Seott and Libby purchased their Brown County home on Sweetwater Lake in Nineveh, Indiana, and made it their permanent home. Over the years, the Skiles have made substantial improvements to their Brown County home, including having 1) reshingled the roof, 2) built a screened-in deck, 3) remodeled the kitchen, 4) purchased one-half of an adjoining lot, 5) installed air conditioning, and 6) spent $30,000.00 on a new dock and boat house. The family me-mentoes (and most of Seott's basketball trophies) have remained in the Brown County home. The home in Brown County has been decorated and maintained in a home-like atmosphere while the house in Florida has a stark and impersonal atmosphere. The Brown County home has never been rented and the Skiles have never considered selling it.
Although the Skiles purchased the house in Florida in 1991, after Scott landed the multi-year, multi-million dollar contract with the Orlando Magic, they continued to return to their "Indiana home" for every off-season and for special occasions. The Skiles returned to their Brown County home in February of 1998 (during the basketball season) to celebrate Sean's first birthday party. Several of Scott's and Libby's friends and relatives, all Indiana residents, attended the party. The Skiles have no family and few friends in Florida.
The Skiles had waited until they returned to Indiana to schedule their son's surgery. In 1992, Seott obtained an Indiana fishing license, stating under penalties of perjury that he was an Indiana resident. A 1993 article in Sports Illustrated reported Scott's statement regarding an event that took place when he had gone "home" to Indiana.
During the summer of 1998, negotiations had been initiated regarding Seott's future with the Magic and there was discussion that Seott might be traded to another team. Scott told his best friend (an Indiana resident) that if he were to be traded from the Magic, the Skiles would sell their house in Florida. Seott informed the Magic that he would not bring his family back to Florida from Indiana unless he was assured that he would not be traded. After having been assured that Scott would have employment with the Magic for another year, the Skiles returned to Florida for the 1998-94 season. Less than two weeks later, marital discord escalated and Libby returned to Indiana with the children and filed for divorce.
Onee acquired, domicile is presumed to continue. State Election Board v. Bayh (1988), Ind., 521 N.E.2d 1313, 1317. A person who temporarily leaves his place of residence with the intention of returning has not lost his original residence. Id. Self-serving statements of intent are not sufficient to establish that a new domicile has been acquired. Id. at 1318.
Since high school, Seott (and later his family) had established the pattern of leaving Indiana to play college or professional basketball during the basketball season and then returning to Indiana for the off-season. The evidence in the light most favorable to the judgment supports the trial court's determination that the Brown County home was the Skiles' permanent residence where they always returned when basketball season was over and had always intended to return when Scott's career as a basketball player was over. Thus, the evidence supports the trial court's judgment that Scott's and Libby's domicile remained in Indiana despite the purchase of the house in Florida. The trial court's decision is not clearly erroneous and should not be disturbed.
Additionally, and perhaps more importantly, the finding by the majority that, at the inception of the present proceedings, the Skiles were residents of Florida and not Indiana has become moot and works an extreme hardship on the Skiles family which, without a doubt, has suffered and will continued to suffer as the result of the protracted litigation. Now that the majority has effectively dismissed the present dissolution proceedings, all Libby need do is refile in *358Indiana and there can be little question that she now has been a continuous and bona fide resident of the State of Indiana for the previous six months. As noted by the majority, Florida has declined to exercise jurisdiction in favor of the instant Indiana proceedings. While it is not necessary that we take judicial notice of the fact that Scott now plays for the Washington Bullets, that fact makes Seott's claim that Florida is the better forum in which to litigate the dissolution less persuasive.
Finally, while I agree with the majority that it is hard to envision cireumstances that would warrant the expenditure of a quarter of a million dollars in preliminary attorney fees (plus whatever fees Scott has incurred), there can be no reasonable doubt that the reasonable attorney fees incurred thus far by both parties have been enormous. However, the issue of attorney fees does not justify the majorities' disposition of this case which, considering the mootness of the jurisdictional issue, will render the reasonable attorney fees incurred in the jurisdictional contest, a total waste. All the majority decision accomplishes is the requirement that the Skiles send good money after bad in effecting their dissolution.
Moreover, even if the preliminary attorney fees awarded in the case are unreasonable, attorney fees awarded prospectively are much like a retainer, the reasonableness which is subject to review in later proceedings. Kyle v. Kyle (1991), Ind.App., 582 N.E.2d 842, 850, trans. denied. When preliminary attorney fees are later determined to be excessive, the payor spouse is entitled to a refund. Id. The preliminary attorney fees awarded in the present case, even if excessive, are not cause for reversal.
Indiana law recognizes that divorce litigation is harmful to the family, especially the children involved. Lamb v. Wenning (1991), Ind.App., 583 N.E.2d 745, 751, modified on other grounds, 600 N.E.2d 96. I am left with the firm conviction that we are making a mistake by requiring the Skiles to start dissolution proceedings over and prolong this ordeal which, without a doubt, will continue to exact an immeasurable personal cost upon the Skiles family.
Sufficient evidence of probative value supports the trial court's judgment that the Skiles had never relinquished their Indiana domicile when they temporarily moved to Florida for Seott to play basketball. We should not disturb the trial court's decision but instead should stand aside to permit the present proceedings to advance to the final hearing scheduled for February 9, 1995, and the earliest resolution possible. Therefore, I dissent.

=== CASE 9740028 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:00.124135+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from that portion of the majority opinion setting aside the murder conviction and ordering judgment entered imposing a sentence for involuntary manslaughter.
The evidence in this case correctly recit ed by the majority opinion is that appellant approached the victim from the rear while she was speaking with a child and struck her so forcefully that a vertebral artery was severed. The jury was fully and correctly instructed as to what they must find to constitute murder.
Although appellant did not use a weapon and struck but a single blow with his hand, the evidence was sufficient for the jury to conclude that due to the position of the victim, the manner in which she was struck, and the damage resulting therefrom that appellant intended to administer a fatal blow.
It is not a proper function for this Court to invade the province of the jury and draw a different conclusion by weighing the evidence. Whether we would reach a different conclusion from the evidence is beside the point. The question at issue is whether there is sufficient evidence to support the verdict of the jury. Alfaro v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 670. I would not second-guess the jury in this case.
I would affirm the trial court in all respects.

=== CASE 2221897 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.114237+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 462 (1992)
John F. McKeown, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 64A03-9201-CR-003.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
October 29, 1992.
Rehearing Denied February 18, 1993.
James V. Tsoutsouris, Valparaiso, for appellant-defendant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Preston W. Black, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
GARRARD, Judge.
John F. McKeown was tried by jury and convicted of operating a motor vehicle while suspended under IC 9-12-2, a class D felony. We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:
On March 23, 1989, Valparaiso police officer Nick Starcevic ("Starcevic") observed John McKeown ("McKeown") driving a white station wagon with a homemade license plate. The license plate consisted of a piece of cardboard with "Not Reg" marked in red letters. When Starcevic stopped McKeown and asked for his driver's license, McKeown replied that he didn't have one. After initially refusing to cooperate, McKeown eventually gave Starcevic enough information to check the status of his driver's license. A computer check revealed that McKeown was an habitual traffic violator and that his driver's license had been suspended from 6/8/87 to 6/7/97. Starcevic arrested McKeown and charged him with operating a motor vehicle while suspended under IC 9-12-2, a class D felony.
Prior to trial, defense counsel filed a motion to dismiss for lack of habitual offender status. On June 25, 1990, the Indiana Court of Appeals had reversed two of McKeown's previous convictions for driving while suspended. The trial court denied the motion and on July 25, 1991, a jury found McKeown guilty of operating a *463 motor vehicle while an habitual traffic offender.
McKeown appeals his conviction and we affirm.
ISSUES:
McKeown presents three issues on appeal which we restate as follows:
I. Whether McKeown's prior convictions, determined after his arrest to be invalid as a violation of his constitutional right to counsel, may constitute a predicate for a subsequent conviction under IC 9-12-2.
II. Whether the trial court erred by admitting State's exhibits 2, 3, and 4.
III. Whether the evidence introduced at trial was sufficient to sustain a conviction for driving while an habitual traffic offender.
DISCUSSION:
Issue I:
On June 25, 1990, over one year after McKeown had been arrested on the present charge of operating a motor vehicle while an habitual traffic offender ("HTO"), the Indiana Court of Appeals reversed two of McKeown's previous convictions for driving while suspended. McKeown v. State (1990), Ind. App., 556 N.E.2d 3, trans. denied. The convictions were reversed because McKeown had not knowingly and voluntarily waived his right to representation by counsel as required by Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S. Ct. 792, 9 L. Ed. 2d 799 (1963). Id. at 6.
Prior to trial in this case McKeown filed a motion to dismiss based on the reversal of the two previous convictions. McKeown contends that the invalidation of these convictions also voids his status as an habitual offender thereby preventing a conviction in this case for driving while an habitual offender. Specifically he contends that the case of Burgett v. Texas, 389 U.S. 109, 88 S. Ct. 258, 19 L. Ed. 2d 319 (1967) prevents uncounseled convictions from being used as a predicate for a violation of IC 9-12-2 (repealed, now IC X-XX-XX-X to -15). We disagree.
We recognize that under the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution an uncounseled felony conviction cannot be used for certain purposes. Lewis v. United States (1980), 445 U.S. 55, 65, 100 S. Ct. 915, 921, 63 L. Ed. 2d 198. See, Burgett v. Texas, supra (enhancement of punishment under recidivist statute); United States v. Tucker, 404 U.S. 443, 92 S. Ct. 589, 30 L. Ed. 2d 592 (1972) (consideration of uncounseled conviction in sentencing on a subsequent conviction); Loper v. Beto, 405 U.S. 473, 92 S. Ct. 1014, 31 L. Ed. 2d 374 (1972) (use of uncounseled conviction to impeach the general credibility of the defendant).
The United States Supreme Court, however, has never suggested that an uncounseled conviction is invalid for all purposes. Lewis, 445 U.S. at 65, 100 S. Ct. at 921. For example, in Lewis, supra, the Court stated that the use of an uncounseled felony conviction may constitute a predicate for imposing a civil firearms disability enforceable by a criminal sanction. Id. at 65-69, 100 S. Ct. at 921-22. The Court went on to explain:
"In each of those cases, [Burgett, Tucker, and Loper] this Court found that the subsequent conviction or sentence violated the Sixth Amendment because it depended upon the reliability of a past uncounseled conviction. The federal gun laws, however, focus not on reliability, but on the mere fact of conviction, or even indictment, in order to keep firearms away from potentially dangerous persons. Congress' judgment that a convicted felon, even one whose conviction was allegedly uncounseled, is among the class of persons who should be disabled from dealing in or possessing firearms because of potential dangerousness is rational. Enforcement of that essentially civil disability through a criminal sanction does not `support guilt or enhance punishment' see Burgett [389 U.S. at 115, 88 S. Ct. at 262], on the basis of a conviction that is unreliable when one considers Congress' broad purpose."
Lewis, 445 U.S. at 67, 100 S. Ct. at 922. The Court went on to note that a felon could, of course, challenge the validity of a *464 prior conviction, or otherwise remove his disability, before obtaining a firearm. "We simply hold today that the firearms prosecution does not open the predicate conviction to a new form of collateral attack." Id.
In Gentry v. State (1988), Ind. App., 526 N.E.2d 1187, trans. denied, the Indiana Court of Appeals adopted the reasoning of Lewis and applied it to convictions for driving while adjudged to be an habitual traffic offender. The court, quoting State v. O'Neill (1984), Me., 473 A.2d 415, stated:
"A person may not take the law into his own hands by driving a motor vehicle in defiance of the State's determination that he is an habitual offender... . There are strong policy reasons supporting [this] statutory scheme of administrative determinations of habitual offender status for repeated violators of the traffic laws of the State and the imposition of criminal sanctions for future violations by the adjudicated habitual offender. Prohibiting imprisonment of habitual offenders for their repeated abuse of the motor-vehicle-operation privilege denied them by reason of their habitual offender status, when their status as such was determined in an earlier civil proceeding without the assistance of counsel or, as in the instant case, where the uncounseled defendant plead guilty to the charge of operating under the influence of intoxicating liquor, would impose on the State and on the courts such severe burdens as to frustrate for all practical purposes the legislative scheme designed to free the highways of the State from those drivers who by their conduct and record have demonstrated their indifference for the safety and welfare of others and their disrespect for the laws of the State... . In the instant case, as in Lewis ... the focus is not on reliability or non-reliability of the previous uncounseled conviction, but on the mere fact of conviction or the mere fact of the adjudication of habitual offender status."
Gentry, supra at 1188.
The court in Gentry held that driving after being determined to be an HTO is an offense separate and distinct from the other previous offenses. The very essence of the crime is driving after being declared an habitual offender. Id. at 1189. The crucial date, therefore, insofar as habitual violator status is concerned, is the date of driving, not the date on which the status is challenged or set aside. Id. If the person is driving, despite notification that he may not do so because he has been declared an habitual violator, he is flaunting the law even if one or more of the underlying convictions is voidable. Id.
We adopt the reasoning in the cases above. As in Lewis, supra, the focus of IC 9-12-2 (now IC X-XX-XX-X to -15) is on the mere fact of conviction in order to prevent potentially dangerous persons from hurting other persons on public roadways. McKeown was arrested at a time when his habitual offender status was still in effect. His present conviction, therefore, is not punishment for his earlier offenses, but stems from his operation of a motor vehicle in direct contravention of his classification as an habitual offender and in open violation of the statutory prohibition purposefully enacted to discourage repeated violations of traffic laws by that class of people. We therefore affirm the trial court.
Issue II:
Next, McKeown contends that the trial court erred in admitting State's exhibits 2, 3, and 4. We disagree.
State's exhibit number 2 is a certified copy of McKeown's driving record. McKeown first objected to its admission on the basis that the State had failed to lay a proper foundation. After the trial court overruled the objection and admitted the document, McKeown objected again on the basis of relevancy. That objection was also overruled.
First, a question cannot be raised on appeal unless a proper and timely objection was made in the trial court. Chustak v. Northern Indiana Public Service Co. (1972), 259 Ind. 390, 288 N.E.2d 149, 155. A party must object to evidence at the time it is offered into the record. Reed v. Dillon (1991), Ind. App., 566 N.E.2d 585, 588. A party who fails to make a timely objection *465 normally waives his right on appeal to assert the admission of the evidence as erroneous. Id. at 588-89. An objection to the admission of written or documentary evidence should be made after it is offered and before it is admitted into evidence. Snow v. Cannelton Sewer Pipe Co. (1965) 138 Ind. App. 119, 210 N.E.2d 118, 124, trans. denied.
In addition, even if an objection is timely, the appellant must demonstrate actual prejudice before the error may be grounds for reversal. Aldridge v. Abram & Hawkins Excavating Co., Inc. (1985), Ind. App., 474 N.E.2d 107, 109, trans. denied. The trial court has considerable latitude in the admission or rejection of evidence and it is only when an error by the judge relates to material matter, or is of such character as to substantially affect the rights of parties, that the error justifies reversal. Posey County v. Chamness (1982), Ind. App., 438 N.E.2d 1041, 1048.
In this case, neither of the objections proffered by McKeown were adequate to preserve an issue for appeal. First, the objection on relevancy grounds came after the exhibit had already been admitted. Objections must be made before evidence is admitted into the record or no error is preserved. Second, McKeown has failed to demonstrate any prejudice flowing to him from the alleged lack of foundation or irrelevancy of the evidence. The burden is his and that burden was not met in this case. McKeown's brief was void of any showing of harm. The trial court, therefore, did not err in admitting State's exhibit number 2.
Next, State's exhibit numbers 3 and 4 are certified documents filed in the Porter County Court in a previous cause number involving McKeown. Exhibit number 3 is a certified copy of an order issued by the Porter County judge. Exhibit number 4 is a certified copy of the information, stating that in the previous case McKeown had been operating a motor vehicle while his driving privileges were suspended under IC 9-12-2. McKeown objected to both of these exhibits on the grounds of relevancy.
An objection which is not specific preserves no error on appeal. Johnson v. Naugle (1990), Ind. App., 557 N.E.2d 1339, 1341; Bryant v. State ex rel. Van Natta (1980), Ind. App., 405 N.E.2d 583, 584. An objection to evidence on the grounds of relevance is not considered to be a specific objection in Indiana and will not preserve the issue for appeal. For example, in Schoby v. Smith (1968), 142 Ind. App. 483, 235 N.E.2d 495, 495, counsel's statement "Objection, your Honor. It is irrelevant." was too indefinite to raise any question on appeal.
In this case, McKeown's attorney objected as follows:
"MR. KERR: You Honor, the matter that we are addressing here today happened in March of 1989. To present court documents of something that happened in 1987, I see absolutely no relevance ..." (R. 206).
Out of the hearing of the jury the attorneys argued to the judge the relative merits of the exhibits and their relevance to the present case.
It is clear from the record that relevancy was the only ground upon which McKeown objected to the introduction of these exhibits. Without more, such an objection is insufficient to preserve an issue for appeal. The trial court, therefore, did not err in admitting exhibit numbers 3 and 4 in the present case.
Issue III:
Finally, McKeown contends that the evidence introduced at trial was insufficient to sustain a conviction under IC 9-12-2. Specifically he contends that the State failed to show that it mailed notice of his suspension.
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a conviction, the reviewing court neither weighs the evidence nor judges the credibility of the witnesses. Traxler v. State (1989), Ind. App., 538 N.E.2d 268, 269. The reviewing court considers only the evidence favorable to the verdict, together with all reasonable inferences flowing therefrom, and if there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the verdict, it will not be disturbed. Id.
*466 First we note that proof of mailing was not an actual element of the offense of operating a motor vehicle while suspended as an habitual violator under IC 9-12-2. Collins v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d 798, 800. Although proof of mailing will permit an inference of this knowledge, the State need only prove that the defendant had knowledge of the suspension. Id.; Chambers v. State (1989), Ind. App., 547 N.E.2d 301, 302.
In Collins, supra, the defendant was stopped by the police six months before the offense with which he was charged and advised that his license was suspended for being an habitual traffic offender. Collins, supra at 801. The defendant also admitted that at a court appearance for the previous arrest, the judge had read to him the charge that he knowingly operated an automobile after having been adjudged an habitual traffic offender. Id. From these facts the court concluded that the defendant had knowledge of his status as an habitual traffic offender. Id.
The facts of the present case are similar. Exhibits 3 and 4 show that in 1987 McKeown was charged with operating a motor vehicle while suspended, the same charge filed against McKeown in the present case. These documents further show that McKeown appeared in court where the information was read to him and he received a copy of it. McKeown testified at trial that he recognized exhibit number 3 and remembered that he was previously in court on the same charges. When McKeown was stopped for the present offense, he stated that he did not have a driver's license. Moreover, McKeown indicated at trial that he knew his license had been suspended:
"Q ... what was the nature of your writing to the Bureau?
A Because I was pulled over so many times for driving while suspended, and I wanted to know why. I never was  no notice (indiscernible) no answer, no response, and after about three times I finally got a letter that said I was suspended because my insurance had run out ..." (R. 272).
.....
"A Well, I did receive one letter years ago from `em. Finally about three years ago  finally telling me why I was driving while suspended ..." (R. 273).
.....
"Q He told you you were charges [sic] with some misdemeanors.
A Yes.
Q And one of those misdemeanors you think was driving while suspended?
A Yeah, I know it was driving while suspended.
Q And do you know what driving while suspended means?
A Well, it probably means I'm suspended from driving." (R. 293-94).
This evidence is sufficient to support an inference that McKeown knew that his license was suspended at the time of his arrest in the present case.
CONCLUSION:
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
RATLIFF and HOFFMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2221917 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.66231+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 365 (1992)
Robert G. RIEHLE, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Larry K. MOORE and Patsy R. Moore, Appellees-Plaintiffs.
No. 79A05-9105-CV-146.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
October 20, 1992.
Transfer Denied December 14, 1992.
*367 Richard T. Heide, Heide Sandy Deets Kennedy Schrader & Antalis, Lafayette, for appellant-defendant.
John J. Fuhs, Petri & Fuhs, Spencer, for appellees-plaintiffs.
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge.
Defendant Robert Riehle appeals the adverse judgment of the Tippecanoe Circuit Court which awarded compensatory damages of $11,158.23 to plaintiffs Larry and Patsy Moore. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
On appeal, Riehle raises six issues, which we have consolidated and restated as follows:
1. Did the trial court commit reversible error when it included within its findings of fact two which were not supported by evidence in the record?
2. Did the trial court properly admit into evidence the Moores' exhibit 1?
3. Was Riehle entitled to a reduction in the amount of damages owed because the Moores reached a settlement with an alleged joint tort-feasor?
4. Were the trial court's findings on the issues of liability and damages supported by sufficient evidence?
5. Did the trial court award the Moores types of damages to which they were not legally entitled?
The following are the facts most favorable to the judgment. The Moores lived in Spencer. In 1980, Larry Moore learned that his job would require him to move to Lafayette. Around Thanksgiving, Larry discussed with Riehle the Moores' desire to buy a house in the Lafayette area. Riehle told Larry of a house that Riehle believed might interest the Moores. The Moores viewed the house in early December of 1980.
After the Moores viewed the house, Larry Moore spoke with attorney John Fuhs. Fuhs advised Larry to make sure that there was title insurance on the property. After this conversation, Larry Moore continued negotiations with Riehle. During these negotiations, Larry asked Riehle about title insurance. Riehle responded that there would be no problem with insurance.
On December 22, the Moores had another meeting with Riehle. At this meeting, they again requested title insurance. Riehle assured them that he would provide title insurance and told them that they should go forward and bid on the house. The Moores bid on the house, and negotiations between the parties culminated in a final purchase agreement which identified James Bailey as the Moores' agent and which was admitted into evidence at trial as plaintiffs' exhibit 2.[1] An earlier version of the purchase agreement, which was admitted into evidence as plaintiffs' exhibit 1, identified Riehle as the Moores' agent. The purchase agreement provided that the Moores would buy the property on a land sale contract for a price of $41,000.00, with a down payment of $14,000.00 and monthly payments of $324.05 for a period of 15 years. The agreement also provided that the seller was *368 to provide evidence of title to the Moores before the closing.
Some time before the closing, the Moores asked Riehle if they should have an attorney present at the closing. Riehle told them that retaining an attorney would be a waste of money because Riehle would take care of everything necessary to make the sale legal.
When the Moores sold their house in Spencer, they contacted Riehle and informed him that they had sold the house. They also requested that Riehle set a closing date and obtain the title insurance. Riehle told them that they would be supplied with the insurance before the closing date which was set for May 21, 1981.
Riehle and the Moores had additional discussions before the closing date. During these discussions, the Moores repeated their request to be supplied with title insurance.
On the day of closing, Larry Moore repeated the request to be shown the title insurance and stated that his attorney had told him that it was important that he see the insurance before closing on the house. Riehle told Larry that the insurance policy had not been completely typed up yet, but that Riehle had seen the insurance and that title was free and clear. Riehle also told Larry that the insurance would be ready the next day. The Moores did not actually receive a copy of the title insurance until March of 1985.
The Moores took possession of the house and kept up with the monthly payments to the seller until March of 1985. That month, the Moores received a letter from an attorney representing the Lafayette Bank & Trust Co. informing them that the seller was in default on a loan secured by a mortgage on their house. The letter also stated that they were named defendants in an action which the bank had filed to foreclose the mortgage.
The Moores retained counsel to defend their interest in the house. However, when it became clear that the mortgage was superior to their interest, the Moores entered into an agreed summary judgment under which the court foreclosed the mortgage. The Moores were forced to buy back their home at the sheriff's sale for a price of $34,750.00 at a time when they would have owed approximately $28,000.00 under the land sale contract. In order to finance this repurchase, the Moores secured a loan from Purdue National Bank. They incurred various expenses in securing this loan.
Riehle first challenges two of the trial court's findings of fact. The first of the challenged findings, finding number four, states:
"That a copy of the listing agreement [between the seller and Hoot Grieves Realty] was admitted into evidence at the trial and was in full force and effect at all relevant times herein."
The court's finding number thirty-five states:
"That the real estate listing contract between [the seller] and Grieves Real Estate did not identify any mortgage even though there was a blank on the listing contract concerning the existence of a mortgage."
Riehle asserts that these findings are erroneous because the listing agreement was excluded from evidence at trial pursuant to his objection. He further asserts that these erroneous findings are sufficient grounds for reversal.
When we review a trial court's judgment based upon findings of fact and conclusions of law, we will reverse only if the findings and conclusions drawn therefrom are clearly erroneous. A judgment is clearly erroneous when it is unsupported by the findings and conclusions. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous if the record fails to disclose any facts in evidence or any reasonable inferences from the evidence in support of the findings. Donavan v. Ivy Knoll Apartments (1989), Ind. App., 537 N.E.2d 47, 50. We do not reweigh the evidence, and we will affirm the trial court unless the evidence, when viewed in a light most favorable to the judgment, points uncontrovertibly to an opposite conclusion. Donavan, 537 N.E.2d at 50-51.
*369 When it makes special findings of fact, the trial court need not recite the evidence in detail, but must only make findings as to those ultimate facts necessary to support the judgment. Salk v. Weinraub (1979), 271 Ind. 115, 118, 390 N.E.2d 995, 997-998. It is true that this court is to disregard any special finding that is based on facts not proper or competent to be considered, and it is also true that such a finding cannot form the basis for a conclusion of law. Gentry v. Gentry (en Banc 1953), 123 Ind. App. 270, 275, 110 N.E.2d 509, 511. However, we may reverse a trial court's judgment only if its findings constitute prejudicial error. Vorhees-Jontz Lumber Co. v. Bezek (1965), 137 Ind. App. 382, 389, 209 N.E.2d 380, 383-384. A finding of fact is not prejudicial to a party unless it directly supports a conclusion of law adverse to him. Id.; Baker v. Johnson (1923), 79 Ind. App. 413, 418, 138 N.E. 780, 782.
In this case, the trial court's special findings four and thirty-five were clearly erroneous because they were not based on evidence admitted at trial. Because they are clearly in error, findings four and thirty-five would be cause for reversal if they were the sole support for any conclusion of law necessary to sustain the judgment of the court. After examining the entire judgment, however, we have determined that the erroneous findings do not constitute the sole support for any conclusion of law necessary to the judgment.
The Moores' complaint alleged the classic elements of fraud: 1) that Riehle made a misrepresentation of past or existing fact; 2) that was false; 3) that Riehle knew to be false; 4) that the Moores relied on the misrepresentation; and 5) that they suffered harm because of the misrepresentation. Scott v. Bodor, Inc. (1991), Ind. App., 571 N.E.2d 313, 319; Captain & Co. v. Stenberg (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 88, 96. In order to find in their favor, the trial court was required to find facts sufficient to support each of these elements. In this case, the disputed findings could only be relevant to the elements of falsity and knowledge of falsity; certainly the existence and contents of the listing agreement between Grieves Realty and the seller has no bearing on whether Riehle made any misrepresentations of past or existing fact, whether the Moores relied on the misrepresentations, or whether they were harmed by the misrepresentations. Thus, the fact that the court made the erroneous findings does not affect these elements in any way.
Disregarding the erroneous findings, we find that the remainder of the trial court's findings, which were supported by evidence on the record, provided ample support for the two remaining elements necessary to sustain the fraud judgment. The elements of falsity and knowledge were supported by the court's findings numbered twenty-seven, thirty, thirty-one, and thirty-six which in essence found that there was a mortgage on the property, that Riehle knew of the mortgage because he helped the seller obtain the loan secured by the mortgage, but that Riehle told the Moores that the property was free and clear of title problems. Because there is evidence sufficient to support the trial court's ultimate findings on the elements necessary to sustain the judgment, we hold that the erroneous findings were merely harmless surplusage which did not prejudice Riehle and which therefore are not grounds for reversal.
Riehle next argues that, for two distinct reasons, the trial court erred in admitting into evidence the Moores' exhibit 1, an unsigned purchase agreement. First, he complains that the court should not have admitted the agreement because it was not listed in the Moores' tendered list of witnesses and exhibits. He further asserts that the court should not have admitted the agreement because it did not comply with the statute of frauds.[2]
*370 The trial court did not err in admitting the agreement into evidence. The question of whether particular witnesses or exhibits should be excluded from evidence because they have not been included in a pre-trial order or list of witnesses and exhibits is committed to the discretion of the trial court. See Plohg v. NN Investors Life Insurance Co. (1992), Ind. App., 583 N.E.2d 1233, 1238-1239. In reviewing a trial court's ruling in such a case we must remember that, "The law provides no official `right' answer; rather it affords the [trial] judge latitude, and our appellate second-sight will not reverse unless we are persuaded that the [trial] judge's decision was clearly against the logic and effect of the circumstances before the court." Plohg, 583 N.E.2d at 1238.
Here, the trial court's decision to admit the agreement was not clearly against the logic and effect of the circumstances. It is true that the Moores did not include the agreement in their pretrial list of witnesses and exhibits. It is also true that, when the Moores attempted to place the agreement into evidence on the first day of trial, December 6, 1989, the trial court sustained Riehle's objection. However, when it became apparent that the trial would take more than one day and that the trial would not continue until a substantial period of time had passed, the trial court indicated that it would not sustain any further objection based on the failure to include an exhibit in the pre-trial list. When the trial resumed on September 28, 1990, the Moores again offered the unsigned agreement into evidence. Riehle restated his objection based on the failure to include the agreement on the list of witnesses and exhibits. This time, the trial court overruled the objection and admitted the agreement. The court did not abuse its discretion because Riehle knew of the agreement and had ample time to prepare for it. There is no reason to reverse the trial court on this ground.
Riehle next argues that the trial court should have excluded the agreement because it was an unexecuted document concerning the sale of land and thus violated the statute of frauds. The trial court did not err because there is no statute of frauds issue here. The statute provides:
"No action shall be brought in any of the following cases:
* * * * * *
Fourth. Upon any contract for the sale of lands;
* * * * * *
Unless the promise, contract or agreement upon which such action shall be brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, shall be in writing, and signed by the party to be charged therewith, or by some person thereunto by him lawfully authorized, excepting however, leases not exceeding the term of three (3) years."
Ind. Code § 32-2-1-1. Riehle cannot rely on the statute for two reasons: this action is not an action upon the purchase agreement and, even if it were, Riehle is neither a party to the agreement nor the privy of a party to the agreement.
In the only subsection relevant to Riehle's argument, the statute explicitly provides that no action shall be brought on a contract for the sale of land unless the contract was reduced to writing. In this case, however, the Moores did not seek to enforce any right under the purchase agreement between themselves and the seller. Instead, they sought damages for fraud based on certain misrepresentations that Riehle made concerning the status of title to the land. Because this was not an action to vindicate any right generated by the contract, it was not an action "upon" the contract and thus falls outside the effect of the statute of frauds.
There is yet another reason that the statute does not govern in this case. Our courts have held that only the parties to a contract or their privies may rely on the statute of frauds. Blue Valley Turf Farms v. Realestate Marketing and Development, Inc. (1981), Ind. App., 424 N.E.2d 1088, 1090. It cannot be disputed that Riehle was not a party to the purchase *371 agreement. Furthermore, Riehle was not a privy to any party to the contract. A privy is "[a] person in privity with another." Black's Law Dictionary 1200 (6th ed. 1990). Privity has been defined as "mutual or successive relationships to the same right of property, or an identification of interest of one person with another as to represent the same legal right." Black's Law Dictionary at 1199 (emphasis added). Riehle has no successive or mutual relationship with any party in regard to any right created by the purchase agreement, and he has no identification of interest with any party. His interest in this transaction was limited to earning a commission by bringing the parties to the sale together. He was thus not a privy and the court properly refused his attempt to assert the statute of frauds.
Riehle next argues that the trial court should have given him a credit against the damages assessed in this action for a twenty thousand dollar claim which the federal bankruptcy court approved pursuant to the agreement of the debtor and the Moores in the bankruptcy of James Bailey, the other Hoot Grieves realtor involved in this transaction.[3] We reject this argument, however, because Riehle has failed to meet his burden of proof on the amount of the credit to which he might have been entitled.
Normally, where the actions of multiple defendants cause a single injury to a plaintiff, a defendant against whom judgment is rendered at trial is entitled to credit against the assessed damages in the amount of any funds received from any settling joint tort-feasor by the plaintiff. Manns v. Department of Highways (1989), Ind., 541 N.E.2d 929, 933; Sanders v. Cole Municipal Finance (1986), Ind. App., 489 N.E.2d 117, 123. This credit is allowed in order to prevent a plaintiff from recovering twice for the same injury. Manns, 541 N.E.2d at 933; Barker v. Cole (1979), Ind. App., 396 N.E.2d 964, 970, 16 A.L.R. 4th 223, 233. Because the credit is in the nature of an affirmative defense on the issue of damages, the defendant who seeks to take advantage of this credit bears the burden of proving the amount of the credit to which he is entitled. See Sanders, 489 N.E.2d at 121-122; Ind. Trial Rule 8.
Here, in an attempt to claim a twenty thousand dollar credit, Riehle relies on certain representations made by the Moores' counsel at trial. In responding to the suggestion by Riehle's counsel that Bailey's bankruptcy might pose an impediment to going forward with the trial of the Moores' claim against Riehle, the Moores' attorney stated that the bankruptcy court had allowed the Moores' claim against Bailey in the amount of twenty thousand dollars. He also stated that Bailey was making some nominal monthly payments on the Moore claim, but that Bailey was laboring under a substantial federal tax lien. Riehle resisted the Moores' attempt to testify as to the amount actually received from Bailey, and the trial court refused to receive evidence on this point. Because there was no evidence on the amount the Moores' actually received, there is nothing indicating that they received a double recovery, and, accordingly, there was insufficient evidence to support a credit here. The trial court did not err.
Next we have consolidated two of Riehle's issues into the single issue of whether the trial court's judgment on the question of liability was supported by sufficient evidence. In particular, Riehle argues that there was insufficient evidence to prove that he engaged in the unlawful practice of law and to prove that Riehle told the Moores that the property was free and clear.
As we noted above, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses when we review the judgment of the trial court. Donavan, 537 N.E.2d at 50-51. Here both Larry and Patsy Moore testified that, in response to their request to be shown the title insurance at the closing, Riehle told them that he had seen the insurance and that the title to the property was free and clear. (Record, pp. 139, 250-251). This court has previously found that *372 such representations by the seller of a piece of property can constitute actionable fraud. See, e.g., Groves v. First National Bank (1988), Ind. App., 518 N.E.2d 819. The evidence is thus sufficient to support the trial court's finding of fraud, and we will not attempt to reweigh the evidence merely because Riehle believes the trial court incorrectly struck the balance at trial.[4]
Finally, Riehle challenges the trial court's judgment because it awarded the Moores damages for Larry Moore's lost wages and for long distance phone calls to their attorney. We agree that, under the circumstances of this case, such damages were not authorized, and we reverse that part of the damage award which represents lost wages and long distance phone calls.
These expenses were incurred for telephone calls to plaintiffs' attorney and for time lost from work in attendance at court proceedings. The trial court explicitly declined in Finding 51 to award "attorney fees, discovery and travel expenses, and punitive damages," because the proof fell short of the clear and convincing standard. There was also no finding of obdurate behavior which could have supported a recovery of attorney fees.
Normally, costs of litigation are not recoverable by a prevailing party in the absence of some express statute providing for reimbursement of such expenses. State v. Holder (1973), 260 Ind. 336, 338, 295 N.E.2d 799, 800; Atwood v. Prairie Village, Inc. (1980), Ind. App., 401 N.E.2d 97, 101. Allowable costs do not include every conceivable expense of litigation, but "only those usual and ordinary expenses of a trial which are prescribed by statute to be paid to the court." Holder, 260 Ind. at 339, 295 N.E.2d at 801. Such costs do not include telephone charges incurred in preparing for a trial. Id.; see also Johnson v. Naugle (1990), Ind. App., 557 N.E.2d 1339, 1346. The trial court erred in awarding long distance telephone charges.
The trial court also erred in awarding Larry's lost wages. The value of wages lost due to the prosecution of a lawsuit is not compensable under Indiana law. McCormick Piano & Organ Co. v. Geiger (1980), Ind. App., 412 N.E.2d 842, 853. We therefore reverse this item of the court's damage award.
The Moores argue that the costs should be allowed because Riehle engaged in obdurate behavior. It is true that in certain instances our courts have allowed one party to recover attorney's fees when his adversary has engaged in bad faith or "obdurate behavior." Cox v. Ubik (1981), Ind. App., 424 N.E.2d 127, 129. However, the trial court did not award attorney's fees here, and the obdurate behavior exception does not apply to the type of expenses included in the court's judgment.
Even if the exception did apply to these types of expenses in general, we would reverse the award in this case because the exception is appropriate when the offending party has engaged in obdurate behavior in prosecuting or defending the instant litigation, not in committing the acts which are the subject of the litigation. Swain v. Swain (1991), Ind. App., 576 N.E.2d 1281, 1285. Here, the Moores did not establish that Riehle engaged in obdurate behavior in defending this suit.
We affirm those portions of the trial court's judgment that found Riehle liable for fraud and assessed as damages the costs that the Moores incurred in order to repurchase their house. We reverse those portions of the judgment that awarded as damages the costs of long distance phone calls to the Moores' attorney and the value of the wages that Larry lost due to the prosecution of this suit.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART.
RUCKER, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result.
NOTES
[1]  Bailey was a broker and Riehle a salesman doing business as "Hoot Grieves Realty".
[2]  The listing agreement or the two purchase agreements could conceivably have been relevant to the question of whom Riehle represented. This question, however, is not one that is material to the Moores' right to recover for fraud, because the Moores could recover on a theory of fraud if Riehle was their agent, Smith v. Fiscus (1916), 62 Ind. App. 156, 159, 111 N.E. 203, 204, or if he was the seller's agent. Tolliver v. Mathas (1989), Ind. App., 538 N.E.2d 971, 977; Howard Dodge and Sons, Inc. v. Finn (1979), 181 Ind. App. 209, 212, 391 N.E.2d 638, 641.
[3]  Bailey originally was a codefendant in this case. The proceedings against him were stayed by operation of the bankruptcy code.
[4]  Because the evidence is sufficient to sustain the court's judgment on the theory of fraud, we need not address the sufficiency to support a finding that Riehle unlawfully engaged in the practice of law.

=== CASE 2221903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.336266+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 398 (1992)
Leland STUMP and Sue Carole Stump, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
INDIANA EQUIPMENT COMPANY, Inc., Macallister Machinery Company, Inc., Steuben County Highway Department and the Steuben County Board of Commissioners, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 49A02-9105-CV-193.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
October 27, 1992.
Rehearing Denied November 25, 1992.
Transfer Denied January 21, 1993.
*399 John F. Vargo, Pardieck, Gill & Vargo, Seymour, Frank J. Price, Ricos & Price, Gloria K. Grinnan, Pardieck, Gill & Vargo, Indianapolis, for appellants-plaintiffs.
R.D. Zink, Meils Zink Thompson & Dietz, Indianapolis, for appellee-defendant Indiana Equipment Co. Inc.
Donald J. Graham, Nana Quay-Smith, Karl L. Mulvaney, Bingham Summers Welsh & Spilman, Indianapolis, for appellee-defendant MacAllister Mach. Co.
John D. Walda, John F. Lyons, Barrett & McNagny, Fort Wayne, for appellees-defendants Steuben County Highway Dept. and the Steuben County Bd. of Com'rs.
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Leland Stump and Sue Stump (hereinafter collective referred to as "Stump") appeal from the trial court's grants of summary judgment in favor of both Indiana Equipment Company and MacAllister Machinery Company. Steuben County Highway Department and the Steuben County Board of Commissioners (hereinafter collectively referred to as "Steuben County") cross-appeal the trial court's denial of their Motion for Summary Judgment.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for further proceedings.
The appeal involves an injury sustained by Stump while working with a piece of heavy equipment, a grader.
Stump presents three issues for our review, which we state as follows:
I. Whether Stump's actions against Indiana Equipment and MacAllister, respectively, are barred by the product liability statute of repose;
II. whether Indiana Equipment and MacAllister, respectively, owed a *400 duty to Stump upon which a finding of negligence may be premised; and
III. whether Indiana Equipment and MacAllister, respectively, were absolved of liability resulting from the condition of the grader by virtue of the "as is" clause contained in the sales contract?
We note at the outset that Stump filed a motion with this court to dismiss the cross-appeal of Steuben County. Steuben County's Motion for Summary Judgment below was denied, while similar motions submitted by defendants Indiana Equipment and MacAllister were granted. Ordinarily, the denial of a summary judgment motion is not a final, appealable order from which an appeal will lie. Loving v. Ponderosa Systems, Inc. (1985) Ind., 479 N.E.2d 531, 532. Nevertheless, Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 4(B)(6) permits the taking of an interlocutory appeal in certain circumstances in which the trial court's ruling is not a final appealable order. In such instances, however, a trial court must certify its ruling for interlocutory appeal in accordance with the provisions of App.R. 4(B)(6). The record reveals that Steuben County did not seek certification of the denial of its summary judgment motion. Therefore, we hereby grant Stump's Motion to Dismiss the cross-appeal of Steuben County.
When reviewing a grant of summary judgment, we accept as true the facts alleged by the nonmoving party. Majd Pour v. Basic American Medical, Inc. (1990) 2d Dist. Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 155.
The following facts are alleged by Stump: On August 13, 1986, Stump was employed by Hitzfield Excavating and was operating a 20-year-old Galion Motor Grader near Fort Wayne, Indiana. He had been operating the grader for a short period of time when he noticed that oil was spattering on the hood. Stump halted the grader, shifted into neutral gear, and shut off the motor. Stump then climbed off the grader and, with the assistance of another Hitzfield employee, removed the side panel which covered the motor. Although the two men could see oil spattered on the motor, they could not discern the precise location or severity of the leak. Stump decided that the best way to pinpoint the leak was to start the engine and watch the motor while it was running. In order to accomplish this, and in order to be in position to shut the motor off immediately should the need arise, Stump positioned himself on the ground beside the grader so that he could push the starter button and view the engine at the same time.
When Stump pushed the starter button, the motor came to life and the grader almost immediately began to move backward. Stump was able to jump away from the grader and escape injury initially, but he then observed that the grader was rolling toward a building in which people were working. Stump ran after the grader, caught up to it before it reached the building, and attempted to pull himself into the driver's seat. Just as Stump was mounting the grader, it struck a curb with such force that he was knocked to the ground. He fell in such a position that the grader's blade pinned him against the curb, and he suffered a traumatic amputation of both legs.
Based upon the various pleadings, depositions and exhibits, the Galion grader originally was equipped with a neutral safety switch which, if functioning correctly, would have prevented the grader from starting while in gear. The neutral safety switch is comprised of two components. The electronic component is a microswitch located in the wiring unit between the starter switch and the starter solenoid; this wiring unit is known as the starter harness. The mechanical component of the neutral safety switch consists of a linkage system located in or near the transmission. A post-accident inspection of the grader revealed that the starter switch was wired directly to the starter solenoid, thus bypassing the microswitch.
This particular grader was originally sold by Indiana Equipment to Steuben County in 1967. Steuben County owned and operated the grader continuously until sometime in 1985, when it decided to trade the Galion grader for a new grader. Accordingly, *401 Steuben County contacted MacAllister, a dealer of Caterpillar graders, and requested a bid for the purchase of a new grader. On October 29, 1985, a MacAllister employee inspected the Galion grader in order to estimate its value for trade-in purposes.
MacAllister eventually was awarded the bid and sold a new Caterpillar grader to Steuben County and accepted the Galion grader as a trade-in. MacAllister was aware that Hitzfield was interested in purchasing a used grader, and thus informed Hitzfield that the Galion grader formerly owned by Steuben County was for sale. Hitzfield's owner inspected the Galion grader and agreed to buy it "as is/where is" from MacAllister. Additionally, Hitzfield agreed to deliver the new grader from MacAllister to Steuben County while picking up the Galion grader, which was still in Steuben County's possession. On January 28, 1986, Hitzfield delivered the new grader to Steuben County and, after a brief discussion with the man who had operated the Galion grader for Steuben County, Hitzfield took possession of the Galion grader. Stump was injured approximately six months later.
When reviewing a grant of summary judgment, our task is the same as that of the trial court: we determine whether there was a genuine issue of material fact and whether the moving party was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Lilge v. Russell's Trailer Repair (1991) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 565 N.E.2d 1146, 1148. All evidence must be construed in a light most favorable to the nonmovant, and any doubt as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved against the movant.
I. Statute of Repose
The trial court granted the summary judgment motions of both Indiana Equipment and MacAllister at least partially upon the ground that actions against both were barred by the statute of limitations applicable to products liability actions contained in I.C. 33-1-1.5-5 (Burns Code Ed. 1992)  a so-called "statute of repose." The court's ruling was premised upon the fact that the grader had been delivered to Steuben County more than ten years prior to the accident. Stump argues that the statute of repose is inapplicable in the instant case.
I.C. 33-1-1.5-5 provides:
"(a) This section applies to all persons regardless of minority or legal disability. Notwithstanding IC 34-1-2-5, it applies in any product liability action in which the theory of liability is negligence or strict liability in tort.
(b) Except as provided in section 5.5 [IC 33-1-1.5-5.5] of this chapter, a product liability action must be commenced within two (2) years after the cause of action accrues or within ten (10) years after the delivery of the product to the initial user or consumer. However, if the cause of action accrues at least eight (8) years but less than ten (10) years after that initial delivery, the action may be commenced at any time within two (2) years after the cause of action accrues."
The statute of repose expressly applies to "any product liability action." The initial question, then, is whether the instant case is a product liability action. In making this determination, we are mindful that a proper interpretation of any particular section of a statute results only when the words in that section are considered in the context of the entire statute. Dague v. Piper Aircraft Corp. (1981) 275 Ind. 520, 418 N.E.2d 207, 210.
The product liability statute of repose commences to run upon the delivery of a product to the "initial user or consumer." Its purpose is to place a temporal limit upon liability for a product's defects. Dague, supra, 418 N.E.2d at 210. The defects to which the statute applies are those present "at the time it is conveyed by the seller to another party," I.C. 33-1-1.5-2.5 (Burns Code Ed. 1992). It is therefore apparent that a "product liability action," as contemplated by the statute of repose, is an action in which the plaintiff complains of a defect which existed at or before the time the product was delivered by the seller to the initial user or consumer. The "seller" of any such defective product is immune from suit after the prescribed period *402 of time has elapsed. Therefore, we hold that the ten-year statute of repose is implicated only if the complained-of defect was present at or before the time the grader was delivered to the initial user or consumer.[1]
As to who may claim the defense, the definition of "seller", i.e., "person engaged in business as a manufacturer, a wholesaler, a retail dealer, a lessor, or a distributor," I.C. 33-1-1.5-2 (Burns Code Ed. 1992), is broad enough to include within its scope any party who was an essential part of the stream of commerce which resulted in delivery to the initial user or consumer. On the other hand, no party may assert the statute as a defense if the action is based upon a latent or patent defect which did not exist at the time of delivery to the initial user.
Our interpretation is consistent with the statute's purpose. The legislation was designed to relieve those parties involved in introducing products into the stream of commerce from open-ended liability premised upon the product's condition at the time of entry into the marketplace. However, it does not follow that all parties are absolved of liability for all claims of negligence concerning a particular product when more than ten years has elapsed since that product was delivered to the initial user. Our legislature simply could not have intended such a wide-sweeping result. Were we to so totally absolve all parties of liability, we would remove an important incentive for the use of care when inspecting, handling, and maintaining products that are more than ten years old. Such an interpretation does not comport with sound public policy.
Applying the foregoing analysis to the instant case, neither Indiana Equipment nor MacAllister may claim the statute of repose as a defense. The defect which Stump alleges proximately caused his injuries was not a defect which existed at the time the Galion grader was delivered to Steuben County. The defect which Stump alleges caused his injuries was the "wiring around" of the neutral safety switch. There is no allegation that this defect existed at the time that the grader was initially delivered to Steuben County. Indeed, all parties agree that the rewiring occurred subsequent to the initial delivery.
We hold that an action involving post-sale (post-initial delivery) negligence, as opposed to a defect present at the time of that initial delivery, is not subject to the ten-year statute of repose which, as earlier noted, begins to run at the time of delivery. Thus, the statute of repose does not bar Stump's claim against MacAllister or Indiana Equipment.
II. Duty
Indiana case law has traditionally held that in order to recover upon a theory of negligence, the plaintiff must prove a duty flowing from the defendant to the plaintiff. Tucher v. Brothers Auto Salvage Yard, Inc. (1991) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 564 N.E.2d 560, trans. denied. The duty owed is determined by the relationship of the parties to each other. Gariup Construction Co., Inc. v. Foster (1988) Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1224. Although the determination is treated as a question of law, the trial court must, in the process, necessarily draw conclusions as to questions of fact. See Harper v. Guarantee Auto Stores (1989) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 533 N.E.2d 1258, trans. denied; but see Kinsey v. Bray (1992) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 596 N.E.2d 938. The duty, when found to exist, is the duty to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances. The duty never changes. However, the standard of conduct required to measure up to that duty varies depending upon the particular circumstances. Walters v. Kellam and Foley (1977) 2d Dist., 172 Ind. App. 207, 360 N.E.2d 199.[2]
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of both Indiana Equipment *403 and MacAllister at least partially upon the ground that neither owed a duty to Stump with regard to the "wiring around" of the neutral safety switch.
A. Indiana Equipment
Initially, Indiana Equipment seeks to escape liability altogether in this area by invoking the rule of imputed knowledge. According to this rule, a principal is deemed to know what his agent knows, so long as the agent's knowledge was acquired while the agent was acting within the scope of his agency. Conrad v. Olds (1941) 110 Ind. App. 208, 37 N.E.2d 297. Indiana Equipment argues that Steuben County's grader operator knew of the wiring defect, and that therefore Steuben County knew. Thus, Indiana Equipment argues, even if it had a duty to warn Steuben County of the defect, failure to perform its duty was harmless because Steuben County already "knew".
Imputed knowledge is a tenet of agency law, and is based upon an underlying legal fiction of agency  the identity of principal and agent when the agent is engaged in the principal's business. Under this rule, the law imputes the agent's knowledge to the principal, even if the principal does not actually know what the agent knows.
Imputed knowledge is similar to another legal fiction in agency law  respondeat superior. Respondeat superior is the principal which, under certain circumstances, confers upon a principal liability for the acts of his agent. The doctrine of respondeat superior creates liability for a principal where it would otherwise not exist. Shelby v. Truck & Bus Group Division of General Motors Corp. (1989) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 533 N.E.2d 1296. The doctrine has its origin in public policy and justice. As Lord Chief Justice Best stated in Hall v. Smith (1824), 2 Bing 156, 130 Eng. Reprint 265, 267 (1912): "The maxim of respondeat superior is bottomed on this principal: that he who expects to derive advantage from an act which is done by another for him must answer for any injury which a third person may sustain from it." The doctrine therefore came about as a means of extending liability. So it is with the doctrine of imputed knowledge.
The rule of imputed knowledge also is a rule of public policy based upon the precept that when a principal acts through an agent, a third party dealing with the agent is entitled to rely upon the agent's knowledge, which binds the principal. In practical application, the rule is applied in order to accomplish the following result: The risks of an agent's infidelity or lack of diligence should fall upon the one who delegates authority to that agent, rather than upon innocent third parties. State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. Sevier (1975) 272 Or. 278, 537 P.2d 88. As with respondeat superior, the rule of imputed knowledge, with one exception not relevant here,[3] is a means of extending liability to a principal. As stated in the Restatement (Second) of Agency, the rules included in the chapter discussing a principal's liability to third parties based upon the agent's notice "are stated in terms of the liability of the principal because the cases in which the language of imputed knowledge is used are those involving the principal's liability for the conduct of the agent." Id. at 582. Such is not the case here.
Indiana Equipment attempts to invoke the rule in the instant case to shield itself from liability. However, the undisputed evidence shows that Indiana Equipment never discovered the defect. The evidence therefore does not reflect that Indiana Equipment knew that Steuben County's operator was aware of the defect. Indiana Equipment attempts to escape liability by seizing upon the fortuitous fact, learned *404 strictly through hindsight, that the operator knew of the defect. This is a misapplication of the rule of imputed knowledge.
The crux of the complaint against Indiana Equipment is that it should have discovered and warned of the defect, and that its failure to do so was a proximate cause of Stump's injuries. The focus of the inquiry into its liability, if any, will be upon Indiana Equipment's actions and knowledge at the time of the various repairs. Indiana Equipment contends that failure to warn Steuben County of the defect was of no consequence because Steuben County already (constructively) "knew". In fact, there is evidence that no one at Steuben County except the operator knew of the defect. There is also an affidavit of the Steuben County official charged with overseeing equipment maintenance to the effect that had he known the defect existed, he would have authorized repairs to the neutral safety switch.
In summary, there is a question of fact, inter alia, as to whether the defect would have been repaired had Indiana Equipment discovered and warned the appropriate personnel at Steuben County of the problem. The determination of whether Indiana Equipment's actions were reasonable under the circumstances must be measured in light of what Indiana Equipment knew and did at the time of repairs. It may not escape liability by invoking a legal fiction intended for use in a different context.
The trial court held that Indiana Equipment had no duty to repair the neutral safety switch:
"And the Court ... now finds:
* * * * * *
5. That no evidence exists that Defendant, Indiana Equipment, caused any alteration to the neutral safety switch which led to Plaintiff's accident.
6. That the evidence is undisputed that Indiana Equipment was never requested to repair the neutral safety switch. Indiana Equipment had no legal duty to repair anything that they had not been requested to repair.
7. That since Indiana Equipment was never requested to repair the neutral safety switch, and since Indiana Equipment never performed any repairs with respect to said neutral safety switch, Indiana Equipment never breached any legal duty giving rise to liability for Plaintiff's accident." Record at 352-53.
Indiana Equipment next argues that it had no duty because it never asked to repair the neutral safety switch. It contends that the real issue before us is "must a mechanic repair [or warn about] that which he has not been requested to repair?" Brief of Appellee, Indiana Equipment Company at 5.
Stump contends that although Indiana Equipment had never been specifically asked to repair the neutral safety switch, it nevertheless should reasonably have discovered and, at a minimum, warned of the defect in the course of its various repairs of the grader. Although it is true that Indiana Equipment was never asked to repair the neutral safety switch, that fact alone does not settle the question.
Stump deposed Donald Herman, a mechanic employed by Indiana Equipment who had worked on the Galion grader. Herman stated that the neutral safety switch is an important safety feature which should be examined regularly to ensure that it is functioning properly.[4] He inspected the Galion grader immediately post-accident and discovered that the electronic component of the neutral safety switch was missing and the switch was inoperable. He indicated that the bypass wiring had probably been in place at least two years, but could not be certain whether it had been in place more than three years. In his opinion, the wiring bypass was a result of "shortcuts on repair." Record at 672.
The repair history of the grader reveals that on August 28, 1970, Steuben County *405 received a new microswitch. However, it is not clear whether, or by whom, the switch was installed. Indiana Equipment performed major transmission repairs upon the grader in the summer of 1978, and in the course of that work replaced the wiring harness, which includes the starter harness containing the electronic component of the neutral safety switch. Herman stated that in reassembling the transmission, the shifter linkage would be reconnected and the neutral safety switch reinstalled. Herman stated that the transmission reinstallation would include ensuring that the neutral safety switch was "functioning," i.e., that the grader would start with the gear in neutral. However, such testing would not include attempting to start the grader while in gear. Herman indicated that when the wiring harness was reconnected, all of the wires should have been properly connected, including the neutral safety switch, even if the switch had previously been bypassed.
In early 1982, Indiana Equipment again performed extensive repairs upon the transmission, which again required disconnecting and reinstalling the neutral safety switch. Herman responded in the affirmative when asked whether, upon reinstallation, the mechanic "would have to hook up the neutral safety switch again mechanically and [should] make certain that it was functioning with the levers". Record at 695-96.[5]
On July 24, 1985, Indiana Equipment again removed and reinstalled the transmission. Herman stated that the neutral safety switch was present (both the microswitch and the linkage) on the grader when it was reinstalled approximately one month later. However, although Herman checked the mechanical component, he did not determine whether the microswitch was working. Finally, Herman agreed that at the October 28, 1985 inspection, it would have been a good practice to inspect the neutral safety switch, but he did not remember doing so.
In order to prevail upon summary judgment, it was incumbent upon Indiana Equipment to demonstrate that there were no reasonable inferences which a trier of fact could draw indicating that the duty to use reasonable care included a duty to inspect, discover, and warn of the wiring anomaly. Based upon our review of the foregoing facts, we conclude that Indiana Equipment has not made such a showing.
B. MacAllister
The court granted summary judgment in favor of MacAllister partially upon the ground that it owed no duty to Hitzfield to discover and warn of the nonfunctional neutral safety switch. Mindful that the duty owed to any party in any particular circumstance is the duty to exercise reasonable care, we consider here whether MacAllister's duty to use reasonable care in the instant case included the duty to inspect, discover, and warn of the defect.
MacAllister's only connection with the Galion grader was as an intermediary party. It sold a new grader to Steuben County and accepted the Galion grader as a trade-in. Pursuant to that sale, MacAllister inspected the grader for its own appraisal purposes. MacAllister then sold the Galion grader to Hitzfield without ever taking physical possession; the grader remained with Steuben County until it was picked up by Hitzfield.
Stump cites Baker v. Midland-Ross Corp. (1987) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 508 N.E.2d 32, trans. denied, in support of his argument that MacAllister's duty included a duty to inspect, discover, and warn of the defect. To the contrary, Baker lends no support to the proposition that "if a dealer repairs or inspects a product and becomes aware or should have become aware that a safety system has been bypassed, the dealer may have the duty to warn or inform the plaintiff user." Brief of Appellant at 41. A dealer's duty in that regard was an issue *406 in Baker at the trial stage, but was not a factor in the decision upon appeal.[6] However, even if Stump's assertion as to Baker's meaning were accurate, that case is distinguishable from the instant case. In Baker, the repairmen went into the plaintiff's place of employment in order to repair a furnace. Clearly, the work performed upon the furnace was for the employer's benefit, and the employer relied upon defendant's expertise, a reliance which the defendant should reasonably have anticipated.
In the instant case, the issue with regard to MacAllister is whether it had a duty to inspect the grader; and, if so, the nature of that duty. Indiana and other states have addressed similar questions with regard to used car dealers.
In Masker v. Smith (1981) Fla.Ct. App., 405 So. 2d 432, a used car buyer sued the used car dealer from whom he had purchased a car, after the car's brakes had failed. In affirming a grant of summary judgment in favor of the dealer, the appellate court concluded that the latent or patent nature of the defect was critical to the analysis. After determining that the complained-of defect was latent, the court stated:
"Whatever may be the duty of a used car dealer to inspect a vehicle prior to sale for defects which could or might be discovered by reasonable and customary inspection, a point not before us and therefore one which we do not decide, we are not aware of any duty on such dealer to discover latent defects which by their very nature could not be discovered by a reasonable and customary inspection." (Emphasis in original) Id. at 433-34.
We conclude that the principle enunciated above applies not only to used automobile dealers, but also to dealers in used equipment such as the Galion grader. It is therefore apparent that a trade-in dealer, such as MacAllister in the instant case, has a duty to inspect and discover patent defects in the used equipment that it sells.
In Crothers by Crothers v. Cohen (1986) Minn.App., 384 N.W.2d 562, the court addressed the scope of a used car dealer's duty to inspect. The court approved the use of the following jury instruction, concluding that it allowed the jury to "determine whether the defect was patent or latent and whether Defendant's salesman used ordinary care." Id. at 565. The instruction read:
"Seller has a duty to use ordinary care to discover obvious defects which would constitute a menace or source of danger. The seller is not required to disassemble the vehicle to make this observation." Id. at 565.
The duty to inspect as defined in Crothers is therefore to be considered in harmony with the principle underlying the holding in Masker; the scope of the inspection is measured in the context of reasonableness under the circumstances and involves an evaluation of the facts of the particular case. We acknowledge that, ordinarily, such factsensitive questions are not susceptible to summary adjudication. However, when undisputed facts so warrant, summary judgment may be appropriate.
Here, the lone inspection performed upon the Galion grader by MacAllister was for MacAllister's own benefit. An inspection undertaken for appraisal purposes differs significantly from the sort of exhaustive inspection generally made for purposes of *407 ascertaining and advising whether equipment is reasonably safe for use. Additionally, the Galion grader never came into MacAllister's physical possession, which further dilutes the argument that MacAllister's duty of reasonable care included inspecting the grader thoroughly enough to discover the bypassed switch.
MacAllister's status as a trade-in dealer defined its duty of inspection. It performed only an appraisal inspection for trade-in purposes, never performed any clean-up or repair work on the grader prior to resale, and indeed never took physical possession of the grader at all. As a trade-in dealer, reasonable care would not include inspecting the grader thoroughly enough to discover the bypassed neutral safety switch and warning Hitzfield of the defect. In this regard, it appears that the wiring bypass would not be discoverable unless a portion of the grader's panelling were removed so as to expose the internal portions of the switch including the microswitch.
Even though there may be conflicting facts or conflicting inferences which might be drawn from undisputed facts as to certain elements of a claim, summary judgment is nevertheless appropriate where there is no real conflict regarding a fact dispositive of the litigation. Johnson v. Patterson (1991) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 570 N.E.2d 93; Watson v. Medical Emergency Services Corp. (1989) 2d Dist. Ind. App., 532 N.E.2d 1191, trans. denied.
As against MacAllister, Stump's complaint alleges only that MacAllister "should have known of the dangerous condition". There is no evidence of record from which plaintiff could have asserted that MacAllister had actual knowledge of the rewired condition of the switch. The existence of any such actual knowledge would necessarily be based solely upon unfounded speculation. It is therefore a non-issue in this case.
Accordingly, the trial court correctly granted MacAllister's motion for summary judgment, not because MacAllister owed no duty to Stump, but rather because MacAllister's duty of reasonable care did not require that it inspect, discover, and warn of the hidden defect.
III. "As Is" Clause
Although the trial court did not grant Indiana Equipment's summary judgment motion upon the ground that the "as is" clause in the contract of sale between MacAllister and Hitzfield absolved any previously negligent parties of liability, Indiana Equipment nevertheless argues such is a proper ground for granting its motion.
In support of its argument, Indiana Equipment cites Stapinski v. Walsh Construction Co. (1979) 272 Ind. 6, 395 N.E.2d 1251. In Stapinski, the plaintiff was injured when the front drive shaft of his employer's truck broke loose and flew through the windshield while he was driving. It was later determined that the shaft broke loose because of a failure to grease the joint, which in turn had occurred as a result of a missing grease fitting. Plaintiff's employer had purchased the truck "as is" from defendant, a construction company which had used the truck in its business. Our Supreme Court affirmed the trial court's grant of summary judgment on the ground that when a non-dealer owner sells a vehicle "as is", the former owner cannot be held liable for personal injuries to a bystander. However, the Stapinski holding is inapplicable to the instant case.
The phrase "as is" when used in a contract for the sale of goods refers to warranty disclaimer. I.C. XX-X-X-XXX (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1992) states:
"(a) Unless the circumstances indicate otherwise, all implied warranties are excluded by expressions like "as is", "with all faults", or other language which in common understanding calls the buyer's attention to the exclusion of warranties and makes plain that there is no implied warranty". (Emphasis supplied.)
Indeed, our research of Indiana cases reveals no instances in which an "as is" clause was construed to refer to anything but disclaimer of warranties. Stapinski is no different. There, the Supreme Court stated: "[Defendant] had no representative present at [plaintiff's employer's pre-sale] *408 inspections [of the truck] and expressly disclaimed any warranty of condition, completing the sale `as is.'" (Emphasis supplied) 395 N.E.2d at 1253. In sum, unless the parties expressly indicate otherwise, an "as is" clause in a sales contract has implications only upon the issue of disclaimer of warranties. See DeVoe Chevrolet-Cadillac, Inc. v. Cartwright (1988) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 526 N.E.2d 1237, 1240 ("as is" clause in car sale contract disclaimed any implied warranty); Perfection Cut, Inc. v. Olsen (1984) 3d Dist. Ind. App., 470 N.E.2d 94, 95 ("as is" clause contained in a contract for the sale of a used vac/blower meant that there were to be no implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for purpose).
The "as is" clause in the sales contract served only to negate any implied warranties that may otherwise have extended from MacAllister to Hitzfield. The clause did not absolve any other party, including Indiana Equipment, of liability for independent negligence with regard to the Galion grader.
Inasmuch as the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of MacAllister is sustainable upon other grounds, we need not address MacAllister's liability in light of the "as is" clause.
We affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of MacAllister Machinery, we reverse the grant of summary judgment in favor of Indiana Equipment Company, and remand to the trial court with instructions to reinstate Stump's complaint against Indiana Equipment Company, and for further proceedings not inconsistent herewith.
SHIELDS and BARTEAU, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  There is no contention from which it could be deduced that a replacement neutral safety switch is the product in question rather than the grader.
[2]  At least one observer has criticized the relationship/foreseeability/public policy analysis as the basis for determining the existence of a duty. See Tidmarsh, Tort Law: The Languages of Duty, 25 Ind.L.Rev. 1419, 1425 et seq.
[3]  The Introductory Note to the chapter entitled "Liability of Principal to Third Persons: Notice Through an Agent" in the Restatement (Second) of Agency explains the exception:
"However, the knowledge of an agent may be a source of benefit to the principal. Thus, an agent may be privileged to act because of knowledge which he has, as where a servant is privileged to make an arrest because of his knowledge of facts indicating the guilt of the one arrested. Properly the courts do not impute the knowledge of the agent to the principal in such cases, but relieve him from liability on the ground that the agent committed no tort." Id. at 582.
[4]  The safety switch is not essential to the actual physical starting of the grader. Its sole purpose is to prevent the grader from being started while in gear and thus moving suddenly so as to endanger persons on or near the grader.
[5]  "Levers" refers to shifting levers with which the neutral safety switch must make contact in order to prevent starting while in gear. Record at 701. The contact point between the neutral safety switch and the levers is apparently a bracket which comes out of a roller protruding from the switch  the roller being the activator for the microswitch. Record at 737.
[6]  In Baker, the plaintiff was injured when a furnace which had been manufactured by defendant exploded. Prior to the accident, someone had modified the furnace, and the modification was later determined to have been the cause of the explosion. Several days before the explosion, several employees of the defendant were working on a furnace situated next to the one that exploded. Plaintiff sued in part upon the theory that defendant's employees should have seen and discovered the modification in the furnace, and then warned plaintiff's employer that the modification posed an increased risk of explosion. Accordingly, plaintiff tendered an instruction concerning post-sale negligence based in large part upon Restatement (Second) of Torts § 324A. The trial court refused the instruction upon the ground that the complaint alleged only strict liability; thus, post-sale negligence was not an issue. Our First District reversed, holding that the issue of post-sale negligence had been tried by implied consent, based upon certain actions of the parties during the course of litigation.

=== CASE 2221905 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.408905+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 972 (1992)
235 Ill. App. 3d 756
176 Ill. Dec. 274
EAST PEORIA COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT No. 309, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GRAND STAGE LIGHTING COMPANY; Shick Supply & Equipment Company; the Pipco Companies, Ltd., and Union Roofing Co., Inc., Appellees.
No. 3-91-0869.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
September 4, 1992.
Rehearing Denied November 13, 1992.
*973 William R. Kohlhase (argued), Dennis R. Triggs, Thomas R. Davis, Miller, Hall & Triggs, Peoria, for East Peoria High School Dist. No. 309.
Eric S. Rein (argued), Schwartz, Cooper, Kolb & Gaynor, Chicago, William R. Kelly, Peoria, Bret A. Rappaport, Earle S. Rappaport, Schwartz Cooper Kolb Gaynor Chtd., Chicago, for Grand Stage Lighting Co., Union Roofing Co., Inc.
Randall Ray, Sebat, Swanson, Banks, Garman & Townsley, Danville, for Shick Supply & Equipment Co.
Daniel G. O'Day, Cusack & Fleming, P.C., Peoria, for The Pipco Companies, Ltd.
J. Paul Bertsche, Fagel, Haber & Maragos, Chicago, Richard J. Dalton, Gridly, for Union Roofing Co., Inc.
Andrew W. Covey, Baymiller, Christison & Radley, Peoria, for First Nat. Bank of Peoria, Commerce Bank, N.A.
David Daley, Sutkowski & Washkuhn, Peoria, for appellees.
Justice GORMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendants-counterplaintiffs-subcontractors filed actions against plaintiff-counter-defendant East Peoria Community High School District No. 309 to collect on amounts unpaid by the general contractor for certain work performed on the school. The trial court granted summary judgment for defendants. We affirm.
In 1985, plaintiff East Peoria High School District No. 309 contracted with Tousley-Iber to oversee a life safety survey and related improvements of some high school buildings. Tousley-Iber contracted with defendant Union Roofing for the roof work; with defendant PIPCO Companies Ltd. for the plumbing and electrical work; with defendant Grand Stage Lighting for stage renovation work; and with defendant Shick Supply and Equipment Company for the locker replacement. All of the subcontractors performed the work contracted for. The original unpaid amounts were as follows: Union Roofing$63,042.61; PICO$15,467.07; Grand Stage$145, 949.00; Shick$22,782.00.
Plaintiff made progress payments to Tousley-Iber. Tousley-Iber did not make any payments to defendant Shick or to defendant Grand Stage Lighting. Tousley-Iber paid defendant Union Roofing and defendant PIPCO for part of the work they performed.
Litigation ensued between the parties. The only claims at issue here are the claims by the subcontractors that they were third party beneficiaries of the agreement between plaintiff and Tousley-Iber and that the Bond Act mandated that plaintiff require Tousley-Iber to obtain a payment bond. Plaintiff raised certain affirmative defenses. The court granted each defendant's motion for summary judgment and held in its February 1990 order that, among other things, the contract was subject to the Bond Act and that the subcontractors were third party beneficiaries of the contract between plaintiff and Tousley-Iber. As a result of the court's October 1991 order entered pursuant to the parties' stipulation, defendants Union Roofing, Grand *974 Stage, and PIPCO received partial payment against their lien claims. The amounts now claimed to be due are as follows: Union Roofing$53,263.34; PIPCO$13,067.80; Grand Stage$123,309.27; and Shick$22,782.00.
Plaintiff now appeals.
The first issue for review is whether the Bond Act mandated that plaintiff require Tousley-Iber to obtain a payment bond.
The Construction Bond Act provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
All officials, boards, commissions or agents of this State, or any political subdivision thereof in making contracts for public work of any kind to be performed for the state, or any political subdivision thereof shall require every contractor for such work to furnish, supply and deliver a bond to the State, or to the political subdivision thereof entering into such contract, as the case may be, with good and sufficient sureties ... Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 29, par. 15.
Every person furnishing material or performing labor, either individually or as a subcontractor for any contractor, with the state, or a political subdivision thereof where a bond or letter of credit shall be executed as provided in this Act, shall have the right to sue on such bond or letter of credit.... provided, however, that this Act shall not be taken to in any way make the state, or the political subdivisions thereof entering into such contract, as the case may be, liable to any greater extent than it was liable under the law as it stood prior to the adoption of this Act. Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 29, par. 16.
As a preliminary matter, Tousley-Iber was a general contractor even though it styled itself a "construction manager". It hired subcontractors and provided no unique services.
Plaintiff argues that the liability of a public body to a subcontractor is controlled by the Mechanics' Lien Act and the Bond Act, with the latter containing a critical proviso. The proviso states that the Bond Act "shall not be taken to in any way make the State or the political subdivision entering into such contract ... liable to any greater extent than it was liable under the law as it stood prior to the adoption of this Act". Pointing especially to the inclusion of the words "in any way", plaintiff asserts that the proviso defeats the subcontractors' contract claims here. Plaintiff argues that Emulsicoat, Inc. v. City of Hoopeston (1981), 99 Ill.App.3d 835, 55 Ill. Dec. 176, 425 N.E.2d 1349 supports its position that the language is to be read broadly.
We are not persuaded by plaintiff's argument. First, we note that "as a remedial statute, the Bond Act is liberally construed to effectuate the General Assembly's intent to encourage and protect artisans, materialmen, and tradesmen. (Chicago Housing Authority v. U.S.F. & G. (1964), 49 Ill. App. 2d 407, 199 N.E.2d 217.) Furthermore, Western Waterproofing Company Inc. v. Springfield Housing Authority (C.D.Ill.1987), 669 F. Supp. 901, squarely addressed the issue presented in the instant case. There, the court had to determine whether a third party beneficiary contract action could be asserted against a public entity where the entity had failed to procure a payment bond from a general contractor. The court held that the Bond Act should be read into the contract between the Housing Authority and the general contractor. The court there noted that "[u]nder Illinois law `statutory provisions applicable to a contract ... are deemed to form a part of that contract and must be construed in connection therewith'". (Western Waterproofing, 669 F. Supp. 901, 903.) "Because the Bond Act was established to achieve the same remedial goal as the mechanics' lien in a public works situation, it follows that the Bond Act should be read into the public works contract between [the Housing Authority] and [the general contractor], requiring the procurement of a payment bond as required by the Bond Act." Id. at 904.
In contrast, the Emulsicoat case dealt only with a negligence claim against two municipalities. The court there specifically examined the Bond Act's proviso and held that it "represent[ed] a very cautious approach *975 by the legislature to the question of tort immunity of municipalities". (Emulsicoat 99 Ill.App.3d 835, 838, 55 Ill. Dec. at 179, 425 N.E.2d at 1352.) Thus we reject plaintiff's argument and hold that the Bond Act mandated that plaintiff require Tousley-Iber to obtain a payment bond.
The second issue for review is whether the subcontractors were third party beneficiaries of the contract between plaintiff and Tousley-Iber.
The general rule is that if a contract is entered into for a direct benefit of a third person not a party thereto, such third person may sue for breach thereof. (Metro East Sanitary District v. Village of Sauget (1985), 131 Ill.App.3d 653, 86 Ill. Dec. 760, 475 N.E.2d 1327.) Moreover, "one is a third party beneficiary of a contractual provision if the parties to a contract, or at least the promisee intended that the agreement confer a benefit on him [citation omitted]. That intent is `to be gleaned from a consideration of all of the contract and the circumstances surrounding the parties at the time of its execution.'" Bates and Rogers Construction Corporation v. Greeley and Hansen (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 225, 93 Ill. Dec. 369, 486 N.E.2d 902.
In Metro East, a regional sewer agreement provided that the municipality "shall reimburse" the other municipal corporations "for fees which such party has paid or become contractually obligated to pay to its attorneys" for work related to the agreement. It also specified the "reimbursable amount due". The municipality refused to pay the attorney. The court held that the attorney was an intended beneficiary under the contract because the agreement expressly referred to attorneys fees and the reference was made in a context showing that the parties anticipated that attorney services would be provided on credit and that they desired to make express arrangement for payment of those services.
Furthermore, in Town and Country Bank v. James M. Canfield Contracting Co., Inc. (1978), 55 Ill.App.3d 91, 370 N.E.2d 630, it was held that a sub-subcontractor was an intended third party beneficiary of a contract between his subcontractor and the general contractor. The basis for that court's decision was Avco Delta Corp. v. United States (7th Cir. 1973), 484 F.2d 692, in which the Seventh Circuit held that a materialman was a third party beneficiary of a promise by a general contractor to provide an affidavit of payment before receiving the retainage from the owner and a promise that the owner could if it chose pay any liquidated claims that arose out of the contract and charge the general contractor.
As noted earlier, "under Illinois law, statutory provisions applicable to a construction contract are a part of that contract and must be construed in connection with such laws." (Western Waterproofing, 669 F. Supp. 901, 903.) As a policy matter, it would be meaningless here to read the Bond Act requirements into the Construction Manager Agreement without reading in third party rights to enforce that statute.
Furthermore, in the Construction Manager Agreement, Tousley-Iber agreed at Paragraph 11.3 to "promptly pay all amounts due" the trade contractors upon receipt of any payment from plaintiff. In Paragraph 2.2.5, Tousley-Iber agreed to "develop and implement a procedure for the review, processing, and payment of applications by Trade Creditors for progress and final payment."
Also, in Paragraph 11.3 of the Agreement, plaintiff and Tousley-Iber agreed that before issuance of final payment, the latter was required to submit satisfactory evidence that all indebtedness had been paid. As in Metro East and Avco, these promises regarding payment show that the parties anticipated that subcontractors' services would be provided on credit and that the parties wanted to make express arrangements for payment to them. Therefore, we hold that defendants here were third party beneficiaries of the contract between plaintiff and Tousley-Iber.
The third issue for review is whether plaintiff has standing to assert that the contract is void because of plaintiff's failure *976 to comply with competitive bidding procedures.
Plaintiff argues that the Construction Manager Agreement is void because it was not awarded after due advertisement and after obtaining competitive bids. Defendants assert that plaintiff lacks standing to raise this argument and is estopped from raising the argument. We agree with defendants. Where a suit alleges injury due to a violation of a statute, the doctrine of standing requires that the plaintiff be one of a class designed to be protected by the statute, or for whose benefit the statute was enacted. Under Cardinal Glass Co. v. Board of Education (1983), 113 Ill.App.3d 442, 69 Ill. Dec. 329, 447 N.E.2d 546, the Third District held that the school bidding procedures were intended to protect taxpayers and bidders. Thus, plaintiff does not now have standing to raise the argument that the contract is void.
Furthermore, estoppel may be applied against school districts. The test is whether, under all the circumstances of the case, the affirmative acts of the district have created a situation where it would be inequitable and unjust to permit it to deny what it has done or permitted to be done, then the doctrine may be applied against it. (Stahelin v. Board of Education, School District No. 4, DuPage County (1967), 87 Ill.App.2d 28, 230 N.E.2d 465.) There it was held that the school board could not assert, on one hand, that it was entitled to a number of credits which were to be adjudicated on completion of school construction under a contract requiring contract changes to be in writing and to have prior board approval and, on the other hand, not be obligated for any of the extras to be adjudicated in the same manner because it did not vote by yeas and nays on expenditures for extras as required by statute. Here, plaintiff's acts of drafting the agreement and then receiving the benefits thereunder estop it from arguing now that the contract is void.
Finally, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in finding that the Construction Manager was subject to the Bond Act but not the School Code.
This argument is without merit. Plaintiff cites no authority that these statutes must be read together. The two statutes are not part of the same act. Moreover, they were designed to effectuate different policies. The Bond Act requires that a public body require a contractor to obtain a payment bond to protect subcontractors. The School Code generally requires competitive bids to assure that taxpayers pay the lowest responsible price.
For all of the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
BARRY, P.J., and McCUSKEY, J., concur.