=== CASE 9739496 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:22.626455+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN, concurring in part and dissenting in part: Generally, with the exceptions noted herein, the majority opinion does a commendable job of analyzing and resolving the issues raised by the defendant on this appeal. I concur in those parts of the opinion, and dissent only from the finding that it was error to have permitted the introduction of evidence concerning the shooting of Gary Green at the aggravation and mitigation phase of the sentencing hearing, and from that part of the opinion which remands the Batson issue for further hearing as to three jurors excused by the State by the use of peremptory challenges. As to the introduction of evidence concerning the killing of Gary Green in 1969, it is important to remember that this evidence was introduced at the second phase of the sentencing hearing. That hearing was held before the court without a jury. At the first phase of that hearing, the court found the defendant eligible for the death penalty, based on the presence of the statutory aggravating factor that the murder had been committed in the course of an armed robbery. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(6).) At the second phase of the sentencing hearing, evidence in aggravation and mitigation was introduced. One of the matters in aggravation which the State introduced at the second phase of the hearing was the 1969 killing of Gary Green. The majority opinion holds that the evidence of this killing should have been excluded because of the State’s decision to nol-pros that charge, and because the trial court’s reliance upon the 1969 killing as an aggravating factor was misplaced. I do not agree. The killing of Gary Green was not presented to establish a second murder to qualify the defendant for the death penalty. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3).) It was presented to prove a matter in aggravation. It was, therefore, not necessary to establish that the defendant had “murdered” Gary Green. The fact that the court, in considering factors in aggravation and mitigation, referred to the “murder” of Gary Green is not significant. The court there used the word “murder” as synonymous with “kill.” As the general context of the judge’s statement indicates, he simply found that the defendant killed Gary Green in 1969, which along with other evidence of defendant’s participation in the fray, such as firing a gun twice, were proper bits of relevant evidence bearing on defendant’s violent nature. McDonald was the only witness who testified at the-sentencing hearing as to actually seeing the defendant fire a gun. He stated that the defendant had a rifle, but ballistics evidence indicated that the bullet was not fired by a rifle. This contradiction is not destructive of McDonald’s testimony and was a matter to be resolved by the trial judge. McDonald could have been mistaken or - the ballistics evidence could have been in error. It appears that only one other person was with the defendant on the other side of the wall from the victim, his brother, and McDonald. The evidence indicates that only the defendant fired a gun. The trial judge acknowledged the problems surrounding this type of a case, but concluded that “the evidence is positive and credible that the defendant did kill Mr. Green.” It was the trial court’s function to resolve conflicts in the evidence and to draw inferences therefrom. (See People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22, 66.) There is ample evidence in the record to support the trial court’s determination. It should not, therefore, be lightly overturned. (People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, 539-40.) Also, I do not think that the fact that the State nol-prossed the charge against the defendant for the murder of Gary Green supports the holding of the majority opinion. It appears that McDonald, the only person who saw the defendant with a gun, did not testify at the nolle prosequi hearing. Gary Green’s brother, Rochester, testified at that hearing that someone by the name of “Rat” killed his brother. At the sentencing hearing in this case, Rochester explained his testimony at the nolle prosequi hearing. He stated he did not actually see the person who shot his brother. He did not know the identity of the person by the name of “Rat” and stated that he had simply presented to the trial judge, at the nolle prosequi hearing, information he had picked up on the street. This testimony, as well as that detailed above, was all before the sentencing judge when he concluded that defendant had killed Gary Green. The evidence surrounding that killing was not unreliable, as the majority opinion concludes. It is no more unreliable than is any other evidence that is in conflict or may have been contradicted. We do not remove from the fact finder’s consideration evidence simply because it may be in conflict with other evidence, or may have been contradicted by previous evidence. I likewise do not think that the trial court erred in excluding statements made by the prosecutor as his reasons for nol-prossing the 1969 murder charge. In refusing to-consider the prosecutor’s reasons, the court properly stated that “[tjhere’s no importance to what the attorneys felt,” and also noted in its findings that “[i]t seems that the State did not have Mr. McDonald at that time.” Thus, the court acknowledged that it had before it more evidence than was available to the prosecutor at the time the previous charge was nol-prossed, and that the reason why the previous charge was dismissed was not relevant to or probative of the issues before the court at the sentencing hearing. I do not think the defendant was prejudiced by the exclusion of this evidence. For these reasons, I dissent from the majority opinion’s holdings on the various issues arising from the consideration by the court at the second phase of the sentencing hearing of matters pertaining to the killing of Gary Green in 1969. As to the Batson issues, I dissent only from the majority opinion’s holding which remands the matter to the trial court for a further Batson hearing as to jurors referred to in the majority opinion as the 13th, 14th and 15th persons excused by the State. I find that the opinion’s analysis of the Batson issues relating to the other jurors who had been peremptorily excused was thorough, and legally and logically sound. I believe that the record reflects facts articulated by the State which support a neutral explanation for the exercise of peremptory challenges to excuse jurors referred to in the opinion as the 13th, 14th and 15th persons excused peremptorily by the State. I feel that the majority misread Uviedo v. Steves Sash & Door Co. (5th Cir. 1984), 738 F.2d 1425. The majority opinion quotes page 1430 of that case as follows: “ ‘[i]t is beyond the province of a trial or reviewing court to determine — after the fact — that certain facts in the record might have served as the basis for an employer’s [discriminatory act].’ ” (129 Ill. 2d at 185.) This statement does not mean that this court, or any reviewing court, is precluded from considering clearly articulated reasons for the use of a challenge which appeared in the record just because the trial court made a finding as to the legitimate exercise of a challenge which is not supported by the record, or made no specific finding as to an articulated reason. In Uviedo, the Federal magistrate had found that the plaintiff had established a prima facie case of discrimination, that the defendant had rebutted the prima facie case, and that the plaintiff had failed to show that the reasons articulated by the defendant were merely a pretext. The Court of Appeals held that although there may be facts in the record which support the finding of the magistrate, “[t]he difficulty here, however, is that defendant never articulated to the magistrate that these were in fact the reasons for the particular challenged action.” (Emphasis in original.) (738 E2d at 1429.) The language quoted in the majority opinion in the context of the Uviedo case does not preclude a reviewing court from considering reasons that are in the record which the prosecutor articulated for the exercise of peremptory challenge, whether or not they are the reasons given by the trial court for finding that the State had given a neutral explanation for the exercise of the challenge. Uviedo only requires us to hold that although the record may disclose an explanation for the exercise of a challenge, that explanation cannot be found to be adequate by either the trial court or a court on review, unless the prosecutor articulated that as a reason for exercising a peremptory challenge. This court can, and for the sake of judicial economy should, evaluate the reasons articulated by the prosecutor for the exercise of peremptory challenges and should determine whether the reasons given constitute a neutral explanation for the exercise of the challenges. We need not be limited to considering only the findings and facts in support thereof given by the trial court. As to the 13th juror excused by the State, the majority opinion holds that the trial court’s reliance upon the fact that the venireperson’s friend was a criminal defense lawyer was improper because the State had never clearly articulated that this fact was a reason that it exercised a peremptory challenge to excuse that juror. It may be that the State did not articulate as a reason for excusing this juror the fact that he had a friend who was a criminal defense lawyer, but the prosecutor did clearly state, as a reason for excusing that juror, that the juror had a friend who was a lawyer and a city councilman, as noted in the explanation by the prosecutor quoted by the majority opinion. This relationship, coupled with the fact that the prosecutor did not have further information concerning how that relationship might influence the juror, caused him to use a peremptory challenge to exclude the juror. I think this is a perfectly valid neutral explanation for the use of a peremptory challenge, which this court is capable of evaluating without sending the case back for another hearing. Apparently, the defendant was not concerned about the finding by the trial court that the juror’s friend was a criminal defense lawyer, because this erroneous finding is not mentioned in the defendant’s brief. The defendant, in the statement-of-facts section of his brief, sets forth the reason stated by the prosecutor for exercising peremptory challenges and the findings of the court as to each of the 17 jurors whose challenges were questioned. As to the challenge to the juror we are now considering, the defendant states, in his brief, that the prosecutor said he excused that juror “primarily because he had a friend *** who was a lawyer and a city councilman.” The defendant’s brief states that the court found that the prosecutor excused this juror “because he knew an Evanston city councilman who was also a lawyer.” In the argument section of the defendant’s brief, the reasons for excusing jurors and the findings of the court are specifically argued as to six of the jurors that were excused by the State. Also, two others are generally referred to without detailed discussion. However, nowhere in the defendant’s brief was any argument made concerning the adequacy of the articulated reasons for the challenge of this 13th juror, or the finding of the court in relation thereto which the majority opinion now finds to have been erroneous. As to the juror referred to in the opinion as the 14th venireperson excused by the State, the opinion states that the finding of the court that the juror lived within a mile of the defendant’s residence was erroneous. It is interesting to note that the defendant’s brief argues that the State’s explanation for why it excused this juror “was nearly identical to its explanation for why it excused [the 12th venireperson excluded by the State].” The majority opinion holds that the explanation for the exclusion of the 12th venireperson was adequate, that is, that “the prosecutor did not have enough information about the venireperson to feel comfortable with having her on the jury.” 129 Ill. 2d at 181-82. Since the defendant argues that the explanation for the 14th venireperson excused was nearly identical with that given for excusing the 12th venireperson, it would appear that the reason for approving the challenge to that juror would compel the approval of the challenge of the venireperson now under consideration. The majority opinion quotes the statement of the prosecutor as to his concern about his lack of knowledge as to this juror. (129 Ill. 2d at 186.) This lack of knowledge is what the defendant refers to in his brief as the reason that was nearly identical with that given for excusing the 12th venireperson. The mere fact that the trial judge found that this juror lived within a mile of the defendant’s residence instead of within 3V2 miles of the scene of the crime, as the defendant asserts was the case, does not detract from the valid explanation of lack of adequate information articulated in the record by the prosecutor. As to the final venireperson excluded by the State discussed in the majority opinion, my colleagues note that the trial court failed to make a specific finding regarding the State’s exclusion of this juror and held that in view of this, there are no sufficient findings in the record to provide a basis for appellate review. (129 Ill. 2d at 187-88.) As noted in the majority opinion, this juror was a woman whose husband was unemployed and whose son had been a victim of an armed robbery and had testified at the trial of his assailant. The prosecutor, at the Batson hearing, stated that he did not know the outcome of that case or whether this juror was satisfied with the treatment her son had received. The prosecutor stated that the voir dire of this juror was sketchy and that he did not have a lot of information about her, compared to the information he had as to other prospective jurors that he was considering at that time. It must be remembered that in this case the court conducted the voir dire. It is understandable that the prosecutor did not want to jeopardize his case by accepting this unknown quantity as a juror. Just as the lack of adequate information on which to base an informed judgment was considered in the majority opinion to be an adequate explanation for the exclusion of the 12th venireperson challenge by the State, it is likewise an adequate reason when articulated by the prosecution for the challenge of other jurors about whom the voir dire and the juror cards do not give sufficient information to permit the prosecutor to make an informed determination. Although the court did not make any specific findings as to the validity of the prosecutor’s explanation for excusing this juror peremptorily, it did make a general finding that the State had come forth with neutral explanations for its use of peremptory challenges. In People v. Mack, the trial court, at the conclusion of a Batson hearing, failed to make specific findings as to the adequacy of the reasons stated by the prosecutor for the use of peremptory challenges. This court stated: “The judge’s oral ruling and written order are sufficiently specific for our purposes here. The record contains the transcript of the explanations offered by the prosecutor. The judge found those explanations to be adequate and race neutral, and sufficient to rebut the defendant’s prima facie case under Batson. There was no further need for the trial judge to enter findings with respect to each black member of the venire excluded by the prosecution.” (People v. Mack (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 231, 245-46.) The majority opinion attempts to distinguish Mack by saying that the trial court, in Mack, found that the facts were not in dispute, whereas, in our case the trial court made no specific findings that the facts were not in dispute. (129 Ill. 2d at 187-88.) This is a distinction without a difference. The record discloses whether or not the facts are in dispute, and this court can make that determination just as well as can a trial court. The holding in Mack is clearly controlling in this case. In Mack, we stated: “Although the credibility of the prosecutor’s explanations for his conduct at the voir dire was in dispute, the underlying facts were not.” (Mack, 128 Ill. 2d at 246-47.) The same reasoning applies in our case, which contains no factual dispute as to the articulated reasons for the use of the peremptory challenges. It is only the sufficiency of these explanations that is in dispute, and this court is perfectly capable of deciding that question from the record. For the reasons given, I find it unnecessary to remand this case to the trial court for a further Batson hearing as to these three venirepersons. The trial court found that the reasons articulated by the prosecutor for excluding these jurors were racially neutral. That finding is supported by the record and is not manifestly erroneous. In closing, I wish to point out the needless additional delay and waste of judicial resources that will be occasioned by the majority opinion. The crimes in this case were committed February 10, 1983. The defendant’s first brief was filed in this court August 10, 1985. As noted in the majority opinion, because of the holdings by the Supreme Court, it was necessary for us to remand this case for a Batson hearing, which we did in May 1987. The case is now before us for the second time, and we still have not disposed of the appeal. The majority opinion again remands the case for a further Batson hearing, following which it will again be appealed to this court for the third time. If we find that the peremptory challenges were properly used, under the holding of the majority opinion, the case will again be remanded to the trial court for a new sentencing hearing, which could be held seven years or more after the original trial. Whatever penalty is imposed at the new sentencing hearing, another appeal will follow. If the penalty is death, the appeal will be directly to this court. If it is other than death, the appeal will be to the appellate court, with a petition for leave to appeal to this court. In any event, before the defendant’s first appeal of his murder conviction is disposed of, this court and the trial court will each have considered this case four times. Of course, this will conclude only the first round. The defendant will then proceed again in the trial court under the provisions of the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 122 — 1 et seq.). It is interesting to note that nowhere in the defendant’s briefs does he profess his innocence or say that he did not commit these crimes. Also, he does not contend that the evidence was not sufficient to prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. I dissent from those portions of the majority opinion discussed above. I would affirm the defendant’s convictions and sentences. JUSTICE MILLER joins in this partial concurrence and partial dissent.

=== CASE 3784419 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.450535+00 ===

The defendant contends that the plaintiff's petition is demurrable because it does not allege that the claim was presented to him as executor within four months after his appointment, as provided by Section 10509-112, General Code (114 Ohio Laws, 320), and contains no allegation to the effect that the plaintiff obtained leave from the Probate Court to file his claim for allowance, as provided by Section 10509-134, *Page 484
General Code (114 Ohio Laws, 320). Subsection 112 reads as follows:
"Creditors shall present their claims, whether due or not due, to the executor or administrator within four months after the date of his appointment. Such executor or administrator shall allow or reject all claims, except contingent claims, within thirty days after their presentation. Any claim presented after the time herein provided shall not prevail as against bona fide purchasers or as against executors and administrators who have acted in good faith, or against a surviving spouse who has made the election to take under the will or at law, and except as to negotiable instruments maturing subsequent to the expiration of such time, any such late claim shall not prevail as against bona fide distributees."
Subsection 134 contains the following language:
"Upon petition filed by a creditor or person deriving title from him, whose claim has not been presented within the time prescribed by law, the probate court, if after notice to all interested parties and hearing, it is of the opinion that justice and equity so require, and that the petitioner is not chargeable with culpable neglect in failing to present his claim within the time so prescribed, may permit petitioner to file his claim for allowance, but such allowance shall not affect any payment or distribution made before the filing of such claim, nor shall it prejudice the rights of creditors whose claims were filed within the time prescribed by law."
The important question here presented is whether these recent amendments are statutes of limitation (or non-claim statutes, as they are frequently designated). The difference of opinion between counsel starts with the very first sentence of subsection 112 which contains the definite mandate that "creditors shall present their claims, whether due or not due, to the executor or administrator *Page 485
within four months after the date of his appointment." Although the word "shall" is ordinarily accepted in its full coercive force, the plaintiff contends that in this instance it is mandatory merely to the extent of preventing a "late claim" from prevailing as against bona fide distributees, etc. To substantiate his view he relies upon the language of this subsection and upon the context. The defendant insists that these provisions effectuate the intention of the sponsors of this legislation to establish a definite non-claim statute in order to expedite the orderly and efficient administration of estates in Ohio. It is of course true that such intention cannot be regarded as conclusive nor even persuasive unless subsequently embodied in the language of the Legislature. This court is of the opinion that the simple wording here involved must be regarded as mandatory when viewed in the light of common acceptation. Reduced to its lowest terms, it unambiguously states that "creditors shall present their claims * * * within four months," and no apparent purpose could be served by attempting to torture it into something else. It is at least interesting to now observe whether this view squares with the expressed intention of the sponsors of the act. On page 91 of the third report of the committee (Supplement to Ohio State Bar Association Report, Vol. III, No. 13, June 24, 1930) appears this comment:
"Under the present statutes there is no definite time within which claims of creditors must be presented, the only reference to the subject being in G. C. 10741 to the effect that six months after his appointment the executor or administrator may pay the debts, without liability if creditors later presenting their claims are not paid in full. The new section provides a definite time within which claims are to be filed and gives certain preferences to creditors who present their claims within this limit. The section of this chapter on 'Order *Page 486
in which debts to be paid' likewise places as No. 6 in the list, 'Other debts as to which claims have been presented within four months after the appointment of the executor or administrator,' and includes as No. 7 on the list, 'Debts due to all other persons.' "
The defendant contends further that Subsection 134 sustains his view and would be utterly meaningless unless Subsection 112 is considered as a non-claim statute. He emphasizes the phrase "Reinstatement of barred claim" which appears as the heading for Subsection 134. However, research discloses that this is not the language of the Legislature. Nevertheless the history of this heading is unusual and interesting. Ordinarily when bills are introduced in the General Assembly they do not contain sectional headings, but in this instance the bar committee supplied the headings. However, they were elided by the Legislature during the process of enactment. Then they were restored by the Secretary of State in the performance of his duties under Section 162, General Code.
What is the import of the language of Subsection 134? The plaintiff insists that it is merely permissive and provides simply an unexclusive method for the presentation of claims. The defendant is equally vigorous in his contention that this is interrelated with Subsection 112 and must be construed as providing the only procedure by which a creditor may file a "late claim" for allowance. A careful study of the act indicates that this is the logical view, especially if confusion is to be avoided and if this subsection is to serve any real purpose. Furthermore, no hardship should result from this construction inasmuch as the Probate Court is invested with a discretion sufficiently broad to insure the allowance of meritorious petitions and at the same time prevent unnecessary delay. Again this view seems to be consistent with the following *Page 487
comment appearing on page 94 of the third report of the bar committee:
"This section gives to the court the power to reinstate a barred claim under certain circumstances."
Moreover, an examination of the first and second reports of this committee discloses nothing at variance with this expression.
It is contended further by the plaintiff that the foregoing construction ignores the words "any claim presented after the time herein provided" appearing in Subsection 112. He insists that this phrase strongly implies the right to file a "late claim" without regard to Subsection 134. This court finds no basis for this view, but is of the opinion that this clearly refers simply to "late claims" filed upon the granting of a petition as provided in Subsection 134.
Since the plaintiff failed to allege that his claim was presented within four months or later upon leave first obtained from the Probate Court, the judgment of the Court of Appeals must be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
STEPHENSON, WILLIAMS, JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur. *Page 488

=== CASE 3784420 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.513117+00 ===

This case originated before the Public Utilities Commission, on the application of plaintiff in error, the Salisbury Transportation. Company, for an amendment of its two certificates. one authorizing an operation between Canton and Alliance, and the other between Canton and Louisville, an intermediate point, so as to authorize it to establish new time schedules between said termini. The effect of such application, if allowed, would be to permit, by bus connection under the schedules applied for, continuous service between Canton and Alliance, where theretofore a modified local service had obtained. Protests against the granting of the application were duly filed. *Page 607
The commission, as disclosed by its order, was of opinion that the granting of the present application would emasculate its former order covering the same territory, made about three months previously, and therefore denied the present application of the plaintiff in error, whereupon error was prosecuted to this court.
The questions presented to the Public Utilities Commission, and now upon error to this court, lie in the domain of fact, and no legal questions are herein presented that have not been heretofore determined by this court. Upon this record this court cannot find that conditions have materially changed since the commission made its previous order, nor that the commission's order in denying the application of the Salisbury Transportation Company for the establishment of the new time schedules was unreasonable or unlawful; neither can we find that the public necessity and convenience in the territory sought to be served require the establishment of the new time schedule applied for, under present conditions, and in view of the existing service prevailing between Canton and Alliance and between Canton and Louisville.
The order of the commission will be affirmed.
Order affirmed.
MARSHALL, C.J., DAY, ALLEN, KINKADE, ROBINSON, JONES and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur. *Page 608

=== CASE 2220076 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:32.975126+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 612 (2007)
In the Matter of the RISK LEVEL DETERMINATION OF J.V.
No. A06-2286.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
November 27, 2007.
*613 John M. Stuart, State Public Defender, F. Richard Gallo, Jr., Assistant Public Defender, Minneapolis, MN, for relator J.V.
Lori Swanson, Attorney General, Angela Helseth Kiese, Assistant Attorney General, St. Paul, MN, for Minnesota Department of Corrections.
Considered and decided by DIETZEN, Presiding Judge; RANDALL, Judge; and HALBROOKS, Judge.
OPINION
DIETZEN, Judge.
In this certiorari proceeding, relator challenges an administrative law judge's (ALJ) order dismissing his request for administrative review of his risk-level assessment under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, arguing that his right to review is unconditional and absolute. Because we conclude that the ALJ did not err in concluding that relator's request for administrative review was moot, we affirm.
FACTS
In July 2001, relator was convicted of fourth-degree criminal sexual conduct and the district court sentenced him to 33 months in prison. Over the next two years, relator was released from prison subject to conditions on two occasions, but he was later arrested for violating the conditions and was reincarcerated. In November 2003, the department of corrections end-of-confinement review committee (ECRC) assigned J.V. a risk level III. J.V. filed a request for administrative review of the ECRC decision.
In January 2004, relator was conditionally released from the Minnesota Correctional Facility-Lino Lakes (MCF-LL), but was then civilly committed to the Minnesota Sex Offender Program (MSOP) and transferred to the Minnesota Security Hospital-St. Peter (MSH-St.Peter). Relator then requested that the ECRC proceed with a hearing on his request for administrative review of his risk-level determination.
During his civil commitment, relator was subject to conditions of release from prison, but he violated a condition and was returned to MCF-LL to complete his sentence. When his sentence expired in February 2007, he was returned to MSH-St. Peter under the civil commitment order. In August 2006, respondent moved to dismiss J.V.'s request for administrative review of the risk-level determination as moot. Following the submission of written arguments, the ALJ dismissed the request *614 for review on the ground of mootness. This certiorari appeal follows.
ISSUE
Did the ALJ err as a matter of law in concluding that relator's request for administrative review under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 6, is moot?
ANALYSIS
Relator argues that the ALJ erred in concluding that his request for administrative review under Minn.Stat. § 244.052 of the ECRC risk-level determination is moot. The issue of whether a cause of action is moot is a question of law, which we review de novo. Isaacs v. Am. Iron & Steel Co., 690 N.W.2d 373, 376 (Minn.App. 2004), review denied (Minn. Apr. 4, 2005); see Frost-Benco Elec. Ass'n v. Minn. Pub. Utils. Comm'n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn.1984) (reviewing court need not defer to agency decisions or expertise when reviewing agency's legal determinations).
A. Applicability of Mootness Doctrine
Relator argues that the doctrine of mootness does not apply to a request for administrative review under the statute. This case arises under the community notification act (CNA), Minn.Stat. § 244.052 (2006), which protects communities from predatory offenders by requiring law enforcement to provide notice of an offender's presence in a community. Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 4. The statute provides that an offender has "the right to seek administrative review of an end-of-confinement review committee's risk assessment determination," which includes the right to a review hearing. Id., subd. 6. It is well established that the doctrine of mootness applies to judicial proceedings in Minnesota. Kahn v. Griffin, 701 N.W.2d 815, 821 (Minn.2005). Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 6(d), provides that "[t]he review hearing is subject to the contested case provisions of chapter 14." Under the rules adopted in accordance with chapter 14, an ALJ shall "recommend dismissal where the case or any part thereof has become moot." Minn. R. 1400.5500(k) (2005). Thus, the doctrine of mootness applicable to judicial proceedings is equally applicable to review hearings conducted under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 6.
B. Mootness Requires Direct and Personal Harm
Relator argues that he will suffer direct and personal harm if the risk-level determination is not reviewed. Thus, relator argues that his appeal is not moot.
A court should exercise its jurisdiction to decide a matter only if there is a justiciable controversy. See Kahn, 701 N.W.2d at 821. A controversy is justiciable if it involves definite and concrete assertions of right. Id. Merely possible or hypothetical injury will not satisfy this standard. Id. A matter may be dismissed as moot if an event occurs that resolves the issue or renders it impossible for the court to grant effectual relief. Isaacs, 690 N.W.2d at 376.
Mootness can be described as "the doctrine of standing set in a time frame: the requisite personal interest that must exist at the commencement of the litigation (standing) must continue throughout its existence (mootness)." Kahn, 701 N.W.2d at 821 (quoting Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 189, 120 S. Ct. 693, 708-09, 145 L. Ed. 2d 610 (2000)). To show a personal interest, a party must demonstrate "a direct and personal harm." Nordvick v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 610 N.W.2d 659, 662 (Minn.App.2000). If a party lacks the requisite personal interest and the court is unable to grant "effectual relief," the issue *615 raised is deemed to be moot and may be dismissed. Kahn, 701 N.W.2d at 821.
Relator argues that during his civil commitment, he is subject to community notification under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 4, and, therefore, his request for review is not moot. Respondent arguedand the ALJ agreedthat because MSH-St. Peter is a "residential facility" under Minn. Stat. § 244.052, subd. 1(4), community notification is prohibited, and, therefore, relator will suffer no harm arising out of his risk-level determination. We agree.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Brookfield Trade Ctr., Inc. v. County of Ramsey, 584 N.W.2d 390, 393 (Minn.1998). When interpreting a statute, we give words their plain and ordinary meaning. Minn.Stat. § 645.08, subd. 1 (2006); All Metro Supply, Inc. v. Warner, 707 N.W.2d 1, 5 (Minn.App.2005).
Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 4(b)(3), provides that law enforcement agencies shall not make any disclosure about the offender if "the offender is placed or resides in a residential facility," A "residential facility" is "a facility that is licensed as a residential program" under section 245A.02, subd. 14. Id., subd. 1(4). Section 245A.02, subd. 14, defines a "residential program" as "a program that provides 24-hour-a-day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation, or treatment outside a person's own home." Minn.Stat. § 245A.02, subd. 14 (2006). All residential programs are required to be licensed by the commissioner of human services, unless exempted by statute. Minn.Stat. § 245A.03 (2006). We conclude that the sex-offender program at MSH-St. Peter meets the definition of a "residential program." MSH-St. Peter provides 24-hour-a-day care for those committed to the sex-offender program; the residents are supervised; the program provides food and lodging; and the focus of the program is on rehabilitating, training, habilitating, and treating sex offenders.
Relator suggests that because MSH-St. Peter is defined as a "secure treatment facility," it cannot also be a "residential facility." See Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a (2006) ("secure treatment facility" means the Minnesota Security Hospital and its sex-offender program). We disagree for several reasons. First, we see nothing in that statute that precludes MSH-St. Peter from satisfying both statutory definitions. More importantly, MSH-St. Peter clearly provides a "residential program" to its residents and, therefore, meets the definition of a residential facility. Because MSH-St. Peter meets the definition of a "residential facility" under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 1(4), community notification is prohibited by Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 4(b)(3).
Relator argues that even if community notification is prohibited under the statute, he will suffer other harm arising from the risk-level assessment. But relator failed to make this argument before the ALJ. We decline to address matters raised for the first time on appeal. E.N. v. Special Sch. Dist. No. 1, 603 N.W.2d 344, 348 (Minn.App.1999). But even if we did reach this issue, we would conclude that relator's argument is speculative and without merit. Relator has failed to establish any personal harm arising out of his risk-level determination. See Isaacs, 690 N.W.2d at 376 ("the doctrine of mootness looks towards actual occurrences, not mere speculation on events that could have happened").
C. Capability of Repetition
Relator next argues that even if his request for administrative review is moot, the determination is capable of repetition *616 and likely to evade review. Generally, a case should not be dismissed on the ground of mootness if it implicates issues that are capable of repetition, yet evading review. Kahn, 701 N.W.2d at 821. But absent certification as a class action, this only applies "to the situation where two elements are combined: (1) the challenged action was in its duration too short to be fully litigated prior to its cessation or expiration, and (2) there was a reasonable expectation that the same complaining party would be subjected to the same action again." Id. (quoting Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U.S. 147, 149, 96 S. Ct. 347, 349, 46 L. Ed. 2d 350 (1975)).
Prior to his release from MSH-St. Peter, relator will have a new ECRC risk level determination that will trigger his right to request administrative review under the statute. Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subds. 1(1), 3. Thus, the ALJ correctly concluded that relator failed to establish a "reasonable expectation" that the next determination would evade administrative review.
DECISION
Under Minn.Stat. § 244.052, subd. 6, relator's request for administrative review of an end-of-confinement risk-level determination is moot because he is civilly committed and not subject to community notification and, therefore, lacks the requisite personal interest in the outcome of the litigation. Consequently, the ALJ did not err in dismissing his request for administrative review.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2220077 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:32.98602+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 221 (1989)
Larry S. WECHTER, Petitioner,
v.
INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF STATE REVENUE, Respondent.
Cause No. 49T05-8809-TA-00048.
Tax Court of Indiana.
September 27, 1989.
John E. Taylor, Williams & Taylor, Indianapolis, for petitioner.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen. by Terry G. Duga, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for respondent.
FISHER, Judge.
This matter is before the court on petitioner's motion for summary judgment and respondent's response thereto.
*222 FACTS
Wechter challenges the Department's assessment for penalty and interest on delinquent sales tax pursuant to IC 6-2.5-9-3.[1] During the period assessed, Wechter was the president of a now defunct Indiana corporation, Muskies, Inc. Muskies owned and operated a restaurant/bar in Indianapolis which closed in September, 1985.
On August 9, 1985, the Department issued seven notices of assessment to Muskies for the period beginning November, 1984 and ending May, 1985. These notices were for delinquent sales tax plus penalty and interest.
Wechter, as responsible officer for Muskies, remitted seven cashier's checks in payment of actual sales tax due the Department. Wechter did not remit any money for the penalty and interest attributable to the sales tax. Wechter sought and was granted an injunction enjoining the Department from proceeding with collection efforts during the pendency of this original tax appeal.
ISSUE AND DECISION
The sole issue to be determined is whether the Department can assess Wechter, as a responsible officer of Muskies, Inc., for penalty and interest under the version of IC 6-2.5-9-3 in effect during the period of assessment.
At the time the subject sales tax liabilities accrued, IC 6-2.5-9-3 provided in relevant part:
An individual who:
(1) is an individual retail merchant or is an employee, officer, or member of a corporate or partnership retail merchant; and
(2) has a duty to remit state gross retail or use taxes to the department of revenue;
holds those taxes in trust for the state and is personally liable for the payment of those taxes to the state.
Subsequently, the above statute was amended and the phrase "plus any penalties and interest attributable to those taxes" was added to the last line before "to the state." This amendment was effective July 1, 1986.
The Department's regulation in effect during the period of assessment provided in pertinent part:
Businesses hold sales ... taxes in trust accounts for the state of Indiana. If businesses do not properly remit these taxes, responsible officers can be held personally liable for those trust fund taxes. 45 IAC § 2.2-9-4.
Wechter contends that since the former version of the statute and the Department's regulation did not include "any penalties and interest attributable to those taxes" he cannot be held personally liable for penalties and interest.
In Van Orman v. State (1981), Ind. App., 416 N.E.2d 1301, Van Orman, a corporate officer, argued that he was not personally liable under existing law for unpaid corporate taxes which had accrued prior to April 1, 1967. The former version provided:
Every retail merchant shall be personally liable for such taxes, which shall constitute a trust fund in the hands of the retail merchant and shall be owned by the state. IC 1971, 6-2-1-49 (now repealed).
The statute was amended in 1967 to extend personal liability for the payment of the sales and use tax to "every officer ... of such retail merchant who as such officer ... is under a duty to remit such taxes."
The state argued that even though the former statute did not contain language *223 assigning personal liability to corporate officers, it was clear that the legislature intended to impose personal liability on persons doing business in the corporate form. The court rejected this argument. The court stated various rules of statutory construction including "when a statute is amended by the addition of a provision, a presumption is raised that the legislature intended to change the law unless it clearly appears an amendment was made only to express more clearly the original intention of the legislature." 416 N.E.2d at 1305. The court found no clear expression to the contrary and concluded that the amendment was a change in the law.
Likewise, to prevail in the case at bar, the Department must overcome the presumption that a change was intended by the amendment. The Department must show that it "clearly appears" that the 1985 amendment to IC 6-2.5-9-3 was a clarification of the original intention of the legislature.
Wechter and the Department each cite to various rules of statutory construction which best support their respective positions. The fundamental or cardinal rule in the construction of Indiana statutes is to ascertain the legislative intent. Park 100 Development v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue (1981), Ind., 429 N.E.2d 220. When a statute is ambiguous, the court may look to subsequent amendments for evidence of the legislature's initial intent. Seymour Nat'l Bank v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1223, 1226, modified, 428 N.E.2d 203. However, "we must bear in mind that the intent we are searching for is that of the legislature that passed the original statute, not that of any subsequent legislature." Bailey v. Menzie (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 126, 128.
The Department relies heavily on the version of IC 6-2.5-9-3 effective as of July 1, 1986 to prove legislative intent. But, the court needs more. "Later acts of a legislature provide a `highly unreliable basis for making a secondary inference respecting the original legislative intent.'" Bailey, 505 N.E.2d at 128 (quoting R. Dickerson, The Interpretation and Application of Statutes 179 (1975)). Moreover, "[t]o the extent that the amendment merely represents the opinion of the amending legislature as to how the statute should be construed, it is not controlling. Construction of doubtful statutes is a judicial function which the courts alone must perform." Bailey, 505 N.E.2d at 128.
On its face, the version of IC 6-2.5-9-3 in force during the period of assessment does not appear ambiguous. The statute clearly states that those individuals who have a duty to permit state gross retail or use taxes to the Department are personally liable for the payment of those taxes to the state. Another statute in force during the period of assessment stated that in the case of withholding tax, responsible officers would be personally liable for "such taxes, penalties, and interest." IC 1981, 6-3-4-8(d) (current version at IC 6-3-4-8(f)). It is difficult to conclude that the legislature, by its silence, intended penalties and interest to be included in IC 6-2.5-9-3 when it used the words "penalties and interest" in IC 6-3-4-8(d). If the intent was to include penalties and interest in both statutes, then both statutes should either include or exclude the words.
The Department contends that prior to the amendment of IC 6-2.5-9-3, the Department took the position that responsible officers could be held liable for penalties and interest due on sales and use tax. See Angelone, Indiana Responsible Officer Tax Liabilities, 23 Res Gestae 68 (1979).[2] The Department contends that other statutes which impose penalties and interest on individuals show that the legislature has always intended to impose penalties and interest under IC 6-2.5-9-3. The Department cites to the following:
*224 IC 6-8.1-10-1 which provides in pertinent part:
Sec. 1. (a) If a person fails to file a return for any of the listed taxes, fails to pay the full amount of tax shown on his return by the due date for the return or the payment, or incurs a deficiency upon a determination by the department, the person is subject to interest on the non-payment.
(b) The interest for a failure described in subsection (a) is twelve percent (12%) per year, or the adjusted rate established by the commissioner under subsection (c) of this section, whichever rate is in effect, from the due date for payment. The interest applies to:
(1) the full amount of the unpaid tax due if the person failed to file the return;
(2) the amount of the tax that is not paid, if the person filed the return but failed to pay the full amount of tax shown on the return; or
(3) the amount of the deficiency.
IC 6-8.1-10-2 which provides in pertinent part:
Sec. 2 (a) If a person fails to file a return for any of the listed taxes or fails to pay the full amount of tax shown on his return on or before the due date for the return or payment, incurs, upon examination by the department, a deficiency which is due to negligence, or fails to timely remit any tax held in trust for the state, the person is subject to a penalty.
* * * * * *
(d) If a person subject to the penalty imposed under this section can show that the failure to file a return, pay the full amount of tax shown on his return, timely remit tax held in trust, or pay the deficiency determined by the department was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, the department shall waive the penalty.
And IC 6-8.1-10-4 which provides in pertinent part:
Sec. 4. (a) If a person fails to file a return or make a full tax payment with that return with the fraudulent intent of evading the tax, he is subject to a penalty.
These statutes are found in Article 8.1. In the first chapter of Article 8.1, "listed taxes" is defined as including the state gross retail and use tax (IC 6-2.5). Furthermore, "person" is defined as including:
An individual, assignee, receiver, commissioner, fiduciary, trustee, executor, administrator, institution, national bank, bank, consignee, firm, partnership, joint venture, pool, syndicate, bureau, association, cooperative association, society, club, fraternity, sorority, lodge, corporation, Indiana political subdivision engaged in private or proprietary activities, estate, trust, or any group or combination acting as a unit. IC 1982, 6-8.1-1-3.
Since IC 6-2.5-9-3 applies to "an individual" it comes within the definition of "person" as used in IC 6-8.1. However IC 6-8.1-1-6 provides:
The provisions of this article apply for the purposes of imposing, collecting, and administering the listed taxes. However, if a provision of this article conflicts with a provision of the law relating to any of the listed taxes, the provision of the law relating to the listed tax controls for purposes of imposing, collecting or administering that listed tax.
IC 6-2.5-9-3 controls over any conflicting provision of IC 6-8.1. Therefore, the Department's reliance on Article 8.1 to show legislative intent is misplaced.
The court finds that during the period of assessment, IC 6-2.5-9-3 imposed liability on responsible officers for taxes and not for penalties and interest. Statutes which impose or levy taxes may not be extended beyond the clear import of the language of the statute. Such statutes are to be construed strictly against the state and in favor of the taxpayer. Van Orman, 416 N.E.2d at 1305. There was nothing in the statutes or regulations at the time of the assessment which would have put Wechter on notice of any personal liability for penalties and interest. Furthermore, the Department has failed to show *225 that it clearly appears that the 1985 amendment to IC 6-2.5-9-3 was a clarification of the original intention of the legislature.
It is therefore ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the petitioner, as a responsible officer, is liable for the food and beverage tax pursuant to IC 6-9-12-1 et seq. and is not liable for any of the penalty and interest assessed.
ORDERED.
NOTES
[1]  Wechter was also assessed for food and beverage tax but he apparently is not contesting this assessment although he does contest the penalty and interest thereon on the same basis as he contests the penalty and interest on the sales tax. The food and beverage tax statutes are found at IC 6-9-12-1 et seq. The food and beverage tax "shall be imposed, paid, and collected in the same manner that the state gross retail tax is imposed, paid, and collected under IC 6-2.5." IC 6-9-12-7. Neither party argues that the food and beverage tax should be treated any differently than the sales tax. Therefore, for the purposes of this case, the court will treat the imposition of the penalty and interest on the food and beverage tax in the same manner as the penalty and interest on the sales tax.
[2]  This article was written by a former Hearing Officer for the Indiana Department of Revenue. The author notes that the sales tax statute does not specifically provide for the transfer of penalties to responsible officers but the withholding tax statute does. The author suggests the state is able to assess penalties in sales tax situations on the theory of joint liability.

=== CASE 2220079 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.026801+00 ===

188 Ill. App. 3d 178 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 60
LORRAINE A. BASLER, Indiv. and as Mother and Next Friend of Michael W. Gee, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
DONALD WEBB et al., Defendants-Appellees.
No. 5-88-0377.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
Opinion filed August 30, 1989.
*179 John Paul Womick & Associates, Chartered, of Carbondale, for appellant.
William Kent Brandon, of Mitchell, Brandon & Schmidt, of Carbondale, for appellees.
Affirmed in part, and reversed in part and remanded.
*180 JUSTICE RARICK delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Lorraine A. Basler, mother of nine-year-old Michael W. Gee, appeals from the dismissal by the circuit court of Union County of her complaint for failure to state a cause of action against defendants, Donald and Francis Webb, grandparents and guardians of six-year-old Tanya Webb. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
On April 22, 1987, at approximately 3:30 p.m., Michael had just gotten out of school and was crossing the street when Tanya, riding a bicycle allegedly with no brakes, ran into and seriously injured him. Plaintiff filed suit individually and on behalf of Michael alleging defendants were negligent in not controlling their granddaughter and in entrusting her with a defective bicycle. Defendants moved to dismiss plaintiff's complaint for failure to state a cause of action. The trial court allowed plaintiff to amend her complaint, but plaintiff chose to stand on her pleadings. The court therefore dismissed plaintiff's complaint with prejudice. Plaintiff argues on appeal the trial court abused its discretion in this instance in dismissing her complaint for failure to state a cause of action for either negligent control or negligent entrustment.
 1 In considering a motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action, all well-pleaded facts within a complaint, as well as all reasonable inferences which can be drawn from those facts, must be regarded as admitted and true. (See Duncan v. Rzonca (1985), 133 Ill. App. 3d 184, 190, 478 N.E.2d 603, 607; Giers v. Anten (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 535, 539-40, 386 N.E.2d 82, 85-86.) Only when no set of facts entitling plaintiff to relief can be proved under the pleadings will we affirm the trial court's decision to grant a motion to dismiss. (Duncan, 133 Ill. App.3d at 191, 478 N.E.2d at 607.) A pleading, however, need not show an absolute certainty of recovery; only a possibility of recovery is required. (See Zimmerman v. Northfield Real Estate, Inc. (1986), 156 Ill. App. 3d 154, 160-61, 510 N.E.2d 409, 413.) Applying these rules of liberal construction, plaintiff believes she has stated a viable cause of action against defendants for negligent control under section 316 of the Restatement of Torts Second (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 316 (1965)), and under the theory of negligent entrustment.
 2-4 Turning first to the theory of negligent control, generally a parent is not liable for the torts of his or her child merely because of that relationship. (See, e.g., Duncan, 133 Ill. App.3d at 199, 478 N.E.2d at 612.) Section 316 of Restatement of Torts Second, which we adopted in Cooper v. Meyer (1977), 50 Ill. App. 3d 69, 365 N.E.2d 201, represents an exception to this rule. Under section 316:
*181 "A parent is under a duty to exercise reasonable care so to control his minor child as to prevent it from intentionally harming others or from so conducting itself as to create an unreasonable risk of bodily harm to them, if the parent
a. knows or has reason to know that he has the ability to control his child, and
b. knows or should know of the necessity and opportunity for exercising such control." (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 316 (1965).)
The key for establishing liability is that the parent knows or has reason to know that he has the ability to control his child and knows or should know of the necessity and opportunity for exercising such control. (See Campbell v. Haiges (1987), 152 Ill. App. 3d 246, 250, 504 N.E.2d 200, 203.) We agree that plaintiff has sufficiently pleaded these requirements in this instance to withstand a motion to dismiss. Specifically, plaintiff alleged in her complaint that: defendants are the grandparents and guardians of Tanya; defendants were at home and had the ability to control Tanya's conduct and prevent her from riding a bicycle without brakes; defendants knew the bicycle was defective and could not be operated safely by Tanya; defendants failed to take the bicycle away from Tanya when they knew, or with reasonable diligence should have known, Tanya would disobey direct commands and ride the bicycle in its defective state; and defendants knew Tanya customarily rode down the street on which the collision occurred, being an extremely steep street, and that a bicycle without brakes traveling down such a steep street presented a gross danger to the public.
Defendants argue, however, plaintiff failed to allege that defendants knew or should have known of the necessity of controlling their granddaughter. Defendants believe liability only arises when a parent or guardian has knowledge, based upon the child's past history, of that child's propensity to commit the act which causes the injury. Because plaintiff failed to allege any similar acts in the past, defendants argue plaintiff failed to state a cause of action for negligent control. Defendants, however, refuse to acknowledge plaintiff alleged that Tanya customarily rode down the steep street where the collision occurred and that she disobeyed direct commands and would ride the bicycle in its defective state anyway. Clearly, plaintiff's complaint sufficiently alleges defendants had prior notice that Tanya would disobey their directives to not ride the defective bicycle. And clearly, injury resulting from riding a bicycle with no brakes was more than foreseeable. (See Blue v. St. Clair Country Club (1955), 7 Ill. 2d 359, 364, 131 N.E.2d 31, 34.) Yet defendants allowed a bicycle with no brakes *182 to fall into the hands of a six-year-old child. Because plaintiff alleged defendants had the ability and the knowledge of the need to control both Tanya and the defective bicycle, in addition to defendants' failure to exercise such control, plaintiff sufficiently alleged a viable cause of action under section 316 of the Restatement of Torts Second. (See Duncan, 133 Ill. App.3d at 200, 478 N.E.2d at 613. Cf. Campbell v. Haiges (1987), 152 Ill. App. 3d 246, 504 N.E.2d 200 (no opportunity to control and no allegations of specific instances of prior conduct, only knew of tendency for violence); Pesek v. Discepolo (1985), 130 Ill. App. 3d 785, 475 N.E.2d 3 (no allegations parents had knowledge of similar acts of violence or opportunity to control minor's behavior); Cooper v. Meyer (1977), 50 Ill. App. 3d 69, 365 N.E.2d 201 (pleadings did not state parent had opportunity to control or knowledge of necessity to exercise control).) While certainly not a model pleading by any standard, plaintiff's complaint is sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss. Defendants cannot argue they have not reasonably been informed of plaintiff's claim against them. (See Karsh v. Schmidt (1979), 79 Ill. App. 3d 365, 368, 398 N.E.2d 592, 594. See also Stenwall v. Bergstrom (1947), 398 Ill. 377, 383, 75 N.E.2d 864, 867.) The trial court therefore erred in dismissing counts I and II of plaintiff's complaint for negligent control.
 5, 6 The trial court, however, did not err in dismissing counts III and IV for negligent entrustment. In order to state a cause of action for negligent entrustment, two elements must be alleged: (1) a negligent entrustment of a dangerous instrumentality; and (2) the inexperience or incompetence of the entrustee being the proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury. (See Allstate Insurance Co. v. Panzica (1987), 162 Ill. App. 3d 589, 592-93, 515 N.E.2d 1299, 1301; State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. McGlawn (1980), 84 Ill. App. 3d 107, 110, 404 N.E.2d 1122, 1124.) Plaintiff's complaint fails to meet this standard. After realleging paragraphs 1 through 10 of count I for count III, plaintiff adds only that: "Defendants * * * were guilty of negligence for entrusting a bicycle, without brakes, to a minor child, Tanya Webb, incapable of safely operating said bicycle when the Defendants knew, or with reasonable diligence should have known, that said child could not appreciate the dangerous condition of said bicycle or control said bicycle * * *." No allegation of any causal relationship between Tanya's incompetency and plaintiff's injury appears in the complaint. (See Rosenberg v. Packerland Packing Co. (1977), 55 Ill. App. 3d 959, 965, 370 N.E.2d 1235, 1240.) Plaintiff simply failed to allege the necessary proximate cause under this theory. (See Bensman v. Reed (1939), 299 Ill. App. 531, 533-34, 20 N.E.2d 910, 911. *183 See also Giers, 68 Ill. App.3d at 540-41, 386 N.E.2d at 86.) Consequently, plaintiff failed to state a viable cause of action against defendants for negligent entrustment, and the trial court committed no error in dismissing counts III and IV of plaintiff's complaint.
For the aforementioned reasons, we reverse and remand for further proceedings that portion of the order of the circuit court of Union County dismissing counts I and II, negligent control, of plaintiff's complaint and affirm the dismissal of counts III and IV, negligent entrustment.
Affirmed in part; reversed and remanded in part.
LEWIS and HOWERTON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739502 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:29.670713+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Following a jury trial in the Scott County Circuit Court, Defendant-Appellant Martin V. Delatorre was convicted of Rape By Threatening The Use Of Deadly Force, a Class A felony, and was sentenced to a term of fifty (50) years.
Delatorre presents five issues for our consideration in this direct appeal:
1. error in the giving of final instrue tions;
2. insufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict;
3. admission of improper evidence;
insufficient chain of custody shown for admission of the sexual assault evidence kit; and
5. insufficient chain of custody for admission of the suspect kit.
The facts supporting the verdict show 'that on July 11, 1987, an "old settlers" celebration was held in Lexington, Scott County, Indiana. The victim, FM., a seventy-five (75) year old resident of Lexington, attended the event with her two brothers. She lived alone and was awakened later that night "with a terrible fear that something was wrong."
She arose and entered her living room where she was confronted by a man in the dark. The man grabbed her, threw something over her head and violently threw her to the floor. He had a strong and painful *1381hold around her neck and threatened to kill her. He told her he had a knife and demanded and took money from her. He then took her into the bedroom and raped her. FEM. stated she knew the perpetrator to be Delatorre. He lived across the street from her and did odd jobs for her. Al though she could not see his face in the dark, she recognized his voice. She said there were other characteristics which were consistent with his, Le., his size, youth, strength, and the fact that he wore a mustache. She said she had heard his voice many times and knew he was the one who had raped her. Earlier in the investigation she had hesitated to name Delatorre and explained later that he made her swear on her Bible not to report him. She is a very religious person and it disturbed her a great deal and made her reluctant to report the crime or the perpetrator because of having sworn not to do so. After talking to her brothers, she decided to report the incident to the police. She said the perpetrator spoke with a Hispanic accent and said some words in Spanish, that he had referred to the fact he was at the "old settlers" celebration earlier and some people had made fun of him there. She also noticed a foul body odor and the smell of alcohol on his breath. There was testimony that Delatorre was at the "old settlers" celebration, that he bragged about his dancing ability and took part in a dancing contest which he lost. He was very upset at losing the contest. There were also witnesses who observed Delatorre drinking earlier that evening.
I
Delatorre tendered final Instruction No. 10 which reads as follows:
Evidence was introduced during trial concerning the similarity of the Defendant's pubic hairs with pubic hairs found at the scene of the alleged rape.
Evidence was also introduced that two specimens of hair could be identical in all of the perceptible characteristics and yet not be from the same person.
It is for you to determine the weight and effect this evidence should be given.
Record at 156.
Janice Lacey, a serologist at the Indiana State Police Laboratory in Evansville, compared samples of Delatorre's head and pubic hair with hairs found on the victim and on her bed sheets. Lacey found the hairs were sufficiently similar to give no basis for exclusion of Delatorre as a suspect. Lacey related that the method of typing she utilized would place the hair examined into only one of three genetic classes. The three classes are Caucasian, Negroid, or Oriental (mongoloid). Consequently, the identification of the hair donor is no more specific than the person's race. The only conclusion to be reached from Lacey's testimony was that the hair came from a general genetic class of Caucasian and that Dela-torre is Caucasian. Lacey emphasized that hair analysis is not a basis for individual identification. The trial court modified De-latorre's tendered instruction by deleting the second paragraph and giving the first and third paragraphs. He explained his omission by stating that the second paragraph was a regurgitation of the evidence and it is not the function of the court to invade the province of the jury and tell them what the evidence is.
Delatorre contends the instruction as given was erroneous and misleading to the jury as it carved out the meat of the instruction that hair analysis is not conclusive for the purpose of establishing identity.
We first observe that the entire instruction fails to state a principle of law but rather recites facts in evidence. The trial court was proper in observing it is not the duty of the trial court to tell a jury what the evidence is. It would have been proper for the trial court to reject the entire instruction. Although it is arguable whether the instruction was better or worse after the modification, Delatorre did tender the subject and the court did tell the jury it had a right to determine the weight and effect to be given to the evidence. In view of Lacey's testimony, which clearly indicated that hair examination is not the *1382basis for individual identification and that her examination did no more than point out that the perpetrator was a Caucasian, we fail to see reversible error presented by the modification of the instruction tendered by Delatorre.
Delatorre contends the trial court erred in refusing his tendered instructions numbered 8 and 9. These instructions proposed to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense of battery.
The victim testified Delatorre had raped her. Delatorre's defense was that he was not the rapist. Where the only point of contention at trial is the issue of the identity of the perpetrator of the offense, it is not error to refuse instructions on lesser included offenses. Pruitt v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 559, 564, 382 N.E.2d 150, 153. The trial court was justified in refusing Delatorre's tendered instructions 8 and 9.
II
Delatorre claims the trial court erred in failing to direct a verdict for the defendant or dismiss the charges since there was insufficient evidence to support the guilty verdict.
Delatorre concedes in reviewing a chal lenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, this Court will not reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses but will examine the evidence most favorable to the State with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Thomas v. State (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 143, 144-45. Dela torre also concedes that the uncorroborated testimony of the victim is sufficient to support a conviction but claims one must examine the victim's testimony. Delatorre relies on a showing the victim equivocated to the police as to Delatorre's identity early in the investigation. Her explanation was that Delatorre had forced her to make an oath on her Bible that she would not reveal his identity. The victim testified at trial that she knew Delatorre, was able to recognize his voice, and was sure he was the one who had raped her. The jury heard all of the evidence, believed it and found Dela torre guilty. There was sufficient evidence before them to support their verdict.
Further, Delatorte claims there was insufficient evidence of deadly force to sustain a Class A felony rape conviction. IC 35-41-1-7 defines deadly force as that force which creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury. Delatorre seems to infer that in a rape case the assailant must threaten to kill the victim while the rape is being perpetrated since such evidence was considered sufficient in Lamb v. State (1984), Ind., 462 N.E.2d 1025, 1028 (assailant threatening "Don't make me hurt you" while holding a steel serewdriver-type object); and Calbert v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 595, 418 N.E.2d 1158, 1159 (assailant threatening "T'll kill you" while repeatedly slapping the victim). Here Delatorre concedes the evidence demonstrated the assailant told the victim "I am going to tie you up and I have got a knife." In addition to this statement, Tammy Machino, an emer-geney medical technician called to the scene, stated the victim told her Delatorre had ordered her to lie still or he would kill her; Trooper Robert Neal testified the victim told him the rapist said he had a knife and if she cried out he would use it; and Detective Charles Demlow testified the rapist threatened to kill the victim if she did not do what he told her. Nevertheless, Delatorre maintains there must be proof of deadly force to upgrade the offense to a Class A felony, and since there was no evidence that a knife was ever produced or held to menace the victim, his conviction should be reversed. We do not agree. IC 35-42-4-1 is clear that threatening the use of deadly force is sufficient to upgrade the offense to the status of a Class A felony. Moreover, this Court has consistently held that a weapon need not be displayed in order to establish the threat of deadly force. See, eg., Lambert v. State (1987), Ind., 516 N.E.2d 16; 19-20 (assailant threatened to kill vietim, no evidence of weapon), reh'g granted and conviction rev'd on other grounds (1989), Ind., 584 N.E.2d 285 (Justices Givan and Pivarnik, dissenting); Zollatz v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 550, 554, 412 N.E.2d 1200, 1202 (assailant threatened to pull knife on victim), Stowers v. State (1977), 266 Ind. 403, 406, 363 N.E.2d 978, 981 (assailant threatened to kill victim, *1383reached under car seat as if reaching for concealed weapon). There was sufficient evidence before the jury to justify its finding a Class A felony.
TII
The State called Sheriff Gordon Julian to relate the content of a statement taken from Delatorre and to describe an anonymous telephone call that the Sheriff received which first accused Delatorre of this crime. On cross-examination, the defense elicited the following:
Q. Have you ever had any trouble out of this man?
A. No, I didn't even know Martin Dela-torre.
Record, 882. After that question, a bench conference was held on Delatorre's previously filed and granted limiting motion which sought to preliminarily exclude mention of his prior criminal record. The State sought relief from the motion in order to inquire of Sheriff Julian if he was aware of any involvement of Delatorre with other agencies, arguing that Delatorre had created a false impression that he was of good character without prior trouble. The trial court reasoned that the question put by the defense to the highest elected law enforcement officer in the county left the jury with the distinct impression that this man had no previous trouble with the law and to some extent opened the door on this subject. The court reasoned it would not nee-essarily be fair to allow the State to introduce Delatorre's entire history based on that question but in all fairness the State ought to be allowed to ask a question in the nature of that proffered by the prosecution. The following then ensued through State interrogation of witness Sheriff Julian:
Q. Sheriff if you recall yesterday we had just completed Mr. Randall's cross examination of you, there was a question asked of you to the extent has the defendant ever given you any or caused you any trouble or given you any problems before to which you answered no, is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Are you aware or have you been informed as to whether the defendant has ever had any problem with other police agencies?
A. Yes I read the-
Q. Okay you are aware of a situation like that?
A. Yes.
Record, 385. Delatorre claims this testimony informed, or at the very least inferred to the jury, that Delatorre had a criminal record and that he was prejudiced to such an extent it requires reversal. The State's contention is that Delatorre opened the door by creating a false or potentially misleading impression and the State was allowed to expose as much of Delatorre's prior record as is necessary to dispel the jury's possible misapprehension.
In Gilliam and Braxton v. State (1978), 270 Ind. 71, 75-77, 383 N.E.2d 297, 300-02, appellants were charged with unlawful dealing in a controlled substance. On direct examination, Braxton testified she had used heroin over a two year period prior to the events at issue. On cross-examination, the State was permitted to ask her about her involvement in dealing in drugs for that period. This Court held that the defendant had opened the door to the subject by giving to the jury the false or misleading impression that Braxton was a heroin user and herself the helpless victim of those who sell drugs for profit. It was held proper to permit the State to respond to this portrayal of Braxton by showing that during the same period 'she herself dealt in drugs. Although such testimony would not ordinarily have been admissible if offered by the State, it became so by the action of the defendant in opening the door to the subject.
The same situation was presented in Berkley v. State (1986), Ind., 501 N.E.2d 399, 400-01, where Berkley, charged with murder, gave the impression by her testimony that she was generally peaceful and engaged in'violence only in cases of self-defense as she related experiences involving violent conduct. The State's rebuttal evidence was held proper regarding her reputation for peacefulness which tended to *1384contradict this inference by showing her to be of a violent nature. See also Gross v. State (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 17, 18-19. We fail to see the trial court abused its discretion by permitting the State to rebut the impression presented by the defense in the limited manner in which it was done.
IV
Delatorre claims State's Exhibit No. 1, the sexual assault evidence kit, was erroneously admitted since the chain of custody foundation was insufficient. Officer Lacey testified the only items she was to examine in the kit were the hair samples, already referred to in this opinion, and the presence of semen. The semen analysis tests were negative.
Evidence shows that Nurse Sally Shapin-sky identified the kit and described the procedures she used to collect the samples. When she went off duty she put the kit in charge of day nurse Lisa Lizenby. Nurse Vickie Shepherd and Doctor William Scott also collected samples for the kit and identified Exhibit No. 1 as the type of kit which would have been used. Shepherd had assisted Shapinsky but could not say this kit was the one being used as Exhibit No. 1. Day Nurse Lizenby testified she found Exhibit No. 1 on her desk in the emergency room when she arrived at work, no one handed the kit to her and the office was not locked at the time. She stated the kit bore Nurse Shapinsky's handwriting and was closed and sealed. She did not break the seal or otherwise open the kit but turned it over to State Police Trooper Robert Neal. Neal then directed the kit to the laboratory technician where it was examined and returned. Delatorre's claim of failure in chain of custody came at the time the kit was left on Nurse Lizenby's desk in an unlocked room. Appellant claims there is no evidence as to who sealed the kit, whether the contents were inventoried pri- or to sealing and whether the kit had items inserted or removed during the time it lay on the desk in the hospital.
To establish a proper chain of custody, the State is required only to provide evidence which "strongly suggests the exact whereabouts of the evidence at all times" and affords a "reasonable assurance" that the evidence passed to trial in an undisturbed condition. Borom v. State (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 712, 714. The State is not required to negate every remote possibility of tampering. Starks v. State (1987), Ind., 517 N.E.2d 46, 58-54, reh'g granted in part on other grounds (1988), Ind., 523 N.E.2d 735 (Justices Givan and Pivarnik, dissenting); Robles v. State (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 660, 665, cert. denied (1988), -- U.S. --, 108 S.Ct. 2872, 101 LEd2d 907; Dunn v. State (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 822, 823. The purpose of requiring chain of eustody for exhibits is to prevent tampering, loss, substitution or mistake. Arnold v. State (1982), Ind., 436 N.E.2d 288, 291. The facts here present, at most, the possibility of tampering but no indication that such occurred rendering the exhibit inadmissible.
y
Finally, Delatorre claims there was an insufficient chain of custody for State's Exhibit No. 19, the suspect kit, containing various body samples from Delatorre. Witness Lacey testified the only item she used from Exhibit No. 19 was a hair sample from Delatorre, which she used to make the comparative analysis previously referred to. She did not testify to any other item in Exhibit No. 19, the suspect kit, nor did any other witness. Delatorre objected to the admission of Exhibit No. 19 on the grounds that no proper foundation had been laid for its admission since there was no testimony concerning blood samples, analysis of blood or any other items taken for testing. He claimed the lack of this testimony rendered the presentation of Exhibit No. 19 into evidence premature. He did not inquire of witness Lacey about the existence or whereabouts of blood samples. His claim on appeal is that since there was nothing to indicate blood samples were in the kit when Lacey examined it, there is evidence the chain was broken.
A similar claim was made in Arnold v. State (1982), Ind., 436 N.E.2d 288, 291. Arnold's objection, among other things, was that the doctor witness testifying in regard to a rape kit did not give testimony concerning the contents of the kit or what, *1385if any, connection he had with the contents. This Court held in Arnold that the absence of testimony by the physician as to the contents of the kit does not in any way affect the chain of custody claim. We further observed that the defense did not avail itself of the opportunity to probe the issue of the authenticity of the exhibit by delving into questions of identity and authenticity through cross-examination of the doctor. The same can be said of Delatorre in the instant case. Although there was evidence through another witness that a blood sample was taken from Delatorre in the emer-geney room, there was no evidence it was placed in the suspect kit for analysis. It could reasonably be presumed the reason for this is that no seminal fluid or blood was found on the victim. No error is demonstrated on this issue.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs, with separate opinion.

=== CASE 2220089 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.226697+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 856 (1989)
Richard A. CHILCUTT, Appellant (Defendant below),
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee (Plaintiff below).
No. 25A03-8811-CR-363.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
October 16, 1989.
Patrick J. Roberts, Roberts & Associates, Peru, for appellant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Louis E. Ransdell, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
HOFFMAN, Judge.
Defendant-appellant Richard A. Chilcutt appeals his trial court conviction for operating a vehicle with a .10%, or more, blood alcohol level. IND. CODE § 9-11-2-1 (1988 Ed.). Defendant's conviction was enhanced to a Class D felony under IND. CODE § 9-11-2-3 (1988 Ed.).
*857 The facts relevant to this appeal disclose that on July 7, 1987, EMTs and Officer Jolley were dispatched to the scene of an accident. They observed an overturned pickup truck lying in a field. The defendant was lying beside the truck. Defendant allowed the EMTs to examine him but refused to go to the hospital. Jolley and the EMTs noticed an odor of alcohol about the defendant. When defendant fell down, he was placed in the ambulance. However, he again refused treatment and left the ambulance. Upon falling down again, Officer Jolley handcuffed him and told the EMTs to take defendant to the hospital. A blood test was taken at the hospital and revealed a blood alcohol content of.17%.
Appellant presents the following issues for review:
(1) whether the presumption in IND. CODE § 9-11-4-15(b) (1988 Ed.) that a subsequent blood alcohol content existed at the time of an alleged offense is constitutional;
(2) whether the provisions of IND. CODE § 9-11-2-1 (1988 Ed.) are applicable to operating a vehicle on private property with a blood alcohol content of .10% or more; and
(3) whether there was sufficient evidence to support defendant's conviction of operating a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol content of .10% or more.
ISSUE I
When reviewing a statute's constitutionality, this Court will uphold a statute as constitutional if it can possibly be done without doing violence to the constitution, and every reasonable presumption must be indulged in favor of the legality of the statute. Grogan v. State (1985), Ind. App., 482 N.E.2d 300, 303. If the language of a statute supports a construction that is constitutional, then that construction must be adopted since statutes are presumed to be constitutional. Grogan, 482 N.E.2d at 303.
The challenged statute, IND. CODE § 9-11-4-15 reads as follows:
"(a) At any proceeding concerning an offense under IC 9-11-2, evidence of the amount by weight of alcohol that was in the blood of the person charged with the offense:
(1) at the time of the alleged violation; or
(2) within the period of time allowed for testing under section 2 of this chapter;
as shown by an analysis of the person's breath, blood, urine, or other bodily substance, is admissible.
(b) If, in a prosecution for an offense under IC 9-11-2, evidence establishes that:
(1) a chemical test was performed on a test sample taken from the person charged with the offense within the period of time allowed for testing under section 2 of this chapter; and
(2) the person charged with the offense had at least ten-hundredths percent (0.10%) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood at the time the test sample was taken;
the trier of fact shall presume that the person charged with the offense had at least ten-hundredths percent (0.10%) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood at the time the person operated the vehicle. However, this presumption is rebuttable."
Defendant contends that this statute has unconstitutionally shifted the burden of proof away from the State, effectively requiring him to prove his innocence. He argues that the State was relieved of proving that he had a blood alcohol content of.10% at the time of the offense and that he had the burden of proving his blood alcohol content was less than .10% when he was operating the vehicle.
"The fourteenth amendment requires the state to prove every fact necessary to constitute the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. In re Winship (1970), 397 U.S. 358, 90 S. Ct. 1068, 25 L. Ed. 2d 368. `It has long been the fundamental law in Indiana that the burden of proof in a trial never shifts to the defendant. The state must establish beyond a reasonable doubt all necessary elements of the crime.' Smith v. State (1969), 252 Ind. *858 425, 438, 249 N.E.2d 493, 500; see also, Dillon v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 412, 275 N.E.2d 312; Thompson v. State (1980), Ind. App., 400 N.E.2d 1151."
Grogan, supra, 482 N.E.2d at 303.
However, the State did prove each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant admitted operating the vehicle and the State proved that a proper and reliable blood alcohol test was given to him. The test results, showing that defendant had a .17% blood alcohol content, were entered into evidence. In addition, the State also had the following testimony of Officer Jolley:
"[State Deputy Prosecutor Mr. Tuley-Welch:]
Q Officer, you were saying, what did the Defendant say when you asked him that question?
[Officer Jolley:]
A He stated that he had not had anything to drink since the accident."
In 22A C.J.S. Criminal Law § 579, pp. 331-332, it is stated:
"The legislature may enact laws declaring that, on proof of one fact, another fact may be inferred or presumed, and such enactments are constitutional, provided no constitutional right of accused is destroyed thereby, the presumption is subject to rebuttal, and there is some rational connection between the fact proved and the ultimate fact presumed." [Footnotes omitted.]
22A C.J.S. Criminal Law § 579.
There is a rational connection in IND. CODE § 9-11-4-15 between the fact proved and the ultimate fact presumed. The fact proved is the person had a blood alcohol content of at least .10% at the time the test sample was taken, which was within the specified period of time. This leads to the ultimate fact presumed that within this time period when the defendant had been operating his vehicle he had at least a blood alcohol content of .10%.
Presumptions in criminal statutes are not considered conclusive and do not affect the burden of proof, but shift the burden of going forward with evidence to the defendant. 22A C.J.S. Criminal Law § 579 (1988 Supp.). The State remains responsible for proving the necessary elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant's constitutional rights have not been destroyed. The presumption is rebuttable and the defendant may produce evidence to overcome the presumption.
Appellant argues that he is having to prove his innocence by producing evidence of post-accident consumption of alcohol. While the State must establish all the elements of the crime, it does not have the burden of negating all affirmative defenses which excuse or exempt the defendant. Grogan, supra, 482 N.E.2d at 303.
"Our courts consistently have held that it is permissible to place the burden on the defendant to establish facts which would mitigate his culpability for a crime."
482 N.E.2d at 303.
Post-accident consumption of alcohol is regarded as an affirmative defense. Dutcher v. Comm'r of Public Safety (1987), Minn.App., 406 N.W.2d 333, 336. The Dutcher court held that the burden of establishing this defense should fall upon defendant, because defendant is in the best position to know how much alcohol, if any, was consumed after the accident. Thus, defendant had the burden of establishing this defense and none of his constitutional rights were destroyed thereby.
ISSUE II
Appellant argues that an offense under IND. CODE § 9-11-2-1 cannot be committed if the person is operating a vehicle solely on private property in a rural area.
The relevant section of IND. CODE § 9-11-2-1 provides:
"(a) A person who operates a vehicle with ten-hundredths percent (0.10%), or more, by weight of alcohol in his blood commits a Class C misdemeanor."
In State v. Carter (1981), Ind. App., 424 N.E.2d 158, the court ruled that the statute prohibiting operating a vehicle while intoxicated applied to not only operation of a vehicle while intoxicated upon a public highway, but also prohibits operation of a *859 vehicle while intoxicated on private property.
Likewise, the statute prohibiting operating a vehicle with a blood alcohol content of at least .10% applies not only to operation of a vehicle with this blood alcohol level on public property, but on private property as well. The reasoning is simply that a person with this blood alcohol level of .10% or more should not be operating a vehicle because he presents a danger to himself as well as others.
Appellant contends that the public was not invited on this property and thus, there was no possible endangerment to third parties. However, in addition to the danger the defendant presented to himself, the facts reveal that there were third parties who were permitted on this property, an example being the owners of the property, who could have been endangered by defendant's operation of the vehicle with a blood alcohol content of at least .10%. The State has a strong interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens from intoxicated drivers, and thus the statute should apply in this instance.
ISSUE III
It is well settled that a court reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence will neither weigh evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses and will look only to the evidence most favorable to the State to determine whether the crime was proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Young v. State (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 455.
In Issue I, it was determined that the State had satisfied its constitutional duty of proving each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. The evidence was examined in that issue and it is sufficient to support the conviction.
As to whether defendant rebutted the presumption by offering witness testimony that he had consumed alcohol after the accident, the trial judge heard the testimony and made a decision as to the credibility of the witnesses. The State provided the testimony of Officer Jolley as to defendant's statement that he had not consumed any alcohol after the accident and testimony that no bottles or other alcoholic containers for alcoholic beverages were found in the area of the accident. There was sufficient probative evidence to support the verdict.
Affirmed.
RATLIFF, C.J., and STATON, J., concur.

=== CASE 2220090 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.275021+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 513 (1989)
LAZARUS DEPARTMENT STORE, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
Patricia SUTHERLIN and Richard Sutherlin, Plaintiffs-Appellees.
No. 30A01-8809-CV-276.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
October 4, 1989.
Rehearing Denied November 22, 1989.
Transfer Denied February 21, 1990.
*516 James R. Fisher, Bette J. Dodd, Ice, Miller, Donadio & Ryan, Indianapolis, Michael J. Tosick, Greenfield, for defendant-appellant.
J. Lee McNeely, Mark W. McNeely, Stephen E. Schrumpf, McNeely, Sanders, Stephenson & Thopy, Shelbyville, for plaintiffs-appellees.
BAKER, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Defendant-appellant, Lazarus Department Store (Lazarus), appeals a jury verdict rendered in favor of plaintiff-appellees, Patricia and Richard Sutherlin (Sutherlin), on their complaint for false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and defamation.
We affirm.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
On December 23, 1985, Mrs. Sutherlin visited Lazarus located in the Greenwood Park Mall in Greenwood, Indiana to complete her Christmas shopping for her family. Additionally, she intended to have her hair styled at the Lazarus Beauty Salon. Immediately upon arriving at the store, Sutherlin proceeded to the beauty salon located on the second floor to set up an appointment. After making her appointment, Sutherlin returned to the first floor to shop for her children. At the time she entered the store, Sutherlin had in her possession a Lazarus shopping bag in which were contained three sweaters she had previously purchased from Lazarus which she desired to return. Sutherlin did not bring with her the sales receipts for the items she was returning, however, believing that they were unnecessary as she had previously returned items to Lazarus without them.
During the course of her shopping, Sutherlin purchased two shirts for her son, a blouse for her daughter, and exchanged one of the previously purchased sweaters she had brought with her. Shortly after *517 1:00 p.m., Sutherlin opened a Lazarus charge account in order to purchase a jogging suit for her husband. She was informed that any other purchases she intended to make with the instant charge card within the next one-half hour should be conducted at the register at which she opened the account. After making the purchase, Sutherlin continued shopping.
She proceeded to another department of the store and observed a blouse which she considered purchasing for one of her two daughters. She removed the blouse from the rack and entered a dressing room to try it on. She exited shortly thereafter carrying the blouse across her arm. Sutherlin then approached the register at which she had opened her instant charge account as she had been previously instructed. She observed, however, that the register was not attended by a clerk. While waiting for a clerk to arrive, Sutherlin left the area and began to browse among several racks of sweaters near the north door of the store. At this point Sutherlin was approached by Becky Stanifer (Stanifer) and Susan Jones (Jones), undercover security operatives employed by Lazarus who had been monitoring Sutherlin's activity. Stanifer and Jones grabbed Sutherlin, displayed their security badges, and escorted her to the store security office. When Sutherlin was grabbed, the blouse across her arm fell to the floor and one of the pair picked it up and placed it in her shopping bag.
In the security office, Stanifer and Jones emptied Sutherlin's shopping bag as well as her purse. They obtained identification from Sutherlin and determined that she had in her possession three sweaters with Lazarus tags on them, a blouse, and a scarf with a Blocks tag. Throughout the ordeal, Sutherlin proclaimed her innocence explaining that she was waiting for the cash register at which she acquired her instant charge to open in order to purchase the blouse. Sutherlin provided receipts for the items she had purchased and a receipt for the sweater she had exchanged that day. She explained to Stanifer and Jones that she had previously purchased the sweaters in her possession and intended to exchange them but did not have a sales receipt for the items. Stanifer and Jones ignored Sutherlin's protestations of innocence and upon completing a case report on the incident, contacted the Greenwood Police Department.
The police arrived shortly thereafter and handcuffed and transported Sutherlin to the Greenwood Police Department. At the Greenwood Police Department, Sutherlin was strip searched, photographed, and fingerprinted. After completing her processing, Sutherlin was handcuffed and transferred to the Johnson County Jail. At the Johnson County Jail, Sutherlin was again strip searched, fingerprinted, and photographed. She was then placed in a small holding cell until her husband was able to post bond and obtain her release later that day. Lazarus instigated criminal prosecution of the matter and on January 15, 1986, the Johnson County Prosecutor charged Sutherlin with theft. No probable cause hearing was held on the matter, however. Rather, the prosecutor proceeded to prosecute Sutherlin on the basis of the information contained in the Lazarus case report and probable cause affidavit executed by Stanifer.
In pertinent part, the case report provided as follows:
Operatives Susan Jones and Becky Stanifer observed a woman enter the store through the west doors. We observed the woman several times approach a rack of clothes and pick a number of sweaters. She then entered the fitting room where we observed her place the sweaters in her shopping bag. She exited the fitting room where she then proceeded to exit the store through the north doors. Susan and I then approached the woman and asked her to come back to the security office.
Record at 549-50. Similarly, the probable cause affidavit read as follows:
Becky Stanifer swears or affirms that she believes and has good cause to believe that on December 23, 1985, Patricia Ann Sutherlin came to Lazarus at Greenwood and went to several different racks of clothes and picked out merchandise. *518 The woman then went to the junior department where she went into the fitting room. I, Becky Stanifer and Susan Jones, Security Operatives, then observed her placing sweaters in her shopping bag. She then proceeded to exit the store through the north door. At this time we stopped her and asked her to come to the security office. She was identified as Patricia Ann Sutherlin by her driver's license and social security number....
Record at 666. Stanifer's affidavit of probable cause was the only document submitted to the trial court and no independent investigation was conducted concerning the allegations set forth therein.
Although originally charged with theft, a Class D felony, the prosecutor reduced the charge to two counts of conversion, Class A misdemeanors. On November 25, 1986, Sutherlin was tried by a jury and acquitted of the charges. Thereafter, Sutherlin instituted this suit against Lazarus for false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and defamation. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Sutherlin awarding her $300,036.75 compensatory damages, together with punitive damages in the amount of $1,000,000. The jury also awarded compensatory damages to Richard Sutherlin, her husband, in the sum of $7,500. Lazarus subsequently instituted this appeal.
ISSUES
Lazarus raises the following issues for our review:
I. Whether the trial court erred in denying Lazarus's motion for judgment on the evidence.
II. Whether the trial court erred in refusing to give Lazarus's tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4 regarding probable cause.
III. Whether the trial court erred in giving Preliminary Instruction No. 3 and refusing to give Lazarus's tendered preliminary instructions.
IV. Whether the trial court erred in refusing to give Lazarus's tendered Instruction No. 10.
V. Whether the award of compensatory damages is against the evidence and excessive.
VI. Whether the award of punitive damages is supported by clear and convincing evidence.
VII. Whether the award of punitive damages is excessive.
VIII. Whether the award of punitive damages violates the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
ISSUE I: Judgment on the Evidence
At the conclusion of Sutherlin's case-in-chief and again at the close of the evidence, Lazarus moved for a judgment on the evidence pursuant to Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 50. The trial court granted the motion with respect to Sutherlin's defamation claim, but denied it with respect to Sutherlin's claims for malicious prosecution and false imprisonment. Lazarus assigns this as error on appeal.
A judgment on the evidence is appropriate when there is no evidence or legitimate inference to be drawn tending to support at least one of the plaintiff's allegations. Saint Mary's Byzantine Church v. Mantich (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 811. The determination of whether the plaintiff has produced sufficient evidence to support her contentions is made by a two-step analysis of all the direct and circumstantial evidence available. Dettman v. Sumner (1985), Ind. App., 474 N.E.2d 100. The court must first determine whether there is reasonable quantitative evidence to support the plaintiff's allegations. If none exists, the motion should be granted. Id. If there is some evidence, however, the trial court must then determine whether a reasonable inference that the plaintiff's allegations are true can logically be drawn from that evidence. Such inferences may not be based upon undue speculation. Id. When reviewing a ruling upon a T.R. 50 motion, we consider only the evidence and reasonable inferences most favorable to the non-moving party.
*519 In order to succeed on a claim for a malicious prosecution a plaintiff must establish that the defendant instituted or caused to be instituted a prosecution against the plaintiff, that the defendant acted maliciously in doing so, that the prosecution was instituted without probable cause, and that the prosecution terminated in the plaintiff's favor. Johnson County Rural Electric Corp. v. Burnell (1985), Ind. App., 484 N.E.2d 989. False imprisonment is defined as the unlawful detention of a person against his or her will. Delk v. Board of Commissioners of Delaware County (1987), Ind. App., 503 N.E.2d 436. We have stated that it is the probable cause to believe that a specific person had or was committing a theft of a merchant's property which makes a detention lawful. Crase v. Highland Village Value Plus Pharmacy (1978), 176 Ind. App. 47, 374 N.E.2d 58; IND. CODE 35-33-6-2.
As seen, the absence of probable cause is common to Sutherlin's claims for both false imprisonment and malicious prosecution. Probable cause exists where the facts found on reasonable inquiry would induce a reasonably intelligent and prudent person to believe that the accused had committed the crime charged. F.W. Woolworth Co., Inc. v. Anderson (1984), Ind. App., 471 N.E.2d 1249; Satz v. Koplow (1979), Ind. App., 397 N.E.2d 1082. Further, prima facie evidence of theft or conversion exists where there is evidence that a person has concealed property displayed or offered for sale and has removed it beyond a point where payment could be made. See IND. CODE 35-43-4-4(c)(1) and (2).
Quantitatively, Sutherlin's testimony alone provided sufficient evidence to support the allegation that Lazarus lacked probable cause to stop and detain her and initiate criminal prosecution for theft of the sweaters and blouse. She denied that while in the dressing room she placed three sweaters or any other merchandise in her shopping bag. Sutherlin unequivocally testified that she had previously purchased three sweaters and brought them back to the store in order to exchange or return them. She also testified that while shopping in the store, she had the blouse draped over her arm or on top of her shopping bag. Finally, Sutherlin testified that she had not exited the store at the time she was apprehended, but rather was shopping in an area where merchandise was exhibited for sale. This testimony was sufficient to fulfill the quantitative requirement.
The second prong of the test, the qualitative analysis, requires a two-step analysis. In the first instance, the question is whether the witness presenting such evidence was credible. Only in cases where the witness's testimony supporting the burdened party's claim stands uncontroverted in the evidence at the time the motion for judgment on the evidence is filed, is a trial court required to determine the credibility of witnesses as a part of its qualitative failure analysis. Dettman, supra. The motion is to be sustained if the trial court determines such witnesses are incredible. Id.
Sutherlin's testimony supporting the allegation that Lazarus lacked probable cause to believe that she had stolen the sweaters is essentially uncontradicted. The only opposing evidence on this subject was elicited from Stanifer and Jones. Both the Lazarus case report and probable cause affidavit filed by Stanifer recite that Stanifer and Jones observed Sutherlin enter the Lazarus store through the west doors, take sweaters from a rack of clothes, enter a fitting room, place the sweaters in a shopping bag, and exit the store through the north doors. Stanifer and Jones each repeated this version of events at depositions taken on Sutherlin's behalf during the course of this litigation. At trial, however, both Stanifer and Jones admitted that the events recited in the probable cause affidavit and case report were wholly untrue. Rather, they testified that they did not see Sutherlin enter through the west doors, nor did they observe her take sweaters from a rack of clothes, place them in a shopping bag, and exit the store with them. In fact, they admitted that Sutherlin was apprehended inside the store near a rack of clothing. In essence, Stanifer and Jones's evidence corroborated Sutherlin's testimony *520 supporting her allegation that there did not exist a probable cause to believe that she had stolen the sweaters. Sutherlin's claim being uncontroverted, it was for the trial judge to determine whether the witnesses were incredible. There has been no assertion, however, that Sutherlin was an incredible witness, and we presume that Lazarus would not attack the credibility of its own witnesses. This evidence, therefore, gives rise to a reasonable inference supporting Sutherlin's contention that probable cause did not exist to stop and detain her and institute criminal prosecution against her regarding the sweaters.
Lazarus argues, however, that the undisputed facts also establish that Stanifer and Jones observed Sutherlin remove a blouse from a rack of clothing, place it in her shopping bag, and proceed past the last possible place of sale before apprehending her. Lazarus maintains that these undisputed facts were sufficient as a matter of law to give Stanifer and Jones probable cause to believe that Sutherlin was committing a theft justifying the stop and detention and subsequent prosecution.
Initially, we observe that Sutherlin vigorously disputed at trial that she placed the blouse in her shopping bag. Sutherlin acknowledged that she removed a blouse from a rack of clothing and tried it on in the fitting room. She maintained, however, that she had it draped over her arm or over her shopping bag when she was apprehended while browsing among a rack of clothes near an exit. Sutherlin's testimony that she had not concealed the blouse was in direct conflict with Stanifer and Jones's testimony to the contrary. Thus, the trial court could not determine whether Sutherlin was a credible witness. Instead, it was required to proceed directly to the second step of its qualitative failure analysis.
When the evidence at this stage is viewed in the light most favorable to Sutherlin, it is qualitatively sufficient to establish the absence of probable cause. Conspicuously absent from the narrative set forth in the Lazarus case report and the probable cause affidavit filed on behalf of Stanifer and Jones are any factual allegations regarding the white blouse. In fact, in a deposition taken six months after the incident, Jones continued to assert that she saw Sutherlin roll up a sweater and place it in her shopping bag. It was not until trial that Stanifer and Jones testified that they observed Sutherlin conceal a blouse in the shopping bag. This testimony was offered in conjunction with their admissions that they had misrepresented the facts as related to Sutherlin's alleged activity with the sweaters. Further, Stanifer and Jones testified that Sutherlin was apprehended in a permissible shopping area where customers were encouraged to shop. This evidence, when coupled with Sutherlin's testimony, gives rise to a reasonable inference supporting Sutherlin's contention that Lazarus lacked probable cause to stop and detain and thereafter institute criminal prosecution against Sutherlin for theft of the blouse.
Lazarus also relies on the Johnson County Prosecutor's decision to file criminal charges as a complete defense to Sutherlin's claim for malicious prosecution. It is true that a judicial determination of probable cause in a criminal proceeding may constitute prima facie evidence of probable cause in a subsequent action for malicious prosecution. See Johnson County Rural Electric Membership Corp., supra. However, the prima facie case may be rebutted by evidence that shows the finding of probable cause was induced by false testimony or fraud. K-Mart Corp. v. Brzezinski (1989), Ind. App., 540 N.E.2d 1276. As previously discussed, both Stanifer and Jones admitted at trial that the information provided the prosecutor and court through the probable cause affidavit and the Lazarus case report was completely false. Although the Johnson County Prosecutor refiled the charge reducing it to two counts of misdemeanor conversion, the amended charging information and probable cause affidavit still recited in part the allegations that Stanifer and Jones admitted were false. Thus, the actions of the Johnson County Prosecutor do not provide Lazarus any form of immunity from Sutherlin's claim for malicious prosecution. *521 The trial court did not err in denying Lazarus's motion for judgment on the evidence and permitting to go to the jury the issue of probable cause.
ISSUE II: Instructions Regarding Probable Cause
Lazarus contends that the trial court erred in refusing to give to the jury its tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4 regarding probable cause. Tendered Instruction No. 3 read as follows:
If you find that at the time Mrs. Sutherlin was stopped by Lazarus security that a reasonable person could have concluded that the sweaters in Mrs. Sutherlin's shopping bag probably belonged to Lazarus and probably had not been purchased by Mrs. Sutherlin, such finding would constitute probable cause to stop and detain Mrs. Sutherlin, or
If you find that a reasonable person could have concluded that Mrs. Sutherlin had concealed or was attempting to conceal the blouse, then such evidence would constitute probable cause to stop and detain her, or
If you find that a reasonable person could have concluded that Mrs. Sutherlin was attempting to leave the store at the time she was stopped, such event would constitute probable cause to stop and detain her.
Record at 135. Tendered Instruction No. 4 read as follows:
If you find that at the time charges were filed against Mrs. Sutherlin a reasonable person could have concluded that the sweaters in Mrs. Sutherlin's shopping bag probably belonged to Lazarus and probably had not been purchased by Mrs. Sutherlin, such a finding would constitute probable cause to initiate the prosecution for the theft of the sweaters.
If you find that at the time charges were filed against Mrs. Sutherlin a reasonable person could have concluded that she had concealed or was attempting to conceal the blouse or if you find that a reasonable person could have concluded that Mrs. Sutherlin was attempting to leave the store, then such evidence would constitute probable
Record at 136.
Lazarus argues that where the underlying facts are in dispute, the trial court is required to instruct the jury as to which set of facts, if believed, would or would not establish probable cause. It asserts that the trial court's failure to do so improperly delegated to the jury the function of determining whether probable cause existed as a question of fact when such is a question of law properly determined by the trial court.
The standard of reviewing a trial court's refusal to give a tendered instruction is well settled. This court considers whether the instruction is a correct statement of the law, whether there is evidence supporting the giving of the instruction, and whether the substance of the instruction is covered by other instructions actually given. Parke County v. Ropak, Inc. (1988), Ind. App., 526 N.E.2d 732; Brokers, Inc. v. White (1987), Ind. App., 513 N.E.2d 200. Furthermore, it is not error to refuse an instruction which does not fully and accurately state the law and would tend to mislead or confuse the jury. Public Service Indiana, Inc. v. Nichols (1986), Ind. App., 494 N.E.2d 349; Foster v. United Home Imp. Co. (1981), Ind. App., 428 N.E.2d 1351.
The trial court properly refused to give Lazarus's tendered instructions for several reasons. The instructions improperly set forth the law regarding the establishment of probable cause. This court defined probable cause in F.W. Woolworth, supra. There, we stated that probable cause exists where the facts found on reasonable inquiry would induce a reasonably intelligent and prudent person to believe that the accused had committed the crime charged. In both Instructions No. 3 and 4, however, the word "probably" is improperly inserted before the operative language necessary for the establishment of probable cause. As noted above, the proper inquiry is whether the accused "had" committed the crime charged, not whether the accused had "probably" committed the crime.
*522 Likewise, the inclusion of the term in both tendered instructions deviated from the language and case law interpreting the Shoplifting Detention Act, IND. CODE 35-33-6-1 to 5, upon which Lazarus based its defense. IND. CODE 35-33-6-2(a) provides in pertinent part:
An owner or agent of a store who has probable cause to believe that a theft has occurred or is occurring on or about the store and who has probable cause to believe that a specific person has committed or is committing the theft may:
* * * * * *
In Crase, supra, we held that the protections afforded under the Shoplifting Detention Act are not extended unless "there is probable cause to believe both that a theft has occurred or is occurring on or about the merchantile establishment and that a specific person has committed or is committing the theft." 176 Ind. App. at 51-52, 374 N.E.2d at 62. Once more, the qualifying phrase "probably" was improperly inserted before the two operative elements necessary to establish probable cause. Thus, the use of a qualifying term in both Instructions No. 3 and 4 was a misstatement of the law or at the very least, would tend to mislead and confuse the jury.
The tendered instructions were also defective in another respect. Tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4 set forth several scenarios upon which probable cause could be premised. Each scenario is independent of the others, allowing probable cause to be established if the jury concludes that the facts of any one scenario are present. The factual scenarios in tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4 are then linked together by the use of the conjunctive word "or". Specifically, paragraph three of tendered Instruction No. 3 would instruct the jury that it is the law in Indiana that there can be probable cause for stopping any person exiting a store, regardless of whether the person exiting the store has in her possession merchandise from the store. This is certainly not the law in Indiana. This defect is also present in tendered Instruction No. 4. Where a requested charge contains several propositions, one or more of which are incorrect, the trial court may refuse the entire request since it must be refused or given as a whole. State Farm Mutual Auto Insurance Co. v. Shuman (1977), 175 Ind. App. 186, 370 N.E.2d 941, trans. denied.
Moreover, the giving of these instructions was not supported by the evidence. Both Instructions No. 3 and 4 allowed the jury to determine probable cause existed on the basis of the sweaters contained in Sutherlin's shopping bag. The undisputed evidence established, however, that Sutherlin purchased the sweaters from Lazarus during a prior shopping visit. Stanifer and Jones acknowledged that they never observed Sutherlin remove any sweaters from a rack of clothes or attempt to conceal them in any manner in her shopping bag. They admitted further, that any statements they had previously made to the contrary were wholly untrue. Rather, they testified that their sole basis for suspecting Sutherlin of theft involved her conduct with the blouse. Thus, to the extent Instructions No. 3 and 4 permitted the jury to find the existence of probable cause on the basis of the sweaters contained in Sutherlin's shopping bag, they were not supported by the evidence.
Finally, the substance of the refused instructions was covered by other instructions given by the trial court. Instructions No. 3 and 4 instructed the jury about the existence of probable cause. The only point of divergence between the two instructions is the time at which the inquiry into the existence of probable cause occurs. In tendered Instruction No. 3, the inquiry is at the time Sutherlin was stopped in the store, while in tendered Instruction No. 4 the inquiry is at the time the charges were filed. In reviewing Instructions 7, 8, and 12 given by the trial court, it is readily apparent that such adequately covered the theory of Lazarus's case as embodied in tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4.
The trial court's Instruction No. 12 defined the term probable cause for the jury. Further, Instruction No. 12 informed the jury that if it found the existence of probable cause, such finding would constitute a *523 defense to Sutherlin's claim. The trial court's Instruction No. 8 instructed the jury on the Shoplifting Detention Act. It advised the jury that the Shoplifting Detention Act specifically authorizes the detention of an individual who is believed to be in possession of unpurchased merchandise where the storeowner or its agent has probable cause to believe that a theft has occurred or is occurring. Additionally, the trial court gave an instruction denoted as Defendant's Instruction No. 7 which outlined evidence from which the elements of theft or shoplifting may be presumed. This instruction charged the jury that theft or shoplifting could be presumed where a person conceals property displayed or offered for sale and removes the property within the business premises to a point beyond that at which payment should be made. These instructions fully encompass the fundamental elements of Lazarus's tendered Instructions No. 3 and 4. The trial court did not err in refusing to give Lazarus's tendered instructions on the issue of probable cause.
ISSUE III: Preliminary Instructions
Lazarus next argues that the trial court erred in giving the jury Preliminary Instruction No. 3 and refusing to give its tendered preliminary instructions. Instruction No. 3 instructed the jury as to each party's respective burden of proof. It read as follows:
The plaintiffs have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence, the material allegations of their complaint.
When I say that a party has the "burden of proof" on any issue or use the expression, "if you find from a preponderance of the evidence", I mean that you must be convinced from a consideration of all the evidence in the case that the issue which a party has the burden of proving is more probably true than not true.
The defendant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence its defense of probable cause.
Record at 523.
Lazarus takes exception to the last sentence of this instruction because it allegedly misled the jury into believing that Lazarus alone carried the burden of proving the existence of probable cause as to both Sutherlin's claims for false arrest and malicious prosecution. It points out that Lazarus only had the burden of proving that it acted with probable cause as to Sutherlin's false arrest claim, whereas Sutherlin had the burden of proving that no probable cause existed with regard to her malicious prosecution claim. It contends that the trial court was required to further instruct the jury on the elements of malicious prosecution and the statutory elements of a stop and detention as were set forth in its tendered preliminary instruction which the trial court refused to give.
Initially, we note that Preliminary Instruction No. 3 was not an incorrect statement of the law, particularly when read together with the other preliminary instructions given by the trial court. That instruction was given directly after the trial court generally informed the jury as to the material allegations set forth in Sutherlin's complaint and the defense asserted by Lazarus. Specifically, the trial court instructed the jury that Lazarus asserted as a defense that it acted with probable cause in detaining Sutherlin. Along these lines, Preliminary Instruction No. 3 correctly stated that Sutherlin had the burden of proving the material allegations contained in her complaint. It also informed the jury that Lazarus bore the burden of proving its affirmative defense of probable cause. It cannot be disputed that the party asserting an affirmative defense bears the burden of proving such. To have instructed the jury regarding Sutherlin's burden of proof as to the allegations raised in her complaint without setting forth Lazarus's burden of proof on its affirmative defense would have been improper.
Although we hold that Preliminary Instruction No. 3 was a correct statement of the law, we acknowledge that it may have misled the jury. The confusion arises because probable cause was an integral element of both Sutherlin's claim for malicious prosecution as well as Lazarus's defense *524 to her claim for false arrest. To the extent such instruction misled the jury, however, any confusion was cured when as a part of its final instructions the trial court outlined in detail and at length the essential elements of a claim for malicious prosecution and explained that Sutherlin bore the burden of proving the absence of probable cause in order to prevail on her claim. The trial court's final instructions also advised the jury of the essential elements of a claim for false arrest and the statutory provisions providing the defense of probable cause to such a claim. It specifically instructed the jury that Lazarus only bore the burden of proving the existence of probable cause in order to succeed on its defense as to Sutherlin's claim for false arrest. In fact, the trial court's final instructions covered in total the substance of those preliminary instructions Lazarus previously submitted. The trial court did not err in giving to the jury Preliminary Instruction No. 3 and refusing to give those preliminary instructions submitted by Lazarus.
ISSUE IV: Instruction No. 10 Regarding Punitive Damages
Lazarus also argues that the trial court erred in refusing to give its tendered Instruction No. 10 regarding an award of punitive damages. Tendered Instruction No. 10 read as follows:
Plaintiff is seeking punitive damages based on the alleged malicious and intentional acts of defendant. In order to award punitive damages, you must find by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant's actions were done with malice, fraud, gross negligence, or oppressiveness, and were not merely the result of mistake of fact or law or honest error of judgment, overzealousness, mere negligence or other human failing.
Record at 142. Lazarus argues that this instruction was a correct statement of the law and was not covered by any other instructions.
We agree that Lazarus's tendered Instruction No. 10 was a correct statement of the law. See Bud Wolf Chevrolet, Inc. v. Robertson (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 135. We disagree that the substance of the instruction was not covered by others given by the trial court, however. Final Instructions No. 15 and 17 contain the trial court's charge to the jury on the issue of punitive damages. Those instructions read as follows:
If you find for the Plaintiff, Patricia Sutherlin, and against the Defendant with respect to any or all of her claims and award her compensatory damages, you must then determine whether or not to award Plaintiff punitive damages against the Defendant.
In order to award punitive damages against the Defendant, the Plaintiff must have proven by a clear and convincing evidence that the Defendant in falsely imprisoning her or maliciously prosecuting her acted with malice, oppression or was guilty of willful and wanton misconduct or gross negligence.
The phrase "clear and convincing evidence" denotes a degree of belief that lies between a preponderance of the evidence and beyond a reasonable doubt which is required to find guilty in criminal prosecutions. The burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence is not a burden of convincing you that the facts which are asserted are certainly true or that they are almost certainly true or are true beyond a reasonable doubt. It is, however, greater than a burden of convincing you that the facts are more probably true than not true.
The burden imposed on Plaintiff to prove her entitlement to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence is to convince you that the facts asserted are highly probably true or that the probability that they are true or exist is substantially greater than the probability that they are false or do not exist. If then you believe upon a consideration and comparison of all the evidence in the case that there is a high degree of probability that such facts are true, you must then find that the fact or facts have been proved by clear and convincing evidence.
If you find from a consideration of all the evidence that the Plaintiff is entitled *525 to recover punitive damages against the Defendant, then you may award the Plaintiff an additional amount of money, as you may determine in your sound discretion to be appropriate, to punish the Defendant and to deter others from like conduct. You should bear in mind not only the conditions under which the purposes for which the law permits an award of punitive damages to be made but also the requirement of the law that the amount of such punitive damages, if awarded, must be fixed with calm discretion and reasoning and must never be awarded in any amount because of any sympathy, bias or prejudice with respect to any party in the case.
Record at 1498. Instruction No. 15 read as follows:
You are instructed that the following terms used in these instructions with regard to the issue of punitive damages have the following meanings:
MALICE: A wrongful act intentionally done without legal justification or excuse with an intent to inflict injury.
OPPRESSION: An act of domination by which one subjects another to a cruel and unjust hardship.
WILLFUL AND WANTON MISCONDUCT: A course of action which shows an actual or deliberate intention to cause injury or which, under existing conditions, shows either an utter difference or conscious disregard for the rights of others.
GROSS NEGLIGENCE: The intentional failure to perform a manifest duty in reckless disregard of the consequences as affecting the life or property of another; such a gross want of care and regard for the rights of others as to justify the presumption of willfulness and wantonness.
Record at 1493-94.
Lazarus concedes that the trial court issued Final Instruction No. 17 on the issue of punitive damages, but asserts that such covered only a portion of its tendered instruction. Specifically it claims that Final Instruction No. 17 did not explain that punitive damages cannot be awarded merely based on "the result of mistake of fact or law or honest error of judgment, overzealousness, mere negligence, or other human failing."
This court has repeatedly stated that not all applicable law must be included in a single instruction. Palmer v. Decker (1970), 253 Ind. 593, 255 N.E.2d 797; F.W. Woolworth, supra; Grad v. Cross (1979), 182 Ind. App. 611, 395 N.E.2d 870. Rather, we look to the instructions as a whole to determine whether the jury was properly instructed. Id. A review of the instructions reveals that Final Instructions No. 15 and 17 exhaustively conveyed to the jury the law in Indiana concerning punitive damages. They provided by far a more and complete comprehensive set of instructions on the issue than that set forth in Lazarus's tendered Instruction No. 10. Final Instruction No. 17 provided an expansive discussion of the burden of proof by which Sutherlin had to establish her entitlement to punitive damages. It also described for the jury the circumstances under which an award of punitive damages was appropriate. Final Instruction No. 15 set forth the definition of the several terms utilized in Final Instruction No. 17 to advise the jury as to when punitive damages may be awarded. While the precise words in Lazarus's tendered Instruction No. 10 advising when punitive damages were appropriate were not contained in the trial court's charge to the jury, Final Instructions No. 15 and 17 more than adequately informed the jury that such could not be awarded merely on the basis of negligent or overzealous conduct. The trial court did not err in refusing to give Lazarus's tendered Instruction No. 10.
ISSUE V: Compensatory Damages
The jury awarded verdicts for compensatory damages in the sum of $300,036.75 to Patricia, and $7,500 to her husband, Richard. Lazarus asserts that these awards were excessive and not supported by sufficient evidence.
This court recently addressed our strict standard of reviewing appeals predicated upon a claim that an award of damages was excessive. A verdict will *526 only be reversed when it is apparent from a review of the evidence concerning the injuries that the amount of damages assessed by the jury is so great as to indicate that the jury was motivated by prejudice, passion, partiality, or corruption, or considered some improper element. Baker v. Champion Motor Home Company, Inc. (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 144. We will not deem the damages to be the result of improper considerations unless the amount of the award cannot be explained on any reasonable ground. Burris v. Riester (1987), Ind. App., 506 N.E.2d 484. Further, when reviewing such a claim we will not reweigh the evidence, but will look only to the evidence and the reasonable inferences therefrom which uphold the verdict. Id.
Both Lazarus and Sutherlin acknowledge that the damages awarded Patricia were in respect of the fright, humiliation, embarrassment, and mental anguish she suffered as a result of the false arrest and malicious prosecution. Lazarus concedes that these are proper considerations for a jury determining an award of damages in an action of this nature. See F.W. Woolworth, supra. We further observe that a jury is afforded even greater latitude in determining these kinds of damages than that discretion traditionally granted juries in assessing damage awards. In order to support an award for mental anguish, however, there must be evidence that the plaintiff experienced some physical or psychological manifestation of emotional distress. Groves v. First National Bank of Valparaiso (1988), Ind. App., 518 N.E.2d 819 (citing Ramsey v. American Air Filter Co., Inc. (7th Cir.1985), 772 F.2d 1303 (jury award for mental anguish resulting from racially motivated dismissal reversed as unsupported by the evidence where there was an absence of any evidence that plaintiff was treated for emotional harm or became depressed for any substantial period of time); Moffett v. Gene B. Glick Company (M.D.Ind. 1985), 621 F. Supp. 244 (award of $50,000 for mental anguish held not excessive where plaintiff demonstrated a variety of adverse psychological and physical manifestations of emotional distress including loss of appetite, sleep disorder, and a stormy home life); Dykes v. Peabody Shoreline Geophysical and Transportation Co. (1985), La. App. 482 So. 2d 662 (award for mental anguish reduced where plaintiff failed to introduce any evidence establishing the extent of her mental anguish)).
In the case at bar, Sutherlin was arrested and incarcerated just two days prior to Christmas. Upon her arrest, Sutherlin was handcuffed and transported to the Greenwood Police Department where she was fingerprinted, photographed, and subjected to a strip search. She was thereafter transferred to the Johnson County Jail where she was again subjected to another strip search. Sutherlin testified that the strip searches to which she was subjected were extremely humiliating and embarrassing. She testified further that following her arrest and incarceration, it was extremely difficult to enjoy life with her family with the prospect of future criminal prosecution, over which she was helpless to exert any control, ahead. She worried continuously during the 11 months criminal charges were pending against her, fearing the loss of her liberty and her children.
Dr. Stephen Stewart, a clinical psychologist, also testified as to the trauma Sutherlin suffered. He explained that as a result of the incident Sutherlin experienced a moderately severe traumatic response. Immediately following the incident, Sutherlin was unable to maintain her daily routine as she had previously. During the several weeks immediately subsequent to her arrest and incarceration, Sutherlin also displayed physical manifestations of her trauma. Stewart described that Sutherlin experienced sleep disturbances, disruption of routine, isolation from usual social functions, and increased feelings of mistrust. Stewart indicated that Sutherlin's humiliation and feelings of powerlessness were exacerbated by the fact that she was subjected to not one but two strip searches. In concluding, Stewart observed that as of the date of trial, Sutherlin was still recovering from the psychologically debilitating condition caused by her arrest, strip search, incarceration, and prosecution.
*527 In light of the evidence of her physical and psychological manifestation of mental anguish, we cannot conclude that the $300,036.75 award to Sutherlin was so high as to demonstrate passion or prejudice on the part of the jury. The award of damages to Sutherlin was supported by sufficient evidence.
There were also reasonable grounds for upholding the award of compensatory damages to Richard. Richard testified that as a result of her arrest, Patricia became withdrawn from him and the family. He had to begin taking over duties which she had previously done in her normal daily routine. Although they celebrated Christmas for the sake of their children, the holidays were a somber occasion. Patricia also became incapable of helping keep books and perform many other duties for the family business as she had previously. Richard explained that the entire experience, from the point of her arrest through criminal prosecution, was unnerving. This testimony is sufficient to support the amount of compensatory damages awarded Richard.
ISSUE VI: Evidence of Punitive Damages
Lazarus contends that there did not exist clear and convincing evidence of malice or willful or wanton behavior on its part to justify submission of the issue of punitive damages to the jury.
Indiana's standard for punitive damage awards places a heavy burden on the plaintiff. To justify an award of punitive damages, there must be clear and convincing evidence which overcomes the presumption that the defendant's conduct was merely negligent or the result of some honest error. A.B.C. Home and Real Estate Inspec., Inc. v. Plummer (1986), Ind. App., 500 N.E.2d 1257. Rather, punitive damages are recoverable only upon clear and convincing evidence that the defendant acted with malice, fraud, gross negligence, or oppression which was not the result of mistake of law or fact, honest error of judgment, overzealousness, mere negligence or other human failing. Bud Wolf Chevrolet, Inc., supra; Travelers Indemnity Co. v. Armstrong (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 349. Clear and convincing evidence is defined as an intermediate standard of proof greater than a preponderance of the evidence and less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt. It requires the existence of a fact to be highly probable. Orkin Exterminating Co., Inc. v. Traina (1986), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 1019. The defendant is cloaked with rebuttable presumption that his actions, though perhaps tortious, were nevertheless noniniquitous human failings. Id.
Punitive damages are not compensatory in nature but are designed to penalize or punish the wrongdoer and dissuade him and others from similar conduct in the future. Carroll v. Statesman Insurance Co. (1987), Ind., 509 N.E.2d 825. They are awarded in addition to the compensatory awards for a financial loss, pain, suffering, and other considerations. Orkin, supra. Thus, the sole issue when considering punitive damages is whether or not the defendant's conduct was so obdurate that he should be punished for the benefit of the general public. Id.
The punitive damages awarded in the case at bar were supported by clear and convincing evidence. Malice may be inferred from the institution of criminal prosecution without probable cause. See F.W. Woolworth Co., supra. As indicated above, there was a wealth of evidence demonstrating that probable cause did not exist to stop and detain Sutherlin or justify the institution of criminal prosecution against her. Sutherlin entered the Lazarus door with previously purchased sweaters in her shopping bag in order to exchange or return them. She never removed them during that visit from a rack of clothes or attempt to conceal them in her shopping bag while in the dressing room. Significantly, Stanifer and Jones admitted at trial that the recitation of events set forth in the Lazarus case report and probable cause affidavit as regarding Sutherlin's alleged conduct with the sweaters was wholly untrue. Rather, they admitted that they did not observe Sutherlin conceal any sweaters or attempt to leave the store with them.
*528 Sutherlin testified that she left the fitting room with the blouse draped over her arm and was apprehended while browsing among a rack of clothes. She proceeded beyond the register at which she was informed to charge additional purchases because it was closed. Stanifer and Jones acknowledged that they apprehended Sutherlin in an area where customers were encouraged to shop and that Sutherlin was not attempting to leave the store. Furthermore, the evidence demonstrated that immediately prior to Sutherlin's apprehension, Stanifer and Jones had met with Lazarus's corporate manager of security at approximately 1:00 p.m. that afternoon. Stanifer testified that she and Jones wanted to effectuate an arrest while he was present. As they left the 1:00 p.m. meeting, Jones told Stanifer, "Let's get something going" and "stir something up." Record at 776, 832-33. Sutherlin's arrest followed shortly thereafter at approximately 1:30 p.m. Sutherlin met her burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that Lazarus acted with malice, fraud, gross negligence, or oppression which was not the result of honest error of judgement, or overzealousness, or mere negligence. Punitive damages were properly imposed.
ISSUE VII: Excessiveness of Punitive Damages
Notwithstanding our determination that there existed clear and convincing evidence supporting the imposition of an award of punitive damages, Lazarus argues that the $1,000,000 awarded here were excessive. Lazarus contends that the magnitude of the punitive damage award is in no way consistent with the nature of its conduct in the case at bar.
We cannot agree with Lazarus's contention, particularly in light of the clear and convincing evidence indicating that it acted without probable cause. Stanifer and Jones admitted that they misrepresented the facts which they initially recited as giving rise to their suspicion of Sutherlin. This evidence and the other testimony outlined above more than adequately supports the $1,000,000 punitive damage award rendered in favor of Sutherlin.
Lazarus also points out, however, that $150,000 is the highest punitive damage award affirmed on appeal, and when viewed in this context, the $1,000,000 award here is outrageous. In the case at bar, the punitive damage award is approximately 3.4 times larger than the compensatory damage award. While there is no rule in Indiana requiring that the amount of punitive damages must be within a certain ratio to the compensatory damages, this factor is evidence of the reasonableness of a punitive damage award.[1]See Bud Wolf Chevrolet, Inc., supra. In Bud Wolf, this court affirmed an award of punitive damages that was more than 20 times greater than the compensatory damages awarded. Moreover, the United States Supreme Court recently upheld substantial punitive damage awards against corporations where the compensatory damages were far less than those awarded in the case at bar. In Browning-Ferris Industries of Vermont, Inc. v. Kleco Disposal, Inc. (1989), ___ U.S. ___, 109 S. Ct. 2909, 106 L. Ed. 2d 219, the Supreme Court upheld a $6,000,000 punitive damage award based upon a compensatory damage award of $51,146. Similarly, in Bankers Life and Casualty Co. v. Crenshaw (1988), 486 U.S. 71, 108 S. Ct. 1645, 100 L. Ed. 2d 62, the Court upheld an award of $20,000 in compensatory damages and $1,600,000 in punitive damages. In light of this precedent and given the nature of Lazarus's conduct, we cannot conclude that the punitive damages awarded by the jury were excessive.
ISSUE VIII: Constitutionality of Punitive Damages
In the alternative, Lazarus argues that the imposition of punitive damages in the amount of $1,000,000 violates both the eighth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, § 16 of the Indiana Constitution prohibiting excessive fines.[2]*529 Specifically, Lazarus contends that the award of punitive damages violates the principle of proportionality underlying the eighth amendment.
We observe that the United States Supreme Court recently rejected the eighth amendment argument. In Browning-Ferris, supra, the Supreme Court held that punitive damages awarded in civil cases do not violate the excessive fines clause of the eighth amendment. In response to the defendant's argument that the $6,000,000 punitive damage award was disproportionate to the jury's compensatory damage award, the Supreme Court stated:
We face here the questions whether the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment applies to a civil-jury award of punitive or exemplary damages, and, if so, whether an award of $6,000,000 was excessive in this particular case. This Court has never held, or even intimated, that the Eighth Amendment serves as a check on the power of the jury to award damages in a civil case. Rather, our concerns in applying the Eighth Amendment have been with criminal process, and with a direct action initiated by government to inflict punishment.
Id. at ___, 109 S.Ct. at 2912 (footnote omitted). The Supreme Court concluded holding:
Awards of punitive damages do not implicate these concerns. We therefore hold, on the basis of the history and purpose of the Eighth Amendment, that its Excessive Fines Clause does not apply to the awards of punitive damages between private parties.
Id.
Lazarus acknowledges this holding, but argues that such is not determinative of the question whether the punitive damages awarded violates the Indiana Constitution. Although this court invites arguments distinguishing the applicability of similar federal and state constitutional provisions, Lazarus presents to us nothing more than the bald assertion that "nothing prevents the state from providing more protection than the federal constitution. Reply Brief at 28.[3] Nevertheless, we find the reasoning advanced in Browning-Ferris, supra, persuasive and hold that an award of punitive damages in a civil case does not implicate the excessive fine provision of the Indiana Constitution.
Lazarus also contends that the punitive damage award violates the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution.
Lazarus's argument regarding the fourteenth amendment, to the extent understood, cannot be embraced. Lazarus develops no argument explaining how the award of punitive damages here denied any rights extended to them under the fourteenth amendment. It only baldly asserts that the proceedings below were fundamentally unfair as demonstrated by the trial court's refusal to give its Preliminary Instructions and tendered Instructions No. 3, 4, and 10. As held above, however, the trial court committed no error in refusing to give these instructions. More importantly, punitive damages have long been recognized as comporting with the Fundamental Fairness Doctrine of the due process clause. Missouri Pacific and R. Co. v. Humes (1885), 115 U.S. 512, 6 S. Ct. 110, 29 L. Ed. 463. It is true, as Lazarus points out, that Justice O'Connor recently commented in a recent opinion about punitive damages and due process protections. See Bankers Life, supra. However, the Supreme Court in that case and in a subsequent decision explicitly refused to consider the question. See Browning-Ferris supra. Thus, we cannot conclude that the punitive damage award *530 here violated the fourteenth amendment of the United States Constitution.
In its reply brief Lazarus also asserts that article I, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution provides for due process of law.[4] Lazarus, however, develops no further argument whatsoever regarding this contention. We note parenthetically that although traditionally thought of as a simple due process provision, § 12 in fact provides greater protection guaranteeing that all courts shall be open and that every person shall have a remedy. See Shepard, Second Wind for the Indiana Bill of Rights, 22 Ind.L.Rev. 575, 581-82 (1989); State ex rel. Board of County Commissioners v. Laramore (1911), 175 Ind. 478, 94 N.E. 761. In any event, Lazarus makes no indication how it has been denied any rights extended under this provision.
Accordingly, for the above reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
ROBERTSON and STATON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We observe that the Indiana legislature has authorized the award of treble damages. See IND. CODE 34-4-20-1.
[2]  Art. 1 § 16 provides: "Excessive bail shall not be required. Excessive fines shall not be imposed. Cruel and unusual punishments shall not be inflicted. All penalties shall be proportioned to the nature of the offense."
[3]  Thus, Lazarus has waived consideration of this issue for failing to present cogent argument or citation to any pertinent authority as required by Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellant Rule 8.3(A)(7). Willsey v. Peoples Fed. Sav. & Loan (1988), Ind. App., 529 N.E.2d 1199, trans. denied.
[4]  Art. 1 § 12 provides: "All courts shall be open; and every person, for injury done to him in his person, property, or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of law. Justice shall be administered freely, and without purchase; completely, and without denial; speedily, and without delay.

=== CASE 2220094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.38271+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 564 (1989)
Kristen S. SAUZER-JOHNSEN, Respondent-Appellant,
v.
Frank J. SAUZER, Jr., Petitioner-Appellee.
No. 64A03-8808-CV-262.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
October 12, 1989.
Rehearing Denied February 20, 1990.
*565 Kenneth D. Reed, Abrahamson, Reed, Adley & Enslen, Hammond, for respondent-appellant.
Max Cohen, Cohen and Thiros, Peter L. Benjamin, Merrillville, for petitioner-appellee.
GARRARD, Presiding Judge.
This case is an appeal from the order of the Commissioner of the Porter County Superior Court setting aside the property settlement agreement executed by Frank J. Sauzer, Jr., appellee-petitioner (hereinafter Frank) and Kristen S. Sauzer-Johnsen, appellant (hereinafter Kristen).
Kristen asks us to decide three issues:
1. Whether the trial court's order setting aside the property settlement agreement was a final, appealable order.
2. Whether the trial court erred in admitting polygraph examinations into evidence.
3. Whether the commissioner had proper jurisdiction and authority to preside over the trial below.
We affirm the order of the Porter County Superior Court.
FACTS
Frank and Kristen were married on November 29, 1969. Their marriage began to deteriorate in 1981. Kristen began seeing *566 Bernard Johnsen, a police officer and self-described karate expert. She invited Johnsen to the couple's residence on numerous occasions. On one occasion, Johnsen allegedly performed a karate demonstration on Frank by knocking a knife from Frank's hand and told him, "Blink and you will die in the dark." Despite Frank's protest, Kristen again invited Johnsen to their residence in September, 1982. On this occasion Johnsen allegedly threatened to kill Frank if he did not give Kristen what she wanted in the property settlement. Johnsen told Frank he carried a "drop gun" that he could use in the event he killed someone without justification. Kristen told Frank that Johnsen was her "muscle," her "pet cop" who would "get him" if Frank did not give her all the property she demanded.
In May, 1983, Kristen allegedly ordered Frank to use attorney Nick Anast to file the dissolution papers and threatened that Johnsen would "get him" if Frank didn't comply. Frank had never retained Anast before that time. Anast arrived at Frank's place of business with dissolution papers prepared for his signature. No discovery or appraisals were used. The threats to Frank continued after the dissolution papers were filed. In August, 1983, Kristen presented a typewritten document purporting to be a property settlement agreement to Frank and "ordered" him to copy it into his own handwriting, to make it appear that the document was Frank's idea.
On October 11, 1983, a final dissolution hearing was held and the custody, support and property settlement agreement was incorporated into the dissolution decree. The property settlement agreement provided that Frank would pay Kristen $33,000 per year, tax-free, for the remainder of her life; $70,000 by August, 1984; and $300,000 by October, 1985. Frank contends that the present value of the property to be given Kristen was $721,500 at an 8% discount rate, and that his net worth on May 18, 1983, was $473,962 (Appellee's Brief, pp. 18-19).
The threats allegedly continued after the decree. On March 13, 1985, Kristen sought to enforce the decree by petition for citation and asserted inter alia that Frank was in arrears $2,842.34 in child support. On March 18, 1985, Frank filed a petition for relief from judgment, alleging that he had been coerced into entering into the property settlement agreement, that it was impossible to perform his part of the agreement, and that the terms of the agreement were so unconscionable and grossly inequitable as to render Frank's performance impossible and manifestly unfair. Kristen moved to dismiss on the ground that Frank's motion was barred by the one-year limitation of TR 60(B). The trial court denied her motion, holding that allegations of undue influence, coercion and duress come within the purview of IC 31-1-11.5-17(a). On May 27, 1988, after a bench trial before the Porter County Court Commissioner, the court entered an order setting aside the property settlement agreement as the product of an involuntary and non-free will act of Frank Sauzer. Kristen's motion to correct errors was denied.
DISCUSSION
I.
Whether the trial court's order setting aside the property settlement agreement was a final judgment from which an appeal can be taken.
Frank contends that the order setting aside the property settlement agreement was an interlocutory order, requiring trial court certification pursuant to Appellate Rule 4(B)(6) in order to appeal. He contends that the petition to revoke the property disposition sufficiently alleged fraud so as to come within the exception to IC 31-1-11.5-17, amended by Acts 1987, P.L. 289, § 1, which states:
"The orders as to property disposition ... may not be revoked or modified, except in the case of fraud which ground shall be asserted within two (2) years of said order." (emphasis added)
IC 31-1-11.5-17(a). Such an order would not be a final order. A final order or judgment:
*567 ... must be one which finally determines the rights of the parties involved; or if it does not, it is still appealable if it disposes of a distinct and definite branch of the proceedings, leaving no further question for future determination by the Court as to that particular issue. [citation omitted].
Geib v. Estate of Geib (1979), 182 Ind. App. 377, 378-79, 395 N.E.2d 336, 337. The trial court's order would ordinarily not be final because it did not redistribute the property. See Marianos v. Marianos (1982), Ind. App., 431 N.E.2d 530; Soil v. Soil (1936), 102 Ind. App. 112, 1 N.E.2d 311. Because it has not been certified for appeal by the trial court, this court could dismiss the appeal.[1]
Kristen contends the order was final because Frank's petition did not allege fraud. If Frank did not allege fraud sufficiently to put his petition within the scope of IC 31-1-11.5-17(a), his petition to set aside the property settlement was a motion for relief from judgment under TR 60(B)(3). A ruling denying or granting a motion under TR 60(B) is a final appealable order. TR 60(C).
Resolution of this question depends upon our resolving the question of whether Frank's petition alleging that he was coerced into agreeing to the property disposition also sufficiently alleges fraud for purposes of IC 31-1-11.5-17(a).
Count I of Frank's petition for relief from judgment alleged in pertinent part:
5. That the Petitioner ... was coerced and threatened into executing said `Custody, Support and Property Settlement Agreement' and consequently did not execute said document of his own free will or volition.
* * * * * *
7. That on numerous occasions during the separation of the parties hereto and immediately prior to the execution of said `Agreements' and entry of the Dissolution Decree, Petitioner was threatened and placed in fear of serious bodily harm and in fear for his life by one Bernie Johnsen, Respondent Kristen Sauzer's present husband, [a police officer] ... who is accomplished in the art and practice of karate and has a history of violence, all of which has been known to Petitioner at all times relevant hereto, which threats he believed would be carried out if he did not execute said Agreements... .
8. That Petitioner was further threatened and placed in fear for his life, and physical safety by Respondent, Kristen Sauzer, during the parties' separation and immediately prior to their dissolution of marriage and execution of [the agreements]... .
9... . [T]hat as a result of said threats, the Petitioner was coerced into executing the Custody, Support, and Property Settlement Agreement... .
10. That said acts of coercion and duress on the part of Bernie Johnsen and Kristen Sauzer have continued through the present time and Petitioner has, up until this present time, been placed under extreme duress by said persons not to contest or in any way attempt to alter, modify or set aside said Custody, Support and Property Settlement Agreement and the attendant Dissolution Decree and Consultant Agreement.
Transcript, Vol. I, pp. 29-32. Kristen moved to dismiss this petition on the grounds that it was barred by the one year limitation. The trial court denied her motion.
Frank did not plead actual fraud. To plead actual fraud, the plaintiff must show that the defendant made a material representation of past or existing fact, that the representation was false and was made with knowledge or in reckless ignorance of its falsity, and that the plaintiff detrimentally relied on the statement. Blaising v. Mills (1978), 176 Ind. App. 141, 145, 374 N.E.2d 1166, 1169. Actual fraud cannot be predicated on promises of future performance. Id. Threats of bodily harm are necessarily *568 promises of future conduct and, even if relied on, are not fraudulent.
"Constructive fraud is fraud that arises by operation of law from conduct which, if sanctioned by law, would secure an unconscionable advantage." Whiteco Properties, Inc. v. Thielbar (1984), Ind. App., 467 N.E.2d 433, 437; Blaising v. Mills, supra, 374 N.E.2d at 1169. A line of Indiana cases stands for the proposition that acts or breach of duty giving rise to constructive fraud may include mistake, undue influence, or duress. Brown v. Woolf (N.D.Ind. 1983), 554 F. Supp. 1206, 1208; Brown v. Brown (1956), 235 Ind. 563, 568, 135 N.E.2d 614, 616; Bedree v. Bedree (1988), Ind. App., 528 N.E.2d 1128, 1132; Blaising v. Mills, supra, 374 N.E.2d at 1169. Frank does not allege mistake, nor has he alleged undue influence. To create a presumption of undue influence, the plaintiff must allege a relationship of trust and confidence between parties to the transaction, weakness or susceptibility in the mind of one of the parties, benefit to the stronger party, and detriment to the weaker. Blaising v. Mills, supra, 374 N.E.2d at 1170. Frank has not alleged all of these elements.
Frank has, however, alleged duress. The Indiana decisions previously cited do not help to determine when duress is sufficient to constitute constructive fraud, except to say that it may do so. Duress does not always constitute constructive fraud; we decide here when it does. Facts that lead to the conclusion of constructive fraud include oppressive conduct, Bedree v. Bedree, supra, at 1130, relationship of the parties, Sanders v. Townsend (1987), Ind. App., 509 N.E.2d 860, 865, and unconscionable result. Frank's allegations that his wife and her police-officer friend, Johnsen, threatened his life to coerce him into signing an agreement to give her the marital property she wanted in an amount that he knew at the time of the agreement exceeded his assets, and that the same threats to life and health continued even after the agreement was executed and partially complied with, show the oppressive conduct of Kristen and her friend, a relationship between the parties and an unconscionable result. Frank has sufficiently alleged constructive fraud.
The trial court's denial of Kristen's motion to dismiss was correct. The petition was within the scope of IC 31-1-11.5-17(a) and the two year statute of limitations. The trial court's order was, therefore, interlocutory and not appealable without certification by the trial court. Nevertheless, we retain jurisdiction pursuant to Appellate Rule 4(E) to pass upon the issue of whether the trial court properly set aside the property dissolution agreement. See Parrett v. Lebamoff (1979), 179 Ind. App. 25, 27, 383 N.E.2d 1107, 1109.
II.
Whether the trial court erred in admitting polygraph examinations into evidence.
Kristen contends that it was error to admit her polygraph examinations into evidence, even though their admission was stipulated to because the trial court "suggested" that she submit to polygraph examinations. Polygraph examinations are generally inadmissible absent a valid stipulation between the parties. Harris v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 382, 384. Where there is a valid stipulation, the trial court has discretion to admit polygraph results. Id. In criminal cases, a stipulation must be in writing and signed by both defendant and prosecutor. Id. There is no such requirement in civil cases.
At trial, counsel for Frank attempted to introduce into evidence Frank's polygraph results. Counsel for Kristen objected, but later stated, "I'm not going to object to the admission of this unauthenticated document if counsel will stipulate that I may sort of toss our polygraph results into evidence also. I don't want to face an objection." (Tr. p. 516) Counsel for Frank agreed and the parties stipulated to the introduction of polygraph reports into evidence. (Tr. pp. 516-17) Later, when the results of the polygraph examinations were found to be conflicting, counsel for both parties stipulated to having a single *569 firm, John Reid and Associates, perform a second set of polygraph examinations. (Tr. pp. 595-96) Implicit in the stipulation was that their earlier stipulation would still be in effect; that is, the results of this second set of examinations would be admitted into evidence without objection. Once the parties stipulate to the admissibility of polygraph evidence, they are estopped from objecting to its admission. Lyons v. State (1982), Ind., 431 N.E.2d 78, 80. Valid stipulations to polygraph examinations cannot be withdrawn once one party learns the results are unfavorable. Holcomb v. State (1980), 268 Ark. 138, 594 S.W.2d 22, 23; Pickens v. State (1980), 96 Wis. 2d 549, 292 N.W.2d 601, 613.
Kristen also contends that the trial court improperly suggested that she submit to polygraph examination to resolve issues of credibility. Polygraphs are inherently unreliable. A trial court's "suggestion" that a party submit to one may lead the party to believe that he must submit to the examination to prove his truthfulness. A "suggestion" with that effect would be error. A fair reading of the record reveals, at most, that the trial court inquired only as to Frank and Kristen's willingness to submit to a polygraph examination. The trial court did not suggest that anyone take a polygraph exam to prove her or his credibility. We find no error.
III.
Whether the commissioner had proper jurisdiction and authority to preside over the trial below.
The dissolution decree incorporating the property settlement decree was entered by Judge Bruce Douglas. After Frank petitioned for relief from judgment or modification, March 18, 1985, Kristen moved to transfer the matter to Commissioner William W. Andersen for hearing. Her motion was granted on March 26, 1985. Frank moved to vacate the March 26, 1985 entry on April 23, 1985. Kristen opposed that motion. Frank also filed objections to Commissioner Andersen's jurisdiction. No order book entry shows a ruling on Frank's motion or objections. The record does show, however, that Kristen sought transfer and actively sought to keep the cause under the commissioner. She did not object at any time during the trial to the commissioner's authority to try the case. She nevertheless contends on appeal that the commissioner had no jurisdiction or authority to try the case.
Lack of subject matter jurisdiction may be raised for the first time on appeal. Short v. State (1982), Ind., 443 N.E.2d 298, 309. However, the commissioner heard the case in the Porter County Superior Court, which has subject matter jurisdiction in all civil cases, including marital dissolution. IC XX-X-XX-X. Even if he had no authority, the commissioner had subject matter jurisdiction. Id. We need not reach the issue of whether the commissioner had the authority to try the case. Kristen raised no objection to the commissioner's authority at trial. Her claim of error cannot be raised for the first time on appeal and is therefore waived. Id. at 310.
Conclusion
We find no error in the proceedings and, therefore, affirm the judgment of the trial court.
STATON and CONOVER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Moreover, Frank's petition would be timely filed. A petition filed pursuant to IC 31-1-11.5-17(a) within two years of the order is timely filed, TR 60(B) notwithstanding. Pactor v. Pactor (1979), 181 Ind. App. 329, 333-34, 391 N.E.2d 1148, 1151.

=== CASE 2220096 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.414483+00 ===

188 Ill. App. 3d 821 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 821
RAYMOND A. KOLANOWSKI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
ILLINOIS VALLEY COMMUNITY HOSPITAL, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 3-88-0586.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed September 22, 1989.
Louis E. Olivero & Associates, of Peru, for appellant.
Douglas A. Gift, of Herbolsheimer, Lannon, Henson, Duncan & Reagan, of La Salle, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE BARRY delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, Raymond A. Kolanowski, brought suit against the defendant, Illinois Valley Community Hospital, for injuries he allegedly *822 sustained when he fell from a bed while he was in the defendant's respite care program. The defendant filed a motion to dismiss, contending that the plaintiff had failed to file an affidavit and medical report as required by section 2-622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-622). The trial court agreed and dismissed the suit, allowing the plaintiff 90 days to file new pleadings. The plaintiff failed to file new pleadings, and the trial court subsequently dismissed the case with prejudice. The plaintiff appeals, arguing that section 2-622 of the Code does not apply to the defendant's respite care program.
The plaintiff's complaint stated in count I that when he entered the defendant's custodial shelter care unit, the defendant knew that he was paralyzed on the left side of his body, rendering him weak, confused, helpless, and susceptible to falling from a hospital bed. It further alleged that on August 2, 1986, the defendant had left him unattended, allowing him to fall out of bed and injure himself. The plaintiff contended that the defendant was negligent in failing to properly supervise him, in failing to fix his bed so that he could not fall out of it or, at least, so that he would not be hurt by a fall, and in allowing him to get out of bed. Count II alleged that the defendant had breached its contract with the plaintiff wherein it agreed to provide him with quality care, 24-hour supervision, and skilled nursing services.
The record contains a copy of a brochure published by the defendant, stating that "Respite Care is an interval of rest or relief for families or primary care-givers of Medicare-aged recipients who need to arrange 24-hour care and supervision for a loved one living with them when they must be away from the home because of short-term business/vacation plans, personal/family commitments, or sheer exhaustion." The contract between the plaintiff and the defendant indicates that the defendant had agreed to provide respite care at the highest level offered, "skilled." Services it agreed to perform included "[m]edication administration based upon level of care and physicians' orders," "[p]rofessional supervision, observation, and treatment at the aforementioned level of care," and "[s]killed nursing services at the aforementioned level of care." The defendant also agreed to provide, as needed, prescribed medication, treatment modalities, physicians' visits, and medical supplies and equipment.
Section 2-622 of the Code provides in relevant part:
"Healing art malpractice. (a) In any action, whether in tort, contract or otherwise, in which the plaintiff seeks damages for injuries or death by reason of medical, hospital, or other healing *823 art malpractice, the plaintiff's attorney or the plaintiff, if the plaintiff is proceeding pro se, shall file an affidavit, attached to the original and all copies of the complaint, declaring one of the following:
1. That * * * [a] reviewing health professional has determined in a written report, after a review of the medical record and other relevant material involved in the particular action that there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of such action; and that the affiant has concluded on the basis of the reviewing health professional's review and consultation that there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for filing of such action. * * * A copy of the written report, clearly identifying the plaintiff and the reasons for the reviewing health professional's determination that a reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of the action exists, must be attached to the affidavit * * *.
2. That the * * * consultation required by paragraph 1 * * * could not be obtained before the expiration of the statute of limitations. If an affidavit is executed pursuant to this paragraph, the certificate and written report required by paragraph 1 shall be filed within 90 days after the filing of the complaint. * * *
*   *   *
(g) The failure to file a certificate required by this Section shall be grounds for dismissal under Section 2-619." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-622.
Section 2-1704 of the Code provides:
"Medical Malpractice Action. As used in this Part, `medical malpractice action' means any action, whether in tort, contract or otherwise, in which the plaintiff seeks damages for injuries or death by reason of medical, hospital, or other healing art malpractice. The term `healing art' shall not include care and treatment by spiritual means through prayer in accord with the tenets and practices of a recognized church or religious denomination." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-1704.
 1, 2 The term "healing art malpractice" is broad in scope. (Lyon v. Hasbro Industries, Inc. (1987), 156 Ill. App. 3d 649, 509 N.E.2d 702.) However, not every injury sustained by a patient in a hospital results from "healing art malpractice." To determine whether a complaint sounds in ordinary negligence or healing art malpractice, courts look to the evidence that will be necessary to establish the defendant's standard of care. Edelin v. Westlake Community Hospital *824 (1987), 157 Ill. App. 3d 857, 510 N.E.2d 958.
"Generally, in a medical malpractice case, plaintiff must offer expert testimony to establish the standard of care unless defendant's conduct is so grossly negligent or the treatment so common that a lay person could readily understand it." (Edelin, 157 Ill. App.3d at 862, 510 N.E.2d at 961.) If, however, the standard may be established on the basis of defendant's administrative policies or other evidence short of medical expert testimony, plaintiff will be permitted to proceed with his suit on a theory of ordinary negligence. For instance, an action based on a slip and fall injury allegedly resulting from defendant hospital's negligent failure to remove or warn of water on the floor constituted an ordinary premises liability claim rather than medical malpractice claim. The standard of care in such a case is that owed by a reasonable owner or occupier of the premises to a business-invitee. (Mooney v. Graham Hospital Association (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 376, 513 N.E.2d 633.) By contrast, it has been frequently held in this State and others that the standard of care where an injury allegedly results from a hospital's failure to provide adequate restraints, including bed rails, can be established only upon expert medical testimony. Consequently, these cases are treated as medical malpractice actions subject to statutory restrictions for healing art malpractice. (See, e.g., Taylor v. City of Beardstown (1986), 142 Ill. App. 3d 584, 491 N.E.2d 803; Lenny v. Loehmann (1980), 78 A.D.2d 813, 433 N.Y.S.2d 135; Bell v. West Harrison County District (Miss. 1988), 523 So. 2d 1031; Howe v. Citizens Memorial Hospital (Tex. Civ. App. 1968), 426 S.W.2d 882; Sexton v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co. (1982), 275 Ark. 361, 631 S.W.2d 270.) Under this State's healing art malpractice act, failure to file the necessary affidavit and report is cause for dismissal with prejudice. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-622(g).
 3 The instant plaintiff contends that since no medical treatment was being rendered to him, he did not need to comply with section 2-622's requirements. We disagree. In advancing his argument, plaintiff relies primarily upon Owens v. Manor Health Care Corp. (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 684, 512 N.E.2d 820. In Owens, plaintiff complained that defendant nursing home was negligent in failing to provide adequate restraints to protect him from falling out of his wheelchair. In determining whether plaintiff's complaint was fatally defective for failure to comply with section 2-622's requirement that a written report of a health professional be attached to the complaint, the court reviewed the nature of care being provided to plaintiff in the nursing home and the direct cause of his injury. First, the court noted that *825 plaintiff was in the home for custodial shelter care, and not for the purpose of being restored to a normal physical or mental state. And second, plaintiff's fall did not result from any medical condition or treatment, but merely because he had tried to get out of his wheelchair. Under the circumstances, even though plaintiff had alleged that his personal physician had ordered a wheelchair restraint, the defendant's alleged negligence did not require the assessment of any healthcare professional, and expert medical testimony was not required at trial because defendant's standard of care under the circumstances was not elevated to that of a "healing art" professional. The court accordingly ruled that plaintiff's complaint sounded in ordinary negligence and could proceed to trial as such. 159 Ill. App. 3d at 689, 512 N.E.2d at 824.
Unlike Owens, in the case before us plaintiff was evaluated as requiring the highest level of care during his stay in the defendant's respite care program. His agreement with the defendant stated that the defendant would provide proper supervision and any needed medication, treatment, and physicians' examinations. The plaintiff's pleadings alleged that the defendant had failed to provide adequate supervision and restraints in light of his condition of partial paralysis. Plaintiff's fall, it appears, was directly related to his medical condition. As indicated above, it has been previously determined in this State that the need for bed rails in light of a patient's medical condition is not a matter of common knowledge, but requires medical knowledge, skill, and training. Taylor v. City of Beardstown (1986), 142 Ill. App. 3d 584, 491 N.E.2d 803.
Under the circumstances of this case, we find that the proper levels of supervision and restraint were determined by the plaintiff's medical condition and therefore involved medical judgments. Accordingly, an expert's opinion regarding the defendant hospital's standard of care would have been required at trial. We hold, therefore, that the gravamen of plaintiff's complaint alleges healing art malpractice and required strict compliance with section 2-622 of the Code. Since plaintiff failed to provide the necessary affidavit and report, the trial court correctly dismissed the cause of action.
The judgment of the circuit court of La Salle County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
HEIPLE and STOUDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739504 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:34.561442+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant James Henderson was convicted of Burglary, a Class B felony, for which he received a term of fifteen (15) years, and further, was found to have violated probation for a prior conviction for Forgery, a Class C felony, for which he received an executed term of five (5) years. His burglary term was ordered to be served consecutively to the five year term for violation of probation.
Six issues are presented for our review in this direct appeal:
1. error in the giving of final instruction seventeen;
2. impermissible remarks by the progse-cutor during Henderson's case in chief;
3. impermissible comment by the prosecutor during final argument on Henderson's right not to testify;
4. insufficiency of the evidence;
5. admission of improper evidence during sentencing; and
6. improper procedure in revoking Henderson's probation status.
The evidence shows that at about 4:45 a.m. on March 2, 1985, victim Steve Kennedy, accompanied by his two brothers-in-law, returned to his apartment in Elkhart. They had left the apartment earlier the evening before, leaving Kennedy's wife alone in the apartment.. When she went to bed, she unlocked the sliding glass door to the apartment so her husband and two brothers could get in. Mrs. Kennedy was asleep when her husband and two brothers returned to the apartment. As Steve Kennedy approached the apartment, he noticed the sliding glass door on the patio was open. He ran into the apartment and encountered Henderson in the living room. Henderson had Steve's new pair of tennis shoes under his arm and charged Steve, trying to get past him and out of the apartment. Henderson was known to play basketball as a hobby. A struggle ensued as Steve tried to stop Henderson from leaving the apartment and they fell to the floor. At this time, Steve's brothers-in-law came into the apartment and helped him subdue *509Henderson. Henderson told them there was another man in the bedroom where Steve's wife was sleeping so the two brothers left Steve with Henderson and went to check on their sister's welfare. Henderson then escaped from Steve but was recaptured by the three outside the apartment and held until police arrived. After Henderson was apprehended, it was discovered that he had on his person a paring knife and a roll of adhesive tape. Henderson told police he had been grabbed as he walked past the apartment and dragged inside.
I
The court's final instruction seventeen was on the subject of Henderson's intent. The language Henderson objects to in the instruction is as follows:
... you may infer that a person is presumed to intend the natural and probable acts, unless the circumstances are such to indicate the absence of such intent. When an unlawful act, however, is proved to be knowingly done, no further proof is needed on the part of the state in the absence of justifying or excusing facts.
Record, at 126.
Henderson failed to object to this instruction in the trial court and failed to assert this claim of error in his motion to correct error. Therefore he has waived this issue. Ind.R.Tr.P. 51(C), 59; Davis v. State (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 167.
Henderson claims the giving of this instruction amounted to fundamental error requiring us to review the issue in spite of the fact he failed to object to it at trial and assert it in his motion to correct error. In Sandstrom v. Montana (1979), 442 U.S. 510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 L.Ed.2d 39, the United States Supreme Court held it was impermissible to instruct a jury that the law presumes a person intends the ordinary consequences of his voluntary acts, because the instruction may have the effect of impermissibly shifting the burden of proof to the defendant. However, language nearly identical to the present instruction was approved by this Court in Jacks v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 611, 623-26, 394 N.E.2d 166, 174-76. Like the instruction in Jacks, this instruction is not a mandatory one but advises the jury: they may infer intent from certain proved acts of the defendant and does not tell them the law presumes that intent. No fundamental error is shown meriting reversal. Jacks, supra; see also Pitman v. State (1982), Ind., 436 N.E.2d 74, 77 (evidence of victims' injuries relevant to prove intent in robbery conviction).
II
During the direct examination of defense witness Vickie Johnson, the prosecutor, while making an objection to the testimony, inferred that Henderson had a responsibility to respond to the State's questions. Henderson claims this was an impermissible comment on the defendant's right not to testify. Vickie Johnson was answering a series of questions about Henderson. Among those questions were the following:
Q. Did you know anything about James being in the Service?
Yeah. }
How long was he in the Service? ©
I'm not quite sure how long he was in, but he's talked about it quite a bit. >
Q. Did he tell you what he did when he was in the Service?
MR. WICKS: I'm going to object to that as being hearsay, Your Honor. We should hear from the defendant on that point.
Record, at 388.
Henderson made no objection at the time the remark was made nor did he ask for any relief from the court regarding it. Furthermore, Henderson did not raise this issue in his motion to correct error. He raises it in this direct appeal, claiming it was fundamental error and should be reviewed by this Court even though he has waived it by not raising it at trial and in his motion to correct error.
We do not find this remark denied Henderson of fundamental due process or *510his right to a fair trial to the extent it presents fundamental error. Although it did indicate the answer to the question would have to come from Henderson, it merely stated that the testimony would be hearsay as to this witness as Henderson is the only one who could speak on it directly. It involved a subject that had nothing to do with Henderson's guilt or innocence or the facts and circumstances of this case. It referred only to background material about Henderson's activities while in the armed forces. Fundamental error is that which, if not rectified, would deny a defendant fundamental due process. When the record reveals clearly blatant violations of basic and elementary principles and the harm or potential for harm could not be denied, this Court will review an issue not properly raised and preserved. Frith v. State (1983), Ind., 452 N.E.2d 930; Warriner v. State (1982), Ind., 435 N.E.2d 562, 563; Johnson v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 145, 151, 390 N.E.2d 1005, 1010, cert. denied (1979), 444 U.S. 944, 100 S.Ct. 302, 62 L.Ed.2d 312. Fundamental error is not apparent here.
III
The evidence disclosed that when Henderson was apprehended in the Kennedy's apartment, he had in his pocket a paring knife and a roll of adhesive tape. Further, the evidence showed that the tennis shoes in question were beside Mrs. Kennedy's bed while she slept. She testified they were there when she went to bed and that she stumbled over them when she got up during the night to go to the bathroom. They were next seen in Henderson's possession as he approached the open patio door. During closing argument, the prosecuting attorney made reference to these items, commenting on what reasons Henderson might have had for having these items in his possession. There was also a towel in the jacket pocket. The prosecuting attorney asked the jury why a person breaking into an apartment would want a knife, tape, and a towel. He then stated that perhaps the knife would be used as a weapon to defend himself, the tape to tape the victim's mouth if she cried out, and the towel to wipe off fingerprints. In his rebuttal, the prosecuting attorney commented that there was no way of knowing exactly what led him to that apartment but surmised he might have been attracted to Mrs. Kennedy. Henderson characterized these statements as being comments on facts not in evidence and inferring Henderson was about to commit offenses other than the offense charged. On the contrary, the comments referred to inferences that might be drawn from facts in evidence. They were not comments on facts not in evidence nor did they infer that the prosecuting attorney had personal knowledge of Henderson's guilt not within the knowledge of the jury. Moreover, Henderson again failed to object or ask for any relief from the trial court at the time these statements were made and failed to raise the argument in his motion to correct error. Henderson accordingly has waived the issue. Ind.R.Tr.P. 59; Frith, supra.
IV
Henderson claims there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for burglary because there was not substantial evidence of probative value that he intended to commit the crime of theft when he entered the apartment. He concedes our standard for reviewing sufficiency claims provides we do not weigh evidence or judge credibility but consider only that evidence most favorable to the State together with all reasonable and logical inferences to be drawn therefrom. Alfaro v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 670, 672.
Henderson concedes he was improperly in the apartment and the evidence supports the conclusion that he broke and entered into it. His only claim of insufficiency is that there is no showing he intended to commit the crime of theft. His contention is not supported by the evidence. Steve Kennedy testified that as he came through the patio door he saw Henderson in possession of his tennis shoes, heading toward the door and, in fact, Henderson tried to get around Kennedy and leave with the shoes. This was sufficient evidence of probative value for the jury to find or infer that Henderson was taking the shoes with him, *511that he was thereby committing the crime of theft and that he broke and entered the apartment with the intent to do so.
V
Henderson claims the trial court violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution because the court relied on inaccurate information alleging other crimes that were not proven in sentencing Henderson.
When Henderson was apprehended in the commission of the instant crime, he had in his possession a knife and a roll of adhesive tape. The presentence report revealed Henderson's past criminal history in which he had committed sexual assaults against women, including rape, where he used a knife and tape during the assaults. Some of the accounts involved cases where he was convicted of sexual crimes against women and some where there was evidence of those activities but he was not tried or convicted for them. At the sentencing hearing, defense counsel objected to the mention of these incidents in the presen-tence report since there was no evidence that Henderson had in any way sexually assaulted Mrs. Kennedy in the commission of this burglary. In the State's argument during sentencing, the prosecutor noted among other things that in 1981 Henderson filed a clemency petition in which he admitted binding and threatening two women. He was convicted of forgery and criminal confinement. The prosecutor indicated he had a statement in which Henderson admitted to a rape in 1977 for which he was never prosecuted. He stated Henderson's criminal confinement conviction involved taping his victims or the victims escaped before anything further happened to them. The prosecutor also commented on other defenses that Henderson raised, including his contention that he was investigating a prowler in the area and happened to be in the neighborhood and in the Kennedys' apartment. The prosecutor suggested since Henderson was found with a knife and tape in his possession, the court could consider this as a sentencing factor and recommended that the court give an aggravated term of twenty (20) years for the burglary conviction. The trial court aggravated the presumptive ten year term for burglary, a Class B felony, from ten (10) years to fifteen (15) years. He found several aggravating factors that he articulated in his order. Those were: Henderson had accumulated three felony convictions, had been on parole, had committed the instant offense while on probation for a prior conviction and that having committed a felony and having been placed on parole and probation, had failed to be deterred from further criminal activities. The court further found there was evidence Henderson committed the acts intending the victim should suffer some harm. He then further found that it is unlikely a short term of incarceration would be of any benefit and imposition of the standard presumptive sentence would depreciate the seriousness of the offense. The court stated that for each of these reasons it found aggravating factors and sentenced Henderson to a term of fifteen (15) years.
Henderson objects to the aggravating factor noted by the court that Henderson committed the acts intending the victim should suffer some harm. In making such finding and imposing its sentence, the trial court relied, Henderson contends, on materially untrue assumptions as there was no evidence he intended or attempted any sexual assault on Mrs. Kennedy. Henderson is correct that the courts have sustained due process objections to sentences imposed on the basis of misinformation of constitutional magnitude. In United States v. Weston (9th Cir.1971), 448 F.2d 626, 628-34, cert. denied (1972), 404 U.S. 1061, 92 S.Ct. 748, 30 L.Ed.2d 749, the court vacated a sentence that was based on unproven government allegations which were denied by the defendant and not supported by reliable evidence. The défendant was accused of being the chief supplier of heroin to the Western Washington area. The court relied on this information in imposing the maximum sentence. The reviewing court vacated the sentence and directed the trial court not to rely on unverified information in sentencing. The same *512was true in United States v. Lemon (D.C.Cir.1983), 723 F.2d 922, where the defendant was sentenced on the basis of unverified information that defendant was a member of a radical religious group involved in criminal activities and that defendant had committed various erimes for the benefit of that organization. These charges were found to be unverified.
However, in Gardner v. State (1979), 270 Ind. 627, 637-38, 388 N.E.2d 513, 519-20, this Court acknowledged this principle but found that the presumption of innocence does not extend to the sentencing proceeding. The sentencing judge is permitted to consider prior convictions, prior criminal activity not resulting in charges or conviec-tions, and even prior acquittals. For example, it was held proper for a sentencing court to consider past convictions for selling whisky in imposing a sentence for possession of a firearm as a convicted felon. United States v. Jones (6th Cir.1976), 533 F.2d 1387, 1393-94, cert. denied (1977), 431 U.S. 964, 97 S.Ct. 2919, 53 L.Ed.2d 1059. Use of unproved criminal activity in sentencing does not violate the presumption of innocence and a judge may even properly consider counts in an unprosecuted indict ment. United States v. Doyle (24 Cir.1965), 348 F.2d 715, 720-22, cert. denied (1965), 382 U.S. 843, 86 S.Ct. 89, 15 L.Ed.2d 84.
The trial court in the instant case had ample reason considering the defendant's past record to take the presence of the knife and tape into consideration in arriving at a fair sentence. Additionally, the court gave several other valid grounds for aggravation, all of which were supported by the evidence. The trial court properly and adequately supported his judgment that the sentence be aggravated for an additional term of five (5) years.
VI
Henderson had previously been convicted of forgery and sentenced to a term of five (5) years. The trial court suspended the sentence and placed Henderson on probation for a period of five (5) years.
The State filed a petition to revoke probation on the basis of Henderson's involvement in the instant burglary charge. The hearing on the petition to revoke was set for the same day Henderson was to be sentenced for the instant burglary conviction. The trial court sentenced Henderson on the instant case and then proceeded into the hearing on revocation of probation. Henderson requested a continuance to determine whether he was subject to revocation of probation and the court granted the continuance. At a subsequent hearing, the trial court found that the burglary of a dwelling conviction in the instant case constituted a violation of Henderson's probation and accordingly revoked Henderson's suspended sentence and probation and ordered that he serve the five (5) years consecutively to the sentence imposed for the burglary conviction.
Henderson's objections are that he was not given a sufficient hearing and claims there was insufficient evidence to revoke his probation because no proof was made of the crime alleged to have constituted the violation of. his probation, no proof was made of the original condition and the terms of probation imposed as a result of that conviction. On a similar set of facts the Third District Court of Appeals in Szymenski v. State (1986), Ind.App., 500 N.E.2d 213, 215, found that a revocation hearing is in the nature of a civil action (citing Shumaker v. State (1982), Ind.App., 431 N.E.2d 862, 863). Therefore, the State's burden is that of preponderance of the evidence and not the criminal burden of beyond a reasonable doubt. Since conditions of probation are imposed by courts, not the legislature, the determination that those conditions have been breached is not an adjudication of guilt. That finding had already been made at the initial hearing. The Szymenski court continued:
Consequently, the defendant at such hearings is not endowed with all the rights he possessed prior to his conviction. Gagnon v. Scarpelli (1973), 411 U.S. 778, 93 S.Ct. 1756, 36 LEd.2d 656. For example, this state has held that the exclusionary rule is not fully applicable in probation revocation hearings. Dulin *513v. State (1976), 169 Ind.App. 211, 219, 346 N.E2d 746, 752. Evidence seized illegally will be excluded from a revocation hearing only if it was seized as part of a continuing plan of police harassment or in a particularly offensive manner. Id., 346 N.E.2d at 751.
Similarly, while it is widely recognized that a trial court may not take judicial notice of its own records in another case previously before the court even on a related subject with related parties, Freson v. Combs (1982), Ind.App., 433 N.E.2d 55, 59, this rule should not be fully applicable in probation revocation hearings. Given the nature of a revocation proceeding, to require technical procedural and evidentiary rules similar to those required at the pretrial and trial phases of our criminal justice system would unduly burden revocation proceedings. See Dulin, 346 N.E.2d at 750. Formal proof of the original conviction and the conditions of probation is not required.
Szymenski, 500 N.E.2d at 215.
The burglary conviction provided grounds supporting the trial court in its finding that Henderson had violated his probation. His order revoking that probation and ordering that the sentence be served was not error.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739505 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:34.566435+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
In this case, appellant Henderson was charged with knowingly breaking and entering a dwelling with the intent to steal. When the court instructed the jury in the last sentence of its state-of-mind instruction that "[when an unlawful act, however, is proved to be knowingly done, no further proof is needed on the part of the state in the absence of justifying or excusing facts," it impermissibly shifted the burden of proof to the defense on the issue of whether there was an intent to steal. This was fundamental error and, in light of the minimal proof of intent to steal, not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 LEd.2d 39 (1979). The instruction impacted differently here than it did in Jacks v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 611, 394 N.E.2d 166, where the charge was murder and there was a single criminal state of mind at issue. Here there were two such states of mind, namely one involving a knowing breaking and entering and one involving an intent to steal. The instruetion told the jury that, in the absence of some proof of justification or exeuse by the defense, once it had inferred that an unlawful act of breaking and entering had been knowingly accomplished, it need not go on and determine whether the breaking and entering had been accomplished contemporaneously with an intent to steal. This was error.
DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739506 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:35.406959+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge.
Mark Beck (respondent) was charged with touching T.P., a three year-old child, with a sponge1 and with his penis on her vaginal area with the intent to arouse or satisfy his sexual desire. The respondent was adjudged to be a delinquent child on August 4, 1987, and was ordered to the Indiana Boys School. Respondent appeals this determination.
We reverse.
There are essentially two issues presented for review:
(1) Whether the defendant's sixth amendment right to cross-examination was violated, and
*205(2) Whether there was sufficient corroborative evidence to render the videotaped statement admissible under I.C. 35-87-4-6.
Respondent was 16 years of age when he was charged with the above offense, which allegedly occurred on March 9, 1987. T.P.'s mother, Elizabeth Cooley, had taken T.P. and T.P.'s younger sister over to Evelyn Edwards' house, with whom respondent was then living, to be babysat while Cooley attended school. Cooley testified that Beck was asleep on the couch when she arrived. After telling Edwards that she was dropping the kids off, Cooley left for school. Although unclear, the facts most favorable to the judgment would permit an inference that respondent was left alone with the two girls, as well as Edwards' own two chil-. dren, for an undisclosed period of time while Edwards was absent from the house.
According to Cooley, TP. was crying when she later picked her up and complained of hunger and of pain in her vaginal area. After asking T.P. what was wrong, Cooley visually examined the child, then called her neighbor over to also examine T.P. Apparently the only thing unusual which they discovered was a white substance, later identified at the hospital as a piece of sponge. Although the record is unclear as to the exact time frame of these events, apparently several hours had passed before the neighbor, Carla Rogers, was called. TP. was subsequently taken to the hospital that evening for an examination.
A videotaped statement of TP. was taken by Detective Conce on the third day following the alleged incident pursuant to 1.C. 85-87-4-6 (Burns Code Ed.Supp.1988). This statute allows out-of-court statements by children to be admitted provided certain criteria are met. This statute reads in part as follows:
"Admissibility of statement or videotape of a child of ten or under in certain criminal actions.2-(a) This section applies to criminal actions for the following:
(1) Child molesting (IC 85-42-4-8).
# * * # # #
(b) A statement or videotape that:
(1) Is made by a child who was under ten (10) years of age at the time of the statement or videotape;
(2) Concerns an act that is a material element of an offense listed in subsection (a) that was allegedly committed against the child; and f
(3) Is not otherwise admissible in evidence under statute or court rule; is admissible in evidence in a criminal action for an offense listed in subsection (a) if the requirements of subsection (c) are met.
(c) A statement or videotape described in subsection (b) is admissible in evidence in a criminal action listed in subsection (a) if, after notice to the defendant of a hearing and of his right to be present:
{1) The court finds, in a hearing:
(A) Conducted outside the presence of the jury; and
(B) Attended by the child;
that the time, content, and circumstances of the statement or videotape provide sufficient indications of reliability; and
(2) The child:
(A) Testifies at the trial; or
*206(B) Is found by the court to be unavailable as a witness because:
(i) A psychiatrist has certified that the child's participation in the trial would be a traumatic experience for the child;
(i) A physician has certified that the child cannot participate in the trial for medical reasons; or
(ii) The court has determined that the child is incapable of understanding the nature and obligation of an oath.
(d) If a child is unavailable to testify at the trial for a reason listed in subsection (c)(2)(B), a statement or videotape may be admitted in evidence under this section only if there is corroborative evidence of the act that was allegedly committed against the child."
This tape included a demonstration by TP. with anatomically correct dolls.
On May 15, 1987, a hearing was held to consider whether the tape contained sufficient indicia of reliability to be introduced as evidence and also to consider whether TP. was available to testify; le., to determine whether or not she understood the nature and obligation of the oath. Respondent was seated at the back of the courtroom; T.P. apparently had her back to the respondent. After inquiry by the judge and both attorneys, the court determined that TP. was in fact not available to testify. The child was then allowed to leave without objection, while the hearing as to the statement's reliability continued. Detective Conce testified at this hearing as to his background with respect to child abuse cases and the technique he employed in taping the statement.
At the subsequent fact-finding hearing held on July 2 for the purposes of presenting substantive evidence and 'determining whether corroborative evidence as required by I.C. 85-87-4-6(d) existed, the doctor who conducted the medical examination testified that he had found no physical evidence to corroborate the charge. The doctor testified that the exam was normal, except for a small foam rubber particle which he found but he declined to speculate as to the source of the particle's presence. The doctor himself found the particle not unusual as children "often put things down there." Record at 164. The doctor was permitted to testify, over objection, to the child's explanation of what had happened. A copy of the medical exam containing the child's narrative was also introduced under the medical records exception over defendant's objection. The doctor stated that the findings of no trauma or scratches to the vaginal area were not inconsistent with the history given him by the child, because the type of contact described by TP. would not leave any external signs.
The tape was admitted into evidence over defendant's sixth amendment objection.
ISSUE I
Respondent contends on appeal that he was denied his sixth amendment right3 to confront and cross-examine the child. The state contends that respondent waived this right because he never asserted it. This issue must be decided in the context of two recent Indiana Supreme Court decisions, Miller v. State (1987) Ind., 517 N.E.2d 64 (Miller I) and Miller v. State (1988) Ind., 531 N.E.2d 466 (Miller II).
In Miller I, the defendant was accused of molesting her grandchild over a period of several years (apparently beginning when the child was 5; she was 9 at the time of trial). The defendant and her counsel were not notified of nor present at the videotaping of the child's statement. An initial hearing was held in which the child's competency and availability as a witness and the admissibility of the videotaped state*207ment were determined. The trial court determined that the child was unavailable to testify at trial. Our Supreme Court reject ed the state's claim that the defendant had waived the opportunity to cross-examine the victim at the hearing and that her failure to call the child as a witness amounted to a waiver of her right to confrontation. The court pointed out that the trial judge had indicated he would not allow the attorneys to question the victim when she took the stand for purposes of determining her competency or to submit questions for the court to pose, presumably because the judge was going to question the child himself. Our Supreme Court determined that the judge's responses to the attorneys were sufficiently broad as to be interpreted as a general ban on questioning by counsel, stating that
"[the defendant was never affirmatively given the opportunity to question the vie-tim. There is a presumption against the waiver of constitutional rights. For a waiver to be effective, there must be 'an intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or privilege.' Hartman v. State (1973), 155 Ind.App. 199, 205, 292 N.E.2d 293, 297, quoting Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 58 S.Ct. 1019, 82 LEd. 1461 (1938)."
Miller I, supra, 517 N.E.2d at 73. Our Supreme Court agreed with the First District4 that the purpose of the pre-trial hearing is to give the defendant the right, under cireumstances less traumatic to the child than a trial, to inquire into the state; ment or ask the child questions about it. The court stated that "[the goal of the statute is to reduce the child's emotional trauma caused by numerous court appearances, not to guarantee that the child will never have to face the defendant." Id.
After examining the evidence to determine whether the confrontation clause violation constituted harmless error, the court concluded it did not. The court stated that the child's testimony on the videotape was straightforward and convincing, and thus constituted particularly damaging evidence because no other direct evidence linked the defendant to the molestations. The judgment was therefore reversed and the case was remanded for a new trial.
In Miller II, supra, 531 N.E.2d 466, our Supreme Court reaffirmed that the hearing held to determine whether the out-of-court statements contain sufficient indicia of reliability to be admissible is intended to be adversarial and to provide the defendant with the opportunity for full cross-examination. The court found that the right to fully confront 'and cross-examine the witness was one of three5 core statutory requirements which must be met before the pre-trial statement of a child victim who cannot testify at trial can be used against the accused at trial.
In Miller II, the defendant similarly had not been given notice of nor was present at the taping of the three-year old child's statement. Instead of conducting a separate hearing pursuant to subsection (c) of the child hearsay statute to determine the competency of the child and the admissibility of the statement, the trial court conducted an in-camera hearing outside of the presence of the defendant, by stipulation of the parties, at the time of trial to determine the child's competency. Defense counsel was permitted the opportunity to question the child at the hearing, but declined. The court found her to be incompetent and the child did not testify at trial. The trial court admitted the taped statement over defendant's objection.
Our Supreme Court held that the appellant was not provided an adequate opportunity to cross-examine the child. The court stated that "an admissibility hearing attended by the child victim and for which provision has been made for the attendance of the accused and his counsel, and at which the accused is afforded full right to cross-examine and confront the witness," should have been held. Id. at 470. "This would include the opportunity for a physi*208cal, immediate face-to-face confrontation." Id., citing Coy v. Iowa (1988) - U.S. -, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 101 L.Ed.2d 857.
Miller I might here be distinguished and a waiver found in the instant case on the basis that T.P., the child victim, was present at the pre-trial hearing (at least while her competency was being determined), was questioned by the defense counsel as to her competency without any interference by the judge, and was allowed to leave before the statement's reliability was determined without objection by defense counsel or request by defense counsel that he be allowed to cross-examine her as to the substance of her statement.
Miller II might also be distinguished upon the basis that here, a hearing separate from the trial was held to determine whether the statement would be admissible (albeit that the hearing was also held to determine the child's competency) and defense counsel failed to assert his right to question her at this time. However, the tenor of our Supreme Court's opinion in Miller II persuades us that a knowing, intentional waiver did not occur. Defense counsel in neither case affirmatively requested the opportunity to question the child about the statement, although both objected to the statements on the basis of a violation of sixth amendment rights. It is clear that the hearing at which T.P.'s competency and the reliability of her statement were determined did not comply with the hearing requirements described in the Miller II opinion. There was no face-to-face confrontation, nor did the court affirmatively give defense counsel an opportunity to question her as to her competency. We therefore hold that the defendant did not waive his right to cross-examination. We further hold, as in Miller I, that the violation of this right was not harmless error. As in Miller I, the videotaped statement of the victim constituted the only direct evidence linking the respondent to the molestation.
ISSUE II
Even were we to hold that the respondent had waived his sixth amendment . right, we would still be required to reverse due to the absence of corroborative evidence as required by I1.C. 85-37-4-6 (Burns Code Ed.Supp.1988). The statute allows a videotaped statement of a child witness to be admitted at trial, even though it would not otherwise be admissible, where the trial court has determined that the time, contents and circumstances of the videotaped statement provide sufficient indications of reliability. I.C. 35-37-4-6. These indicia of reliability are required whether or not the child testifies at trial 1.C. 85-87-4-6(c). Where the child has been determined to be unavailable to testify at trial, as here, the videotaped statement may only be admitted "if there is corroborative evidence of the act that was allegedly committed against the child." 1C. 85-37-4-6(d). Thus, the corroboration requirement is separate from the reliability requirement and evidence going to support the reliability of the statement does not necessarily provide corroborative evidence of the act alleged in the statement. See e.g., State v. Petry (1988) 2d Dist.Ind.App., 524 N.E.2d 1293; Altmeyer v. State (1986) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 496 N.E.2d 1328, 1331.
We note that in Miller II, supra, 531 N.E.2d 536, our Supreme Court held that physical evidence corroborative of vaginal penetration does not provide evidence of the reliability of the statement. It would seem that conversely evidence leading to a reasonable conclusion that the statement is reliable is not sufficient to constitute corroboration that the alleged act occurred.
The standard of review here is that used for any question concerning sufficiency sufficiency of a foundation for the admissibility of evidence-namely, an abuse-of-discretion test. Petry, supra, 524 N.E.2d 1293, 1296. In the present case the court found sufficient corroborative evidence to support admitting the child's videotaped statement from the child's complaint to her parent close to the time of the alleged incident, coupled with the child's subsequent trip to the hospital and the history given to the physician. We hold this to be an abuse of discretion.
*209The court allowed the doctor to testify as to T.P.'s narration of the events over defense counsel's objection.
A medical history, even though hearsay, might form the basis of a medical opinion but such history may not be used as proof of the fact or facts contained in the history given by the patient. C.T.S. Corp. v. Schoulton (1978) 270 Ind. 34, 383 N.E.2d 293. Physicians are permitted to testify as to statements made to them by one who makes them for the purpose of securing diagnosis and treatment; not to establish the truth of the statements made. Such statements are relevant to the basis of the doctor's opinion.6 City of Anderson v. Borton (1961) 132 Ind.App. 684, 178 N.E.2d 904; Cerra v. McClanahan (1967) 141 Ind.App. 469, 229 N.E.2d 737. Any facts within a medical history given by the patient are not admissible as substantive evidence. Payne v. State (1987) 2d Dist.Ind.App., 515 N.E.2d 1141.7 It was error for the court to have considered the child's narrative statement to the doctor as corroborative evidence. This is not to say the trial court erred in considering the evidence purely because it was hearsay and inadmissible. In State v. Jones (1989) 112 Wash.2d 488, 772 P.2d 496, the Washington Supreme Court held that testimony by three other witnesses that defendant enjoyed the sexual practice of urolagnia and the four-year old victim's precocious knowledge of the acts constituted sufficient corroborative evidence. The court stated that the urolagnial evidence was competent corroborative evidence despite the fact that it may not be admissible at trial because a trial court is not bound by the Rules of Evidence when it determines questions concerning the admissibility of evidence. We need not here decide whether hearsay evidence may be considered by the trial judge to provide corroborating evidence of the act of molestation as required by 1.0. 35-87-4-6. In this case the hearsay of the child contained in the doctor's testimony is not corroborative because it is not independent evidence tending to prove that a molestation occurred. It is instead only further evidence of the child's own statement and is cumulative. Thus we are left with the question whether the child's complaints alone constitute sufficient corroborative evidence.
Corroborative evidence is not defined in the statute. Black's Law Dictionary defines "corroborating evidence" as:
"Evidence supplementary to that already given and tending to strengthen or confirm it. Additional evidence of a different character to the same point." Black's Law Dictionary 311 (5th Ed., 1979).
To "corroborate" is defined as
"'To strengthen; to add weight or credibility to a thing by additional and confirming facts or evidence. The testimony of a witness is said to be corroborated when it is shown to correspond with the representation of some other witnesses, or to comport with some facts otherwise known or established." Id.
The First District in Miller v. State (1986) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 498 N.E.2d 1008, 1013, viewed the corroboration requirement as serving "the same purpose as the requirement that independent corroborative *210proof of. the corpus delicti be introduced before a confession is admitted. The phrase simply requires corroboration that the 'act' was committed by someone." However, in State v. Petry, supra, 524 N.E.2d 1293, 1300, we found corroboration to be a broader term than corpus delicti, although it served the same purpose, i.e., prevention of the danger of falsification. Petry was the first Indiana case to look closely at the requirement of corroborative evidence. Our District in Petry concluded that corroboration could consist of any evidence which, within the bounds of relevancy, tends to make the occurrence of the act in question more probable.
The Washington Appellate Court in State v. Hunt (1987) 48 Wash.App. 840, 741 P.2d 566, found that an identical requirement of "corroborative evidence of the act" in Washington's child hearsay statute required that there be "evidence of sufficient circumstances which would support a logical and reasonable inference that the act of abuse described in the hearsay statement occurred." Id., 741 P.2d at 571-572. According to the Washington Supreme Court in State v. Jones, supra, P.2d 496, this requirement requires a balancing of the statute's goal of making child victim hearsay more readily available as evidence, against the concern that use of such hearsay should not create too great a risk of an erroneous conviction. Finally, in State v. Allen (1988) 157 Ariz. 165, 755 P.2d 1153, the Arizona Supreme Court distinguished corroborative evidence from cumulative evidence, noting that to be corroborative, the evidence must be separate and apart from that already given and tend to strengthen or confirm the matter corroborated, whereas cumulative evidence merely augments or tends to establish a point already proved by other evidence.
In Ketcham v. State (1959) 240 Ind. 107, 162 N.E.2d 247, the mother of a five-year old testified as to the alleged rape of her daughter, as related to her by the child. The child did not testify at trial. The court stated that in a sexual crime, the complaint by the victim is competent evidence but the complaint may not consist of a narrative of the happening. In allowing the mother to testify, the court was faced with prior decisions which had stated in dicta that a complaint is not admissible unless the prosecuting witness also testifies, since it must corroborate the witness. This reasoning was based upon the conclusion that a complaint was corroborative of the testimony of the victim. Our Supreme Court disapproved this conclusion, however, finding that the complaint was really corroboration of the occurrence itself, rather than the testimony of the victim.
Although this statement gives us pause, we do not construe it to refer to the type of corroborative evidence of the act that was contemplated by the legislature when it drafted subsection (d) of the child hearsay statute. As explained in State v. J.S. (1988) 222 N.J.Super. 247, 536 A.2d 769, the admission of the complaint originally was not intended to either bolster the victim's credibility nor corroborate the alleged offense. The purpose of the fresh complaint rule was to allow the state to meet in advance the negative inference which would be drawn from the absence of evidence that the victim reported the incident to one to whom she would naturally turn for comfort and advice. Thus the credibility of the witness was protected from unfair attack. Given the rule's limited purpose and the Ketcham court's dilemma in admitting evidence of the complaint where the child was not available to testify, we do not believe it contradictory to hold that while T.P.'s complaints may have constituted sufficient indicia of reliability they did not constitute the independent corroborative evidence contemplated under our statute.
By requiring corroborative evidence whenever the child was not available to testify, the legislature enacted a higher burden of proof than was required under Ohio v. Roberts (1980) 448 U.S. 56, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 65 L.Ed.2d 597.8 To allow the *211child's complaint to her mother or doctor, albeit in a different form than her videotaped statement, to constitute corroborative evidence of the act is to virtually eliminate the corroboration requirement and to bootstrap the statement into substantive evidence which alone would justify a conviction of the crime. Prosecution in a substantial percentage of child sex abuse cases is no doubt triggered by a complaint made by the child to an adult. The requirement of corroborative evidence was intended to act as a safeguard due to fears about the reliability of a young child. As Justice DeBruler noted in Miller II, while the inability of a child to understand the nature and consequences of the oath does not render a child's statement inadmissible as a matter of law, it is a significant negative factor. Furthermore, the child's young age (in Miller IL, the child was three at the time of the incident alleged, and four at the time of trial) indicates a major disability in observing, remembering, recollecting and describing experiences. If we were to allow a complaint made by a child to an adult to constitute the requisite corroborative evidence, there would be no need to introduce evidence beyond the fact that the complaint was made.
The problem facing courts when corroborative evidence of the act is required has been well-documented. As Justice Shepard noted in Miller I, prosecution of sexual abuse crimes involving young children presents special problems as the child vie-tim is often the only eyewitness to the crime and physical corroboration is often unavailable because the sex offense may be nonviolent and the child may not have resisted. Although we agree with the Jones court that the "statute's essential purpose should not be defeated by a stubborn insistence on corroboration that is impossible to obtain," Jones, supra, 772 P.2d 496, 500, and while we are sensitive to the increasing number of child sex abuse cases being reported, the fact remains that the legislature was unwilling to allow a conviction based solely upon the child's statement where the child is not available to testify.
We therefore hold that there was not sufficient corroborative evidence of the act as contemplated by subsection (d) to render the videotaped statement admissible.
We reverse and remand for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
SHIELDS, P.J., concurs.
MILLER, J., concurs in result and files separate opinion.
. We note that there was no evidence as to any touching by respondent with a sponge, even in the child's videotaped statement; this portion of the charge should therefore have been stricken.
. The trial court ruled at the May 15, 1987, initial hearing that LC. 35-37-4-6 applies to a delinquency proceeding in which the juvenile is charged with an act that, if committed by an adult, would be child molesting under LC. 35-42-4-3(b):
"Now the ... Statute is written to apply to criminal actions, that issue has been presented to this Court before and this Court has ruled ... that ... this particular section should apply to delinquency actions as well, so, under sub-section (a) of Section 6, the State meets that requirement as this delinquency charge is one of Child Molesting pursuant to LC. 35-42-4-3...." Record at 84.
Appellant did raise a hearsay objection at the initial hearing (Record at 109) but this objection consisted of defense attorney's contention that I.C. 35-37-4-6 was unconstitutional as applied. Appellant did not contend at trial and does not now contend that the statute itself did not apply to a juvenile proceeding. Accordingly, we do not decide whether I.C. 35-37-4-6 is applicable in a delinquency proceeding nor whether or not the appellant's hearsay objection should have been sustained.
. The U.S. Supreme Court has held that the sixth amendment right to confrontation is applicable to juvenile proceedings such as the present one, where the consequences of the proceeding might be involuntary commitment to a state institution. In re Gault (1967) 387 U.S. 1, 87 S.Ct. 1428, 18 L.Ed.2d 527. For purposes of this opinion, the right to confrontation and the right of cross-examination shall be referred to inter-changeably. We recognize, however, that the rights are not identical. Coy v. Iowa (1988) - U.S. -, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 101 L.Ed.2d 857. Cf. Brady v. State (1989) 3d Dist. Ind.App., 540 N.E.2d 59 (Hoffman, J. dissenting), trans. pending.
. Miller v. State (1986) 1st Dist. Ind.App., 498 N.E.2d 1008.
. The second core requirement is the determination of the statement's reliability and the third core requirement is the finding of corroborative evidence.
. The opinion testimony of the doctor here does not have substantial probative value due to its speculative nature. When asked his overall impression, the doctor stated "I wrote, suspected child molestation." Record at 164. This "opinion" merely confirms the reason why the child was brought in for the exam. Cf. Noblesville Casting Division of TRW, Inc. v. Prince (1982) Ind., 438 N.E.2d 722; Watson v. Medical Emergency Services (1989) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 532 N.E.2d 1191, trans. denied.
. A more liberal federal rule is discussed in U.S. v. Iron Shell (1980) 8th Cir., 633 F.2d 77, cert. denied (1981), 450 U.S. 1001, 101 S.Ct. 1709, 68 L.Ed.2d 203. The rule would permit declarations as to cause but generally not fault or identity. However, some courts have extended the rule further and permitted physicians to testify as to statements revealing the identity of the abuser on the theory that identity is relevant to proper diagnosis and treatment. See, e.g., State v. Robinson (1987) 153 Ariz. 191, 735 P.2d 801. Other courts have refused to allow physicians to testify as to the child's statements absent evidence that the child was capable of recognizing the need to provide accurate information for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment at the time statements were made. See, e.g., Oldsen v. People (1986) Colo., 732 P.2d 1132.
. Ohio v. Roberts, supra, held that a prior statement was admissible upon a showing that the statement had indicia of reliability and that the declarant was unavailable to testify. In Roberts, however, the prior statement was made in a *211judicial setting and was subject to the equivalent of cross-examination.

=== CASE 9739632 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:51.553377+00 ===

OPINION
KIRSCH, Judge.
R.C. Patel, M.D., appeals the jury verdict against him in favor of Mary Barker, raising the following issues for review:
I. When in the course of a single surgical procedure, the surgeon breaches the applicable standard of care in two or more ways causing separate injuries, whether each of the breaches is a separate occurrence for purposes of the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act.
II. Whether the trial court erred in denying Patel’s motion for judgment on the evidence because Barker failed to present any evidence that Patel breached the standard of care causing her colon injury.
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Barker was diagnosed with a malignancy in her colon and referred to Patel for surgery. Patel performed the surgery, which involved resectioning the colon. During this surgery, Patel used hemo-clips1 to control bleeding. At some point following the surgery, it was discovered that Barker’s colon was leaking into her abdominal cavity at the point of reattachment. Patel performed a second surgery to create a colostomy.
Later, doctors discovered that a hemo-clip had been left on Barker’s ureter. A colorectal surgeon and a urological surgeon then performed a third surgery to remove the hemoclip and reverse the colostomy.
Barker filed a suit for medical malpractice against Patel. At trial, Barker claimed that Patel breached the standard of care in two ways: by suturing the colon in such a way that it leaked and by leaving a hemoclip on her ureter. The case was tried to a jury, which awarded Barker $1,800,000 in damages. The trial court reduced the award to $1,500,000, in compliance with the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act limitation of $750,000 in damages per act of malpractice. Patel now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Occurrence of malpractice
Patel first argues that the acts about which Barker complains constitute one *31“occurrence” under the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act. We note at the outset that the issue before us arises solely from the decision of the Indiana General Assembly to treat medical providers who have committed malpractice differently from other tortfeasors and to compensate those killed or injured as a result of that malpractice differently than those harmed by any other tort. In a negligence action arising from an automobile collision, for example, the negligent driver is liable for all of the damages proximately caused by his negligence and the injured party recovers all of the damages resulting from the negligence without regard to whether the negligent driver breached the standard of care in one or multiple ways. Thus, it is only because of the inability of those injured as a result of medical malpractice to recover the full amount of their damages that the present inquiry becomes relevant.
Patel argues that the acts about which Barker complains constitute one “occurrence” of malpractice under the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act and maintains that Barker should be entitled to only one recovery, or $750,000. Barker, on the other hand, contends that Patel committed two breaches of the standard of care, and therefore two “occurrences” by failing to close her colon correctly and by leaving a hemoclip in place. Thus, she maintains, and the trial court agreed, that she is entitled to recover the statutorily-capped amount of damages for each occurrence of malpractice.
To resolve this dispute, we must interpret the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act. When a statute is clear and unambiguous, we need not apply any rules of construction other than to require that words and phrases be taken in their plain, ordinary, and usual sense. Poehlman v. Feferman, 717 N.E.2d 578, 581 (Ind.1999); Community Hosp. of Anderson & Madison County v. McKnight, 493 N.E.2d 775, 777 (Ind.1986). Clear and unambiguous statutory meaning leaves no room for judicial construction. Poehlman, 717 N.E.2d at 581.
If a statute is ambiguous and its meaning is not clear from the words used, judicial construction is proper. Sue Yee Lee v. Lafayette Home Hosp., Inc., 410 N.E.2d 1319, 1322-23 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). In such case, the purpose and goal of judicial construction is to give effect to the intention of the legislature. Id. A statute should be construed to accomplish the end for which it was enacted. Id. In construing a statute, the court must consider the whole act and, if possible, effect must be given to every word and clause therein. Guinn v. Light, 558 N.E.2d 821, 823 (Ind.1990). Finally, the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act is in derogation of the common law and must be strictly construed. Cacdac v. West, 705 N.E.2d 506, 510 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. dismissed.
In the Act, malpractice is defined broadly as a tort or breach of contract based on health care services that were provided or that should have been provided to a patient. IC 34-18-2-18. IC 34-18-14-3 further provides:
“(a) The total amount recoverable for an injury or death of a patient may not exceed the following:
(1) Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for an act of malpractice that occurs before January 1, 1990.
(2) Seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000) for an act of malpractice that occurs:
(A) after December 31,1989; and
(B) before July 1,1999.
(3) One million two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($1,250,000) for an act of malpractice that occurs after June 30,1999.
(b) A health care provider qualified under this article (or IC 27-12 before its repeal) is not liable for an amount in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) for an occurrence of malpractice.”
*32Thus, the meaning of the Act hinges on the definitions of the terms “an injury or death,” “an act of malpractice,” and “an occurrence of malpractice.” Although Barker and Patel debate the meaning of the term “occurrence,” this term appears only in subsection (b), which discusses the ramifications of a claim to the health care provider. By contrast, subsection (a) is concerned with the effect of the limitation on recovery to the patient. This provision addresses the subject in terms of “injury” and the critical concept is “an act” of malpractice. We therefore conclude that the meaning of “occurrence” is not the disposi-tive issue here.
In a pair of cases in 1992, this court interpreted the Act’s recovery limitation and focused on the term “injury.” In St. Anthony Med. Ctr., Inc. v. Smith, 592 N.E.2d 732 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied, the plaintiff, the decedent’s estate, brought a wrongful death claim based on medical malpractice. Smith, the decedent, went to the hospital to have a test performed. Prior to the test, he was placed on a restrictive diet and instructed to take laxatives. This, combined with the test itself, can cause a hypotensive condition that can lead to a stroke. After the test, Smith was discharged to the dressing room. Four and a half hours later, an aide found him lying on the floor. He had suffered a stroke. Thereafter, he was admitted to the hospital, where he was later administered an overdose of medication. He died two weeks later while still a patient at the hospital. After a trial, the jury awarded Smith’s estate nearly one million dollars. The trial court reduced the award to the statutory cap for an act of malpractice, and the estate appealed.
Quoting the language of the statute, we determined that the estate was entitled to recover only $500,000 (the cap at that time), even if Smith had suffered two separate acts of malpractice. This result obtained because “John suffered a' single injury, a stroke, which led to his death. Betty’s claim, filed against SAMC, is derived from that death.” Id. at 739. Thus, the patient’s injury was the determinative focus.
Similarly, in Bova v. Roig, 604 N.E.2d 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), the plaintiff sued for medical malpractice based upon the care of his left eye. He contended that the defendant committed malpractice in his performance of eye surgery and in the postoperative care that he provided. The plaintiff eventually lost sight in his eye. After a trial, the jury awarded the plaintiff damages in excess of the cap, the trial court reduced the award to the cap amount, and the plaintiff appealed.
Once again focusing on the language of the statute and therefore the injury to the patient, we stated that: “The Act allows a recovery of $500,000 for ‘any injury or death.’ I.C. § 16-9.5-2-2(a). Bova suffered a single injury, blindness in his left eye. Hence, he is entitled to recover only once.” Id. at 3.
A few years later, in Miller v. Memorial Hosp. of South Bend, Inc., 679 N.E.2d 1329 (Ind.1997), our supreme court considered whether certain conduct constituted one or two separate acts or occurrences of malpractice. In that case, the plaintiffs alleged that Mrs. Miller’s obstetrician failed to appropriately treat her infant in útero for posttermism which resulted in hypoxia and brain damage. The plaintiffs also alleged that the hospital failed to treat the infant upon birth for zero blood glucose, which caused additional, distinct brain damage. Id. at 1331. The plaintiffs argued that these were two separate acts of malpractice. resulting in two separate injuries and therefore allowing two separate recoveries under the Malpractice Act.
Our supreme court agreed. It characterized the injuries as prenatal and postnatal, noting that they resulted in damage to different parts of the infant’s brain. Further, the plaintiffs’ complaint asserted two claims against two defendants and specified different dates for each claim. Thus, the court held that a genuine issue of *33material fact existed as to “whether Nicholas Miller suffered separate injuries from two distinct alleged occurrences of medical malpractice.” Id. at 1329. In noting “the rare factual circumstances” of the case where separate acts caused separate injuries, the Miller court acknowledged that while the Malpractice Act authorizes only-one recovery where a single injury exists, irrespective of the number of acts causing the injury, the statute did not preclude separate recoveries where there are two separate and distinct injuries caused by two separate and distinct occurrences of malpractice. It stated:
“The Medical Malpractice Act’s limitations apply to ‘any injury or death of a patient’ and ‘for an occurrence of malpractice.’ It authorizes only one recovery in those cases where a single injury exists, irrespective of the number of acts causing the injury. Conversely, there is no dispute that, if there are two separate and distinct injuries caused by two separate occurrences of malpractice, the statute does not preclude two separate recoveries (each separately limited in accordance with the-Act).”
Id. at 1331-32 (citations omitted).2 See also Haswell v. Kramer, 659 N.E.2d 146, 151 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied (1996) (“[T]here is nothing in the act precluding recovery for separate injuries that are sustained as a result of more than one act of malpractice.”)
Thus, the cases have interpreted the Act as allowing only one recovery when multiple breaches lead to a single injury and multiple recoveries when multiple breaches during more than one procedure lead to multiple injuries. Here, we face the unique case where multiple breaches during a single procedure lead to multiple injuries. Nonetheless, we see no principled reason why this distinction should require a different analysis. Rather, the limitation on recovery applies to “an injury or death,” not “an act of malpractice.” Here, it is undisputed that Barker had two distinct injuries from two distinct acts of malpractice to two separate body systems, her digestive system and her urinary system. Thus, we believe the plain language of the Act allows for recovery up to the cap amount on each claim arising from separate acts of malpractice resulting in separate injuries.
We hold that the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act allows for one recovery for each distinct act of malpractice that results in a distinct injury, even if the multiple acts of malpractice occur in the same procedure. The trial court did not err in allowing separate recoveries each subject to the statutory cap.
Patel also contends that the trial court erred in reducing the jury’s award to $1,500,000. He claims that because the jury returned a general verdict, it was impossible to discern the amount of damages awarded on each claim, and there was no evidence that the jury intended an equal amount of damages on each claim. In essence, Patel asserts that the jury could have awarded one dollar in damages on one of the claims and the remainder on the other, (making his liability after remit-titur $750,001) rather than $750,000 on each. However, at trial, Barker requested separate verdict forms for her two claims and Patel objected. Based on Patel’s objection, Barker withdrew her request and agreed to the general verdict form. A party cannot invite error then complain about the error on appeal. E.R. v. Marion County Office of Family & Children, 729 N.E.2d 1052, 1061 (Ind.Ct.App.2000) (invit*34ed error is not reversible error). Patel has waived the form of the general verdict for appellate review by his failure to challenge it at trial. Stover v. State, 621 N.E.2d 664, 668 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
II. Judgment on the evidence
Patel next asserts that the trial court erred in denying his motion for a judgment on the evidence contending that there was no evidence that Barker’s anas-tomotic colon leak was the result of any breach of the standard of care by Patel.
The denial of a motion for judgment on the evidence is within the broad discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only for an abuse of that discretion. Zemco Mfg., Inc. v. Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d 1064, 1071 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (1999). In reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment on the evidence, we apply the same standard as the trial court and look only to the evidence and reasonable inferences most favorable to the non-moving party. City of Fort Wayne v. Moore, 706 N.E.2d 604, 607 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied; Firstmark Standard Life Ins. Co. v. Goss, 699 N.E.2d 689, 696 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (1999).
When the defendant moves for judgment on the evidence at the close of the plaintiffs evidence in a jury trial, the motion should be granted only where an issue in the case or an essential element of the claim is not supported by sufficient evidence. Firstmark, 699 N.E.2d at 696; see Ind. Trial Rule 50(A). Judgment on the evidence is appropriate only if there is no substantial evidence or reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom to support an essential element of the claim. City of Fort Wayne, 706 N.E.2d at 607. If there is any probative evidence or reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence or if there is evidence allowing reasonable people to differ ás to the result, judgment on the evidence is improper. Firstmark, 699 N.E.2d at 696.
Here, Dr. Joseph Tyrrell, who assisted on Barker’s surgery, and who was a general doctor and surgeon, testified that while a leak is more likely the result of anatomy, the surgeon’s technique can play a role in developing a leak. He stated that if the surgeon examines the bowel, he should be able to see if there is a leak. He also opined that it is inappropriate to close a surgical incision if there is a leak and that it is a deviation from the standard of care to close an incision without diagnosing a leak if a leak is present. This was evidence of Patel’s breach of the standard of care which resulted in Barker’s colon leak. Thus, there was evidence on every element of the claim, and Patel was not entitled to judgment on the evidence. The trial court did not err in denying Patel’s motion.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., concurs.
FRIEDLANDER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. A hemoclip is similar in function and appearance to a staple.
. We note that the courts in Miller, Bova, and Smith interpreting the Act discussed it as it appeared at IC 16-9.5-2-2. At that time, the limitation on recovery applied to “any injury or death” (emphasis added). In 1993, the General Assembly recodified the Act at IC 27-12-14-3. When it did so, it changed the statutory language to “an injury or death” (emphasis added). We perceive no substantive change was intended or effected by this change. The Act was subsequently moved again to its present location in title 34, but the language was not altered.

=== CASE 9739633 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:51.55795+00 ===

FRIEDLANDER, Judge,
dissenting.
I believe that Barker is entitled to recover for only one incident of malpractice under the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act (the Act) and respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion to the contrary.
I agree with the majority to the extent that it characterizes the question as one involving “multiple breaches during a single procedure.” Op. at 33. The majority focuses upon the “multiple breaches” in concluding that there were two incidents of medical malpractice under the Act. I, on the other hand, believe that the dispositive fact is that Barker’s allegation’s stem from a single surgery.
Previous opinions of the Indiana Supreme Court and this court have acknowledged that the Act was a legislative response to an impending health care crisis in the 1970s.
Specifically, “the problem of expensive medical malpractice insurance, which had been simmering for over a decade, came to *35a boil and threatened to make such insurance completely unavailable.” Winona Memorial Hosp. Found. of Indianapolis v. Lomax, 465 N.E.2d 731, 738 (Ind.Ct.App.1984). The Act “was the legislative response to the crisis in the availability of medical malpractice insurance, which, in turn, was threatening the availability of the health care services to the public.” Id. at 739. Our supreme court noted in Roh-rabaugh v. Wagoner, 274 Ind. 661, 413 N.E.2d 891 (1980) that one of the methods conceived by the Legislature to remedy this problem involved limiting patient remedies against health care providers. Those limitations included restricting the amount of money a medical malpractice plaintiff could recover. It is beyond debate that the cap on recoveries under the Act is an integral part of the legislative scheme. As the majority notes, our courts have several times been called upon to determine issues relating to the cap. Since the cap aspect of the Act was declared constitutional, the question is seldom, if ever, presented in the form of a challenge to the actual amount of the cap. Rather, plaintiffs have sought to increase the amount of their recoveries on the basis of multiple claims of malpractice.
Thus far, the principles that have emerged on this question are that (1) a person may recover only once for a single injury, even where that injury was caused by multiple breaches of the standard of care, see, e.g., Bova v. Roig, 604 N.E.2d 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) and (2) multiple recoveries may result from multiple, separate breaches that cause multiple injuries. See, e.g., Miller v. Memorial Hosp. of South Bend, Inc., 679 N.E.2d 1329 (Ind.1997). I find those conclusions unassailable, in part because those principles are entirely consistent with the purpose and legislative intent underlying the Act.
With regard to the question at issue here, the Act neither expressly embraces nor rejects the concept of multiple recoveries for multiple breaches in a single surgical procedure. Indiana’s appellate courts have not decided a case that compels either result. Indeed, viewed strictly as an exercise in statutory construction, the majority’s analysis is not unreasonable. My disagreement with the law created in the instant case is based upon my conclusion that it contravenes the purpose of the Act, and therefore also contravenes the intent of the legislature that passed the Act.
The principles that emerge from the cases that have thus far grappled with this question embody the concept that, in order to justify multiple recoveries, there must be a separation in time and circumstance of the multiple breaches. See, e.g., Miller v. Memorial Hosp. of South Bend, Inc., 679 N.E.2d 1329 (involving prenatal and postnatal injury to a child). In my view, for purposes of the Act, a surgical procedure should be regarded as a single act of medical treatment, albeit one that may include many steps. The various steps in a surgery are not sufficiently distinct from one another in time and circumstance to justify multiple recoveries under the Act. In other words, the Act does not contemplate the possibility of as many recoveries of the cap amount as there are steps in a single surgical procedure. Such runs contrary to the very purpose of the Act. I believe that when the Legislature limited recovery to $750,000 for an act of malpractice, it did not envision or intend multimillion-dollar recoveries stemming from what is referred to in the common vernacular as a “botched” surgery, regardless of the number of ways in which it was botched.
I would reverse the trial court and limit the amount of Barker’s recovery to $750,000.

=== CASE 9739634 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:52.832043+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Joseph Snell, a licensed chiropractor, appeals from a September 1999 circuit court order affirming sanctions imposed against him by defendants, the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation (Department) and its then-director, Nikki M. Zollar, based on Snell’s violation of section 26 of the Medical Practice Act of 1987 (Act) (225 ILCS 60/26 (West Supp. 1999)). Snell argues that (1) the Department’s decision was against the manifest weight of the evidence; and (2) section 26, as applied to him, violates his first amendment right to free speech. Because we agree with Snell’s second argument, we reverse. I. BACKGROUND In December 1996, the Department filed an administrative complaint against Snell, which alleged, inter alia, that Snell violated the advertising provisions set forth in section 26 of the Act (225 ILCS 60/26 (West Supp. 1999)) by displaying in his office waiting room a 27-page booklet entitled “Our Patients Speak” (hereafter booklet). Section 26(2) of the Act provides, in pertinent part, that “[i]t is unlawful for any person licensed under this Act to use testimonials or claims of superior quality of care to entice the public.” 225 ILCS 60/26(2) (West Supp. 1999). At a June 1997 administrative hearing, the evidence showed that the booklet contained preprinted forms entitled “My Chiropractic Story.” Each form contained 14 questions addressed to Snell’s past or current patients. The questions included the following: (1) “What led to your decision to try chiropractic?” (2) “Did you have any doubts that chiropractic would help you?” (3) “What were your first impressions of chiropractic, this office, and the doctor?” (4) “Is anyone else in your family a chiropractic patient?” (5) “How has chiropractic helped them?” (6) “What would you recommend to others who are sick, suffering, or in pain?” (7) “How do you feel about chiropractic, now that you have enjoyed its benefits?” The answers to the questions were supplied by the patients in their own handwriting, and each form was accompanied by the photograph and signature of the patient. Following the hearing, the administrative law judge (ALJ) issued her ruling and found that the booklet contained testimonials in violation of section 26 of the Act. Based upon this finding, the ALJ recommended that Snell be reprimanded, pay a $2,500 fine, and complete certain continuing education courses. In September 1997, the Department’s medical disciplinary board adopted the ALJ’s findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendations, and ordered that Snell pay a $2,500 fine. Snell subsequently sought administrative review of the Department’s decision by the circuit court. In September 1999, the circuit court upheld the Department’s decision. This appeal followed. II. FIRST AMENDMENT CHALLENGE  Initially, we note that constitutional questions will not be considered where the case can be determined on other, nonconstitutional grounds. See People v. McDaniel, 164 Ill. 2d 173,180, 647 N.E.2d 266, 269 (1995); see also Lacny v. Police Board, 291 Ill. App. 3d 397, 400, 683 N.E.2d 1265, 1267 (1997). However, because it appears that defendants would prevail on the merits of Snell’s nonconstitutional claim, we address Snell’s constitutional argument. Snell argues that by prohibiting his use of the booklet, section 26 violates his first amendment right to free speech. We agree. A. Protection of Commercial Speech Constitutional protection for commercial speech is a relatively recent development in the Supreme Court’s first amendment jurisprudence. Prior to the mid-1970s, the Supreme Court adhered to the broad rule that the Constitution imposes no restraint on governments with respect to commercial speech. See Valentine v. Chrestensen, 316 U.S. 52, 54, 86 L. Ed. 1262, 1265, 62 S. Ct. 920, 921 (1942). In 1976, the Court changed course in Virginia State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 761-62, 48 L. Ed. 2d 346, 358, 96 S. Ct. 1817, 1825-26 (1976), holding that purely commercial speech is entitled to first amendment protection from unwarranted governmental regulation. The Court expressed the belief that the free flow of commercial information is indispensable to the proper allocation of resources in a free enterprise system because it informs the numerous private decisions that drive the system. Virginia State Board of Pharmacy, 425 U.S. at 765, 48 L. Ed. 2d at 360, 96 S. Ct. at 1827.  The Supreme Court has continued to define the appropriate constitutional protection afforded to commercial speech since its holding in Virginia State Board of Pharmacy. See Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., 515 U.S. 618, 622-23, 132 L. Ed. 2d 541, 548-49, 115 S. Ct. 2371, 2375 (1995) (listing history and holdings of the Court’s commercial speech cases). However, even today, first amendment protection of commercial speech is not absolute. “ ‘ “[C]ommercial speech [enjoys] a limited measure of protection, commensurate with its subordinate position in the scale of [fjirst [a]mendment values,” and is subject to “modes of regulation that might be impermissible in the realm of noncommercial expression.” ’ ” Florida Bar, 515 U.S. at 623, 132 L. Ed. 2d at 549, 115 S. Ct. at 2375, quoting Board of Trustees of State University of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 477, 106 L. Ed. 2d 388, 402, 109 S. Ct. 3028, 3033 (1989), quoting Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n, 436 U.S. 447, 456, 56 L. Ed. 2d 444, 453, 98 S. Ct. 1912, 1918 (1978). B. Central Hudson’s Four-Part Test  Restrictions on commercial speech are analyzed under the four-part test set out in Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm’n, 447 U.S. 557, 566, 65 L. Ed. 2d 341, 351, 100 S. Ct. 2343, 2351 (1980): In further refinement of the Central Hudson test, the Supreme Court in In re R.M.J., 455 U.S. 191, 203, 71 L. Ed. 2d 64, 74, 102 S. Ct. 929, 937 (1982), held that while the State may entirely prohibit misleading advertising, it may not absolutely prohibit potentially misleading advertising if the information may also be presented in a way that is not deceptive. In addition, the Supreme Court has noted that the four parts of the Central Hudson test are not entirely discrete. Greater New Orleans Broadcasting Ass’n v. United States, 527 U.S. 173, 183-84, 144 L. Ed. 2d 161, 174, 119 S. Ct. 1923, 1930 (1999). “All are important and, to a certain extent, interrelated: Each raises a relevant question that may not be dispositive to the [fjirst [a]mendment inquiry, but the answer to which may inform a judgment concerning the other three.” Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 183-84, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 174, 119 S. Ct. at 1930. “At the outset, we must determine whether the expression is protected by the [fjirst [a]mendment. For commercial speech to come within that provision, it at least must concern lawful activity and not be misleading. Next, we ask whether the asserted governmental interest is substantial. If both inquiries yield positive answers, we must determine whether the regulation directly advances the governmental interest asserted, and whether it is not more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest.” 1. The First Prong of the Central Hudson Test  At the outset, we conclude that the booklet constitutes commercial speech. See Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 561-62, 65 L. Ed. 2d at 348, 100 S. Ct. at 2349 (commercial speech consists of “expression related solely to the economic interests of the speaker and its audience” and of “ ‘speech proposing a commercial transaction’ ”), quoting Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456, 56 L. Ed. 2d at 453, 98 S. Ct. at 1918. Defendants do not contend that the booklet is actually deceptive, misleading, false, or illegal. Indeed, at oral argument before this court, the Department conceded that the booklet itself is not deceptive, misleading, or false. Instead, the Department asserts that the testimonials in the booklet, like all testimonials, are “inherently misleading.” We disagree.  In Desnick v. Department of Professional Regulation, 171 Ill. 2d 510, 523, 665 N.E.2d 1346, 1354 (1996), our supreme court noted that because the first amendment’s concern for commercial speech is based on the informational function of advertising, the government may legitimately suppress commercial expression that is more likely to deceive the public than inform it. See Bates v. State Bar, 433 U.S. 350, 383, 53 L. Ed. 2d 810, 835, 97 S. Ct. 2691, 2709 (1977) (false, deceptive, or misleading advertising is subject to restraint).  A “testimonial” has been defined as “[a] formed, or written statement testifying to a particular truth or fact” (American Heritage Dictionary 1330 (1975)) and as “a statement testifying to benefits received” (Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 1218 (10th ed. 1996)). Although testimonials have the potential to be misleading, there is nothing inherently misleading about them. Testimonials are not innately more likely to deceive the public than inform it. Indeed, the testimonials in Snell’s booklet, which included candid patient comments such as (1) “Examine all your options. See if a chiropractor or another specialist can help”; (2) “[Depending on the problem, I’d suggest a consultation with a chiropractor”; and (3) “[chiropractic treatment helped my] wife 75%,” are prime examples of testimonials that are neither misleading nor deceptive.  Because we conclude that the testimonials in the booklet are not inherently misleading, we further conclude that the booklet constitutes protected speech under the first amendment. In so concluding, we note that Ardt v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 154 Ill. 2d 138, 607 N.E.2d 1226 (1992), does not require a different result. In that case, the Department disciplined a dentist, in part, on the ground that he violated section 45 of the Illinois Dental Practice Act, which prohibits claims of superior quality of care (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111, par. 2345(h)(1) (now 225 ILCS 25/ 45(h)(1) (West 1998))). Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 141, 607 N.E.2d at 1227-28. The dentist responded that the provision contravened his first amendment right to free speech. Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 151, 607 N.E.2d at 1232. The dentist’s ads represented, in pertinent part, that he provided “quality dentistry.” The supreme court concluded that the phrase “quality dentistry” implied superior quality, was inherently misleading, and thus could be prohibited by the State. Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 154, 607 N.E.2d at 1233. Even assuming that the supreme court would still adhere to its view that a “quality dentistry” advertisement is inherently misleading (for a cogent discussion regarding why such an advertisement is not inherently misleading, see Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 158-60, 607 N.E.2d at 1235-36 (Heiple, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)), Ardt is inapposite. In that case, the supreme court specifically addressed a challenge to that portion of section 45 of the Illinois Dental Practice Act prohibiting “claims of superior quality of care” (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. Ill, par. 2345(h)(1) (now 225 ILCS 25/45(h)(l) (West 1998))). Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 151-57, 607 N.E.2d at 1232-35. Unlike the present case, the Ardt court did not have before it, and, thus, did not address, any challenge to the portion of section 45 that prohibits the use of testimonials. (Both section 26 of the Act (225 ILCS 60/26(2) (West Supp. 1999)) and section 45 of the Illinois Dental Practice Act (225 ILCS 25/45 (West 1998)) prohibit “testimonials or claims of superior quality of care to entice the public.”) 2. The Second Prong of the Central Hudson Test  The second prong of the Central Hudson test asks whether the asserted governmental interest served by the speech restriction is substantial. Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 185, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 175, 119 S. Ct. at 1931. Defendants contend that the State has “a substantial interest in restricting physicians’ commercial speech to that which is not misleading” and which is helpful and informative to the potential consumer. We agree. The State has a substantial interest in regulating the medical profession. Desnick, 171 Ill. 2d at 528, 665 N.E.2d at 1356. Our supreme court has also recognized that “the State has a very real and compelling interest in restricting the advertising of health-care services to those which are truthful, informative[,] and helpful to the potential consumer in making an intelligent decision.” Talsky v. Department of Registration & Education, 68 Ill. 2d 579, 591, 370 N.E.2d 173, 179 (1977). Accordingly, we conclude that defendants have satisfied the second prong of Central Hudson. 3. The Third and Fourth Prongs of the Central Hudson Test  The third prong of the Central Hudson test asks whether the speech restriction directly and materially advances the asserted governmental interest. Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 188, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 177, 119 S. Ct. at 1932. “This burden is not satisfied by mere speculation or conjecture; rather, a governmental body seeking to sustain a restriction on commercial speech must demonstrate that the harms it recites are real and that its restriction will in fact alleviate them to a material degree.” Edenfield v. Fane, 507 U.S. 761, 770-71, 123 L. Ed. 2d 543, 555, 113 S. Ct. 1792, 1800 (1993). Consequently, “the regulation may not be sustained if it provides only ineffective or remote support for the government’s purpose.” Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 564, 65 L. Ed. 2d at 350, 100 S. Ct. at 2350. The Supreme Court has stressed that “this requirement [is] critical; otherwise, ‘a State could with ease restrict commercial speech in the service of other objectives that could not themselves justify a burden on commercial expression.’ ” Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 514 U.S. 476, 487, 131 L. Ed. 2d 532, 542, 115 S. Ct. 1585, 1592 (1995), quoting Edenfield, 507 U.S. at 771, 123 L. Ed. 2d at 555, 113 S. Ct. at 1800.  The fourth prong of the Central Hudson test complements the direct-advancement inquiry of the third part, asking whether the speech restriction is not more extensive than necessary to serve the interests that support it. Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 188, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 177, 119 S. Ct. at 1932. The government is not required to employ the least restrictive means conceivable, but the challenged regulation must be narrowly tailored such that the regulation and the asserted interest demonstrate “a fit that is not necessarily perfect, but reasonable; that represents not necessarily the single best disposition but one whose scope ‘is in proportion to the interest served.’ ” Fox, 492 U.S. at 480, 106 L. Ed. 2d at 404, 109 S. Ct. at 3035, quoting In re R.M.J., 455 U.S. at 203, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 74, 102 S. Ct. at 937. Defendants baldly assert that (1) the restriction “protects the public from deceptive commercial speech” and “from being misled by any claims of beneficial results”; (2) section 26 “is limited in scope and prohibits only a discrete [form] of advertising that is inherently misleading”; and (3) the restriction is “narrowly drawn to advance Illinois’ substantial interest in restricting the advertising of health[-] care services to that which is informative and helpful to the potential consumer in making an intelligent decision.”  The record before us contains no anecdotal accounts of actual harm to potential consumers of chiropractic who were misled or deceived by the booklet’s testimonials. In addition, defendants do not point to any studies or empirical evidence suggesting that the testimonials in the booklet, or any other types of testimonials, mislead or deceive potential consumers. Defendants correctly point out that speech restrictions have been upheld on “commonsense links” between the harms the State seeks to prevent and the State’s speech restriction. See Desnick, 171 Ill. 2d at 533, 665 N.E.2d at 1359 (noting that the Supreme Court has upheld speech restrictions on such commonsense links and listing those cases). However, we fail to see any commonsense link between a categorical ban on testimonials, which, as we earlier concluded, are not inherently misleading, and the purported harms the State seeks to prevent. In our judgment, such an outright ban does not directly and materially advance the State’s substantial interests. See R.M.J., 455 U.S. at 203, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 74, 102 S. Ct. at 937 (the State may not absolutely prohibit potentially misleading advertising if the information may also be presented in a way that is not deceptive). In addition, we conclude that section 26, by banning testimonials outright, sacrifices an intolerable amount of truthful speech about lawful conduct. We further conclude that the complete ban on testimonials is not in proportion to the State’s admittedly important interests and is unnecessarily and disproportionately broad in the scope of communication it prohibits. See Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 152, 607 N.E.2d at 1232 (holding that categorical ban of the phrase “family dentistry” was an unconstitutional abridgement of free speech because the phrase was only potentially misleading); see also Bailey v. Morales, 190 E3d 320, 324-25 (5th Cir. 1999) (holding unconstitutional a Texas law prohibiting chiropractors from soliciting as patients individuals with a special need for chiropractic services arising out of an accident or preexisting condition, in part, because the law was not reasonably tailored to the harm the State sought to prevent). In sum, if a testimonial is not misleading, not false, and not deceptive, then a governmental ban of it falls afoul of the first amendment. For all of the above reasons, we hold that by prohibiting Snell’s use of the booklet, section 26 of the Act violates Snell’s first amendment right to free speech. Accordingly, we reverse the circuit court’s decision upholding the Department’s decision. III. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated, we reverse the circuit court’s decision. Reversed. MYERSCOUGH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739635 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:52.83645+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, dissenting: I respectfully dissent because I am unable to reconcile the majority’s decision with Illinois Supreme Court precedent. State regulation of commercial speech is permissible by means of appropriate time, place, and manner restrictions and where such speech is false or misleading. Desnick, 171 Ill. 2d at 518, 665 N.E.2d at 1352. Further, the overbreadth doctrine, traditionally utilized in analyzing challenges to a regulation’s constitutionality, does not apply to commercial speech challenges. Desnick, 171 Ill. 2d at 519, 665 N.E.2d at 1353. Thus, the challenging party may not simply attack the regulation’s validity, claiming that it infringes protected speech of others even if it might constitutionally be applied to him. Rather, he must claim that the acts that are the subject of the litigation fall outside what a properly drawn regulation could cover. Desnick, 171 Ill. 2d at 520, 665 N.E.2d at 1353. A challenge to the application of a commercial speech restriction is analyzed under the four-part framework set out in Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566, 65 L. Ed. 2d at 351, 100 S. Ct. at 2351. Unlike the majority, I conclude that the first prong of the Central Hudson test is dispositive in this matter. The United States Supreme Court did note in a recent case that “[t]he four parts of the Central Hudson test are not entirely discrete” and that “[a]ll are important and, to a certain extent, interrelated.” Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 183-84, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 174, 119 S. Ct. at 1930. However, the parties there agreed that the speech at issue was not misleading. Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, 527 U.S. at 184, 144 L. Ed. 2d at 175,119 S. Ct. at 1930. I conclude that the testimonials at issue here are “inherently misleading” for purposes of the Central Hudson test when viewed in light of the Supreme Court of Illinois’ decision in Ardt. The majority has discussed why it believes Ardt is not dispositive here; however, I conclude that Ardt requires affirmance of the circuit court. Section 26 of the Act regulates advertising and prohibits chiropractors from utilizing testimonials or claims of superior quality to entice the public. 225 ILCS 60/26 (West Supp. 1999). In Ardt, the court applied this same language and concluded that a dentist’s advertisement promoting “ ‘quality dentistry for all family needs and all ages’ ” was inherently misleading because the statement could not be measured or tested empirically. Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 154, 607 N.E.2d at 1233. I find particularly applicable the court’s statement: “Whether the quality of any one dentist’s services is superior to that of his colleagues is a matter of opinion for the dentist’s patients to decide after treatment. Prior to treatment they should not be misled by advertising which might prove to make an empty claim.” (Emphasis added.) Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 154, 607 N.E.2d at 1233. See also Talsky, 68 Ill. 2d at 590-91, 370 N.E.2d at 178-79 (upholding advertising limitations on chiropractor, court determined that the public is particularly susceptible to advertising or promises of medical relief and that the State has a compelling interest to guard against potential abuse). Each of the “chiropractic stories” contained in the booklet was favorable and supportive of Snell and his practice. Snell elicited praise with questions directly related to the benefits received by the patient and with questions that asked patients to “describe [their] results, including time involved.” He elicited statements such as the following: “little to zero pain — took three months”; “Severe pain disappeared after a couple treatments and only slight discomfort was left after several weeks”; “Pain decreased in about 2 weeks. In about 6 weeks all pain was gone”; and “Just after 2 mo. I feel 100% better than I did when I came to Dr. Snell.” Other questions seemed designed to elicit testimonials. Question No. 12 asks: “What would you recommend to others who are sick, suffering, or in pain?” Some of the answers included: “Chiropractic can help you feel healthier and more alive”; “Try a chiropractor. They may be able to help”; “Go see Dr. Snell”; “I would tell them to go to Dr. Snell right away”; “I would send them to Dr. Snell right away”; “I would send them, to Dr. Snell”; “Go to Snell Chiropractic Center. It helped me with my pain!” Finally, some of the requests for information were phrased so as to assume a favorable response or an expression of appreciation. Question No. 11 asks: “How do you feel about chiropractic, now that you have enjoyed its benefits?” Answers to this inquiry included the following: “I believe in the ability of a chiropractor to make a person feel 100% better” and “I feel great about it. I have never felt so good in my fife.” Like the advertisement of “quality dentistry” at issue in Ardt, these statements cannot be measured or tested empirically. Further, “testimonials,” particularly when assembled as they were in this case, imply to Snell’s waiting room patients that the treatment advertised is 100% or nearly 100% effective for all persons and is superior to other methods. No unfavorable testimonials were made available in the waiting room. Since the Supreme Court of Illinois found the phrase “quality dentistry” to be inherently misleading, I am led to the same conclusion with respect to the testimonials and statements contained in the booklet. I find the testimonials at issue here to be even more misleading than using the phrase “quality dentistry” in an advertisement. Since inherently misleading commercial speech may be completely prohibited, I would end the analysis there. Ardt, 154 Ill. 2d at 155, 607 N.E.2d at 1234. As an additional matter, I note that the majority opinion, taken to its logical conclusion, would require the Department to present evidence to show that a particular testimonial is deceptive, misleading, or false in order to bar its use. Ardt did not impose a similar duty upon the Department to establish that the public was actually misled by the phrase “quality dentistry.” The majority places an impossible burden on the Department, requiring it to question the particular chiropractor’s clients to ascertain the effect that a certain testimonial had upon them. Such a requirement fails to recognize the scope of the legislative power in this area. The State has a substantial interest in regulating the medical profession, and in carrying out that interest it has the power to draw lines, to classify. It is not only inevitable but necessary in the management of the medical profession that lines be drawn. See Jacobson v. Department of Public Aid, 269 Ill. App. 3d 359, 368, 646 N.E.2d 949, 955 (1994) (public welfare system). I would find that the ban on the testimonials at issue here does not violate the first amendment.

=== CASE 9739636 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:53.099525+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK delivered the opinion of the court: In December 1998, Christine Kresse, decedent Bernadine Goffinet’s daughter, commenced this áction by filing claims against the estate for personal services rendered as guardian of Bernadine’s person (755 ILCS 5/1 la — 17 (West 1992)) from October 1993 to June 1998. During trial, the court barred a portion of Kresse’s testimony based upon section 8 — 201 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code), often referred to as the Dead-Man’s Act (alternately referred to herein as the Act) (735 ILCS 5/8 — 201 (West 1998)). Kresse appeals, arguing that (1) the trial court erred in its application of the Act to her claim against the estate; and (2) if the trial court properly applied the Act, the court abused its discretion in the amount of mileage reimbursement and attorney fees awarded. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with directions. I. BACKGROUND Bernadine had three daughters, Christine Kresse, Phyllis Bank-son, and Kay Buzan, and a son, James E. Goffinet. In October 1993, James and Kay filed a petition for guardianship in Macon County. Each family retained its own attorney throughout these proceedings. Kresse initially opposed a guardian for her mother. However, once James and Kay filed the petition for guardianship, she asked to be sole guardian; Bernadine’s other children asked that they all serve as guardian together. In 1993, the court appointed Kresse sole guardian of Bernadine’s person and she served in that capacity until her mother’s death in June 1998. The court appointed Magna Trust Company, the predecessor to respondent, Union Planters Bank (Bank), guardian of Bemadine’s estate and appointed Kresse guardian of her person. Bernadine’s daughters and James’ three children survived her. The will left the residue of her estate to her four children, in equal shares per stirpes. The Bank serves as executor. Following the probate of Bemadine’s will, Kresse and her attorney, Charles J. Gramlich, filed four separate claims against the estate: (1) Gramlich’s claim for $3,743.25 for unpaid attorney fees incurred by Kresse; (2) Kresse’s claim for personal services rendered as guardian of Bemadine’s person for over $120,000; (3) Kresse’s claim for over $100,000 for personal services rendered pursuant to section 18 — 1.1 of the Probate Act of 1975 (Probate Act) (755 ILCS 5/18 — 1.1 (West 1998)) for Bemadine’s care; and (4) Kresse’s claim for $9,673.18 for attorney fees incurred by her as the guardian of Bernadine’s person. The executor filed a demand for a bill of particulars as to all four claims. Kresse filed a motion to withdraw her claim for over $100,000 under section 18 — 1.1 of the Probate Act (755 ILCS 5/18 — 1.1 (West 1998)), which the court granted. In August 1999, the trial court commenced the hearing on the claims. Greg Johnson, the Bank’s trust officer, testified that the Bank paid caregivers for taking care of Bemadine throughout the guardianship. He also testified that the Bank reimbursed Kresse as guardian of Bernadine’s person. During the guardianship, the trial court granted a petition authorizing the Bank, as guardian of the estate, to make gifts up to $10,000 individually and $30,000 per family each year to the four families of Bemadine’s children. During the August 1999 hearing, Kresse testified that the attorney fees for which she sought reimbursement were for services to obtain the gifts throughout the guardianship and fees charged for preparing and prosecuting the instant claim. Kresse attempted to testify to a log containing a summary of what she did for her mother as guardian of the person, but the executor objected to this testimony on the basis of the Act. At the hearing, the executor provided the court a memorandum in support of the Act’s application. Kresse’s attorney said that he had just received the memo that day, and he sought time to read the cases and address the issue it raised. The trial court ruled that, based upon the Act, Kresse could not testify about services she performed in Bernadine’s presence. In September 1999, the trial court held further hearings. The court held that contemporaneous records maintained by Kresse were inadmissible to the extent that those records represented services rendered in Bemadine’s presence. Kresse made several offers of proof during the hearings concerning the services that she performed in her mother’s presence. In November 1999, the court issued its ruling as follows: (1) the attorney time records lacked detail and generally did not distinguish between the attorney fees for representing Kresse individually in connection with the benefits she received as part of the estate planning and those that she incurred in her capacity as guardian of Bernadine’s person; (2) attorney fees for services rendered to Kresse in connection with the gifting program would be inappropriate; (3) the court awarded $817.50 for attorney fees that it was able to trace to her duties as guardian; (4) the court awarded Kresse $7,685.32 that it found to be her unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses; and (5) the court awarded Kresse $15,000 as a reasonable fee for her services as guardian of Bernadine’s person. In December 1999, Kresse filed a motion for reconsideration and/or clarification, which the court granted in part and denied in part. In January 1999, the court modified its order to indicate that it intended the $15,000 award to include mileage. This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS A. Application of the Act  The Bank, as executor, contends that the trial court properly applied the Act, which provides as follows: “Dead-Man’s Act. In the trial of any action in which any party sues or defends as the representative of a deceased person ***, no adverse party or person directly interested in the action shall be allowed to testify on his or her own behalf to any conversation with the deceased *** or to any event which took place in the presence of the deceased ***, except in the following instances!/]” 735 ILCS 5/8—201 (West 1998).  The Act bars an interested party from testifying on his or her own behalf to conversations with the deceased or to events that took place in the presence of the deceased. Kamberos v. Magnuson, 156 Ill. App. 3d 800, 804, 510 N.E.2d 112, 114-15 (1987). The purpose of the Act is to protect the decedent’s estate from fraudulent claims. Simon v. Plotkin, 50 Ill. App. 3d 603, 607, 365 N.E.2d 1022, 1024 (1977). It bars evidence that the deceased person could have refuted. Coleman v. Heidke, 291 Ill. App. 3d 670, 672, 684 N.E.2d 163, 165 (1997). If neither party raises any question on appeal concerning the competency of either the respondent or the petitioner to testify as to transactions and conversations with the decedent, the matter is deemed waived. Estate ofKloss, 57 Ill. App. 2d 118, 123, 207 N.E.2d 92, 95 (1965). Here, the Bank objected.  A trial court’s ruling on an issue involving the Act (735 ILCS 5/8—201 (West 1998)) will not be reversed unless the error was substantially prejudicial and affected the outcome of the trial. In re Estate of Kline, 245 Ill. App. 3d 413, 429, 613 N.E.2d 1329,1341 (1993). The party seeking reversal bears the burden of showing prejudice. White v. Raines, 215 Ill. App. 3d 49, 60, 574 N.E.2d 272, 280 (1991). However, de novo review applies to issues of statutory construction. Department of Public Aid ex rel. Davis v. Brewer, 183 Ill. 2d 540, 554, 702 N.E.2d 563, 569 (1998). Kresse argues that the trial court erred in applying the Act as barring her testimony about services that she performed on Bemadine’s behalf to the extent that Kresse performed those services in Bernadine’s presence. She maintains that the trial court previously made her guardian of Bernadine’s person (755 ILCS 5/lla — 17 (West 1992)) in conformance with the Probate Act (755 ILCS 5/lla — 1 through 11a — 23 (West 1992)). As guardian of Bemadine’s person, Kresse had broad powers to act in the best interests of the ward. In re Estate of D.W., 134 Ill. App. 3d 788, 791, 481 N.E.2d 355, 356-57 (1985). She testified that she played an active role as guardian.  Under the Probate Act, a representative is entitled to reasonable compensation for the services rendered. 755 ILCS 5/27—1 (West 1998). The Probate Act defines a “representative” to include a “guardian” under its definition. 755 ILCS 5/1 — 2.15 (West 1998). Guardians of disabled adults are entitled to receive compensation from the ward’s estate for services performed to meet the emotional needs of the ward for such things as human contact and companionship, visits with the ward, and taking the ward on outings. In re Estate of Donnelly, 98 Ill. 2d 24, 29-32, 455 N.E.2d 88, 91-92 (1983). The guardian of the person may petition the court for an order directing the guardian of the estate to pay an amount periodically for provision of the services specified by the court order. 755 ILCS 5/lla — 17(a) (West 1998).  The Probate Act provides that a court may direct the guardian of a person to file a report containing various information about the ward’s condition and status, including a summary of the guardian’s visits with and activities on behalf of the ward. 755 ILCS 5/lla—17(b) (West 1998). Thus, a guardian of the person is under the continuing direction and supervision of the court. No court has ever held that the type of testimony that Kresse wishes to provide is barred because of the Act. Kresse relies on In re Conservatorship of McHarry, 26 Ill. App. 3d 268, 325 N.E.2d 131 (1975), for support. In McHarry, the court allowed into evidence an independent conservator’s journal of hours and activities spent caring for his ward. McHarry, 26 Ill. App. 3d at 271, 325 N.E.2d at 133. Kresse argues that McHarry suggests that her log was admissible as an exception to or regardless of the Act. McHarry is of limited support in the instant case since the court did not analyze application of the Act; however, it provides an example of a trial court considering this type of information in determining fees.  In addition, section 8 — 601 of the Code states as follows: “Laws not affected. Nothing in this Article shall in any manner affect the laws now existing relating to the settlement of the estates of deceased persons, minors, persons under legal disability who have guardians, or to the acknowledgment or proof of deeds and other conveyances relating to real estate, in order to entitle the same to be recorded, or to the attestation of the execution of last wills or of any other instrument required by law to be attested.” 735 ILCS 5/8—601 (West 1998). This provision applies to the Act, and thus this court must interpret the Act harmoniously with the Probate Act. Under the Probate Act, as stated above, a representative is entitled to reasonable compensation for the services rendered. 755 ILCS 5/27 — 1 (West 1998). We must allow a guardian of the person to testify as to all services rendered as guardian of the person, even those that take place in the presence of the decedent. To interpret the Act otherwise would so affect the compensation provision of the Probate Act (755 ILCS 5/27 — 1 (West 1998)) as to practically invalidate it. This is true because a large portion of the acts performed as guardian of the person will necessarily be in the presence of the decedent. We conclude that, in light of Kresse’s position as a court-appointed guardian of the person and section 8 — 601 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/8 — 601 (West 1998)), the Act does not apply. We direct the trial court to conduct a hearing to evaluate Kresse’s testimony and records concerning all services performed as guardian of Bernadine. We also note that section 11a — 17(a) of the Probate Act provides that the guardian of the person may petition the court for an order directing the guardian of the estate to pay an amount periodically for provision of the services specified by the court order. 755 ILCS 5/1 la— 17(a) (West 1998). In the future, better practice might suggest filing quarterly reports for all claimed expenses under this section. This would permit those concerned to raise and address issues as they arise; if the guardian of the person is making claims that the trial court deems unwarranted, that person may then choose to continue to serve knowing the limits of compensability or resign that office on that basis. The fact that compensation for five years of services is sought in a single petition, after the death of the ward, may cast some doubt on the validity of the claim. B. Attorney Fees  Kresse also contends that the trial court erred with respect to her claim for attorney fees incurred while serving as guardian of the person. The attorney for a “representative is entitled to reasonable compensation for his services.” 755 ILCS 5/27—2 (West 1998). The decision as to what constitutes reasonable compensation is a matter within the province of the trial court, and its determination must be based upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case. In re Estate of Rumoro, 90 Ill. App. 3d 383, 388, 413 N.E.2d 70, 74 (1980). Attorney fees incurred by a representative can only be awarded from the estate where the services are rendered in the interest of and to benefit the estate. In re Estate of Freund, 63 Ill. App. 3d 1, 3, 379 N.E.2d 935, 937 (1978). The Bank questioned Kresse as follows on cross-examination: “Q. What you are trying to collect, your attorney’s fees incurred in the petition, in the guardianship to obtain gifts for you and your siblings and also get attorney’s fees for preparing this and prosecuting this claim. Is that what you are seeking attorney’s fees for? A. Yes.” The trial court awarded Kresse attorney fees in the amount that it found clearly traceable to her serving as guardian of her mother’s person. It did not allow recovery for (1) fees in prosecuting this claim or (2) estate planning that resulted in gifts out of the estate to herself and her siblings.  With respect to the latter, the Bank argues that Kresse and her siblings were the true beneficiaries of that legal work, not the estate, and Kresse cites no legal authority requiring reimbursement for attorney fees under these circumstances. On this point, we agree with the Bank. Section 11a — 18(a—5) of the Probate Act (755 ILCS 5/lla— 18(a — 5) (West 1998)), addressing the duties of the estate guardian (not the personal guardian), states that the trial court may, upon petition of the guardian of the estate and after notice to all persons interested, consider tax minimization and authorize the guardian to provide gifts to relatives during the ward’s life. Since that duty lies with the guardian of the estate, common sense suggests that the legislature did not intend that every “natural object of the ward’s bounty,” including the guardian of the person, should be able to hire a lawyer to investigate the tax benefits of the ward gifting the client and then later seek reimbursement for the attorney fees so incurred. If an outside attorney prepared work product that the estate guardian would otherwise necessarily have performed, and so saved the estate guardian attorney expense, that attorney could timely request some compensation from the estate guardian, but we conclude that it would be for the estate guardian, in its discretion, to recommend compensation based on the savings it concluded the work accrued to the estate. If the estate guardian and executor opposed any such compensation, we conclude that the attorney’s client must bear those expenses. However, with respect to the attorney fees otherwise traceable to prosecuting her claim, we agree that Kresse is entitled to reasonable attorney fees. On remand, she may submit records that separate out billing for prosecuting her claim as guardian of the person from those billings related to estate planning for her mother. She may further seek reasonable attorney fees for that portion of the appeal attributable to prosecuting her claim for reimbursement for services and expenses for serving as guardian of her mother’s person. III. CONCLUSION We conclude that the Act did not apply here and remand for further proceedings consistent with the views stated herein. The mileage award may also be revisited. The denial of attorney fees insofar as they were traceable to the gifting program is affirmed; we otherwise reverse the attorney fee award and remand, with the court to take further proof as necessary to determine reasonable attorney fees for prosecuting the claim for guardian of the person expenses. Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded with directions. GARMAN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 3784421 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.548846+00 ===

The first issue presented by the record is whether the medical certificates furnished by the plaintiff to the defendant company constituted "due proof" of total and permanent disability as required by the insurance contract. It is claimed by the defendant that "due proof" is made a condition precedent to the insured's right to receive benefits and that the submission of proof of any disability, less than total and permanent disability which renders the insured unable at any time to perform any work or engage in any business for compensation or profit, does not satisfy this condition.
In the opinion of this court "due proof" of total and permanent disability requires only prima facie evidence of such disability. It does not require such certainty of proof of total and permanent disability as is required in the proof of such a claim in an action at law in case the claim is rejected by the insurer. No such exhaustive and complete investigation and proof is required. The defendant is scarcely in a position to claim that "due proof" requires absolute proof of all the elements of the claim which would entitle the plaintiff to recover disability payments when it is not obliged to accept such proof or to be bound by it in the allowance of a claim. The real purpose of the proof of claim is to advise the insurer of the nature and character of the claim made by the insured with reference to his disability. This is to enable the insurer to make proper investigation for the purpose of determining whether the claim should be allowed or rejected. Otherwise, no claim where due proof, as interpreted by the defendant, is properly made, should be rejected. *Page 395
The proof of claim submitted in this case alleged that the plaintiff was suffering from a mental disease, designated as dementia precox; that his condition was complicated with diabetes; and he was not able to engage in any gainful employment and that the question of total and permanent disability was "indefinite yet"; and that while some estimates were made as to when he might be able to return to work, there was nothing to indicate that he would probably recover from what is generally regarded as a progressive and incurable disease. In the opinion of the court, the plaintiff's proof of claim was sufficient under the terms of the contract to serve the purpose for which it was required.
The defendant claims further that the proof submitted in the trial of this case did not establish the fact, as required by the insurance contract, that the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled, or unable at any time to perform any work or engage in any business for compensation or profit.
The undisputed evidence shows that the plaintiff was stricken with mental trouble on July 30, 1940; that he was hospitalized on that date and the next day in two Cincinnati hospitals, at which time he became so violent that he was anesthetized by his physician; that he was taken by his brothers to Michigan for a rest and while there he became uncontrollable and was placed in a Detroit hospital and remained there for almost a month prior to September 2, 1940; that he was then placed in a Cincinnati sanitarium and afterwards spent some time in Florida, where he was examined by physicians; that on his return he attempted to resume his work selling hats and caps to the retail trade, but failed; and that during the year 1941, the plaintiff was under the treatment of a neurologist, of Cincinnati, who diagnosed his illness as "manic-depressive insanity."
The neurologist testified at the trial to the effect that *Page 396
he saw the plaintiff last in November 1941; that he was unable to do any accurate or successful work in his regular occupation; that he did not show any recovery, but "fluctuated from one stage of the disease to the other"; that he, the doctor, "could not scientifically say when and if he would recover"; that any statement made by him "would be in the nature of an approximation"; that "some of these cases remain chronic all their lives and have recurring attacks of the disease"; and that the plaintiff was not able to engage successfully in any occupation for compensation for which he was intellectually qualified when normal; that in his opinion, plaintiff's affliction was a chronic recurring disease which lasts more or less throughout the life of the individual; and that "he may go into a chronic maniacal stage or a chronic depressed stage." There was no medical or other testimony to rebut this testimony.
Testimony was adduced by the defendant that the plaintiff, after November 1941, had been given employment by one of his brothers in his business at a salary of $50 per week, which employment continued up to the time of trial. But this brother testified that this arrangement had been made by himself and two other brothers at the suggestion of the physician as a health measure for the plaintiff, and that the money paid him was paid out of their own pockets wholly as a matter of gratuity, and not as compensation for any work that he did.
What construction is to be given to the insurance contract in question, providing for payment in case of total and permanent
disability, in the light of the evidence submitted to the jury in this case?
The greatest difficulty arises in determining what is meant by the term "permanent" as used in the context of this insurance agreement. Few authorities go to the extent that it must be interpreted to mean, *Page 397
necessarily, disability for the remainder of the life of the insured. It is the defendant's claim, as expressed in its brief filed in this case, that the plaintiff "may recover only upon proof that his disability is both total and permanent and will, with reasonable certainty, prevent him from engaging in any work or occupation throughout life."
That the defendant company did not consider a so-called permanent disability as necessarily being one! for a lifetime, or res judicata as to a further or later judicial determination of a similar claim for a later period of time, is shown by the terms of its contract which provides that notwithstanding proof of disability had been accepted as satisfactory, the insured must, on the insurer's demand, but not oftener than once a year, furnish due proof of the continuance of such disability.
In fact, if the term "permanent" is to be given a literal interpretation, there is an apparent conflict or ambiguity introduced into the contract by reason of the later provision for redetermination above noted. See Federal Life Ins. Co. v.Lewis, 76 Okla. 142, 183 P. 975, 5 A. L. R., 1637.
The general rule of interpretation under such circumstances is that where the meaning of the language in an insurance policy is ambiguous or susceptible to two different constructions, it will be strictly construed against the insurer, and that construction adopted which is most favorable to the insured. 29 American Jurisprudence, 181, Section 166.
The term "permanent disability," as used in the policy, must mean that claimant's disability will probably continue for some indefinite period of time. It is comparable to the idea conveyed by the term "permanent residence." The meaning of permanent residence is not that it shall necessarily continue for one's lifetime, but for an indefinite future period, with the possibility, however, that a change may occur. *Page 398
The testimony adduced at the trial was to the effect that plaintiff's disability existed at the time of trial and that it would probably continue, at least, indefinitely. This is sufficient proof to go to the jury on the question of permanency. Gibbons v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 135 Ohio St. 481,  21 N.E.2d 588. See, also, Equitable Life Ins. Co.of Iowa v. Gerwick, 50 Ohio App. 277, 197 N.E. 923; MutualLife Ins. Co. of N.Y. v. Wheatley, 243 Ky. 69,47 S.W.2d 961.
The court is of opinion that under the terms of the policy in question, the test of plaintiff's ability to perform any labor for compensation is not limited strictly to the occupation or vocation in which the insured may be engaged at the time his disability accrued, but extends to any comparable employment for which the insured is fitted by education, experience and physical condition. Here, the testimony indicated that the plaintiff was not mentally fitted for any responsible employment, and the jury was therefore permitted to find, under the testimony, that the money paid him was, in fact, a gratuity on the part of his brothers. The admission of evidence to the effect that the plaintiff was not able to follow his former employment, and the charge of the court to the effect that his ability to work and to earn compensation, should be limited to his former employment, no interrogatories having been submitted, were not prejudicial. Likewise, and for the same reason, the complaint of the defendant concerning the charge of the court as to the character of the payment which the plaintiff received, as bearing upon the liability of the defendant, was not prejudicial. There was evidence to support the verdict of the jury, and the charge of the court was not prejudicial.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., MATTHIAS, ZIMMERMAN, BELL, WILLIAMS and TURNER, JJ., concur. *Page 399

=== CASE 3784422 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.575768+00 ===

Josephine McWilliams is the widow of one Marcellus McWilliams, who, on January 23, 1929, was injured while he was an employe of a company which had complied with the Workmen's Compensation Law. (Sections 1465-37 et seq., General Code). McWilliams died on June 1, 1930. The widow made application to the commission for an award on *Page 509
account of his death, which the commission denied for the reason that the proof failed to show death resulted as a result of said injury. She thereupon filed her appeal in the common pleas court, which, in addition to the foregoing facts, alleged that McWilliams suffered his injury while he was riding in an automobile which skidded and overturned, causing him physical injuries from which he thereafter died.
In the common pleas court the Industrial Commission filed an answer in which it admitted the employment, the compliance of the company with the Workmen's Compensation Law, the dependency of the widow and the proceedings before the commission for compensation; but denied every other allegation contained in the petition. It was stipulated that the injuries were sustained while in the employ of his employer. At the close of the evidence the commission moved for a directed verdict in its favor. This motion was overruled by the trial court, the defendant commission excepting thereto.
The jury found in favor of the plaintiff. A judgment was rendered in her favor and that was affirmed by the Court of Appeals. The cause is now in this court after allowance of the commission's motion to certify.
The injury occurred after the decedent's automobile had skidded and struck a bridge, causing his car to overturn. His injuries consisted of a crushed finger, necessitating amputation, and also lacerations of the face, head and eye. On February 1, 1929, McWilliams applied to the commission for compensation, which the commission awarded and paid until March 29, 1929; the attending physician at the time certifying that his disability would likely exist for a period of four weeks. Some time after the accident he returned to work for his employer, the latter paying the decedent his regular salary until death occurred. After his injury he complained on several occasions of dizziness, and of *Page 510
pain in his back, head and chest. The physician who was called, and who reached the decedent a few minutes before his death, and who signed the death certificate, put the cause of his death as angina pectoris.
The plaintiff's counsel asked this physician this question: "Are you positive that was the cause of his death?" He answered: "I would not swear to it, no sir." He further stated that it would be impossible to tell the cause of his death at the time he saw him; that so many things could enter into such a cause; and that "angina pectoris is one of the things that covers a multitude of sins." He was asked on cross-examination whether, in his opinion, it was a heart condition that caused his death. He answered that he could not "swear positively * * * that heart disease killed him."
It is manifest from this evidence that, while the decedent had suffered some pain on various occasions between the time of his injury and his death, there is no probative evidence contained in the record that his death was caused or accelerated by the injuries he received about seventeen months prior thereto. There is no proof of a causal connection between the injury and death. The only direct testimony upon that feature was the testimony of the physician called by the plaintiff, who, when questioned, testified that he did not know whether he had angina pectoris; or, that if he had such disease, whether it was induced or caused by the injuries sustained in 1929. Proof of this necessary and vital fact, tending to establish a causal connection between the injuries and death, was lacking. While the burden was upon the plaintiff, the jury could only guess at the real cause of death.
Since there was no evidence offered by the plaintiff tending to establish a causal connection between the injuries and death, it was error for the trial court to overrule the motion of the commission for a directed *Page 511
verdict in its favor. Industrial Commission v. Davis, 119 Ohio St. 221,  162 N.E. 796.
For the reasons stated the judgments of the courts below will be reversed and final judgment entered in favor of plaintiff in error.
Judgment reversed.
DAY, ALLEN, STEPHENSON, JONES and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.
WEYGANDT, C.J., dissents.
KINKADE, J., not participating.

=== CASE 3784423 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.608371+00 ===

It is not necessary to discuss the issue of defendant's negligence raised by the pleadings and evidence, since the evidence on that issue was conflicting. *Page 388
We confine ourselves to the chief legal question presented, and that is whether the undisputed evidence and the testimony of plaintiff's truck driver disclosed that he was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. The Municipal Court and the Court of Appeals answered that in the affirmative. The facts may be brieflly stated. Those relating to contributory negligence come from the lips of the driver of the truck and were testified to by him on the witness stand.
Colerain avenue in the city of Cincinnati runs approximately north and south. At a railroad crossing on that avenue there are three parallel railroad tracks running in an easterly and westerly direction. Gates operated by gatemen were maintained on each side of the crossing, one on the south and the other on the north side. These gates were approximately sixty feet apart. The truck driver testified that about 7:10 on a May morning he was driving his truck north on Colerain avenue. As he approached the crossing the gates were up; but just as he was crossing the first or south track, and while he was on that track, he observed that the north gate had started to descend. While he testified that he had shortly before been driving at a greater rate of speed, he said that the speed at which he was driving just before he entered the crossing was at a rate from twenty to twenty-five miles an hour, and that he continued at the same speed until he reached the middle track, when he gave his truck more gas in an endeavor to cross before he was caught by the descending gate. He testified that at a point twenty feet south of the first track he looked to the left, but did not look to the east, which was the direction from which the train was coming, until about the time the train struck him on the northern track. He was asked:
"Q. As you were on the first track did you look east or the direction in which the train was coming? A. *Page 389
When I was looking there the gates were coming down and then I knew a train was coming."
A large billboard had been erected near the southeast crossing, which undoubtedly obstructed his view; but it is clear from the record that, while he was on the first track when he saw the north gate beginning to descend, he had an unobstructed view to the east for several hundred feet. The truck driver testified that his eyesight and hearing were good.
While safety gates in an upright position may give the traveller assurance that he can safely pass, yet no one can know when they will start to descend; but when they do they give to the traveller assurance of imminent danger which calls for caution. The driver testified that he confined his attention entirely to his effort to beat the gates and that he kept his eyes upon their descent the entire time. Had he exercised the caution that an ordinarily prudent man would have exercised under the same circumstances by applying the brakes to his car and looking in the direction of the approaching train, the accident could have been avoided. This he failed to do. A driver upon a highway cannot rely upon an assumption that a crossing protected by gates will always remain safe. He knows gates are placed there for his own safety; but he also knows that they may come down at any time. The protection provided by the use of safety gates is not unlike the protection taken by railroad companies in the maintenance of automatic signal alarms. In the latter class of cases, we have held that the failure of such alarms to exercise their proper functions does not absolve the traveller from the duty of exercising such care as ordinarily prudent men would use under similar circumstances. Toledo Terminal Rd. Co. v. Hughes, 115 Ohio St. 562,  154 N.E. 916; Columbus, Delaware  Marion Electric Co. v.O'Day, Admx., 123 Ohio St. 638, 176 N.E. 569.
We find ourselves in accord with the opinions of *Page 390
the trial and appellate courts in holding that, by his conduct, the driver of the truck was guilty of negligence which directly contributed to the injuries sustained by the truck. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON, MATTHIAS, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3784424 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.613287+00 ===

Concurs in the syllabus, but dissents from the judgment of affirmance on authority of Railway Co. v. Schneider, 45 Ohio St. 678,17 N.E. 321.
In 22 Ruling Case Law, "Railroads," 1042, Section 275, the following appears: "Some cases seem, from a practical standpoint, to require the same care of a traveler when approaching a crossing where safety gates are up as is required where no gates are maintained, while others hold that the jury may be authorized to find that a traveler was justified in relying exclusively upon the fact that safety gates were open as an indication of safety. By the weight of authority, however, while the fact that the gates are open is an implied invitation to cross, and an assurance of safety from the danger of any passing train, upon which a traveler may, to a certain extent, rely, this fact will not relieve him from the duty of exercising due care, although he is not required to exercise the same vigilance as he would be at a crossing where gates had not been erected and maintained. Whether the traveler exercised the care necessary under the circumstances is for the jury, unless the evidence conclusively shows that he rashly stepped in front of the moving train, or that if he had used his senses he would have avoided injury."
The subject is covered in Thompson Commentaries on the Law of Negligence, Volume 2, 290, Section 1613: "Many decisions — to use a form of expression which *Page 391
has come into vogue — concede that the traveller approaching a railway crossing has the right to rely upon the fact that the gate is open, or that the flagman is absent from his post, and to assume from those indications that no train is approaching and that he may safely proceed to cross; and so where the gates are up, and a flag flying, indicating that a train will stop before reaching the crossing; and so where the traveller, having waited several minutes, starts to cross on the gates being raised. While, as we shall soon see, some courts condone the fault of the railroad company in luring the traveller to his death or injury by deceptive appearances, and visit all the blame on the traveller, yet, even these courts concede that a traveller approaching a crossing guarded by gates, is not required to exercise the same vigilance in looking and listening as when he approaches one not so guarded. One of these courts has made the concession that the question whether he was guilty of contributory negligence in not stopping to look and listen where the gate was open, and other usual signals of approaching trains were not given, becomes a question of fact for a jury. The prevailing opinion possibly is that, while a traveller is not relieved from the duty of exercising care in crossing a railroad track by the fact that the safety gates are standing open, such fact is to be considered by the jury in determining whether he exercised due care under the circumstances."
These authors and compilers cite many cases and if one goes to these original sources of the law he will find ample authority to support the rule laid down in the case ofRailway Co. v. Schneider, supra. *Page 392

=== CASE 3784425 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.649678+00 ===

The question presented is one of the construction of the provisions relating to the descent of real estate under Section 10503-4, General Code, as amended, effective September 2, 1935 (116 Ohio Laws, 389).
Martha C. Smith having died intestate, the right to share in her personal property and real estate is controlled exclusively by the statutes in force at the time *Page 314
of her death on October 26, 1936. The provisions applicable are as follows:
"Sec. 10503-4. When a person dies intestate having title or right to any personal property, or to any real estate or inheritance in this state, such personal property shall be distributed, and such real estate or inheritance shall descend and pass in parcenary, except as otherwise provided by law, in the following course: * * *
"7. If there be no such brothers or sisters or their lineal descendants, one-half to the paternal grandparents of the intestate equally, or to the survivor of them, and one-half to the maternal grandparents of the intestate equally, or to the survivor of them.
"8. If there be no paternal grandparent or no maternal grandparent, then such one-half to the lineal descendants, if any, of such deceased grandparents, per stirpes; if there be no such lineal descendants, then to the surviving grandparent or grandparents or their lineal descendants, per stirpes; if there be no surviving grandparents or their lineal descendants, then to the next of kin of the intestate. There shall be no representation among such next of kin.
"9. If there be no next of kin, to stepchildren or their lineal descendants, per stirpes.
"10. If there be no stepchildren or their lineal descendants, escheat to the state of Ohio."
"Sec. 10503-7. When all the descendants of an intestate, in a direct line of descent, are on an equal degree of consanguinity to the intestate, whether children, grandchildren or great-grandchildren, or of a more remote degree ofconsanguinity to such intestate, the estate shall pass to such persons of equal degree of consanguinity to such intestate in equal parts, however remote from the intestate such equal andcommon degree of consanguinity may be." (Italics ours.)
"Sec. 10503-8. If some of the children of such intestate are living, and others are dead, the estate shall *Page 315
descend to the children who are living, and to the lineal descendants of such as are dead, so that each child of the intestate who is living will inherit the share to which he or she would have been entitled if all the children of the intestate were living, and the lineal descendants of the deceased child or children of the intestate inherit equal parts of that portion of the estate to which such deceased child or children would be entitled if such deceased child or children were living."
"Sec. 10503-9. The provisions of the next preceding section shall apply in all cases in which the descendants of the intestate, not more remote than lineal descendants ofgrandparents as provided in Section 10503-4, entitled to share in the estate, are of unequal degree of consanguinity to the intestate, so that those who are of the nearest degree of consanguinity, will take the share to which he or she would have been entitled, had all the descendants in the same degree of consanguinity with him or her, who died leaving issue, been living." (Italics ours.)
These sections were enacted piecemeal, and at different times in an attempt to define more clearly the legislative intent. All of them dealing with the same subject are to be consideredin pari materia.
Paragraphs 7 and 8 of Section 10503-4, General Code, now clearly provide that, in event distribution is to be made either to grandparents or their lineal descendants, the estate is to be divided equally into halves. One half portion would be distributed or descend to those on the paternal side, and the other half portion to those on the maternal side of the intestate. If there be no descendants on one side then the other which would have descendants of grandparents would inherit more than one-half. Only in event that there be neither grandparents nor lineal descendants of grandparents on both sides would the next of kin of the intestate inherit. *Page 316
The claim of Florence G. Bedell that as next of kin she is entitled to the entire estate cannot be maintained. While no grandparents survive, there are lineal descendants of both pairs of grandparents surviving Martha C. Smith. Under our interpretation of the statute they are entitled to share in the estate. Only where the nearest survivor is of a more remote degree than lineal descendants of grandparents, would the next of kin, as such, inherit.
As we said previously, an examination of the seventh and eighth paragraphs of Section 10503-4, General Code, shows a manifest intention that the estate should be equally divided in halves, and that the half portions are to be distributed or descend separately according to the provisions of law. In other words, after the estate is equally divided into halves, descent depends upon the particular circumstances existing in the particular branch of the family, and apportionment is made as if there were two estates instead of one. Such a construction follows of necessity from the very basis of the adoption of a half-and-half provision.
Both of the courts below recognized that to be the legislative intent, the Court of Appeals saying that "the statute requires a complete permanent and equal division between them as classes, and that the halves are apportioned among the members of each class according to the circumstances within each class, uninfluenced by conditions in the other class, no matter what such conditions may be."
The Court of Appeals, after reviewing the statutory provisions, concluded "that this real estate of Martha C. Smith devolved upon the descendants of the paternal grandparentsper stirpes, and the other half to the descendants of the maternal grandparents, per stirpes, the roots in each case being the grandparents."
It is the contention of the appellant that this interpretation was erroneous. It is claimed that all those of equal degree of consanguinity to the intestate living *Page 317
should take per capita, and the descendants of those of the same degree of consanguinity, whose parents are dead, should take per stirpes. In such event, it is said that those of nearest degree of consanguinity to the intestate who are living must be taken as the stirps or roots in determining the descent.
The eighth paragraph of Section 10503-4 is not altogether clear. It is susceptible of the interpretation that the perstirpes distribution or descent should be taken as from the grandparents. On the other hand, the words "per stirpes" in the statute can be construed to modify "lineal descendants" and not "grandparents."
Reference to the other sections is essential to ascertain the legislative intent as applicable to the facts before the court. It will be noticed that the provisions of Sections 10503-8 and 10503-9, General Code, are to apply to collateral heirs not more remote than lineal descendants of grandparents. It is claimed, however, that nothing in either section provides for anything but descent per stirpes, except where the property passes to the next of kin.
It must be remembered that all of these sections are in parimateria. Section 10503-7, General Code, upon first reading would seem to apply only to "the descendants of an intestate, in a direct line of descent," which would limit its application to lineal descendants. However, it is likewise provided that when the descendants are of equal degree of consanguinity to such intestate, "whether children, grandchildren or great-grandchildren or of a more remote degree of consanguinityto such intestate the estate shall pass to such persons of equal degree of consanguinity to such intestate in equal parts,however remote from the intestate such equal and common degree of consanguinity may be." (Italics ours.)
It is conceded that with reference to lineal descendants this section provides for a per capita distribution *Page 318
or descent where all are of equal degree of consanguinity, and that by Section 10503-8, General Code, a method of descent was provided where the lineal descendants were of unequal degree of consanguinity.
It is strenuously contended that neither section has any application where there are collateral heirs, but that they apply solely to instances involving lineal descendants.
Section 10503-7, General Code, specifically declares that "the estate shall pass to such persons of equal degree of consanguinity to such intestate in equal parts, however remote from the intestate such equal and common degree of consanguinity may be." That language makes its provisions apply to collateral heirs as well as lineal heirs. It is not limited to those lineal descendants in a direct line, but includes those of a more remote degree of consanguinity to the intestate. In fact it says that the per capita or equal division shall apply "however remote" the relationship may be from the intestate. Read in connection with Section 10503-9, General Code, the rules of Sections 10503-7 and 10503-8, General Code, apply to those "not more remote than lineal descendants of grandparents" as provided in Section 10503-4, General Code.
In Ewers v. Follin, 9 Ohio St. 327, this court held that a statute which contained practically the same wording as Section 10503-7, General Code, was to apply in "every case, in which an estate was to be divided among a class of descendants, whether their consanguinity to the intestate be lineal or collateral." Section 10503-7, General Code, was formerly Section 8581, General Code, which has read exactly as it does now since March 14, 1853, and has been construed many times by this court.
This rule that where the descendants, either lineal or collateral, are of equal degree of consanguinity, they takeper capita as heirs in their own right, and not by representation has been consistently approved *Page 319
and followed in this state. See Dutoit v. Doyle, 16 Ohio St. 400,405; Parsons v. Parsons, 52 Ohio St. 470, 40 N.E. 165;Hasse v. Morison, 110 Ohio St. 153, 143 N.E. 551.
If the statute was properly construed in Ewers v. Follin,supra, the judgment of the Court of Appeals should be reversed. The Court of Appeals itself recognized the precedents of Ewers
v. Follin, supra, and Hasse v. Morison, supra, but said that "subsequent legislation modifying other related provisions may require a restricted meaning to be given, notwithstanding a judicial construction given when the language was in a different setting." We are unable to conclude that any construction limiting the application of the provisions of Section 10503-7, General Code, to lineal descendants could be made without expressly overruling a long line of decisions of this court commencing with Ewers v. Follin, supra.
Section 10503-7, General Code, provides that when all the descendants of an intestate are of an equal degree of consanguinity they take equally. Under Section 10503-8, General Code, if some of those are living and others are dead, leaving children, those living take the same per capita share to which they would be entitled if all were living, and the lineal descendants of those deceased take per stirpes. Section 10503-9, General Code, applies this method in all cases where the descendants of the intestate are "not more remote than the lineal descendants of grandparents."
Therefore, in line with previous decisions of this court, it is our conclusion that under paragraph 8 of Section 10503-4, General Code, the lineal descendants are designated as the roots and the phrase "of such grandparents" is descriptive only.
Applying these rules to the facts in the instant case, on the paternal side the one-half share is to be divided into fourteen parts. Florence G. Bedell, a first cousin, as the nearest in consanguinity, would receive one *Page 320
twenty-eighth portion of the real estate. The remainder would be divided among the lineal descendants of the thirteen first cousins who are deceased, per stirpes, with the roots or stirps
being first cousins.
On the maternal side of the family the roots for the basis of descent are first cousins once removed. C. Birney Seymour and Sarah B. Evans, both being in this class, would each receive one-eighth portion as their per capita share, while Edwina M. Panton, daughter of Mary Maxson, would receive one-eighth, and Leila B. Callam and Frances M. Callam, children of Agnes B. Callam, would each receive one-sixteenth as their per stirpes
shares.
Since no rightful lien or encumbrance could be imposed upon the property by any co-tenant under the provisions of Section 10502-1, General Code, the spouses of the co-parceners were not necessary parties to the action in partition.
For the reasons stated the judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed and that of the Court of Common Pleas affirmed.
Judgment reversed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., MATTHIAS, DAY, ZIMMERMAN, WILLIAMS, MYERS and GORMAN, JJ., concur. *Page 321

=== CASE 2220136 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:34.432972+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 492 (1989)
Irvin JONES, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 27S00-8701-CR-59.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
October 11, 1989.
*493 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender and John Pinnow, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen. and Cheryl Lynn Greiner, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
PIVARNIK, Justice.
Appellant, Irvin Jones, was convicted of Child Molesting, a Class B felony, in a trial to the Grant Circuit Court. He was sentenced to a term of twenty (20) years and the judgment was affirmed on his direct appeal. Jones v. State (1983), Ind., 445 N.E.2d 98.
The current proceeding involves Jones' appeal from the denial of his Petition for Post-Conviction Relief and denial of his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence. The following issues are raised on appeal:
1. whether Jones was denied the effective assistance of counsel;
2. whether Jones' waiver of his right to trial by jury was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary;
3. whether Jones was denied due process of law; and
4. whether the trial court erred in denying Jones' Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence because two prior convictions were set aside.
We first note that Jones has the burden of proving his grounds for relief in a post-conviction proceeding by a preponderance *494 of the evidence. Music v. State (1986), Ind., 489 N.E.2d 949, 950. This Court will not reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses and will not set aside the post-conviction judgment unless the evidence is without conflict and leads to but one reasonable conclusion contrary to that of the trial court. Id.
I
Appellant was represented by a public defender at trial. At the hearing on post-conviction relief, Jones testified that trial counsel consulted with him only two or three times in person and only twice on the telephone before the trial. The longest conversation was approximately ninety (90) minutes, while the other two conversations in person lasted twenty (20) to thirty (30) minutes. Jones testified that he was not satisfied with counsel's investigation or preparation, that he had requested counsel to personally contact the witnesses rather than contact them through letters, and that he did not like the way counsel questioned the witnesses. Jones also believed that counsel acted ineffectively by not objecting when Jones was charged with a Class A felony, but was convicted of a Class B felony.
The State argues that this issue has been waived because Jones failed to argue this alleged error on his direct appeal. Jones argues that waiver is not applicable here because both the State and post-conviction court addressed the issues on the merits and any waiver defense has itself been essentially waived. The State contends that all of the witnesses Jones asked counsel to contact appeared at trial and testified. The State also points out that Jones conceded that counsel asked all the questions Jones would have asked, albeit not in the order or manner Jones would have desired. Counsel testified that any confusion over the class of felony facing Jones had been resolved prior to trial and Jones was aware of the possible sentence if convicted. Jones admitted he did not know how he would have prepared differently had he known the charge was a Class B felony.
A defendant must overcome, with strong and compelling evidence, the presumption that his counsel was competent. McCraney v. State (1987), Ind., 508 N.E.2d 798, 799; Bailey v. State (1985), Ind., 472 N.E.2d 1260, 1264. This Court stated in Hestand v. State (1986), Ind., 491 N.E.2d 976, 978:
The guidelines for determining competency of counsel require deciding (1) whether counsel's performance was so deficient that he was not functioning as counsel as guaranteed by the Constitution, and if so, (2) whether this failure to function as counsel was so prejudicial as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial. Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, 692-693, U.S. reh. denied (1984) 467 U.S. 1267, 104 S.Ct. 3562, 82 L.Ed.2d 864; Bieghler v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 78, 96; Elliott v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 707, 710. Both poor performance and prejudice must be shown. Id.
The acts of trial counsel here do not show a lack of reasonable professional judgment nor do they show that Jones was prejudiced by unreasonable acts or omissions of his attorney. Strickland v. Washington, supra. What they do tend to show is that trial counsel's strategy differed from that of Jones. There will be no reversal due to choice of strategy where it appears that counsel exercised professional judgment. Ingram v. State (1987), Ind., 508 N.E.2d 805, 808. Jones does not show how counsel acted unprofessionally, nor how the outcome would have changed. Appellant has failed to meet his burden on this issue.
II
Before his trial began, Jones waived his right to a trial by jury. Jones had discussed this matter with his attorney and stated in open court he waived this right in order to spare his daughters' appearance at a trial. The State dropped its request for an habitual offender finding as part of the agreement to waive the jury trial. Jones now alleges that the record was insufficient *495 to show a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver.
On the contrary, as the State correctly points out, the record clearly shows that the trial court questioned Jones about his waiver of a jury trial. The judge determined that Jones had discussed the matter with counsel, that he understood it was a constitutional right, that only he could waive that right, and that by waiving a jury trial, the judge would decide the case and impose sentence if Jones was found guilty. A knowing, intelligent and voluntary waiver of a jury trial may be accomplished by a written waiver or in open court. Kimball v. State (1985), Ind., 474 N.E.2d 982, 986; Rodgers v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 102, 105, 415 N.E.2d 57, 59. Where the record shows it was appellant's personal wish to waive his right to a jury trial and that he was adequately informed about that waiver, the waiver is proper. Brown v. State (1986), Ind., 495 N.E.2d 178. We find that Jones' waiver was proper here.
III
Jones claims his due process rights were violated because he was charged with a Class A felony, but convicted of a Class B felony. He believes due process has been denied because he did not know the nature of the charge and potential sentence, but Jones admitted he did not know how he would have changed his preparation for trial.
The State argues that Jones was advised of the charge of child molesting, regardless of its character as a Class A or Class B offense. Trial counsel testified that Jones was aware it was a Class B felony prior to trial and they had discussed the sentencing possibilities. According to the State, Jones benefited, if anything, because a Class B felony carries a lower sentence than a Class A felony.
Jones has failed to show how this variance between the charging instrument and the evidence at trial has prejudiced him; indeed, he was adequately advised of the charge and was able to prepare a defense. Dudley v. State (1985), Ind., 480 N.E.2d 881, 892-93. Accordingly, no error was committed by the post-conviction court.
IV
The last issue to be addressed is whether the post-conviction court erred in denying Jones' Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence. Following Jones' conviction, the trial court imposed the maximum sentence of twenty (20) years. The trial court gave its reasons for the maximum sentence as follows:
In this particular instance, it is the judgment of the Court that in addition to the fact that the sentence appears to be appropriate under the statutes there are certain aggravating circumstances present here, which include the Defendant's own history of prior criminal activity as an adult and juvenile, one of these incidents which include a prior attempt at sex offense. Another circumstance that the Court considered was the tender age of the victims of this crime and their close relationship to the Defendant and the ability of the Defendant in that relationship to perpetrate this activity. And finally, it is the feeling of the Court that a lesser sentence would depreciate the seriousness of this offense, so with that the Defendant would be remanded to the custody of the Sheriff for execution of the sentence.
Record at 256.
Jones filed his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence and alleged that his original sentence was in error because earlier convictions for attempted escape and forgery had subsequently been set aside. He contends that the trial court partially relied on these two convictions in imposing sentence inasmuch as they were included in the presentence report considered by the trial court. Thus, because these alleged aggravating factors have been set aside, Jones argues that the trial court erred in denying his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence and his sentence should be reduced.
Ind. Code § 35-38-1-15 governs motions to correct an erroneous sentence, and provides as follows:
If the convicted person is erroneously sentenced, the mistake does not render *496 the sentence void. The sentence shall be corrected after written notice is given to the convicted person. The convicted person and his counsel must be present when the corrected sentence is ordered. A motion to correct sentence must be in writing and supported by a memorandum of law specifically pointing out the defect in the original sentence.
Ind.R.P.C. 1, § 1(a)(3) states: "Any person who has been convicted of, or sentenced for, a crime by a court of this state, and who claims ... that the sentence exceeds the maximum authorized by law, or is otherwise erroneous ... may institute at any time a proceeding under this Rule to secure relief."
In Thompson v. State (1979), 270 Ind. 677, 679, 389 N.E.2d 274, 276, this Court held that a defendant may use either avenue in forwarding his sentencing error. Thompson was drafted partly in response to some confusion over what procedure to follow and whether a trial court should treat an unverified petition, purportedly under Ind.R.P.C. 1, § 1(a)(3) and attacking only the sentence, as a motion to correct sentence pursuant to the statute. Id. at 680, 389 N.E.2d at 276.
However, it is well-settled now that while the statutory procedure may be utilized to correct an erroneous sentence, the preferred procedure is by way of a petition for post-conviction relief. Gee v. State (1987), Ind., 508 N.E.2d 787, 788. The use of the statutory procedure should be limited to those instances where the sentence is erroneous on its face. The use of Ind. Code § 35-38-1-15 is proper for errors in sentencing similar to those which an appellate court would hold to be fundamental and would correct even if presented for the first time on appeal. Such fundamental error would include illegal sentences in violation of express statutory authority or an erroneous interpretation of a penalty provision of a statute. See Killian v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 411, 412. Not included within the type of fundamental error that may be raised under the statute would be constitutional issues or issues concerning how the trial court weighed factors in imposing sentence.
Although Jones initially sought review of his sentence under the statute, the post-conviction court held a hearing on both his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence and his Petition for Post-Conviction Relief. Both were denied by the post-conviction court. We now turn to Jones' allegations.
Jones argues that the trial court partially relied on his prior criminal activity in enhancing the sentence. Therefore, Jones believes the post-conviction court erred in denying his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence where he showed that two of his convictions have since been vacated. Jones analogizes this to a situation where this Court held that it was reversible error to allow the State, over objection, to amend an habitual offender count to include convictions for which the defendant had not yet been sentenced. We rejected the State's argument that the error was harmless on grounds that the habitual offender finding was supported by evidence of two other convictions. Wells v. State (1982), Ind., 437 N.E.2d 1333; Miller v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 454, 458, 417 N.E.2d 339, 342. Wells and Miller do not support Jones. Those cases referred to a specific requirement in an habitual criminal finding of proper sequence of perpetration, conviction and sentence.
The sentencing court stated that another aggravating circumstance "was the tender age of the victims of this crime and their close relationship to the Defendant and the ability of the Defendant in that relationship to perpetrate this activity." Record at 256. Jones contends that this reliance is improper because he was charged only with molesting one of his daughters, and the use of "victims" refers to testimony from another daughter that he had had sexual contact with her. Jones states that the sentencing court cannot properly use uncharged crimes or acquittals to enhance a presumptive sentence, citing Anderson v. State (1983), Ind., 448 N.E.2d 1180, 1186. Cf. Russelburg v. State (1988), Ind., 529 N.E.2d 1193, 1197.
The trial court gave three reasons for enhancing the sentence:
1) Jones' prior criminal history as a juvenile and adult;
*497 2) the young age of the victims and Jones' close relationship to them (father-daughter); and
3) the court's belief that a lesser sentence would depreciate the seriousness of the crime.
The State argues that although Jones' convictions for attempted escape and forgery were vacated in post-conviction proceedings, he was also committed to the Indiana Boys School for assault and battery with the intent to commit a felony rape and committed to the Indiana State Farm for auto theft. The State also contends that Jones has failed to show that the sentencing court improperly considered uncharged criminal conduct by using "victims" instead of "victim," along with the use of plural pronouns.
The trial court is vested with wide discretion to determine whether the presumptive sentence will be enhanced due to aggravating factors involving the particular defendant or crime. Shippen v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 903, 905. The record does not reflect that the sentencing court improperly considered uncharged criminal conduct in imposing sentence or that vacating two prior convictions removes the reasons for sentence enhancement. The trial court stated the two convictions were a minimal consideration in his decision to enhance the sentence. One statutory aggravating factor which the court listed was that a lesser sentence would depreciate the serious nature of the crime. In addition, the trial court also focused on the relationship between the perpetrator and the victim. This alone would support the trial court's view that a lesser sentence would depreciate the serious nature of the crime.
The judgment of the post-conviction court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., DeBRULER, GIVAN and DICKSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739512 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:46.860948+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge.
Ralph F. Liquori appeals his conviction of driving while intoxicated.
We affirm.
Liquori was charged with driving while intoxicated,1 a class A misdemeanor, and driving without a valid operator's license,2 a class C infraction. Liquori appeared at an initial hearing on May 26, 1987, and was advised by the court as to his jury right as follows:
"You each have the right to have a public speedy trial by jury to determine your guilt or innocence[.] Do you understand those Constitutional rights, Mr. Liquo-ri?" Record at 72.
* a * * # *
"Let me also note for your benefit, with regard to this being a misdemeanor case, it's not set, at this time, for a jury trial. Written request is needed ten days before trial to secure that jury right. Do you understand that?" Record at 77.
Liquori orally indicated both times that he understood.
An omnibus hearing was set for June 15, 1987, a pre-trial conference was set for July 28, 1987, and trial was set for August 8, 1987. Attorney Phillip R. Smith entered his appearance as attorney for Liquori on July 1. Approximately two weeks later, Smith moved for a continuance which was granted, and trial was rescheduled for September 9. Smith filed a second motion for a continuance on August 21, which also was granted, and trial was rescheduled for October 20, 1987. On October 15, Attorney Charles Deets entered his appearance for Liquori, filed a waiver of initial hearing, and requested a continuance. Deets additionally requested a jury trial. This was the first time that such a request was made. The court determined Deets' appearance to be supplemental as Smith had not yet withdrawn and therefore denied the request for a continuance. The court also found the waiver of initial hearing improper and denied the jury trial request as untimely.
Upon Smith's subsequent withdrawal and Deets' renewed motion for a continuance, the court rescheduled the trial for November 17, 1987. A hearing was held at trial on Liquori's objection to the bench trial, but the objection was overruled. Li-quori was found guilty of driving while intoxicated.
Liquori raises several issues upon appeal, which we rephrase as follows:
*201(1) Whether the trial court erred in not granting the defendant's request for trial by jury; and
(2) Whether there was sufficient evidence to support the conviction.
I. JURY TRIAL REQUEST
The right to trial by jury in misdemeanor cases is controlled by Indiana Rules of Procedure, Criminal Rule 22, which at the time of Liquori's trial provided as follows:
"A defendant charged with a misde meanor may demand a trial by jury by filing a written demand therefor not later than ten (10) days before his scheduled trial date. The failure of a defendant to demand a trial by jury as required by this rule shall constitute a waiver by him of trial by jury unless the defendant has not had at least fifteen (15) days advance notice of his scheduled trial date and of the consequences of his failure to demand a trial by jury."
In determining whether Liquor! was wrongfully denied his right to a jury trial, we must first determine whether Liquori was adequately informed concerning Criminal Rule 22, and second, determine whether Liquori timely filed a request for a jury trial.
A. Adequacy of Advisement
In order for a defendant's failure to demand a jury trial to constitute a waiver, the defendant must receive fifteen (15) days advance notice both of his scheduled trial date and of the consequences of his failure to demand a trial by jury. Although Liquo-ri received proper notice of his trial date, Liquori contends that the court's advisement of the consequences of his failure to make a timely demand was faulty because the court failed to inform him of the difference between a jury trial and a bench trial and also failed to specifically inform him that he would lose the right to trial by jury if he did not request it timely.
Although our Supreme Court has yet to speak on what precisely was contemplated by the term "consequences," the court has previously held that there is no statutory or constitutional requirement that the trial judge explain to the defendant the difference between a trial by court and a trial by jury; nor is there any requirement that the record demonstrate that the defendant understood the difference. Earl v. State (1983), Ind., 450 N.E.2d 49; Kennedy v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 382, 393 N.E.2d 139, cert. denied (1980), 444 U.S. 1047, 100 S.Ct. 737, 62 LEd.2d 734. Although Horl and Kennedy involved felony charges and C.R. 22 was not implicated, the Supreme Court did not indicate any reason to impose a higher standard with regard to advise-ments in misdemeanor cases than in the more serious felony cases. The promulgation of a rule which provides a procedure by which the right to a jury could be waived in misdemeanor cases does not imply that new substantive advisements regarding the nature of the jury trial are required.3 Our conclusion is buttressed by dictum in Hutchins v. State (1986) Ind., 493 N.E.2d 444, wherein the court, in discussing whether an on-the-record hearing was required, found no merit in the appellant's contention that misdemeanants are afforded more protection than are felons regarding waiver of the right to trial by jury.
Liquori's argument appears to be directed at the nature of the advisement required to apprise him of his right to a jury in the first place-not to the consequences of failing to request one. In this regard, we note that although some courts have held that certain facets of the jury trial must be explained to the defendant in order for his waiver of this right to be truly knowledgeable,4 our supreme court has mandated no *202specific form of advisement to be given. We note also that the advisements given in Belazi v. State (1988), 1st Dist. Ind.App., 525 N.E.2d 351, and Combs v. State (1989), 1st Dist. Ind.App., 533 N.E.2d 1241, trans. pending, discussed infra, were held sufficient and yet contained no such explanation.
Liquori also contends that the advisement was deficient because the court failed to advise him specifically that he would waive his right if he failed to request it.
In Vukadinovich v. State (1988), 3rd Dist. Ind.App., 529 N.E.2d 837, the defendant was generally advised of his right to a jury trial by a form entitled "Your Rights," but the document made no mention of the C.R. 22 ten-day rule or the consequences of failing to adhere to it; nor did the trial court at any time advise the defendant of the rule's time constraints. The Third District held that the waiver was invalid.
In Belazi, supra, 525 N.E.2d 851, 852, the following written advisement was held sufficient:
"I understand that I have the right to a trial by jury of six (6) impartial persons from the community. I understand that I must file a written request for trial by jury at least ten (10) days in advance of my scheduled trial date.
I understand that if I do not file a written request for trial by jury within that time a judge will hear the evidence and determine if the State of Indiana has proven my guilt beyond a reasonable doubt."
This advisement was also used and upheld in Combs, supra, 533 N.E.2d 1241.
We conclude that the advisement given Liquori was sufficient to notify him of the consequences of his failure to timely file a request-no jury trial. In so doing, we distinguish Weidner v. State (1988), 4th Dist. Ind.App., 530 N.E.2d 774. In Weidner, the Fourth District found the following advisement to be deficient:
"THE COURT: You have the right to a public and speedy trial by court or by jury. If you sought to have a jury trial you must notify this court in writing of that request at least ten days before the matter is set for a court trial." Id. at 776.
The court reasoned that "while the trial judge did mention the necessity of making such a request no later than ten days prior to the scheduled trial date, he at no time disclosed the failure to make the request would waive Weidner's right to a jury trial." Id.
Although we consider the advisement used in Belazi and Combs to be a model advisement, to hold the advisement here fatally deficient would elevate form over substance.5 Liquori was told the case was not currently set for a jury trial and that in order to secure his right to a jury, he had to request it. Implicit in the advisement was that if he failed to do so, he waived the right. Furthermore, Liquor makes no claim that he was misled and thought he would receive no trial, i.e., go free, if he did not request a jury trial; nor does he claim incompetency or below-average intelligence.*2036
B. Timing of Request
Liquori also contends that his request for jury trial was timely because it had been filed more than ten days before "the ultimate trial date." Appellant's Brief at 14. Liquori argues that "once such a request is made, it should be allowed to stand if the trial date eventually meets the ten (10) day requirement." Id. at 15. The actual request for a jury trial was filed five days prior to Liquori's third scheduled trial date. According to Liquori's reasoning, the request became timely once the court granted his motion for a continuance and rescheduled the trial for its fourth and final trial date of November 17, 1987.
A similar argument was made and rejected in Combs, supra, 533 N.E.2d 1241. The First District decision inferred from the Supreme Court Committee Note to C.R. 227 that the term "scheduled trial date" referred to the first scheduled trial date and held that the defendant's request had not been timely filed where the trial date had been rescheduled several times. The court held that the time for making a demand was not extended by the continuance, es. The correctness of this holding was affirmed by our Supreme Court's subsequent amendment of the rule, effective January 1, 1989. The word "first" was inserted before "scheduled trial date."8 We therefore hold that the trial court was correct in ruling that the request was not timely filed.
II. SUFFICIENCY OF THE EVIDENCE
Liquori also challenges the sufficiency of the evidence.
Officer Bluemke testified that Li-quori's car was traveling about 65 miles per hour in a 55 mile per hour zone when he caught up to it;9 that Liquori was traveling in the left hand lane and made an abrupt lane change without a turn signal, causing a van in the right hand lane to brake to avoid a collision; that Liquori's eyes were bloodshot and he smelled of alcohol; that Liquori swayed while standing on his feet; that Liquori twice failed a finger-to-nose field sobriety test; and that the Intoxilyzer test showed a blood alcohol content of .14%.
We hold that this evidence was sufficient to establish impaired condition as required by IC. 9-11-1-5 (Burns Code Ed.Repil. 1987). See Collins v. State (1986), 1st Dist. Ind.App., 491 N.E.2d 1020.
The judgment is affirmed.
BUCHANAN, J., concurs.
SHIELDS, P.J., concurs and files separate opinion.
. ILC. 9-11-2-2 (Burns Code Ed.Repl.1987).
. LC. 9-1-4-26 (Burns Code Ed.Repl.1987.).
. We acknowledge that Wilson v. State (1983), 1st Dist. Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 340 contains a contrary view.
. See, e.g., United States v. Delgado (1981), 7th Cir., 635 F.2d 889 (court must explain to the defendant the following before accepting a jury waiver: 1) that a jury is composed of twelve members of the community, 2) that the defendant may participate in the selection of jurors, 3) that the verdict of the jury must be unanimous, and 4) that if the defendant waives a jury trial, the judge alone will determine guilt or innocence); Commonwealth v. Williams (1982), 301 Pa.Super. 271, 447 A.2d 963 (basic ingredi-*202enis of jury trial, the understanding of which are necessary to a knowing, intelligent waiver, are the requirements that the jury be chosen from the community, its verdict must be unanimous, and the defendant will be allowed to participate in its selection); cf. Seattle v. Williams (1984), 101 Wash.2d 445, 680 P.2d 1051 (a municipal court rule providing that defendant will be deemed to have waived his right to a jury trial unless he demands one in writing within ten days after entering his plea or ten days of receipt of notice of appearance of counsel requires that defendant first be informed of his constitutional right to jury trial before the court and on the record, and if defendant indicates he wants to waive this right, he must be informed he has a minimum of ten days to change his mind and request a jury trial; the conditional waiver made at arraignment must be in writing).
. We note that advisements were held lacking or insufficient in several other cases, but it is unclear from the opinions as to the precise advisements given. See, Casselman v. State (1985), 3d Dist. Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 1310; Wilson v. State (1983), 1st Dist. Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 340; Suits v. State (1983) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 451 N.E.2d 375, overruled on other grounds in Kimberling v. State (1988), Ind., 520 N.E.2d 442.
. Liquori's claim of difficulty in obtaining adequate in-state representation (Liquori was an Illinois resident) does not persuade us otherwise. Liquori makes no claim that his first counsel was ineffective. The record shows that Phillip R. Smith, a local attorney, had entered an appearance for Liquori as of July 1. Al though statements in the record would support an argument that he told counsel that he wanted a jury trial but his counsel was delinquent in requesting one, no such argument was presented on appeal.
. This note read as follows: "This is a new rule. It prevents last second demands for trial by jury. It does not confer a new right to withdraw a valid waiver of a trial by jury made earlier."
. The amendment also added a second paragraph, which reads as follows:
"The trial court shall not grant a demand for a trial by jury filed after the time fixed has elapsed except upon the written agreement of the state and defendant, which agreement shall be filed with the court and made a part of the record. If such agreement is filed, then the trial court may, in its discretion, grant a trial by jury."
. Liquori implies in his brief that Officer Bluemke's testimony as to Liquori's speeding was deficient because police radar was not involved. However, defendant cites no authority for this proposition and thus has waived any possible error. Furthermore, Liquori did not object when this evidence was offered at trial.

=== CASE 9739514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:48.476011+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Stanley Boclair, an inmate at the Pontiac Correctional Center, was indicted in the circuit court of Livingston County on four counts for the murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, pars. 9 — 1(a)(1), (a)(2)) of Thomas Riley, a fellow inmate. Eight months later, defendant was also indicted on one count of conspiracy to commit said murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 8 — 2(a)). The two indictments were consolidated for trial. Prior to trial, defendant waived his right to have the jury sit on the aggravation and mitigation portion of the case. A jury found defendant guilty on all five counts. The trial court, at a separate sentencing hearing, found that the necessary aggravating factors existed and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty, and sentenced defendant to death. By direction of the trial judge, a notice of appeal was filed in this court on August 8, 1986. Defendant thereafter filed a post-trial motion in the trial court on August 15, 1986, but since the trial court had been divested of jurisdiction, defendant then filed, in this court, a motion to remand the cause to the trial court for the limited purpose of deciding his post-trial motion for a new sentencing hearing. This court allowed the motion. On remand the trial court denied the post-trial motion. On appeal, defendant raises the following issues: (1) the evidence did not establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; (2) the trial court, (a) made erroneous evidentiary rulings, (b) erred in admitting into evidence his statement to prison investigators, and (c) erred in requiring him to produce his investigator’s notes, thereby depriving him of the effective assistance of counsel, due process, and the right against self-incrimination; (3) production of the notes violated his sixth amendment right to counsel; (4) the State improperly questioned the jury about the death penalty; (5) he was deprived of a fair, impartial and unanimous jury; (6) the trial court erred in sentencing him to death; and (7) the Illinois death penalty statute is unconstitutional. The theory of the State’s case was that defendant and two other inmates, Robert Jones and Charles Jordan, killed the victim in furtherance of a conspiracy among a group of inmates. The evidence reveals that Thomas Riley, the victim, was murdered on October 7, 1984. He died of multiple stab wounds to the thigh, head, back and chest area, with penetration of the heart. The murder occurred on or near the back of seven gallery, of the south cellhouse at the Pontiac Correctional Center. After the murder, the five and seven galleries were placed under lock-down conditions, and the inmates were confined to their cells. Interviews were conducted by investigators the day of the murder with the inmates of five and seven galleries, and with correctional officers. Follow-up interviews were conducted over the course of the next few days. Defendant was not interviewed until nine days later. The State introduced the testimony of four inmates, three of whom, Kenneth Broughton, James Cameron, and Craig Chothen, saw the murder. The fourth, Brian Trimble, was present at a meeting at which the victim’s murder was planned. Broughton testified that at the time of the murder he was sitting on a windowsill and was scanning five and seven galleries when he saw Jones, Jordan, defendant and the victim on the back of seven gallery, near cell 751 or 752. Broughton said that they seemed to be talking and defendant acted as though he was going to walk away. Instead, defendant turned around and stabbed the victim. On cross-examination, Broughton admitted that his trial testimony differed in some respects from the statements he had given to Investigator Irvin. James Cameron testified that he was walking towards the back of five gallery when he noticed Jones, Jordan, a west cellhouse resident and the victim on the back landing of five gallery. As he continued walking towards the back he saw them and the defendant enter on seven gallery, where they stood approximately two cells away from the back landing. It appeared that the victim had already been wounded because there was blood on his head and shoulders. A scuffle ensued and the defendant then hit the victim “in the chest with a blow with a shank.” The victim fell over the railing, landed on his feet on five gallery and then fell to the ground. Cameron went to the back of five gallery and saw the victim lying there. Cameron said he started to walk towards the front of the gallery and, about five minutes later, saw defendant and Jordan near the middle of five gallery holding brooms and sweeping. Cameron noticed that defendant had changed clothes and was now wearing a sweat jacket. During the lock down, and prior to being interviewed on the night of the murder, Cameron passed a note to Lieutenant Eddie Ringo, which read: “BO-ClAiR ‘MADE The hit’ 7 ‘GAllERy.’ ” On cross-examination, Cameron stated that he had been a member of the gang’s “five gallery security team,” that he did not mention the west cellhouse resident at the first interview, but he did say something about him at the second interview. Also at the second interview, Cameron said that he told an investigator that defendant had been wearing a blue jean jacket at the time of the murder, while Jordan had been wearing a dark blue hooded sweat shirt. Craig Chothen testified that the night before the murder he saw Jones and James Wilcox, the “gang’s leader in prison,” talking with the victim on five gallery, near the window opposite cell 508. He did not hear the conversation but said it looked as if they were arguing. Before breakfast on the day of the murder, Chothen said he saw Jones and Wilcox talking to the victim, in the same area as the previous night, and heard Jones say to Riley, “Man, you owe us.” Chothen testified that he was on the stairway going up to seven gallery when he heard “a moan” up on seven gallery. He looked up and saw “three guys swinging shanks” at the victim. Chothen identified the “three guys” as defendant, Jones and Jordan. Chothen stated that he backed away from where he was standing and heard a “thump on the floor,” turned around and saw the victim wobble on his feet and fall to the floor. Chothen then went back into five gallery to get his jacket from his cell. On cross-examination Chothen admitted that he had never told the investigators that he returned to five gallery after witnessing the murder, until he had viewed a videotape which showed him walking back and forth on five gallery. Chothen admitted that he clarified his earlier statements to reflect the fact that he returned to five gallery. Chothen also admitted that he had been a gang member for 12 years, but said he left the gang after the murder. Brian Trimble, a third gallery resident in the south cellhouse, testified that just before the murder he was in the yard where he saw some gang members talking, through the fence, with an inmate in the west cellhouse yard. Trimble walked over to the group and they were discussing the “hit” on the victim. According to Trimble, Wilcox said that word came down from Larry Hoover, the leader of the “whole [gang] nation,” that the victim had to be hit. Melvin Jones, the gang’s chief of security, explained to the group that he wanted defendant, Jordan, and Robert Jones “to take care of the hit.” Robert Jones was to coordinate and set up the hit and defendant and Jordan were to “kill” the victim. Trimble identified those present at this meeting as Wilcox, Melvin Jones, Jordan, Robert Jones, Fontaine, defendant and himself. Trimble also said that he had not been interviewed by investigators and had not come forward with this information until seven months after the murder, following a prison gang assassination attempt on his life. David Turner, a correctional officer, testified that after the murder he saw defendant around cell 730 or 735. Turner said that defendant seemed “peculiar” because he was just standing there not paying attention to what was going on, while everyone else was at the back of the gallery looking over the railing or trying to see what was happening. Correctional Officer Michael Jones testified that he had let defendant out of his cell on the morning of the murder. Jones recalled that defendant was wearing blue jean pants and a blue jean jacket. After the murder, Jones was instructed to secure seven gallery. When Jones locked the defendant in his cell, Jones noticed that defendant was not wearing the blue jean jacket he wore earlier that day. Edward Kallal, an Illinois State Police crime scene technician, testified that, on the day of the murder, he took photographs of the crime scene, attended the victim’s autopsy and collected standards, including blood, palm and fingerprints from the victim, and collected swabs of blood from the crime scene. Kallal also testified that Officer Langlois gave him defendant’s leather gloves, and that the clothing came from defendant’s cell. Kallal stated that when he, Officer Langlois, and some guards conducted a search of defendant’s cell around 8 p.m. on the night of the murder, he took defendant’s blue jean jacket and tennis shoes because they appeared to have blood on them. When Kallal inquired about the clothes, defendant identified the items as his and told Kallal the blood had gotten on his clothes two weeks before. Kallal stated that he could not tell if defendant had “done his laundry” but defendant’s blue jean jacket was damp. Kallal also testified that all the evidence he collected or received was turned over to the State Police laboratory. Terrance Delaney, a special agent captain with the Illinois State Police, testified that on the day of the murder he was on assignment to the Department of Corrections as its chief investigator, and he received a call summoning him to the Pontiac Correctional Center. Delaney said that he toured the crime scene, observed what work had been done by the crime scene technician, began reviewing reports, was made aware of the interviews that had been conducted with the correctional officers, and was told of Cameron’s note to Lieutenant Ringo. Delaney then organized the inmate interviews. He restricted the interviews to the inmates of the five and seven galleries, because the majority of the inmates from the six and eight galleries were not in the cell area at the time of the murder. Those inmates who remained on the six and eight galleries at the time of the murder were locked in and could not get out. Interviews with other inmates were conducted as information surfaced from the interviews with five and seven gallery inmates. Delaney said that there were some differences between first and second interviews of several inmates, but the discrepancies were usually clarified in the second interview. He also acknowledged that Chothen gave four statements; the fourth being restricted to Chothen’s movements as depicted on the videotape. Delaney said that defendant was not interviewed on the day of the murder, but that he was interviewed on two occasions: once formally, and once informally at defendant’s request. Diane Schneider, a forensic scientist with the Illinois State Police, testified on behalf of the State and the defense. She stated that she received a number of items from Kallal on October 16, 1984, and again on October 31, 1984. Schneider said she also received blood standards from the victim, defendant and Ferrell Morris, another inmate. Schneider said she analyzed the blood swabs for ABO typing and standards and found them to contain human blood, the results of which would include the victim as a possible donor, but exclude the defendant. She also observed what appeared to be bloodstains on the back of defendant’s leather glovés, the back of the palm area, the fingers, and on the inside wrist of the right glove. Schneider tested the stains and identified human blood, but was unable to determine whether the blood type was consistent with that of the victim or the defendant. She found a stain on the left pocket of defendant’s blue jean jacket to be blood of a type consistent with defendant or Ferrell Morris. She tested a stain in the shoulder area of the jacket, near the right sleeve, and although the results were inconclusive, she said that the source possibly could have been the victim. Similarly, she tested the scattered small stains found on defendant’s tennis shoes. The tests revealed the presence of human blood, but there was no ABO substance which made the results inconclusive as to the source. There were stains on defendant’s blue jean pants which Schneider found to be human blood, but detecting no antigenic activity she was unable to identify the source. She also said that washing a garment would affect the fluids. Defendant introduced the testimony of inmate Clifton Hale, Jr., who testified that on the day of the murder, he was housed in cell 701 in the south cellhouse. Hale said that after breakfast he saw defendant in defendant’s cell. Hale said that he was on his way to the yard when he returned to his “house” to get his cigarettes, after which he started walking towards the back gate on seven gallery. When he reached cell 708 or 709, Jordan, defendant’s cellmate, shouted to him from five gallery asking Hale to get him a cigarette from defendant. Hale said he went to the cell, knocked on the doorway, got a cigarette from defendant and threw it down to Jordan, and resumed walking down seven gallery. As he- approached cell 730, he saw something go over the railing and heard a noise, but he could not tell what it was. As Hale got to cell 740, he looked down and saw a body lying on the floor of five gallery. Hale never mentioned the cigarette incident in either of his two statements to investigators. Inmate Ferrell Morris, an eight gallery resident in the south cellhouse, testified for the defense. Morris stated that on two occasions before the murder he had been bleeding when he was near the defendant. The first time was about a week before the murder when he was involved in a fight, but he did not come into physical contact with the defendant at that time. The second time occurred two to three days before the murder, when defendant stopped by Morris’ cell while Morris was fighting with two other inmates. Morris testified that he was bleeding from the nose and mouth and when defendant came into the cell, he hugged the defendant. Defendant testified that he lived in cell 707 in the south cellhouse and that October 7, 1984, was his 27th birthday. He stated that he, his cellmate Charles Jordan, and John Coleman, an eight gallery resident, had planned to celebrate his birthday in Coleman’s cell. Defendant said that, after waking up, he “washed up” and put on a blue zip-up sweatshirt, not his blue jean jacket, a pair of blue jeans and work boots. He and Jordan went to buff the back landing of five gallery until breakfast. Defendant said that he went to breakfast with Jordan but left the dining room alone, went up to seven gallery, and headed into his cell. Defendant said that he began talking to a Latino inmate on five gallery, who “lived between 501 and 507.” Defendant said that while he was talking to the Latino inmate someone on seven gallery came and asked him for a cigarette for Jordan. Defendant said he went into his cell, got a cigarette, went back out and gave it to the person, and then resumed talking to the Latino inmate. Defendant stated that he did not hear or see anything unusual, but he did notice people gathering on the back of seven gallery. He started walking toward the back of seven gallery and got to the middle of the gallery when he leaned over the railing and looked toward the back of five gallery. He did not see the body, but he did see seven or eight people milling around in a circle on the back of five gallery. Defendant said that, after being on seven gallery for six to seven minutes, he jumped to five gallery somewhere around cell 710 when he saw Jordan. They started to talk and then walked towards the front of five gallery and stopped by a window. They stayed there until they saw the stretcher bearing the victim’s body being carried into the yard, and then they picked up brooms to sweep the gallery. Defendant said that when the majority of the gallery had been locked up, he and Jordan were let out onto the back landing where they finished buffing the landing. From there they went to the seven gallery landing and began buffing it. He said that Officer Jones locked him up, and later that evening, Kallal and three correctional officers came to his cell. Defendant said he turned over his blue jean jacket, white tennis shoes and tan leather gloves, and the jacket was not wet and he had not washed it. Two days later, defendant said he was taken to the condemned unit in the north cellhouse. Defendant testified that he got blood on his blue jean jacket when he was hugged by inmate Ferrell Morris; at that time, he was also wearing his white tennis shoes. He said this incident took place only a few days before the murder. Morris’ blood was on the wall, floor, blankets and his coat, and after the hug he may have put on his leather gloves to help Morris clean up the blood. Defendant said that after he was moved to the north cellhouse, but before being interviewed by investigators, he received a disciplinary ticket which informed him that he was under investigation for a homicide. Defendant also knew he was a suspect in the victim’s murder, but he did not speak with investigators until October 16, 1984, after being in the condemned unit for a week. He said he felt a lot of pressure, was in shock, scared, and confused, although while in the condemned unit he had such privileges as visitation, hospital care and exercise. Defendant stated that before the investigators interviewed him, they read him his “rights” and told him he had a right to a lawyer. Defendant said he agreed to talk to them, and he knew he had a right to an attorney but he did not request one. In this interview, defendant never mentioned that he had talked with a Latino or any other alibi witness, nor did he mention the cigarette incident. Defendant said that he knew one of the investigators, Doug Read, who had been a guard at Pontiac, and had not fared too well in the past with Read. He was nervous and uncomfortable at the interview and was told before the interview “that they would seek the death penalty.” Defendant also said that he and James Cameron were on bad terms. Finally, he denied committing, or conspiring to commit, the murder. Defendant first contends that his conviction should be reversed because the evidence failed to establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. He makes several arguments in support of his contention: he has consistently maintained his innocence and presented evidence in support of his innocence; the trial court recognized that there was evidence supporting his defense; the State’s witnesses gave inconsistent testimony; the inmate gang members’ testimony was so inconsistent as to be legally insufficient; he was being “set up”; and the physical evidence contradicts the testimony of the State’s witnesses. The State responds that the defendant is merely contesting the fact that the inmates’ testimony should not have been believed by the jury. The State argues that the jury was fully aware of the discrepancies and inconsistencies that were present in the case; that it was the jury’s duty to resolve them; and that the totality of evidence supports the jury’s guilty verdict. The purpose of a jury is to make available the commonsense judgment of the community as a hedge against the overzealous or mistaken prosecutor. (Taylor v. Louisiana (1975), 419 U.S. 522, 530, 42 L. Ed. 2d 690, 698, 95 S. Ct. 692, 698.) It is the jury’s duty to assess the credibility of witnesses and to weigh the evidence in determining a defendant’s guilt or innocence. (See, e.g., Glasser v. United States (1942), 315 U.S. 60, 80, 86 L. Ed. 680, 704, 62 S. Ct. 457, 469; People v. Byron (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 81, 90.) That determination is entitled to great deference, and when the sufficiency of the evidence is challenged we will not retry the defendant, although it is our duty to set aside a conviction when the evidence raises a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt. (People v. Sanchez (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 238, 260; People v. Collins (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261.) On review, “ ‘the relevant question is whether, after reviewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” (Emphasis in original.) Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 261, quoting Jackson v. Virginia (1979), 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789. Based upon the evidence, the jury found defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. After our review of the record, we cannot say that the jury’s verdict is so unsatisfactory, unreasonable or improbable as to raise a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. The jury’s verdict is not diminished because inmates testified for one side or the other. (See, e.g., People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, 360-62.) Although there may have been minor inconsistencies in the testimony, we believe, as did the trial court, that there was sufficient and substantial evidence to establish a prima facie case and establish issues of fact which were within the jury’s province to decide. We, therefore, find defendant’s arguments on this issue to be without merit. Defendant next contends that the trial court committed reversible error by admitting into evidence his statement made to investigators nine days after the murder. Defendant asserts that the statement was obtained in violation of his fourth, fifth, sixth and fourteenth amendment rights. Defendant points out that he was isolated from the general prison population, held in the condemned unit of the prison and told he was being investigated for murder, but was not provided with the details of the charges against him while being told the State would seek the death penalty. Defendant maintains that these facts, coupled with his preexisting paranoid state, lead to the conclusion that his statement was not voluntarily, intelligently or knowingly made. Defendant further maintains that because of psychological coercion, fear and intimidation, he did not waive his right to remain silent. The State responds that defendant has procedurally defaulted this issue by failing to adequately make a record for review, because he never raised a voluntariness issue in the trial court. The State asserts that the defendant could have made a motion to suppress the statement from use in the State’s case in chief, made a motion in limine to prevent the State from using it for impeachment, or objected at trial when the State attempted to introduce the statement into evidence. We agree with the State, but for reasons different from those cited. Defendant was not required to make a pretrial motion to suppress to preserve this issue for appeal, because the statement was neither an admission nor a confession. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 114 — 11.) A motion in limine or an objection at trial would have preserved the issue, provided that it was also raised in a post-trial motion. Defendant’s attempt to raise this issue on appeal must fail as he did not preserve it in his post-trial motion. (People v. Lucas (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 245, 250.) Even assuming the issue has not been waived, we find no merit to defendant’s argument as he admits that he was read his rights, understood them, and then agreed to talk to the investigator. Furthermore, although defendant was in the condemned unit, he still had prison privileges such as visitation, hospital care and exercise. Under these circumstances we cannot say that defendant’s constitutional rights were violated. Defendant also asserts that his conviction must be reversed because the trial court made several erroneous evidentiary rulings. Defendant claims error in: admitting expert testimony regarding blood samples; excluding evidence that the victim had carried a concealed shank; and excluding evidence of a prior murder conviction of one of the State’s witnesses. The State responds that the trial court did not abuse its discretion. In the alternative, the State argues that if the rulings were error, they did not prejudice the defendant. The State also argues that defendant has waived the issue concerning admission of the blood analysis by failing to raise it in a post-trial motion. Evidentiary rulings are within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed on review unless the trial court has abused its discretion. (People v. Johnson (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 170, 193.) To begin, the trial court denied defendant’s motion in limine to exclude blood sample evidence and allowed Diane Schneider, a forensic scientist, to present testimony relative to the blood sample evidence. The judge’s ruling on this matter only went to the admissibility of the evidence, not its weight, which was to be determined by the jury. Accordingly, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting this evidence. See, e.g., Johnson, 114 Ill. 2d at 197. Nor did the trial court abuse its discretion in excluding, on relevancy grounds, evidence that the victim was carrying a “shank” at the time of his death. “ ‘ “Relevant evidence” means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable than it would be without the evidence.’ ” (People v. Monroe (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 317, 322, quoting Fed. R. Evid. 401.) Here, testimony whether the victim was carrying a shank was irrelevant for two reasons. First, the defendant did not raise an issue of self-defense. Second, there was no evidence presented at trial that the victim had drawn the shank to defend himself. Defendant asserts that the trial court erred in limiting the scope of cross-examination of Craig Chothen,- to the date and nature, but not the circumstances, of Chothen’s murder conviction. Defendant also asserts that Chothen gave inconsistent testimony. Defendant argues that by limiting the cross-examination of Chothen, the trial court prevented him from demonstrating the existence of a significant reasonable doubt as to his guilt. The State argues that defendant brought out impeaching and inconsistent testimony during his extensive cross-examination of Chothen; therefore, the trial court did not manifestly prejudice the defendant by limiting the scope of cross-examination. The scope of cross-examination concerning the circumstances of a witness’ prior conviction is within the trial court’s sound discretion, and absent an abuse of that discretion which results in manifest prejudice to the defendant, the ruling will not be overturned on review. (People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, 362.) While the State opened the door on direct examination by inquiring into the witness’ past convictions, limits may be placed on the scope of cross-examination once the door has been opened. The opening is not a funnel through which the circumstances of prior convictions can be poured. The witness was not the one on trial and to dredge up the details of his prior conviction would only muddy the waters. (See, e.g., People v. McDonald (1975), 62 Ill. 2d 448.) The jury, following Chothen’s testimony and the defense’s probing cross-examination, was in the position to judge his demeanor and credibility. The trial court’s ruling did not interfere with the jury’s duty or ability to make those judgments, nor did it prejudice the defendant. Accordingly, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in limiting the scope of cross-examination. See People v. Harris (1988), 123 Ill. 2d 113, 144-45. Defendant argues next that the trial court’s discovery order requiring the defense to produce its investigator’s notes violated his right to counsel, his right to effective assistance of counsel and his right against self-incrimination. The facts surrounding this claim are set forth in our earlier opinion. (People v. Boclair (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 368.) We only present those facts necessary for resolving the issues presented here. When the defendant was arraigned the court appointed the public defender to represent him. The public defender obtained a court order appointing a private investigator to assist him in investigating the case. The public defender withdrew upon the appointment of private counsel, who also retained the services of the same private investigator. Both sides moved for discovery. The State in one of its responses listed nearly 200 potential witnesses and the defense interviewed many of them. The State subsequently moved for discovery of the investigator’s notes concerning those interviews. The trial court granted this discovery request and ordered defense counsel to produce discoverable materials, but he refused. The trial court then found defense counsel in contempt of court and sentenced him to six days’ conditional discharge. The defense attorney appealed, contending discovery was barred by the work product doctrine. The appellate court agreed (139 Ill. App. 3d 350), and it reversed the trial court. On review, this court determined the case was moot, but we found that the work product doctrine is not an absolute and that it did not necessarily preclude the discovery of the investigator’s notes, and this court reversed the appellate court, and enforced the contempt order. 119 Ill. 2d 368. Following the appellate court decision, and prior to our ruling, the trial court required the defense to submit the investigator’s notes for an in camera inspection before the State cross-examined a defense witness. The purpose for the in camera inspection was to determine whether anything in the notes was subject to discovery by the State. Defense counsel “specific[ally]” objected on the basis of defendant’s right to counsel, his right against self-incrimination, and the Illinois discovery rules. The defendant reasserted these claims in his post-trial motion. Defendant also raised the work product argument. He also raises, for the first time, a due process argument. Defendant argues that the discovery order would chill criminal defense trial preparation and investigation, result in the defense doing the prosecutor’s job, and unduly intrude into the defense’s investigative efforts. The State responds that the doctrine of the “law of the case” bars the relitigation of these issues and that if we reach the merits, the claim should be denied as defendant has failed to timely present the constitutional bases for this argument in the trial court. We have already decided the work product doctrine argument adversely to the defendant (119 Ill. 2d 368) and under the “law of the case” we need not reexamine that claim (see, e.g., Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich (1979), 74 Ill. 2d 574, 579; City of Chicago v. Collin (1925), 316 Ill. 104, 113-14). We disagree, however, with the State that the law of the case precludes our consideration of the remaining issues concerning the constitutional bases of defendant’s arguments, because the issues were preserved by an objection at trial and they were reasserted in a written post-trial motion. Therefore, we reach the merits of defendant’s contentions that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel and his privilege against-self-incrimination, but defendant has waived his due process claim by failing to object on this basis at trial. People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176,186-88. In his effective-assistance-of-counsel argument, defendant asserts that his investigators did the prosecutor’s work, and that the State used the notes to buttress and perfect its case in chief, as well as to cross-examine defense witnesses. Defendant also contends that acceptance of the disputed discovery order will inhibit a criminal defendant from being free and open with his counsel, and will discourage defense counsel from conducting a rigorous investigation to unveil facts or evidence. Defendant relies upon State v. Williams (1979), 80 N.J. 472, 404 A.2d 34, and a footnote in Weatherford v. Bursey (1977), 429 U.S. 545, 554 n.4, 51 L. Ed. 2d 30, 39 n.4, 97 S. Ct. 837, 843 n.4, to support his contentions. We find those cases to be inapposite. Williams dealt with the discovery of inculpatory material unveiled, not by the State, but by the defense. This case involves no such factual similarity. Defendant’s reliance on the Weatherford footnote is similarly misplaced. The language of the footnote is taken out of context in defendant’s brief. The footnote states, in relevant part, that the “Sixth Amendment’s assistance-of-counsel guarantee can be meaningfully implemented only if a criminal defendant knows that his communications with his attorney are private and that his lawful preparations for trial are secure against [the surreptitious or clandestine] intrusion by the government.” (429 U.S. at 554 n. 4, 51 L. Ed. 2d at 39 n.4, 97 S. Ct. at 843 n.4.) The thrust of this passage is that it is the attorney-client communications which must be safeguarded, not those of third parties or potential witnesses. See also United States v. Nobles (1975), 422 U.S. 225, 233-34, 45 L. Ed. 2d 141, 151, 95 S. Ct. 2160, 2167-68. Here, the trial court’s in camera inspection of the contested notes safeguarded the defendant’s right to the effective assistance of counsel. The trial court excised irrelevant and privileged matter, and ordered defendant to turn over only the portions of the notes that contained factual statements which could fairly be said to be the witness’ own words. (Boclair, 119 Ill. 2d at 376.) Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the defendant was deprived of the effective assistance of counsel. Defendant also argues that the discovery order violated the privilege against self-incrimination by requiring him to work against his own interests by disclosing to the State information which would be used against him. The discovery order only exposed to production, after the trial court’s in camera inspection, that material which the State was entitled to under the rules of discovery (107 Ill. 2d R. 413). The scope of the discovery order did not extend to privileged matter. The trial court excised irrelevant and privileged matter, thus insuring that only discoverable material was to be produced. The discovery order did not threaten or undermine the attorney-client privilege or disturb that relationship. Defendant’s contention that the State “used the notes to buttress and perfect its case-in-chief” is unsupported by any record citation and our review of the record fails to disclose any such occurrence. Defendant’s allegation that the notes were used to cross-examine the defense investigator also does not persuade, as by taking the witness stand the investigator and the defense clearly waived any privilege. United States v. Nobles (1975), 422 U.S. 225, 239-240, 45 L. Ed. 2d 141, 154, 95 S. Ct. 2160, 2170-71. Defendant also asks this court to extend State constitutional protections against this type of discovery. Defendant relies on two cases from other jurisdictions, In re Misener (1985), 38 Cal. 3d 543, 698 P.2d 637, 213 Cal. Rptr. 569, and Scott v. State (Alaska 1974), 519 P.2d 774, which he argues reflect a more enlightened view of State guarantees against self-incrimination and discovery in the criminal area. These two courts have interpreted their State constitutions more expansively than the United States Supreme Court has construed the right against self-incrimination. These decisions also reflect a minority view. Moreover, defendant presents us with no argument whatsoever, other than mere case citation, in his effort to expand our State’s constitutional protections. We are unpersuaded by defendant’s contention and adhere to the discovery provisions of our rules (107 Ill. 2d R. 411 et seq.). We next consider whether defendant was denied a fair and impartial jury. Defendant argues that the State improperly questioned veniremen about the death penalty, which resulted in a death-qualified and conviction-prone jury, and that in permitting this questioning the court erred in not sequestering the venire. The State responds that defendant has defaulted on whether the State improperly questioned a venireman about the death penalty by failing to object at trial. Our review of the contested voir dire examinations reveals no timely objection to any alleged error committed by the prosecutor during his inquiry of the venireman at which purportedly death-qualifying questions were asked. Indeed, the defendant waited until the next morning, following the prosecutor’s inquiry and after the panel had been sworn, to object. Such an objection can hardly be considered timely and defendant has therefore waived the issue. People v. Evans (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 50, 61-62. Defendant also asserts that an otherwise qualified venireman, Gary Brauman, was improperly dismissed from the jury in violation of the Witherspoon standard. The State argues that there is no Witherspoon issue in this case. We agree with the State. This court has held, that even where a defendant waives a jury at the sentencing phase, as defendant did here, a jury that is questioned about the death penalty is still presumed to be a fair jury on the issue of guilt or innocence. (People v. Erickson (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 271, 292.) Defendant has failed to muster any evidence to rebut this presumption. Additionally, Witherspoon held general objections to the death penalty could not support a challenge for cause. (Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 522-23, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 784-85, 88 S. Ct. 1770, 1777.) Venireman Brauman, however, stated that he could not be fair in determining defendant’s guilt or innocence. It was not error to excuse him for cause. Wainwright v. Witt (1985), 469 U.S. 412, 424, 83 L. Ed. 2d 841, 851-52,105 S. Ct. 844, 852. Defendant next contends that the trial court committed reversible error by disregarding juror John R. “Bob” Vercler’s recantation of his guilty verdict. The jury had the case under consideration for over 24 hours, having first started deliberations at 2:40 p.m. on April 18, 1986. Eight hours later it had not reached a verdict. When the jury assembled in open court, at 11 p.m. that evening, the trial court gave a Prim instruction (People v. Prim (1972), 53 Ill. 2d 62, 75-76) and sequestered the jury for the night. The jury resumed deliberations at 9 a.m. the next day. At 3:55 p.m. the jury returned its verdict of guilty on all five counts. The jury was polled and each juror, in open court, affirmed their written verdict in counts I through V. The jury was then excused from service. The defense subsequently received an undated and unsolicited letter, postmarked April 28, 1986, from Vercler. The prosecution also received a copy of the letter. In the letter, Vercler wrote that he thought defendant was innocent, and that he had resisted a guilty verdict for as long as he could, but when two other jurors collapsed he too capitulated and voted guilty. Defendant maintains that Vercler’s unsolicited letter, postmarked nine days after the verdict, and .his testimony at the evidentiary hearing on defendant’s motion for acquittal or a new trial, impeached the jury verdict. Defendant argues that he is entitled to a new trial, because Vercler’s letter and testimony conclusively show that he was deprived of his right to a unanimous verdict by a fair and impartial jury. The State argues that the trial court did not err in refusing, after the evidentiary hearing, to set aside the unanimous verdict. The trial court held an evidentiary hearing on June 27, 1986. Vercler testified at this hearing, as did Barbara Harston, another member of defendant’s jury. Vercler testified that everyone knew who was voting guilty and who was not, and the jury had thoroughly discussed the evidence. He said that he had presented his theory to the other jurors but had failed to sway any votes. He said that when two other jurors switched their votes to guilty, a situation developed where “[he] felt the pressure of 11 [other] people all saying you know we are the jury and we have decided what we are going to do. Now it is just a question of wrapping it up so we can go home, so come on and vote guilty.” Vercler stated, however, that there was no force or coercion or “anything like that,” and that he only voted guilty because “[everybody said we have now decided what we are going to do and we are the majority.” He also testified that at the time he voted guilty he maintained a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt and “felt somebody else did it,” and he “had no idea of going back to the court and asking it to change his signature.” Juror Harston testified that the jury went “into the courtroom to use the model [of the prison] and at some point as we were going over things, [Vercler] said, T will go along with the rest of you and vote guilty.’ [0]ne of the [other jurors] said ‘no, that is not what we want. We will go over the evidence once more. We want you to be sure, in your own mind, before you vote guilty.’ ” Harston testified that it was another half an hour or 45 minutes before Vercler agreed that the defendant was guilty. It is a well-settled principle that a jury’s verdict may not be impeached by the testimony or affidavit of a juror which shows the motive, method or process by which that verdict was reached. (See Chalmers v. City of Chicago (1982), 88 Ill. 2d 582, 537; Tanner v. United States (1987), 483 U.S. 107, 116-27, 97 L. Ed. 2d 90, 103-11, 107 S. Ct. 2739, 2745-51.) Vercler’s letter and testimony go to the very heart of the jury system. This is not a matter which courts take lightly. (See Tanner, 483 U.S. at 121-25, 97 L. Ed. 2d at 106-09, 107 S. Ct. at 2748-50; People v. Holmes (1978), 69 Ill. 2d 507, 511-16.) It is clear that Vercler was not coerced or intimidated in any manner, and that he was, indeed, persuaded by the evidence that defendant was guilty. Under the facts of this case, we cannot say that the trial court erred in refusing to set aside the jury’s unanimous verdict of guilty and, consequently, we do not reach the merits of defendant’s remaining contentions relative to this issue. Having determined that no error was committed during the guilt phase of defendant’s trial, we now reach the alleged errors at the sentencing phase. Defendant does not dispute the findings in the first stage of the sentencing hearing as to his eligibility for the death penalty. Defendant does, however, argue that the trial court erred in sentencing him to death. The first stage of the death penalty hearing was held on June 27, 1986. The trial court found that the defendant had attained the age of 18, in that he was 27 years old at the time of the offense. The court further found that the victim was an inmate of the Department of Corrections. The court also found that the defendant had been convicted of the crimes by a jury in Livingston County. The trial court found defendant eligible for the death penalty and it ordered a presentence report. The second stage of the sentencing hearing occurred on July 17, 1986. The presentence report had been filed earlier the same day. Defendant offered evidence in mitigation, which consisted of the testimony of Everlena Watkins, defendant’s cousin from Muncie, Indiana. Watkins said that she had helped defendant’s father raise defendant after his mother had left the family when defendant was only one year old. Watkins stated she cared for defendant until he was seven years old, when his father moved the family to Chicago. She said that the defendant would come down and stay with her when school was out and that he helped her around the apartments she owned. She also said that defendant was obedient and never acted badly, she would like defendant to live with her, and she cared for and loved him. Defendant presented no other evidence in mitigation. After reviewing the evidence in aggravation and mitigation, the trial court found that the necessary aggravating factors existed and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. The trial court then sentenced the defendant to death. A direct appeal was erroneously taken to the appellate court. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §4(b); 107 Ill. 2d R 603.) After an amended appeal was filed in this court, defendant made a post-trial motion in the trial court for a new sentencing hearing. The trial court, however, had been divested of jurisdiction. (Harrisburg-Raleigh Airport Authority v. Department of Revenue (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 326, 341.) Defendant then filed, in this court, a motion to remand the cause to the trial court for the limited purpose of deciding a post-trial motion for a new sentencing hearing. This court allowed the motion. The defendant moved for the appointment of a psychiatrist, access for examination, production of records and a continuance of the hearing. The motion was granted and the State produced 20 pages of medical and psychological reports. An agreed order was entered appointing Dr. Daniel J. Cuneo to conduct a psychological examination to determine defendant’s present mental state and defendant’s mental state prior to, at the time of, and subsequent to the commission of the offense. The hearing on the post-trial motion for a new sentence was conducted on April 13,1987. Dr. Cuneo testified that he first saw defendant on January 14, 1987, and went through a history and a standard interview, and he checked defendant’s “affect or mode” and found it to be depressed. He administered a “quick test,” to ascertain defendant’s intellectual abilities, the results of which revealed that defendant had a “ninety-six I.Q.,” which was within the normal range of intelligence. He also administered a Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) test, a 566 true-false question profile used to determine if someone is “malingering.” Dr. Cuneo said that the defendant had told him that he had twice sought psychiatric assistance. He also said that defendant was seen by Dr. Robling on November 1, 1985, who diagnosed him as having a major depression, and was seen by Dr. Ali on January 22, 1986, who had reported that defendant had no signs of depression or psychosis. Dr. Kruglik had also reported that defendant was not psychotic when he examined defendant on January 2, 1986. Dr. Cuneo also stated that defendant had told him he had been stabbed just prior to the murder and that, while defendant downplayed the incident, he' would have liked to have seen the extent of the stabbing and the wounds. The medical report of this incident, however, was not in the materials sent to him by the State’s Attorney. Dr. Cuneo also testified about defendant’s MMPI score, the results of which were consistent with someone who had extreme irritability, hostility and tension, with depression and insomnia accompanying these states of agitation. He said it would also appear that there was severe alcoholism and/or drug abuse appearing symptomatic of strong regressive oral stirrings, a “real strong” dependency and paranoid trends with possible deviant sexual orientation. Dr. Cuneo used the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual Number 3 (DSM — 3) in formulating his diagnosis of defendant. He had no diagnosis on Axis Three, and his diagnosis on Axis One was mixed substance abuse in remission due to incarceration. On Axis Two, Dr. Cuneo said that defendant had clear antisocial personality trends, and that his principal diagnosis would be a paranoid personality disorder; and that only 3% of the present population exhibit this disorder, and not everyone in prison had a paranoid personality disorder. He added that defendant’s MMPI profile was consistent with a diagnosis of paranoid personality disorder, that defendant was not a malingerer; rather, he would prefer to be executed than to be labeled mentally ill, as that would be a sign of being weak. Dr. Cuneo was asked his opinion regarding defendant’s mental state at the time of the offense. He said that the paranoid personality disorder was the correct diagnosis but he had some difficulty with the severity of the disorder at the time of the offense, because defendant denied committing the murder, and was saying that he existed in a neutral zone, where no one could cause him problems. His experience with inmates was that there could be no neutral zone. In light of these problems, he said that in order to give his opinion he would need a hypothetical question. Defense counsel then presented Dr. Cuneo a hypothetical question as to whether defendant was acting under an extreme mental or emotional disturbance at the time of the commission of the offense. This hypothetical assumed the theory of the State’s case: there was a meeting at which defendant was ordered to commit the murder and defendant committed the murder. The hypothetical added the fact that the defendant had recently been attacked and stabbed by the gang. Given this set of facts, Dr. Cuneo opined that defendant “would have been under extreme mental and emotional disturbance.” Asked to assume the same set of facts as to whether defendant would have been acting under the compulsion of threat or menace of imminent infliction of death or great bodily harm, Dr. Cuneo opined that defendant would have been acting under compulsion and under threat. After giving his opinion, at defendant’s request, and with no objection from the State, Dr. Cuneo examined the defendant and saw- the stab wounds and scars from the gang attack on defendant. Dr. Cuneo also reviewed the medical records of that stabbing incident. Following the resumption of the hearing and in response to the same defense hypothetical, Dr. Cuneo reaffirmed his opinion that defendant would be acting under an extreme mental or emotional disturbance at the time of the offense. Upon examination by the State, Dr. Cuneo stated that the first time defendant sought psychiatric help at age 15 was in an attempt to get out of the dormitory in which he was staying. He said that another suicide attempt, where the defendant started a mattress on fire, was also aimed at getting out of whatever dormitory he was in at that time. Dr. Cuneo also stated that Dr. Kruglik had examined the defendant on January 2, 1986, when defendant complained that he did not want to be housed in “E” unit. He said that Dr. Kruglik’s report concluded that defendant was neither an aggressive person nor a psychotic. He also said that defendant had been manipulating events in his two suicide attempts to gain some benefit; but he added that those incidents would not be symptomatic of a paranoid personality disorder. Dr. Cuneo said that he had relied on the analyses of Drs. Kruglik, Ali, and Robling in forming his diagnosis, and admitted that none of those doctors had diagnosed defendant as having a paranoid personality disorder. His analysis relied in part upon the answers defendant gave him, but that fact did not affect the certainty of the paranoid personality disorder diagnosis, because the defendant “fits the criteria for the diagnosis, and the denial does not even come into play.” On further examination by the State, Dr. Cuneo was asked what effect defendant’s denial had on his diagnosis. He replied that regardless, “I’ve got an individual with a paranoid personality disorder,” and the denial would only affect the severity of the disorder. Dr. Cuneo then went through two scenarios: defendant’s denial of the crimes, and his conviction for the crimes. He stated that assuming there was no meeting, and defendant was existing in a neutral zone, there would have been some emotional duress, but not rising to an extreme level. He also said that if he believed the defendant then there would be no emotional duress, because defendant said there was none. Dr. Cuneo said that, insofar as defendant was convicted, he would have to assume that a “hit was going down,” and since defendant had been recently stabbed, defendant would have been under emotional duress and would be acting under emotional distress, extreme paranoia, fear of retaliation, duress and compulsion at the time the murder was committed. Following closing arguments, the court began its ruling. The trial court stated the question was whether either compulsion or extreme mental or emotional disturbance existed as defined in the Illinois death penalty statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, pars. 9 — 1(c)(2), (c)(4)). The trial court reviewed Dr. Cuneo’s testimony and found nothing from either “Axis One” or “Axis Three” to be helpful, stating “defendant’s case must rise and fall with respect to the diagnosis on Axis Two.” The trial court said that when Dr. Cuneo rendered his opinion that it was a paranoid personality disorder that was influencing defendant at the time of the offense, he based his opinion on two events defendant denied — that he committed the offense and that he met with gang leaders before the murder. The trial court said that Dr. Cuneo believed this was the “weakest link” in his testimony, that this was the type of evidence about which Dr. Cuneo was most unsure, and yet Dr. Cuneo was certain as to his diagnosis of the paranoid personality disorder. The trial court went on to state: “It seems to me that when he characterizes this testimony as the weakest portion of his testimony, that that is certainly true, and it also seems to me that based upon my observations of numerous inmates who have been before this Court from the penitentiary charged with various offenses that they all to a certain extent suffer from this type of, of — they all evidence this, this same type of guardedness that the Doctor says characterize — characterizes a paranoid personality disorder. *** And to that extent, it seems to me that Mr. Boclair is no different than any number of other people who are incarcerated in the penitentiary. *** So I’m not persuaded that this is a mitigating factor such as would preclude the imposition of the death penalty.” Following this finding the court went on to address whether defendant had acted under compulsion of threat or menace of imminent infliction of death or great bodily harm. The trial court found that defendant had alternatives available to him other than participating in the murder, in that he could have told a correctional officer and sought protective custody. The trial court also found that this was not a mitigating factor sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. Defendant raises three arguments: the trial court erred in speculating about his future dangerousness in prison; the overwhelming weight of mitigating evidence rendered the death penalty an inappropriate sentence; and the trial court rejected unrebutted expert testimony regarding the presence of two statutory mitigating factors. The State asserts that the death penalty was properly imposed because of the circumstances of the offense and the character of the defendant. The State also contends that at the hearing, on defendant’s motion for a new sentencing hearing, the trial court properly weighed the evidence in mitigation and aggravation, and in that weighing process the judge took into account the expert’s opinion as well as the defendant’s character. The purpose of the aggravation and mitigation phase of the sentencing hearing is to insure that the discretion of the sentencing authority is exercised in an informed manner, based upon the evidence at hand and not on extraneous influences; on reason not caprice. People v. Orange (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 364, 391; People v. Devin (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 326, 345-46; People v. Gleckler (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 145, 162. In mitigation, defendant presented the unrebutted testimony of Dr. Cuneo. The credibility and weight to be given to this testimony are for the trier of fact. (People v. Wright (1985), 111 Ill. 2d 128, 154.) The ultimate question of whether or not the death penalty is the appropriate sentence is an issue for the trial court, not the expert. We agree with the trial court that the defendant was not acting under compulsion of threat or menace. As the trial court noted, the defendant had alternatives open to him other than participating in the murder. We do, however, disagree with the trial court’s finding as to Dr. Cuneo’s testimony regarding defendant’s mental state at the time of the commission of the offense. From our review of the record, the trial court misunderstood Dr. Cuneo’s testimony. The trial court found that Dr. Cuneo’s opinion relied upon two things which defendant denied — the commission of the offense and meeting with gang leaders. This was incorrect. Dr. Cuneo gave his opinion in response to a hypothetical question which assumed the theory of the State’s case, and the facts which defendant denied: defendant attended a meeting with gang leaders at which he was ordered to make the “hit,” defendant committed the murder, and added the fact that the defendant had been recently attacked and stabbed by the gang. Dr. Cuneo’s opinion was that, under these facts, defendant would have been acting under an extreme mental or emotional disturbance at the time of the commission of the offense. Also, under the trial court’s standard any prisoner appearing before this trial judge who suffers from a paranoid personality disorder would be unable to plead or prove an extreme mental or emotional disturbance, because in the trial judge’s opinion, all “inmates who have been before [him] suffer” from “a paranoid personality disorder.” The trial court’s statement demonstrates a prejudice against incarcerated defendants, rather than a reasoned and informed judgment based upon the evidence contained in the record. Additionally, a defendant is entitled to individualized sentencing treatment. (Lockett v. Ohio (1978), 438 U.S. 586, 605, 57 L. Ed. 2d 973, 990, 98 S. Ct. 2954, 2965; Woodson v. North Carolina (1976), 428 U.S. 280, 304, 49 L. Ed. 2d 944, 961, 96 S. Ct. 2978, 2991; People v. La Pointe (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 482, 494-96.) This court has also stressed the importance of excluding extraneous and irrelevant influences from consideration at a death penalty hearing. People v. Devin (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 326, 346. Here, the trial court “believe[d]” Dr. Cuneo’s diagnosis, that defendant had a paranoid personality disorder, was correct, but then failed to consider that testimony in light of the individual circumstances of the defendant then appearing before him. The trial judge reasoned that in his experience all of the inmates who had appeared before him could be classified as having paranoid personalities. Significantly, the trial court’s belief was at odds with the unrebutted expert evidence that not all prisoners have paranoid personality disorders. Nevertheless, the trial court relied upon its irrelevant and unsupported assertion to deny defendant’s motion for a new sentence, thus affirming the death sentence. The trial judge’s comparison was not an appropriate consideration nor did it insure “[rjationality, consistency, and evenhandedness in the imposition of the death penalty.” People v. Szabo (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 327, 352-53. The trial court abused its discretion by failing to consider the defendant’s mitigating evidence as well by denying the defendant the individual sentencing treatment to which he is entitled. Accordingly, we must vacate the death sentence and remand the cause to the trial court for a new sentencing hearing. Therefore, we need not address defendant’s constitutional challenges to the Illinois death penalty statute. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Livingston County is affirmed in part and vacated in part, and the cause is remanded for a new sentencing hearing.

=== CASE 9739515 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:48.482979+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN, dissenting: The majority opinion finds that “[tjhe trial court’s statement demonstrates a prejudice against incarcerated defendants, rather than a reasoned and informed judgment based upon the evidence contained in the record.” (129 Ill. 2d at 494.) I do not agree with the opinion’s assessment of the trial judge’s statement. Things have been read into the judge’s comment that cannot reasonably be deducted from what was said. Not only do I think the above inference is wrong, but also, as demonstrated below, other conclusions were drawn with which I do not agree. I do not think that the trial judge’s statement demonstrates a prejudice against incarcerated defendants. Also, I do not agree with the conclusion in the majority opinion that the statement of the judge implies that he reasoned “that in his experience all of the inmates who [have been] before him could be classified as having paranoid personalities.” (129 Ill. 2d at 495.) The statement from which the opinion draws these erroneous conclusions was made by the court in evaluating Dr. Cuneo’s opinion that the defendant had a paranoid personality disorder that was influencing him at the time of the offense. The judge’s statement set forth the reasons that he did not give great weight to Dr. Cuneo’s opinion. The judge’s statement referred to testimony of Dr. Cuneo that the defendant displayed a certain guardedness which the doctor said characterizes a paranoid personality disorder. The judge noted that based upon his observation of numerous inmates who had appeared before him, they all, to a certain extent, evidenced this same type of guardedness. The trial court then concluded that the testimony of Dr. Cuneo did not establish a mitigating factor which would preclude the imposition of the death penalty. In my opinion, the trial judge did not demonstrate a prejudice against incarcerated defendants. For the judge to say that all inmates who appeared before him, to a certain extent, evidenced the same type of guardedness, which the doctor says characterizes a paranoid personality disorder, is simply an observation by the trial judge as to why he did not give much weight to the doctor’s opinion. It does not demonstrate a prejudice against incarcerated defendants. It does not show that the judge reasoned that all inmates who have appeared before him could be classified as having paranoid personalities. These are just erroneous conclusions which this court has drawn from the judge’s statement. The judge simply-stated that all of the inmates who appeared before him, to a certain extent, demonstrated the characteristics which the doctor considered significant. The opinion states that the credibility and weight to be given to Dr. Cuneo’s testimony are for the trier of fact. Yet the opinion rejected the trial judge’s evaluation of Dr. Cuneo’s testimony because of the erroneous conclusions drawn from the trial judge’s statement made during the evaluation of that testimony. I think that the erroneous conclusions drawn by this court are unfair to the trial judge. I think the finding, judgment and sentence of the trial court should be affirmed. I, therefore, dissent. JUSTICE STAMOS joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739516 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:49.629175+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE EGAN delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Freddie Gonzalez, was found guilty by a jury of armed robbery and aggravated battery; and he was sentenced to imprisonment for 4x/2 years. No issue is made of the sufficiency of the evidence. The case against the defendant was based on his identification by the complainant, Jose Asia, and statements the defendant made to the police. Before the trial began, the defendant made an oral motion in limine requesting that the State be prohibited from introducing any testimony that the defendant was in any way affiliated with a gang and that any testimony regarding the police photo books used to identify the defendant exclude any reference to the Spanish Cobras gang. The judge held that he would allow testimony regarding the defendant’s gang membership for the limited purpose of showing the procedure and circumstances leading to his identification. Asia testified that on September 4, 1986, at about 1:20 p.m. he went home from school. After spending a little time there, he went to the home of his friend Kenneth Siaz at 2321 N. Albany in Chicago. Siaz had a new racing bicycle worth about $200 which he allowed Asia to borrow. Asia took the bicycle for a ride around the neighborhood at approximately 2:30 p.m. As he was riding in the street through the 3100 block of West Belden, he saw a group of 8 to 10 boys standing on the sidewalk in front of a burned-down building. He knew only one of the boys standing there, and his name was Pony Boy. Asia had lived in the neighborhood for five years before moving out the previous year. He continued to visit everyday and previously had seen a group of individuals in front of the burned-down building who “represented” that they were members of the Spanish Cobras gang. They would so “represent” by yelling out their gang name and making a hand signal like a “C.” On the day of the robbery the burned-down building had an “SC” with pitchforks written on it. That symbol meant Spanish Cobras to him. After riding by the building, Asia’s friend Danny stopped him. Asia was about three houses away with his back to the burned-down building. He talked with Danny for five minutes, and Danny left. As Asia was about to leave, a man he later identified as the defendant came up behind him and grabbed the bicycle’s handlebars. Asia was still sitting on the bicycle. He said that the defendant was “with the guys in the group behind” him, but he could not say for sure where the defendant had come from, because he had his back to the defendant when he grabbed the handlebars. He had never seen the defendant before that day, and after the defendant grabbed the handlebars they were face to face and roughly two feet apart. He made an in-court identification of the defendant. He told the defendant it was his friend’s bicycle. The defendant threatened that if Asia did not give him the bicycle he was going to hit him. Asia would not give it to him, and the defendant struck him with his clenched fist in the face below his left eye. Asia remained on the bicycle, and the defendant hit him a second time in the forehead. After receiving the second blow, Asia released his grip on the handlebars, and the defendant rode off on the bicycle down Belden. Asia returned to Kenneth Siaz’s house and called the police. When Officer Leo Velez arrived, Asia gave him the physical description for a male Puerto Rican and a description of his clothing. He told Velez that he thought the robber was a Spanish Cobra. The next day Asia went to the police station and met with Officer Noon. He looked at about 75 photographs of young men in a book. The book contained photos of blacks as well as whites; however, the majority of the individuals were Hispanic. He picked out the defendant’s photograph from the book. He did not know whether the defendant belonged to a gang. He acknowledged that he did not give Officer Velez the defendant’s eye color because he could not tell what color they were. The entire incident with the defendant lasted a minute. He did not identify the defendant from a lineup; instead, the next time he saw the defendant was at a preliminary hearing after the defendant had been arrested. He identified him at that time. Officer Noon testified that he observed a bump on Asia’s forehead. He gave Asia two Chicago police department photo albums which contained photographs of “self-admitted Spanish Cobra gang members.” The court sustained the objection of the defendant and instructed the jury as follows: “With respect to the last answer, ladies and gentlemen, that these two books contain that of self-admitted Spanish Cobras, the comment of self-admitted is hereby stricken from the record as irrelevant and the defense objection to that is hereby sustained. I must remind you once again, ladies and gentlemen, this testimony concerning the gang membership, the Spanish Cobras, of the defendant is admissible in evidence solely or only to show the circumstances and the procedures that were used in the identification of the defendant in this case.” Noon further testified that on September 11, 1986, after looking for the defendant for a few days, he and his partner Officer John Guzman saw him at 3800 West Leland with one or two other white Hispanic males. As the officers approached, the defendant asked, “If [they were] looking for [him] for that robbery where [he] took the kid’s bike.” At that point Noon placed the defendant under arrest and took him to Area 5 headquarters. Noon questioned the defendant alone after giving him his Miranda warnings for a second time. The defendant told him he was on Belden Street when he saw a “guy” on a new bicycle. He went up to the person and told him to get off the bike. The person did not want to get off the bike so the defendant forced him off. He then got on the bike and rode off with it. Noon asked the defendant where the bike was, and the defendant replied that he kept it for a day and then gave it to a person named Gunner, a member of the Simon City Royals gang. The defendant denied hitting Asia. The police were unable to recover the bicycle. On cross-examination, Noon testified that he and his partner did not have time to say anything to the defendant before he made the statement asking if they were looking for him for the robbery where he took the “kid’s bike.” Noon typed out a supplemental police report after questioning the defendant which included the defendant’s statement that he had taken the bike, did not hit the person from whom he had taken the bike and that he gave the bike to a Simon City Royal gang member named Gunner. The defendant’s evidence consisted, in part, of a stipulation to the testimony of an official court reporter who was present at the defendant’s preliminary hearing at which Asia was asked if it took the defendant five minutes to tell him to get off the bike and he answered, “or ten [minutes] or so.” Officer Leo Velez testified for the defense that he met with Asia at approximately 3 p.m. He did not think that Asia provided him with the hair or eye color of the person who robbed him. Velez marked in his report that the hair and eye color were unknown. On cross-examination, he testified that Asia was ’ “hysterical, all shook up.” Asia was able to provide a description of the robber’s clothes and gave his age, height and weight. The defendant first contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion in limine and allowing the State to introduce testimony of the defendant’s gang affiliation with the Spanish Cobras.  The supreme court has spoken on the admissibility of evidence showing a defendant’s affiliation with a gang: “To prevent the conviction of one accused of a crime merely because of his membership in an organization that is unpopular, it is the thrust of [United States v.] Rosenberg that proof of membership is admissible only if there is also sufficient proof to show that membership is related to the crime charged, for example, to show common design or purpose.” People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 348, 372, 263 N.E.2d 840. We cite People v. Hairston as the expression by the highest court of this State of the applicable principle of law governing admissibility of evidence of gang affiliation. By no means do we say or imply that Hairston is factually apposite here. We recognize that the supreme court affirmed the conviction holding that the evidence of gang affiliation in that case met the court’s standard. The potential for prejudice in the admission of such evidence has been recognized in People v. Parrott (1976), 40 Ill. App. 3d 328, 331, 352 N.E.2d 299: “It is common knowledge that there is a deep, bitter, and widespread prejudice against street gangs in every large metropolitan area in America.” In the trial court, the State argued, and the judge agreed, that evidence was admissible for the purpose of showing the procedure and circumstances leading to the defendant’s identification. No Federal or State court case is cited to support introduction of evidence of gang affiliation to show the procedure and circumstances leading to the defendant’s identification. Our research has disclosed none.  The issue should not be clouded by reference to this evidence in connection with the rule concerning proof of other crimes or in connection with the hearsay rule. Those issues may be addressed on another day in another case. The narrow issue is whether this evidence was relevant and prejudicial. When evidence is relevant but prejudicial, it is the duty of the judge to weigh the prejudicial effect of the evidence and its probative weight. But the first hurdle is relevance; and we conclude that the evidence was not relevant and its prejudicial effect was considerable. Put another way, the issue is whether proof that the defendant was a member of the Spanish Cobras is “related [or relevant] to the crime charged.” We conclude that it was not. The argument advanced by the State in this court is that “[i]t was necessary for the jury to know how the police were able to obtain a positive identification of defendant and thereafter to be able to find and arrest defendant.” (Emphasis added.) Our answer is that it was not “necessary.” This was a trial; not a motion to suppress evidence. The issue before the jury was whether Asia’s identification was correct, not whether the police had probable cause to arrest the defendant and not whether the police acted efficiently. Asia properly testified to the description he gave the police of the physical characteristics of the defendant and the clothing he was wearing, but there was no need for his statement that he “thought” the offender was a Spanish Cobra. The State’s argument reduced to its essentials is this: Asia thought the defendant was a Spanish Cobra; the defendant was a Spanish Cobra. Since Asia was right about the defendant’s association with the Spanish Cobras, Asia must have'been right about his identification of the defendant. To follow the State’s syllogism to its logical conclusion, in other cases where identification is the issue, a witness should be permitted to testify, for example, that he thought the perpetrator was an ex-convict, or a pervert, if in fact it can be later shown that the person was an ex-convict or a pervert. As should be obvious, validity of the syllogism, which we doubt, is heavily outweighed by the great prejudice to the defendant. Asia also properly testified about his identification of the defendant’s picture in a book. But there was no necessity to have the book identified as one containing pictures of Spanish Cobras. The State further tells us that with Asia’s statement that he believed the man to be a Spanish Cobra, Officer Noon “was able to narrow down the investigation.” Again to follow the State’s argument to its logical conclusion, in a trial of a person charged with a sex offense, for example, an identifying witness would be able to testify to selection of a picture from a group of photographs of sex offenders, because, the State would argue, the police narrowed its search to known sex offenders. In our judgment, all references to the Spanish Cobras, including evidence of the actions of a group of persons calling out their gang affiliation and making signs indicating they were members of the Spanish Cobras, were irrelevant and prejudicial. That evidence of the actions of the group of boys was introduced as a circumstance that would lead to the inference that the defendant was a member of the Spanish Cobras, an inference of doubtful validity. But it was also used in a prejudicial manner in the final arguments. In the opening argument the following occurred: STATE’S ATTORNEY: “He gives the police a description, a physical description, a clothing description and he tells him, I think he belongs or I think he is a Spanish Cobra. And he explains to you why he made that statement. Here’s a young man who grew up in the neighborhood, who spent his summer there because that is where all his friends are and he knows about this particular group, the Spanish Cobras, and again use your common sense. These kids that live in the neighborhood where these groups hang out know about these groups. They know what they do, what they represent and the signs they use and the graffiti and the hassle they put up with every day. DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Objection, Judge. THE COURT: That is sustained. The last comment, the hassle they put up with every day, the jury is instructed to disregard that.” (Emphasis added.) In an attempt to soften the impact of the improperly admitted evidence, the defendant’s attorney argued that the jury should not convict the defendant because “he may be a member of a gang” and that the gang evidence “has nothing to do with this case.” The State now argues that that argument invited the following remarks by the assistant State’s Attorney: “STATE’S ATTORNEY: Counsel has just got through telling you it is not a gang case. Well, let me tell you this. It took a lot of guts for Jose to get on that stand and face this man and say he did — . DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Objection, Judge. THE COURT: Sustained. * * * STATE’S ATTORNEY: Why would he say that to the police officers that he has committed this robbery. Maybe he didn’t think Jose Asia would be here. Maybe he didn’t think he would testify. DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Objection, Judge. THE COURT: Sustained. STATE’S ATTORNEY: We don’t live in a vacuum in this city. You know what happens in the streets of the city ***. * * * STATE’S ATTORNEY: Now, [Noon] is an experienced officer. He deals in gang crimes. He knew he had this information that this person may have been a Spanish Cobra and lo and behold, he is a Spanish Cobra. He was picked out of the book. He is brought in and he admits to it.” In spite of the fact that the court had already sustained an objection to the prosecutor’s remarks about the courage displayed by Asia in testifying, the following occurred: “STATE’S ATTORNEY: Based on the overwhelming [sic] in this case, the fact that Jose had the guts to come in here and testify ***. DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Objection, Judge. THE COURT: That is sustained.” We first observe that there was no admissible evidence that the defendant was a Spanish Cobra nor any evidence that he admitted he was a member of the Spanish Cobras; and we reject the argument that the prosecutor’s remarks were invited by the defendant’s attorney. This case is similar to People v. Parrott (1976), 40 Ill. App. 3d 328, 352 N.E.2d 299, in which the defendant was convicted of unlawful use of weapons. Hearsay testimony was admitted which included evidence of gang activity. The court held that the evidence was inadmissible as hearsay, and on the additional ground that the evidence was prejudicial, citing People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 348, 363 N.E.2d 840. The State there made an argument similar to that made here: the evidence was relevant to show “the motive, knowledge and intent of the arresting officers.” (40 Ill. App. 3d at 328.) The court rejected that argument and emphasized that the prejudicial effect of the evidence, as in this case, was accentuated by the State’s improper argument. The State relies upon People v. Rivera (1986), 145 Ill. App. 3d 609, 495 N.E.2d 1088. In that case, however, the State showed that leaders of the Latin Kings had instructed the defendants, who were also members of the Latin Kings, to execute a man because he was selling drugs in an area under the control of their gang without paying dues. The court concluded that the evidence was relevant because it indicated that the gang had not only provided the motive for the murder but the executioners and their weapons as well. In addition, one of the defendants conceded the relevance of gang affiliation in his case. In passing, we note that the State here made a point of establishing, over objection by the defendant, that neither Asia nor his friend Danny was a member of a gang. While the State’s purpose of introducing such evidence was to remove any possible stigma from Asia that it was placing on the defendant, it also removed any possible motive that would justify the admission of the evidence. An argument that this testimony of Asia was probative to counteract any suggestion that Asia was intentionally lying to implicate a rival gang member is considerably weakened by the fact that he was permitted to testify that his friend Danny also was not a gang member, and Danny did not testify. We do not agree with the State’s argument that the statement of the defendant that he gave the bicycle to a member of another gang provided the basis of the admissibility of the evidence. Since we have determined that the evidence was prejudicial, the issue becomes whether or not it was so prejudicial that its admission requires a new trial.  The defendant does not contend that the evidence is not sufficient to establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; and we hold that it was. The evidence consisted of an identification and an oral confession; but each aspect of the evidence, although admissible, had some weakness affecting its weight. First, there is an element of suggestion in showing a witness a book marked “Spanish Cobras” after that witness has told the police he thinks the perpetrator was a Spanish Cobra. Second, the defendant was not identified in a lineup, but rather in a courtroom in a preliminary hearing. Such identifications have been criticized. Last, no explanation was given for failure to have a lineup identification. Passing on to the confession, it was oral and is, in part, at variance with the testimony of Asia. Moreover, the officer testified that the only thing he put in his report was that the defendant said he took the bike but did not hit the victim and that he gave the bike to a man named Gunner. The officer had taken written statements many times; and normally, he either writes the statement out by hand or has a court reporter take it. He never explained why neither procedure was followed in this case. He wrote out a summation of what the defendant had said, not “completely” what he had said. He never showed it to the defendant nor asked him to sign it. No explanation was made for his failure to show the summary to the defendant or to ask him to sign it. By these observations we do not mean to suggest that the testimony of Asia and Officer Noon should be disregarded as not credible. We do mean to suggest that their testimony, with its weaknesses, such as they were, does not constitute overwhelming evidence. We note that in Rivera this court reversed the conviction and remanded for a new trial because of the introduction of improper evidence of gang affiliation on the part of a witness’ husband in spite of the fact that both defendants had made written confessions. We also note that in Parrott this court reversed and remanded for a new trial because of the introduction of prejudicial evidence of gang affiliation without even discussing the sufficiency of the evidence. We have previously warned against the practice of offering evidence for a limited purpose and, after admission, making impermissible use of the evidence in closing argument. (People v. Hunter (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 516, 464 N.E.2d 659.) We said that in flagrant cases that practice might lead to reversal. In our judgment, this is such a case. In fact, grounds for reversal in this case are even more compelling since the evidence of gang affiliation was not admissible for any purpose. In our judgment, the defendant did not receive a fair trial. In wew of the position we take on the prejudicial effect of the evidence and the State’s argument, it is unnecessary to pass on. the defendant’s argument that the testimony of the officer that the books contained the pictures of Spanish Cobras was inadmissible hearsay and his argument that an instruction on circumstantial e-vidence was improperly given. For these reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. Reversed and remanded. McNAMARA, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739517 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:49.634207+00 ===

JUSTICE QUINLAN, dissenting: I respectfully disagree Avith the decision of the majority as well as the rationale for its discussion. In my opinion, the judgment of the trial court should be affirmed. I believe the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion in limine, and its admission of the testimony regarding the defendant’s gang membership, for the limited purpose of showing the procedure and circumstances leading to the identification of the defendant, was proper. Furthermore, to the extent that the limitation was exceeded by the State, the defendant objected, and the court sustained the objection and properly instructed the jury concerning the limited purpose of the evidence. However, in any event, I am of the opinion that any error that might have occurred here was harmless error under the circumstances, because the evidence of defendant’s guilt was overwhelming. Additionally, I do not find People v. Parrott (1976), 40 Ill. App. 3d 328, 352 N.E.2d 299, or People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 348, 263 N.E.2d 840, which are relied upon by the majority, to be apposite in this situation. In fact, I believe that both cases can readily be distinguished from the present case. In Parrott, the defendant was charged with knowingly possessing and selling an illegal shotgun. There, the State apparently began its case by introducing the testimony of the arresting officers, who testified concerning a department memorandum which stated that the sale of firearms by gangs was occurring within the city and also included Mr. Parrott’s name and address as part of the memorandum. (Parrott, 40 Ill. App. 3d 328, 352 N.E.2d 299.) It appears quite clear from the opinion that this information was completely irrelevant to the charge of possession and sale of the shotgun involved there. Moreover, the specific basis on which the evidence was excluded by the court there was on the ground that the officer’s testimony was impermissible hearsay, and not because of the gang nature of the testimony. (Parrott, 40 Ill. App. 3d at 330, 352 N.E.2d at 302.) The Parrott court’s observation about the widespread prejudice against street gangs, as noted by the majority here, only occurred later in the Parrott opinion and was merely a secondary reason for the court’s reversal. Furthermore, even then, the Parrott court expressly observed that the reason this information (concerning gangs) was incompetent was because, under the circumstances of that case, as noted above, it was irrelevant to the offenses charged. The court said, “[t]he identity of the alleged buyer of weapons had no relationship to the intent, design or motives of the police officers [in investigating the sale of firearms].” Parrott, 40 Ill. App. 3d at 331, 352 N.E.2d at 303. This is not similar to our case. In the Parrott case, as stated, the evidence concerning gangs was introduced by the testimony of police officers, and, as found by the court there, for the sole purpose of establishing the truth of gang activity and the defendant’s membership in the gang. That was not the case here. In contrast to the reason for introducing the gang evidence in Parrott, the evidence here was introduced initially by the victim, for the purpose of identifying the defendant, and the victim’s statement regarding gangs was merely part of the description of his observations concerning the defendant. In fact, this description subsequently led to the defendant’s identification and arrest. Such descriptive information seems to me most relevant and, under circumstances such as those here, most proper.1 Thus, it was not error for the trial court to allow this evidence, even though it may have been prejudicial to the defendant. As this court noted in People v. Jones (1987), 161 Ill. App. 3d 688, 515 N.E.2d 166, “evidence of gang membership is admissible if there is sufficient proof that it is related to the crime charged *** and need not be excluded merely because it may tend to prejudice the defendant where it is otherwise relevant and admissible.” Jones, 161 Ill. App. 3d at 697, 515 N.E.2d at 171; see also People v. McClendon (1986), 146 Ill. App. 3d 1004, 1009, 497 N.E.2d 849, 852 (where no error was found in the admission of the victim’s testimony that he heard gang slogans being shouted as the defendant struck him and that the defendant was a member of a gang). In addition, I do not find that People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 348, 263 N.E.2d 840, relied upon by the majority, requires a reversal of this case because of the admission of the “gang related” evidence either. In that case, the court actually found that the evidence of gang membership was properly admitted. The court stated that the evidence introduced permitted, at least, a reasonable inference that there was a common design or performance to do an unlawful act, and then noted that, contrary to the defendant's contentions, where the evidence of gang activity is relevant and otherwise admissible, it is not to be excluded merely because it may also have a tendency to prejudice the accused. (Hairston, 46 Ill. 2d at 372, 263 N.E.2d at 854-55.) That court also found that there was no error in the failure of the trial judge to give a cautionary instruction since, as the court noted, it was the obligation of the defendant to request such an instruction and the defendant had failed to do so. (Hairston, 46 Ill. 2d at 372-73, 263 N.E.2d at 855.) Consequently, the court affirmed the defendant’s conviction there even though no cautionary instruction had been given. In the present case, as in the Jones case discussed previously, the trial court did, however, properly instruct the jury as to the limited purpose of the gang membership testimony. I think it is worthy to note that in Jones, this court concluded that such a limiting instruction was sufficient to protect the defendant from any prejudice. (Jones, 161 Ill. App. 3d at 697, 515 N.E.2d at 171.) Hence, I likewise believe that the trial court’s limiting instruction here was sufficient to protect the defendant from any alleged prejudice and, thus, unlike Hairston, any potential prejudice here was offset by the jury instruction. Moreover, I also believe that, in any event, the references here to the defendant’s gang membership, when viewed in context, were minor in light of the overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt. Therefore, in such circumstances, the testimony concerning the gang membership could not be so prejudicial that it would have prevented the jury from rationally evaluating the proper evidence before it. See People v. Portis (1986), 147 Ill. App. 3d 917, 928, 498 N.E.2d 675, 682. Furthermore, I find it is also noteworthy that Professor Graham, in his Handbook on Federal Evidence, in commenting on the admissibility of evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts, observes that great inroads upon the prior rule of exclusion of such evidence has taken place under the modern federal rules of evidence. In fact, he notes that the Federal rule permits the introduction of evidence of another crime, wrong or act unless the sole purpose for the offer is to establish the defendant’s propensity for crime. (M. Graham, Handbook of Federal Evidence §404.5, at 200-10 (2d ed. 1986); see also United States v. Ford (9th Cir. 1980), 632 F.2d 1354, 1375 (where the court there observed that “[the] rule is one of inclusion which admits evidence of other crimes except where that evidence tends to prove only criminal disposition).”) Professor Graham also makes a similar observation in E. Cleary & M. Graham, Handbook of Illinois Evidence section 404.5, at 162-69 (4th ed. 1984), where he again emphasizes that evidence of other crimes, wrongs or acts is usually admissible where it is offered for any purpose other than to merely show a propensity on the part of the defendant to commit the crime. He further observes there that the decision with respect to the admissibility of such evidence will be overturned only if there exists a clear abuse of discretion. Hence, it would appear that the admission of the gang evidence here was also consistent with the current view of admissibility of such evidence both in the Federal and State courts. Accordingly, I find the reversal of the defendant’s conviction, as the majority’s decision holds, based solely on the admission of the evidence relating to gangs to be unwarranted and unnecessary. I especially find reversal to be unnecessary because, as stated earlier, the evidence of the defendant’s guilt is clear. When there is sufficient and competent evidence establishing a defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and there has been no showing that an alleged error was the basis for the jury’s verdict, the error is harmless and reversal is not warranted. (See People v. Johnson (1986), 150 Ill. App. 3d 1075, 1083, 502 N.E.2d 304, 310.) I do not believe that defendant has shown, or could show, that the alleged error here formed the basis for the jury’s verdict. Furthermore, to the extent that the majority suggests that portions of the State’s evidence should be discounted, apparently as not credible because it was inconsistent with normal prosecution procedures, this is not a proper issue to be decided by this court.2 Resolution of factual disputes and the assessment of the credibility is for the jury and will not be overturned on appeal unless the evidence is so unsatisfactory or improbable that a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt remains. (People v. Williams (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 309, 315, 444 N.E.2d 136, 138.) This was not the case here, for, as noted by the majority itself, the defendant did not contend that the evidence was insufficient to establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Consequently, any error here was harmless and did not require reversal. For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the trial court.   The majority also specifically observed that the State made a point of establishing that neither the victim, Asia, nor his friends were gang members and that this evidence was introduced to remove any stigma from Asia that the State was attempting to place on the defendant by associating him with a gang. This, the majority asserts, in effect destroyed any basis for the State’s contention that the introduction of gang evidence was for any purpose other than to prejudice the defendant. I respectfully disagree with this unsupported assertion by the majority. It seems to me more reasonable that the State’s basis for doing so was to counteract any contention that Asia was lying for purposes of “getting back at” a member of a rival gang, as was the assertion in the Hairston case. See Hairston, 46 Ill. 2d 348, 263 N.E.2d 840.    The majority, however, states that it does not mean that the evidence should be disregarded as not credible, but only that it is weakened, so that in the majority’s view, this evidence was not overwhelming. Respectfully, I do not see the legal significance of this distinction. First, the procedures employed here are not, nor does the majority say they were, improper (i.e., not in conformance with some mandatory standard of conduct), illegal, or unconstitutional, so that their use alone would require a reversal. The procedures were just not the normal procedures or the best procedures available to the State. Second, the question of the weight to be given to the evidence is also a proper function of the jury or trier of fact, and the decision of the trier of fact should not be set aside on appeal unless the verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. (People v. Hermann (1988), 180 Ill. App. 3d 939, 946-47, 536 N.E.2d 706, 711.) Finally, a conviction also should not be set aside simply because the evidence is not overwhelming, but, as observed above in my dissent, should be set aside only where there is a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. (People v. Jaffe (1986), 145 Ill. App. 3d 840, 847, 493 N.E.2d 600, 606.) Moreover, a reasonable doubt arises on appeal only when, after viewing all the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution, no rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. (People v. Jimerson (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 12, 43-44, 535 N.E.2d 889, 903.) This was not, as noted by the majority opinion, the situation here.

=== CASE 9739518 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:51.535426+00 ===

MILLER, Judge.
Barry Dale Johnson appeals his convictions, received after a jury trial, of battery, criminal confinement, and intimidation. Johnson's trial was bifurcated in order that Johnson's earlier battery conviction committed against the same person as the vie-tim in the present case. Florence Stokes, could be proven in the second phase of the trial in order to enhance the present bat tery conviction from a class A misdemean- or to a class D felony. We reverse Johnson's convictions and remand for a new trial because of an evidentiary error, the admission of remote assaults by Johnson upon Stokes.
Issues
Johnson raises eight issues. We address two. We address the sufficiency of the evidence because had Johnson's arguments been meritorious he would have been entitled to an acquittal. We also address an evidentiary error that entitles Johnson to a new trial.
I. Whether the evidence was sufficient to support Johnson's convictions?
II. Whether the trial court erred in admitting testimony about Johnson's prior acts of violence toward Stokes?
Facts
The facts most favorable to the verdict demonstrate that on the night of October 31/morning of November 1, 1987, Johnson arrived at the home of Florence Stokes, grabbed her by the throat, lifted her, slammed her against the wall, threw her down, hit her with his fists, grabbed her fingers and bent them back. He then forced her into a car and drove to a vacant house where he parked and threatened to kill her if she refused to drop the charges she had filed against him regarding an altercation occurring earlier that week on October 25, 1987.
During that earlier altercation of October 25, 1987, Johnson had broken a window at Stokes s house entered, and fought with her son. Stokes reported to the police and later to the proseeutor that Johnson had broken into her home armed with a shot gun. She obtained a protective order from the small claims court by alleging the same set of facts. She later recanted by admitting that Johnson was not armed with a shotgun when he broke into her house. Instead it was her son who was armed with the shotgun during the altercation. She admitted she lied in order to encourage prompt police response.
Johnson and Stokes had been involved in n "off and on" romantic relationship since 1980. During the first phase of the bifurcated trial, Stokes was permitted to testify about thrée prior acts of violence by Johnson against her dating back to 1980. One of these, occurring in 1982, resulted in Johnson being convicted of battery. During this first phase, Stokes testified to the beating underlying the conviction without mentioning that Johnson had been prosecuted and convicted as a result. At the close of the first phase the jury returned verdicts against Johnson for battery (class A misdemeanor), criminal confinement, and intimidation.
During the second phase, Stokes was permitted to testify that the 1982 battery she had described earlier resulted in Johnson being convicted of battery. Therefore, Johnson's class A misdemeanor battery conviction was enhanced to a class D felony pursuant to IND.CODE 85-42-2-1(2)(D). The two convictions for the present battery were merged into one, the felony conviction.
Additional facts are supplied below.
*167Decision
I. Whether the evidence was sufficient to support Johnson's convictions?
As noted earlier, we must address this issue because a meritorious argument would require us to order Johnson's acquittal. Had the State failed to present sufficient evidence at Johnson's first trial it could not be afforded another opportunity to make its case. Highley v. State, (1989) Ind.App., 535 N.E.2d 1241.
Johnson first attacks his conviction of intimidation. Johnson was charged, and the jury was instructed, under the following section of IND.CODE 35-45-2-1 which defines intimidation:
Sec. 1. (a) A person who communicates a threat to another person, with the intent that:
(2) the other person be placed in fear of retaliation for a prior lawful act:
commits intimidation, a Class A misdemeanor.1 (Johnson's offence was enhanced to a Class D felony because he threatened to kill, a forcible felony. 1.0. 85-45-2-1(b)(1)(A).)
Johnson argues the evidence most favorable to the verdict indicates he threatened to kill Stokes in retaliation for filing charges against him for the October 25, 1987 incident. He argues that because Stokes filed false charges against him, an unlawful act, he cannot be convicted of threatening her with retaliation for a prior lawful act.
The State admits in its brief that Stokes's report was "probably actionable" as a false police report but argues her resort to the prosecutor and the courts for protection was "certainly lawful." We agree. Stoke's report was partly true and partly false. That she petitioned the police and the courts for protection from Johnson was entirely justified and, under the circumstances, perhaps essential to her survival. Stokes's exaggeration of the facts does not excuse Johnson from threatening to kill her in retaliation for petitioning the authorities for protection from him.
Sufficient evidence exists to affirm a conviction, absent an evidentiary error as in this case, if there exists substantial evidence of probative value from which the jury could have inferred guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. McDonald v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1066; Highley, supra. Stokes testified that Johnson, after beating and abducting her, told her that he would kill her if she did not drop the charges from the previous Monday. This would otherwise constitute sufficient evidence to affirm Johnson's conviction for intimidation. ©
Stokes testified that Johnson arrived at her home, grabbed her by the throat, lifted her and slammed her against the wall, threw her down, hit her with his fists and grabbed her fingers and bent them back. This would otherwise constitute sufficient evidence to sustain the battery conviction.
Stokes testified that immediately after the above described beating, Johnson stated "let's go" to which she responded: "okay, please don't kill me, don't hurt me no more." She testified she believed Johnson would kill or continue to beat her if she resisted him. Johnson then took Stokes in a car to a vacant house. This would otherwise constitute sufficient evidence from which the jury could have inferred that Johnson knowingly or intentionally removed Stokes by force from one place to another as proscribed by IND.CODE 85-42-83-83 (criminal confinement). a
II. Whether the trial court erred in admitting testimony about Johnson's prior acts of violence toward Stokes?
During the first phase of the bifurcated trial, Stokes was permitted to testify about three earlier occasions in which Johnson inflicted violence upon her or her property. She testified that in 1980 Johnson hit her in the stomach which caused her stomach muscles to knot up. She testified that in April of 1986 Johnson broke the windows of her house by throwing bricks or chunks of asphalt at them.
Stokes testified that in May of 1982 Johnson kicked in her front door and entered her house. She ran out the back door but Johnson caught her, beat her, struck her with and threatened her with a shot gun. During the second phase of the trial, Stokes testified, and the State showed by *168introducing court docket sheets, that Johnson was convicted of battery for this incident.
We must assume the exclusion of other crime evidence applies unless and until the facts and their unique juxtaposition warrant the application of a specifically tailored exception for a specifically accepted purpose. Stuart, Evidentiory Use of Other Crime Evidence: A Survey of Recent Trends in Criminal Procedure, (1987) 20 Ind.L.Rev. 188, 209. Highley, supro. The rule prohibiting the introduction of prior acts of misconduct guards against the fear that a jury may require lesser proofs to convict a person shown to have committed other crimes. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, See. 404.201, at 252. Highley, supra. Generally, evidence of a defendant's character, as shown by other crimes, is not admissible in a criminal case to show the defendant has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.2 Malone v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 1339. However, exceptions to the general rule apply when the evidence of other crimes is offered to show the defendant's intent, motive, knowledge, malice, sanity, scheme or plan, or capacity to commit the offense, or the criminal actor's identity. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, Sec. 404.201, at 254.
The trial court in the case at bar recognized the need for a bifurcated proceeding to keep evidence of Johnson's prior conviction of a battery against Stokes from prejudicing the jury before 'the second or enhancement phase of the trial. Proceedings are bifurcated in cases where prior convictions serve to enhance a present conviction in recognition that evidence of prior crimes is generally inadmissible in criminal cases, because it has no tendency to establish the guilt or innocence of the accused but, if effective at all, can serve only to prejudice or mislead or excite the minds and inflame the passions of the jury. Lawrence v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 306, 286 N.E.2d 830 (bifurcation required for habitual criminal enhancement). The necessity of the bifurcated procedure has been recognized for other enhancement proceedings that are similar to the one in the case at bar where an offense is elevated from a class A misdemeanor to a class D felony with proof of an earlier similar conviction. For example, the bifurcated procedure has been found to be necessary for the enhancement of second convictions of marijuana or hashish offenses. Sweet v. State (1982), Ind., 439 N.E.2d 1144, and drunk driving. Smith v. State (1983), Ind.App., 451 N.E.2d 57. The rationale of these cases obviously stems from a recognition that evidence of repeated commision of similar crimes is not sufficient to establish a common scheme or plan. Burch v. State (1986), Ind.App., 487 N.E.2d 176 (trans. denied ).
We are at a loss to understand why the trial court in the present case recognized the necessity of a bifurcated proceeding to shield the jury from being prejudiced by evidence of Johnson's prior conviction of a battery against Stokes and at the same time allowed Stokes to testify about the particular battery for which Johnson was convicted. It would seem to us that, if the evidence was admissible at all, the most competent evidence, that of the conviction itself, would be admissible.
Further, it would appear to us that evidence of the earlier crime without evidence of the conviction could be more prejudicial than evidence of the crime and the resulting conviction. After the first phase of the trial, the jury could conclude that, while the evidence for the present offense is insufficient to convict Johnson, they should nevertheless convict him, albeit improperly, for the earlier crime because otherwise it would appear to them that Johnson would escape punishment for this earlier offense.
*169The State argues the evidence of the three prior acts of violence by Johnson against Stokes and her property is admissible under the common plan or scheme exception to the rule prohibiting evidence of prior acts of misconduct to show Johnson's common plan or scheme to abuse and terrorize Stokes. Because the question of the admissibility of prior acts of misconduct has been addressed time and time again in our courts-377 Indiana cases are listed under the appropriate West headnotes, we must resort to a hornbook to gain some perspective for our analysis. The polestar of our analysis lies in balancing undue prejudice against the probative value of the evidence in question. Evidence of other criminal activity may be excluded if the court finds that the probative value is outweighed by its tendency to prejudice the defendant's case unfairly or mislead the jury, even if an exception to the general rule of inadmissibility of such evidence would apply. Montgomery v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 544, 412 N.E.2d 793. The potential for unfair prejudice to the defendant's case may be outweighed by the probative value when the evidence is offered under one of the exceptions to the rule, but it is not eliminated. Accordingly, the court must balance the probative value of the evidence against the potential for improper use by the jury even when the evidence is offered for a proper purpose. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, See. 404.204, at 258.
Evidence of other crimes may be admitted to show a common scheme or plan; but the purpose of the evidence will not be the same in all cases. Proof of a plan may show the motive, intent or the identity of the defendant as the perpetrator of the crime charged. Indiana decisions do not always report the specific use to which the "common scheme or plan'" evidence has been put. However, evidence which does nothing more than to show that the defendant has committed prior crimes is never admissible under this exception. Accordingly, the admissibility of evidence of other crimes to show a common scheme or plan should be determined with reference to the issue to be proved by the evidence. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, Sec. 404.215, at 284-289. For example, in Williams v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 1319, a common plan or scheme was admissible to prove an intent to steal in a burglary trial. In Burch, supra, a common plan or scheme was admissible because "identity was the primary issue." Id. at 179 {emphasis in original).
The prior violent acts of Johnson against Stokes are of no probative value or relevance because they do not tend to prove any disputed fact in issue. Norton v. State (1980), 273 Ind. 635, 408 N.E.2d 514. As stated above, a common scheme or plan may be proven to show motive, intent, or identity. None of these are seriously in issue in this case. Johnson's identity is not an issue; he and the victim had been intimately acquainted for eight years. While battery and criminal confinement require the State to prove the defendant acted with the mens rea of knowingly or intentionally, no one has or could seriously maintain that the beating Stokes received or her subsequent abduction were the result of an accident-not committed knowingly or intentionally.
Therefore, the scales have been tipped. Even if we were to hold the common plan or scheme exception applies in this case, we would reverse because the probative value of the evidence could not outweigh the prejudicial effect Johnson received from the introduction of the evidence in question. The evidence had little, if any, probative value. The State does not argue Johnson suffered no prejudice, nor could it. The distinct possibility the jury improperly convicted Johnson of the 1982 battery or required lesser proof to convict for the present offenses cannot be ignored.3
*170However, we also reverse because the common plan or scheme exception, or any other exception for that matter, is not applicable in this case. The State cites many cases in which prior assaults against the victim by the defendant were properly admitted in murder trials, e.g. King v. State (1987), Ind., 508 N.E.2d 1259. The State asserts, without citing any cases, that this exception is applicable in battery cases. The State is mistaken. Indiana's courts have traditionally held that evidence of a defendant's prior threats or acts of violence toward the decedent is admissible in murder trials as proof of malice. Even though malice is no longer an element of the crime of murder in Indiana, such proof will likely remain admissible as proof of intent in murder trials. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, See. 404.210, at 274. The applicability of this exception is limited to murder cases and does not apply in the case at bar.
Our supreme court recently addressed the common plan or scheme exception in the case of Clark v. State, (1989) Ind. 536 N.E.2d 493 (Justices Givan and Pivarnik dissenting). Clark was convicted of possession of heroin (more than three grams) and cocaine. The State had admitted evidence of a 1974 conviction for possession of heroin and cocaine and a 1980 conviction for conspiring to distribute heroin and cocaine. The court reversed the convictions holding that "[to call the evidence admitted in this case proof of 'common scheme or plan' is simply to say that one who committed a similar crime more than a decade ago may now be guilty of doing it again." Id. at p. 495 of handdown version.
Because of the breadth of articulate analysis in Clark, we will rely on it extensively. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Shepard explained that Indiana cases describe two branches to the common plan or scheme exception. The first branch permits proof of a prior offense committed with an identical modus operandi when the identity of the perpetrator is in genuine issue. Penley v. State (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 806. The second branch permits proof of a prior offense as evidence of a preconceived plan that includes the charged crimes. Id.
This second branch of the common plan or scheme exception, with which we are concerned, requires that the uncharged or prior crime be tangibly connected to the one for which the defendant is on trial. Some nexus is required. Clark, supra. The Clark court used as an example the case of State v. Toshishige Yoshino (1961), 45 Hawaii 206, 364 P.2d 688 where evidence of an earlier robbery was held admissible in the trial of a second where the name of the second victim was procured from the first. The Clark court also cited Lewis v. United States (10th Cir.Ok1.1985), 771 F.2d 454, cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1024, 106 S.Ct. 579, 88 LEd.2d 562 where testimony that the defendant burglarized a garage store in order to procure a cutting torch was admissible in his trial for burglarizing a post office by using the torch.
The Clark court then reviewed some Indiana cases which held a common scheme or plan could be used to prove drug dealing. The court relied on, and quoted the following excerpt from, Sweet v. State (1986), Ind., 498 N.E.2d 924 4:
The November transactions are not so remote in time or circumstance as to be irrelevant. The February transaction precedes the charged transactions by nine months. Although more remote in time, the circumstances of the transaction tend to prove a common scheme and plan of conducting a drug dealing busi-mess for profit, Id. at 928 (emphasis added).
The prior acts of misconduct proven in Toshishige Yoshino, supra, and Lewis, supra, were indicative of much more than a behavior pattern or a propensity to engage in criminal conduct. They were tangibly connected to the offenses for which the defendant was on trial in each case. Likewise, the prior acts of misconduct in the Sweet, supra, case evidenced an on-going drug dealing business; obviously, the running of a business is a common plan or scheme.
In the present case, Johnson's pri- or acts of violence have a single nexus-albeit an important nesus-the victim, Flor*171ence Stokes. But the earlier crimes are not tangibly connected to each other or to the present crimes. They are not unusual, dis-tinetive, or similar to each other or to the present beating, abduction, and threat in any way.
Nothing indicates Johnson's crimes arose out of a common plan or scheme. Instead, it would appear that they all arose out of separate, distinct crisis situations in the on-going saga of Johnson's and Stokes's "off and on" romantic relationship. All of the incidents are separated by significant periods of time. The 1980 beating consisted of a punch to the stomach. The 1982 break-in and beating occurred while Johnson was armed with a shot gun with which he struck Stokes. The 1986 incident consisted of Johnson throwing bricks or asphalt through Stokes's windows, apparently a crime against property alone.
If we were of the mind to take judicial notice of certain popular sociological concepts and terms-which we are not, nor should we be-we might use the term "wife-beater," or a "significant-other beater" to describe Johnson. Better yet, we might say that Johnson and Stokes suffer from "spousal abuse syndrome." we were at it, we might recognize alcohol ism, drug dependency, and kleptomania as diseases. We do not doubt for a minute that these terms describe important, valid concepts. What they have in common is that they describe chronic behavioral patterns. While
Behavioral patterns are not common plans or schemes. No one plans or schemes to become an alcoholic or a wife beater. We are unaware of any case that permits the introduction of prior incidents of, or arrests for, intoxication to prove a present public intoxication or drunk driving offense. Nor are we aware that a defendants propensity to steal is admissible to prove theft. In Clork, supra, our supreme court held a propensity to possess, and deal in heroin and cocaine is not admissible to prove possession of heroin and cocaine. Today, we will not allow evidence that Johnson has the propensity to beat Stokes to prove a present beating.
Johnson's prior acts of violence evidences a pattern of abuse against Stokes. He is a "wife or significant-other beater." However, principles of American jurisprudence insist a defendant be tried for what he has done rather than for what he is. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE. See. 404.-201, at 252. Highley, supra.
Therefore, Johnson's convictions must be reversed and remanded for retrial.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs.
CHEZEM, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Johnson was not charged with the previous section of the statute, LC. 35-45-2-1(a)(1), which provides:
Sec. 1. (a) A person who communicates a threat to another person, with the intent that:
(1) the other person engage in conduct against his will; commits intimidation.
. There exists in Indiana an exception to the general rule prohibiting evidence of the defendant's prior criminal acts to prove character. When incest, sodomy, criminal deviate conduct, or child molesting are charged, evidence of similar conduct is admissible under the "depraved sexual instinct" exception. 12 MILLER, INDIANA EVIDENCE, Sec. 404.216, at 290; Cobbs v. State (1975), 264 Ind. 60, 338 N.E.2d 632.
It would appear the dissent would also recognize an exception for crimes involving violence within an on-going relationship. If we were to recognize exceptions for patterns of behavior-professional burglars, thieves, prostitutes, bad check artists, etc.-we would soon have no general rule prohibiting evidence of prior acts of misconduct. We must leave the recognition of any new exceptions to the wisdom of our supreme court.
. Similarly, the State does not argue harmless error, nor could it. The State's case depended upon the testimony of one witness-that of the complaining witness, Florence Stokes. The sufficiency question concerning the intimidation charge we addressed earlier was submitted to the jury. They were entitled to find that the unlawful, false character of Stoke's police report exonerated Johnson from liability on the count of intimidation. Concerning the conviction for criminal confinement, vigorous cross-examination attempted to establish that Stokes voluntarily went for a ride in the car with Johnson.
. Sweet is the same case after remand we cited earlier. The earlier case established the requirement of a bifurcated proceeding for the enhancement of a second conviction for a marijuana or hashish offense.

=== CASE 9739520 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:51.828065+00 ===

Perretta, J.
This is an appeal by the Commonwealth from an order of a District Court judge allowing the defendant’s motion to suppress as evidence items (white powder and drug paraphernalia) seized by a State trooper from the defendant’s truck, in which he and another man were sitting while parked in a highway rest area at night. After an evidentiary hearing on the motion, the judge ruled that the trooper had acted on a hunch rather than with a reasonable suspicion or probable cause *805to believe that a crime had been or was being committed. We reverse, concluding that the trooper was conducting a reasonable investigatory check, that in the process of so doing he had cause to become concerned for his safety, and that the evidence came into his plain view when, for purposes of protecting himself, he opened the truck door and ordered the men out of the vehicle.
I. The Facts.
We relate the facts as found by the judge and as supplemented by details from the transcript of the hearing at which trooper James Conley was the only witness.1 On August 13, 1987, Conley was on highway patrol on Route 2 in Athol. He was driving in a clearly marked police cruiser. It was about 9:00 p.m. , when he noticed a lone vehicle, a pick-up truck, parked in a rest area off the highway.
It was part of “patrol procedure” to check all rest areas off the highways. Conley drove into the rest area and stopped behind and to the left of the truck. There were two men seated in the truck, and its interior light was on. Conley got out of his cruiser “to check [on] the well-being” of the occupants of the truck. At this time, Conley testified, he had no reason to be suspicious of them. He started to walk toward the truck on the driver’s side.
Just as he began his approach of the truck, Conley saw the men turn and look towards him. The interior light of the truck went off, and Conley saw the men begin “to move about frantically, making furtive movements and moving — moving all about.” Now concerned for his safety — the men were continually looking back to check his progress, the passenger bent or fell out of sight, the driver (the defendant) was turning “towards the right” and the “upper part of his body” was moving — Conley changed his direction “in somewhat of a surprise.” He came up to the truck on the passenger’s side. Without inquiry, Conley opened the door “at an angle for . . . [his] own *806. . . protection” while warning, “Don’t move; keep your hands visible.” When Conley opened the door, “everything was visible.” He saw white powder, a mirror and a straw on the front seat between the men. Conley ordered the men from the truck and patted them down.
Conley then called for “backup” assistance. When the other officers arrived at the scene, they searched the truck, finding a marijuana cigarette, a knife, and a clear bag containing a quantity of white powder.2
II. The Defendant’s Fourth Amendment Rights.
It has never been the Commonwealth’s position that the turning off of the interior light and the men’s frantic and furtive movements gave Conley the right to approach the truck and open its door. Rather, the Commonwealth argues that Conley was making a reasonable investigatory check of a vehicle in a rest area in accordance with patrol procedures policy, see Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. 233, 242 (1983), and that, in the course of doing so, he became concerned for his safety. His opening of the door and ordering of the men from the truck, the Commonwealth contends, were minimally intrusive acts, warranted by his belief that he was in danger.
Although the truck was parked and Conley did not block its path in any way, compare Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. at 236; Commonwealth v. Helme, 399 Mass. 298, 299 (1987), the encounter between the men and Conley implicated their rights under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. That the defendant might have been free to drive away when Conley approached the truck is irrelevant. There can be no dispute that, when Conley opened the door, the defendant was stopped from doing anything other than what was ordered.
Whether Conley had the right to open the door depends upon whether he was justified in making an investigatory check. Fear of harm, standing alone, does not justify a stop. “Any *807person, including a policeman, is at liberty to avoid a person he considers dangerous. If and when a policeman has a right to disarm such a person for his own protection, he must first have a right not to avoid him but to be in his presence.” Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 32 (1968) (Harlan, J., concurring). See also 3 LaFave, Search and Seizure § 9.4(a) at 499-500 (2d ed. 1987) (“[I]n the absence of some legitimate basis for the officer being in immediate proximity to the person, a degree of suspicion that the person is armed which would suffice to justify a frisk zjf there were that basis will not alone justify such a search” [emphasis in original]). As Conley’s basis for approaching the truck was the policy requiring that he check on all vehicles in highway rest areas, the question is whether that policy was constitutional, see Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. at 241-242, irrespective of the fact that he did not block the truck with his cruiser.
HI. The Investigatory Check.
An investigatory check “constitutes a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment and is required by the very purpose of the Fourth Amendment to be reasonable. See Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653-654 (1979). The test for determining reasonableness requires balancing the need to search against the invasion that the search entails. Commonwealth v. Silva, 366 Mass. 402, 405 (1974). See Delaware v. Prouse, supra at 654.” Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. at 241. See also Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 50-51 (1979). As Conley testified, his purpose in approaching the truck was to check on the occupants’ “well-being,” which we construe to mean whether assistance or aid was needed.
In Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. at 242, the public interest to be served — protecting motorists from the hazards of winter driving — was held to justify the intrusion presented to motorists approached in accordance with a policy of investigating during winter months every stopped or parked vehicle, no matter where situated, to ascertain whether any occupants were in need of aid. However, in Commonwealth v. Helme, 399 Mass. at 302, the policy of checking “all parked automobiles with their interior lights on” was found to be un*808reasonable. It was not supported by a significantly sufficient public interest as the “use of interior lights in an automobile” does not “indicate[] potentially hazardous conditions confronting the occupants of the vehicle.” Id.
We view the policy here in question — to check on all vehicles in highway rest areas to determine if aid or assistance is needed — as furthering a public interest of sufficient concern to justify a nighttime investigatory check. As the check here in issue took place after dark, we need not and expressly do not consider the reasonableness of the policy as it might pertain to the daytime.' Cf. Commonwealth v. Balthazar, 366 Mass. 298, 302 (1974); Commonwealth v. Adams, 389 Mass. 265, 272 (1983); Commonwealth v. Love, 26 Mass. App. Ct. 541, 544-545 (1988).
The very purpose of a highway rest area is to provide motorists with a respite or shelter from the hazards of driving, such as fatigue, illness, or mechanical failure to, name but a few. This is not to say that motorists pull into rest areas only for reasons related to driving hazards. We do not think, however, that it is unreasonable to inquire of a motorist parked in a highway rest area after dark whether aid is needed. Such an inquiry presents a minimum intrusion which ends with a negative response. Further, the policy was not discretionary, it applied to all vehicles, and it was limited to rest areas.
When considered in the circumstance of the nighttime, we cannot say that an investigatory check of the defendant’s truck was unreasonable. We conclude, therefore, that Conley had the right not to avoid the risk he perceived and to carry out the investigatory check procedures to completion.
IV. The Threat of Harm.
Having concluded that Conley was entitled to approach the truck to inquire if assistance was needed, we must now consider whether he was entitled to take the precautions that he did. ‘“The test is an objective one. While the officer need not be absolutely certain that the individual is armed, the basis for his acts must lie in a reasonable belief that his safety or that of others is at stake. Terry v. Ohio, supra at 27. Essentially, the question is whether a reasonably prudent man in the police*809man’s position would be warranted in the belief that the safety of the police or that of other persons was in danger. ’ ” Commonwealth v. Almeida, 373 Mass. 266, 271 (1977), quoting from Commonwealth v. Silva, 366 Mass. 402, 406 (1974). See also Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 1046-1049 (1983); Commonwealth v. King, 389 Mass. at 243, and cases therein cited.
Trooper Conley was on duty alone, it was night, there was no other vehicle in the rest area, and he was out of his cruiser before the cause for concern arose. After noting that Conley was approaching, both men began a series of furtive movements, and the interior light went out. Like the police officer in Commonwealth v. Sumerlin, 393 Mass. 127, 129-130 (1984), Conley “had no more than a few seconds in which to assess the extent, if any, of the danger, and to ascertain the most effective and least intrusive means of protecting himself.” As further stated in Sumerlin, supra at 130: “The officer could reasonably have taken into account the ‘inordinate risk confronting an officer as he approaches a person seated in an automobile.’ Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 110 (1977). See Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 148 n.3 (1972). ‘To all of these facts the officer [was] entitled to apply [his] police experience.’ Commonwealth v. Silva, 366 Mass. 402, 407 (1974).” As for ordering the men out of the truck, see and compare Commonwealth v. Ferrara, 376 Mass. 502, 505 (1978), with Commonwealth v. Loughlin, 385 Mass. 60, 62 & n.3 (1982).
Because the defendant never put in issue Conley’s actions after he opened the truck door, we need go no further in our discussion. We conclude that in the circumstances presented, the trooper acted reasonably.
Order allowing motion to suppress reversed.
The motion judge accepted the trooper’s testimony. His ruling is based upon a conclusion of law and not a determination concerning credibility.
The sole issue in the District Court and on appeal is whether the trooper’s actions of investigating the truck and opening its door were lawful. The defendant has never made an argument concerning the search of the truck after the men were ordered from it.

=== CASE 9739521 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:51.833103+00 ===

Smith, J.
(dissenting). In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), the Supreme Court held that a frisk for weapons was legitimate as long as the “officer is justified in believing that the individual *810whose suspicious behavior he is investigating at close range is armed and presently dangerous to the officer or to others.” Id. at 24.1 The officer’s belief would be justified only if “a reasonably prudent man in the circumstances would be warranted in the belief that his safety or that of others was in danger .... And in determining whether the officer acted reasonably in such circumstances, due weight must be given, not to his inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or ‘hunch,’ but to the specific reasonable inferences which he is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience.” Id. at 27. “In the case of the self-protected search for weapons, he must be able to point to particular facts from which he reasonably inferred that the individual was armed and dangerous.” Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 64 (1968). Also see Terry v. Ohio, supra at 21 (“officer must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion”).
Here, the majority concludes that the trooper was justified in opening the door because he reasonably believed that his safety was in jeopardy. Because I believe that the record before us does not support that conclusion, I respectfully dissent.
The “specific and articulable facts” upon which the trooper based his belief that his safety was in jeopardy consisted entirely of his observations of the movements of the occupants (and the fact that the interior light went off) as he approached the truck.2 On that point the trooper testified that he “observed both subjects turn, look towards me as I was approaching the vehicle. The interior light went off and both subjects began to move about frantically, making furtive movements and moving — *811moving all about.” He stated that the defendant “continually . . . turned back a number of times to check my progress, and I observed him turn toward the right, and I observed movement on the upper part of his body.” On this record I conclude that the officer did not articulate specific facts from which a rational inference could be drawn that the occupants of the truck were armed and dangerous and that the trooper’s safety was jeopardized.3
In Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032 (1983), the Supreme Court extended Terry v. Ohio, supra, to include automobile “frisks.”
The trooper’s answers on that point are unequivocal.
“Q. Did you have any other reason to open that, open the passenger side door, other than your observation of the movements of the two passengers?
A. Yeah, at that point I was protecting myself.
Q. But the only reason that you felt the need to protect yourself was that you observed movement of the two passengers?
A. Yes; the way they reacted to my presence.”
Commonwealth v. Sumerlin, 393 Mass. 127, 129-130 (1984), relied on by the majority, is not to the contrary. In Sumerlin, the police were investigating an illegally parked automobile in a high crime area where shootings had occurred. In this case, the trooper was not investigating a crime — he was checking on the well-being of the occupants of a truck properly parked in a rest area. There is nothing in the record that shows that the trooper' was aware of any criminal activity whatsoever associated with that particular rest area.

=== CASE 9739522 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:52.478675+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Respondent-appellant Joyce Harlan (Joyce) appeals from the trial court's divi*554sion of property in the dissolution of her marriage to Hal Harlan (Hal), claiming the trial court abused its discretion when it deducted from the marital estate the possible tax liability which would be incurred if Hal sold one of his businesses, and when it valued the marital residence. Hal cross-appeals, claiming the trial court incorrectly interpreted the parties' ante-nuptial agreement.
We reverse in part and affirm in part.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to the judgment reveal that the parties were married on January 26, 1980, after having executed an ante-nuptial agreement. At the time of the marriage Hal had a net worth in excess of $1.2 million. Among his assets was approximately three-fourths ownership of Harlan Industries, Inc., which later became Harlan, Sprague, Dawley, Inc. (HSD). He also owned several other small businesses. Hal's income in 1985 was over $270,000.
Before the marriage, Joyce worked as a realtor, and continued to do so during the first year of the marriage. According to the Court's Findings of Facts, #44, her "contribution to the growth of the subject businesses was negligible and was often, in fact, negative and disruptive to the operation of the business." Record at 54. But, Joyce "did provide nominal contribution to the marital household." Finding of Fact # 45, Record at 54.
During the marriage, the marital residence was constructed, and Hal's business assets continued to increase in value. The value of the marital estate was in excess of $4 million at the time of separation. Hal petitioned for dissolution on January 2, 1986, and the final hearings on the dissolution were held in March of 1987. In June, 1987, Hal moved to set aside the parties' stipulation as to the value of the marital residence.
The trial court valued the marital residence using the information contained in Hal's motion to set aside the stipulated value of the residence. The trial court also concluded that the ante-nuptial agreement precluded Joyce from receiving any portion of HSD only during the first five years of the marriage. Therefore, that portion of the agreement was no longer in effect, as more than five years had passed between the parties' marriage and the filing of the petition for dissolution.
The trial court's division of the marital property awarded Joyce a total of $924,581, consisting of the marital residence, a car, household and office furniture, a boat, furs, stocks and cash, and including $427,-162 in cash to be paid over a period of one hundred eighty months, with a three percent rate of interest.
In this disposition of the property, the trial court apparently attempted to divide the value of the increase in the marital estate during the marriage evenly between the parties. However, in its calculation of the value of HSD, it subtracted from HSD's value the amount of tax lability which would be incurred if all of Hal's shares of stock were sold, approximately $1.5 million. The trial court also determined that HSD was highly leveraged and Hal could not pay Joyce's share of the estate with a lump sum payment without selling some assets.1
ISSUES
Joyce presents three issues for our review, and Hal cross-appeals with two additional issues. Because we reverse, we will only consider Joyce's first two issues and Hal's second issue, which are:
1. Whether the trial court abused its discretion when it subtracted the value of the possible tax liability from the value of HSD?
2. Whether the trial court erred when it determined the value of the marital residence?
3. Whether the trial court erred when it interpreted the parties' ante-nuptial agreement?
DECISION
ISSUE ONE-Did the trial court abuse its discretion when it subtracted the tax liability from the value of HSD?
*555PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Joyce argues that the trial court abused its discretion by using a non-existent tax liability to offset the value of HSD. She contends that the relevant statute only contemplates tax consequences that are the result of the property division, not speculative tax liabilities that are avoided by the division plan. Hal argues that the trial court did not abuse its discretion and properly considered the tax consequences of the property disposition.
CONCLUSION-The trial court abused its discretion.
Fortunately, there is a relevant statute, enacted in 1985, which provides the solution to this case. Ind.Code 81-1-11.5-11.1 (1988) (hereinafter, the Statute), says:
"'The court, in determining what is just and reasonable in dividing property under section 11 of this chapter, shall consider the tax consequences of the property disposition with respect to the present and future economic circumstances of each party." (Emphasis supplied.)
Before this statute became effective, this court reviewed decisions of several trial courts treating the tax consequences of a property disposition in marital property divisions. See Porter v. Porter (1988), Ind.App., 526 N.E.2d 219, trans. denied; Qazi v. Qazi (1986), Ind.App., 492 N.E.2d 692, trans. denied; Wright v. Wright (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 1240, trans. denied; In Re Marriage of Mulvihill (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 10; and Burkhart v. Burkhart (1976), 169 Ind.App. 588, 349 N.E.2d 707.
In each of these cases, the trial court's consideration of the tax consequences of the property distribution was upheld. In Qazi, Wright, and Burkhart, the trial court concluded that because the property disposition did not require the liquidation of any assets which would result in a tax liability, a reduction of the value of the marital estate due to a speculative tax liability was unwarranted. The trial court in Mulvihill allowed the deduction of the tax liability from a party's employment retirement plan. This court recognized that, assuming the party did not die before retirement, there would be a tax liability resulting from the division plan. Mulvihill, supra.
In Porter, the trial court allowed the deduction of some of the tax lability from a pension plan, recognizing that there were some tax consequences inherent in the plan, but did not deduct the entire tax liability that would be realized if the plan were liquidated. This court reasoned that because the liquidation of the plan was neither a required nor necessary result of the property division, the claimed tax liability was not incurred by the disposition. Porter, supra at 227.
Then, in 1985, the legislature enacted the Statute, which was after Burkhart, Mulvi-hill, and Wright were decided, leaving us with the impression of an affirmation of the rationale of Burkhart, Mulvihill, and Wright, which is also not inconsistent with the results reached in Qazi and Porter.
The thrust of the Statute is to recognize that there may be in the plan of division of marital property certain tax consequences which should be taken into account. The clear inference is that only tax consequences necessarily arising from the plan of distribution are to be taken into account, not speculative possibilities. The Statute specifically limits the trial court to consider only the tax consequences "of the property disposition."
There were no inherent, necessarily incurred tax consequences to be taken into account in this case. The trial court determined that HSD was a highly leveraged company that could not pay a large cash payment without selling stock. Record at 81. So it structured a disposition of the property so that Hal, who had a substantial income, was only required to pay $2,878.12 per month for 180 months and transfer the marital domicile. Record at 84. Hal's salaries in 1985 were $151,690 and his total income was $270,284. Record at 80.
There is no evidence in the record whatsoever of other expected tax consequences from this plan of division of the other marital assets. Nothing about cost bases, tax rates, taxable transfers, etc., for either the *556marital residence or other property distributed by the plan, except HSD.
Under these cireumstances there is no ominous specter of an IRS agent lurking in the shadows waiting to pounce on this plan of distribution.
We can only conclude the trial court abused its discretion and must reverse the property distribution.
ISSUE TWO-Did the trial court err when it determined the value of the parties' marital residence?
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Joyee asserts that the trial court erred when it determined the value of the marital residence was different than the value stipulated by the parties. Hal responds that he properly moved to set aside the stipulation on the basis of newly discovered evidence, and therefore the trial court properly exercised its discretion.
CONCLUSION-The trial court erred when it determined the value of the marital residence.
It is well-established that when parties stipulate to a fact, both the parties and the court are bound by that stipulation. Viccaro v. City of Ft. Wayne (1983), Ind.App., 449 N.E.2d 1161. The record shows that the parties stipulated the value of the marital residence, including both the house and lot, was $645,000, with $282,250 of equity. Record at 6.
The trial court, however, valued the equity in the residence at $856,250. This value was based on an offer to purchase the residence made after the final hearing but before the trial court had entered its judgment. Hal petitioned the court to set aside the stipulation and requested the property be valued at the offered price. In its judgment, the trial court valued the residence at that offered price.
As a general rule, stipulations may not be withdrawn without the consent of both parties, or for cause. Typically, the grounds for setting aside a stipulation include fraud, mistake, undue influence, or grounds of a similar nature. See 88 C.J.S. Stipulation §§ 30, 35 (1958). It is not a ground for relief that the stipulation was disadvantageous to the party seeking relief. Id.
This court in Gilbert v. Lusk (1952), 123 Ind.App. 167, 106 N.E.2d 404, recognized that a party should not be allowed to withdraw a stipulation absent fraud or mistake. Reviewing Hal's motion to set aside the stipulation, no grounds other than "new evidence" were asserted to support the motion. This amounts to little more than a claim that the stipulation is disadvantageous to Hal, as Hal is precluded from attempting to disprove the stipulated value of the marital residence. Schreiber v. Rickert (1943), 114 Ind.App. 55, 50 N.E.2d 879.
The trial court was bound by the stipulated value of the marital residence, and it erred by determining its value was different than the stipulated value.
ISSUE THREE-Did the trial court err when it interpreted the parties' ante-nuptial agreement?
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Hal argues that the trial court erred when it determined a provision of the parties' antenup-tial agreement had no effect, claiming the trial court misinterpreted the provision's meaning. Joyce asserts the trial court properly applied the terms of the agreement.
CONCLUSION-The trial court did not err.
The antenuptial agreement provided, in pertinent part:
"Hal and Joyce covenant and agree that Joyce shall have no right, claim, title, or benefit, as it relates to Harlan Industries, Inc., its subsidiaries and affiliates during the lives of either or both such parties for a period of five (5) years from this date, except as either or both shall hereafter expressly provide by a valid Last Will and Testament in effect and subject to probate at the time of their respective deaths."
Record at 24.
The trial court concluded that because five years had passed, this provision was no longer effective. Record at 81. Antenuptial agreements are to be con*557strued according to the general principles applicable to the construction of ordinary contract provisions. Rose v. Rose (1988), Ind.App., 526 NE.2d 231.
The unambiguous language of the contract is conclusive upon the parties to the contract and upon the courts, and it is within the discretion of the trial court to determine if the provision is ambiguous. Rose, supra.
The contract language unmistakably states that Joyce would have no claim related to HSD for a period of five years from the date of the marriage. This is further supported by the fact the five year limitation was added to the contract, which originally contained no limitation. Record at 24.
The judgment is reversed as to the distribution of marital property, and this cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent herewith, including a new trial as to division and distribution of marital property, if necessary.2
SULLIVAN, J., concurs.
HOFFMAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Finding of Fact #41, Record at 54.
. We recognize a different trial judge must necessarily hear this case on remand.

=== CASE 9739523 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:52.483005+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's determination that the trial court abused its discretion when it subtracted potential tax liability from the value of HSD. By considering the tax consequences which would be incurred if Hal was required to sell his shares of HSD stock, the trial court was properly following the dictates of IND. CODE § 31-1-11.5-11.1 (1988 Ed.).
The majority construes IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-11.1 as an endorsement of the common law existing at the time of its enactment. The common law respecting inclusion of tax liability in the valuation of the marital estate grew out of three cases: Wright v. Wright (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 1240; In re Marriage of Mulvihill (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 10; and Burkhart v. Burkhart (1976), 169 Ind.App. 588, 349 N.E.2d 707. From those cases, an approach developed whereby a trial court could consider tax liability if (1) the property disposition involved a mandatory transfer of assets or (2) the realization of tax consequences was inevitable regardless of the structuring of the property disposition. In all other instances, tax lability would be deemed a speculative and inappropriate consideration.
When it enacted IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-11.1, the legislature was cognizant of this Court's position concerning the inclusion of tax liability in the valuation of marital assets. It is unlikely that the legislature merely sought to express its approval of this Court's rationale when the statute was adopted. IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-11.1 is more reasonably construed as an attempt to effectuate a change in the common law.
The statute contains no limiting language, but provides that "[the court, in determining what is just and reasonable in dividing property ..., shall consider the tax consequences of the property disposition...." [Emphasis added.] Id. In accordance with that statute, the lower court in the instant case took into account the tax consequences of selling stock in HSD. The fact that a transfer of stock was not mandated by the property disposition is no longer a relevant consideration. Moreover, the tax liability discerned by the trial court is no more speculative than the majority's assumption that Hal's income will remain at a level which will permit him to pay $2,378.12 per month without selling stock.
For the foregoing reasons, I dissent.

=== CASE 9739524 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:53.126382+00 ===

STATON, Judge.
Home Builders Association of Indiana, Inc. (HBAI), appeals an order of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission (Commission), following an investigation into the rates and charges of Indiana public utility corporations in consideration of the reductions in the corporate federal income tax rate resulting from the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA-86). Gary Hobart Water Corp., Indianapolis Water Company and Indiana Chapter/National Association of Water Companies (collectively referred to as "Water Companies") filed Briefs of Ap-pellee. HBAI raises three issues:
1. Whether the Commission was without jurisdiction to issue the June 1 order because it failed to give proper statutory notice of the proceedings.
2, Whether the Commission was without jurisdiction to issue the June 1 order because it established a pre-fil-ing date for evidence only nine (9) days after notice of the formal hearing was given.
8. Whether the Commission's June 1 order in regard to the treatment of contributions in aid of construction is contrary to law.
We affirm.
The Commission instituted an investigation by order on November 26, 1986, pursuant to Indiana Code 8-1-2-58. The purpose of the investigation was to determine the "implications and impact of TRA-86 [which reduces the corporate tax rate from 46% to 84%, effective July 1, 1987] upon Indiana public utilities and to consider the development of uniform standards and procedures for implementing any necessary changes in accounting treatment or adjustments to rates and charges of such public utilities." (R. 3.) The Commission formed an Executive Committee and gave it the duty of preparing a comprehensive report discussing the effect of TRA-86, devising a plan of action by which the Commission might address those effects and recommending a specific course of action. The Executive Committee submitted its report to the Commission on April 15, 1987.
On April 21, 1987, the Commission issued a docket entry determining that a formal hearing should be held to receive evidence pertinent to the implications and impact of TRA-86 and its potential for requiring rate adjustments. By the same entry, the Commission set the time and place for the hearing to be held on May 13, 1987, and determined that all potentially affected utilities *183should be named as respondents. The entry also provided that all prepared testimony should be prefiled with the Commission by May 4, 1987.
Public notice of the investigation and hearing date was published in accordance with the statutory requirements between April 23rd and May 4th, 1987. HBAI, an association of, among others, residential developers, filed its petition for leave to intervene on May 6, 1987, which the Commission granted on May 11, 1987. The public hearing was held on May 13 and 14, 1987. In addition to evidence presented by several parties, the report and recommendations of the Executive Committee were admitted into evidence without objection. The Commission entered its interim order on June 1, 1987 ("June 1 order").
The portion of the order relevant to this appeal concerns TRA-86's effect on contributions-in-aid-of-construction ("CIAC"). CIAC arise under Rule 25 of the Commission's Rules and Standards for Water Utilities, 170 IAC 6-1-25. Under Rule 25, a water utility must make, free of charge, a main extension if it costs less than three times the estimated annual revenue anticipated to be received from customers connecting to the main. If the cost of the extension exceeds three times such estimated annual revenue, the applicant for the main extension, frequently developers of new residential areas, must advance to the utility funds to cover the excess. During the ten year period following the date the main is placed in service, the utility must refund to the applicant an amount equal to three times the estimated annual revenue from each additional new customer connecting to the main not previously accounted for. After ten years, any unrefunded advances become the utility's property and are accounted for on the books as CIAC.
Prior to 1987, CIAC were not recognized as taxable income to the utility. However, TRA~-86 made them so effective January 1, 1987. It appears that the new tax law treats as CIAC even those funds eventually refunded, making them taxable. The utilities have treated the tax as an added cost of construction of the main extension and have passed it (and the tax owing on the collection of the CIAC tax) along to the developer. This practice is known as the "gross up" method of collecting the CIAC tax.
The Executive Committee, in its recommendation report, noted that shifting the tax to the applicant could prohibit economie development, particularly in economically disadvantaged residential areas. As a result, the Executive Committee recommended two alternative methods, in addition to the "gross up" method, for treating the CIAC tax. The three alternatives recommended were:
1. Gross up. Continue applying the existing 170 I.A.C0. 6-1-25 to cover the associated tax as a "cost of construe, tion". This tax would allow the utility to collect the tax, and the tax owing on that collection of tax, from applicants for main extensions.
2. Partial Tax Expense. Collect only construction costs of a main extension (excluding tax) and recover, through rates, the income tax, using a 34% rate, on 50% of customer advances (reflecting a compromise percentage of customer advances that have historically become contributions-in-aid-of-construction). Any and all tax owing on the remaining 50% of customer advances shall be permanently absorbed by any utility operating under this alternative.
3. Gross up-No Refund. All applicants for main extensions are given the option to choose one of the following alternatives:
(1) Gross up (see 1 above), or;
(2) No refund ... collect only construction costs of a main extension (excluding tax) from applicants. The utility pays the tax on the contribution-in-aid-of-construction. No refunds based on subsequent connections are made. This approach will require amending 170 LA.C. 6-1-25.
(R. 291.)
In its June 1 order, the Commission approved and adopted the Executive Committee's recommendations and also ordered *184that a formal proceeding addressing the potential modifications to Rule 25 shall be initiated.1
I.
Standing
Water Companies raise the issue whether HBAI is adversely affected by the Commission's order such that it has standing to bring this appeal. Indiana Code 8-1-3-1 establishes that in order to bring an appeal a party must be adversely affected by an order of the Commission. Laborers Local No. 204 v. Public Service Company of Indiana (1988), Ind., 524 N.E.2d 318, 319. Water Companies argue that HBAI benefits from the Commission order because it provides for alternatives to the "gross up" method which may not pass the cost of the tax on to the developers. "Adversely affected" means that a party has sustained or is in immediate danger of sustaining a direct injury as a result of the order. Terre Haute Gas Corp. v. Johnson (1942), 221 Ind. 499, 45 N.E.2d 484, 486, modified, 221 Ind. 499, 48 N.E.2d 455. Although the Commission's order does provide alternatives that would benefit HBAI, it also provides that water and sewer companies may continue to pass the cost of the tax along to the developers as an added cost of construction. This clearly affects HBAI adversely as this method will increase the cost to HBAI to develop areas. The fact that this method was already practiced by the utilities does not make the Commission's reaffirmance of its availability any less adverse to HBAI. Standing is not removed because a party might be better off under a Commission order than it was prior to the order if the effect of the order is nevertheless injurious. See Johnson, supra 48 N.E.2d at 487 (rate payers had standing to appeal Commission order which reduced rates because rate payers may have believed that the reduced rates were exorbitant).
IL.
Notice
HBAI raises the issue whether the Commission was without jurisdiction to issue the June 1 order because it failed to give notice of the hearing pursuant to statute. The statute at issue is IC 8-1-2-59, which provides:
See. 59. If, after making such investigation, the commission becomes satisfied that sufficient grounds exist to warrant a formal hearing being ordered as to the matter so investigated, it shall furnish such public utility interested a statement notifying the public utility of the matters under investigation. Ten (10) days after such notice has been given, the commission may proceed to set a time and place for a hearing and an investigation, as hereinbefore provided.
HBAI contends that the June 1 order is void because the Commission set the date and time of hearing by the same order it determined a hearing was necessary. HBAI argues the Commission was required to wait ten (10) days after informing the utilities of the matter under investigation and the need for a formal hearing before it could set a time and place for the hearing. Water Companies counter that HBAI does not have standing to challenge the Commission's procedure because HBAI did not intervene in the proceedings until after the order was made and intervenors must take the case as it is at the time of intervention. Further, they argue that HBAI cannot complain because it is not a public utility affected by the investigation. HBAI responds that it does have standing because if the Commission did not give the proper notice of the hearing pursuant to statute then it did not have jurisdiction to issue the June 1 order.
Generally, an intervenor is bound by all stipulations and rulings prior to the time he is made a party and an intervenor takes the case as he finds it. Sexton v. Johnson Suburban Utilities, Inc. (1981), *185Ind.App., 422 N.E.2d 1293, 1297, trans. denied; L.S. Ayres v. Indianapolis Power & Light (1976), 169 Ind.App. 652, 351 N.E.2d 814, 824; 170 IAC 1-1-9(c). We have not found any cases either in Indiana or from other jurisdictions addressing the issue whether an intervenor may attack the jurisdiction of the Commission to issue an order based on following improper procedure in giving notice to parties prior to the time of intervention. If the question is one of notice to acquire jurisdiction over the person, the issue of proper notice can be waived by the complaining party who has actual notice of the proceedings and participates in the proceedings. City of New Haven v. Indiana Suburban Sewers, Inc. (1972), 257 Ind. 609, 277 N.E.2d 361, 362. An inter-venor may not raise errors of a technical nature after the error has been waived by the other parties. Woerner v. City of Indianapolis (1961), 242 Ind. 253, 177 N.E.2d 34, 39, cert. denied 368 U.S. 989, 82 S.Ct. 605, 7 LEd.2d 526. However, if the notice prescribed is a prerequisite to jurisdiction of the subject matter of the proceedings, the right to challenge such jurisdiction cannot be lost or waived. City of New Haven, supra. It logically follows that if the issue is one of jurisdiction of the proceedings, which may be raised any time, an inter-venor, once made a party to the proceedings, would have the right to challenge the Commission's jurisdiction.
Thus, we must determine which type of notice statute is involved here. IC 8-1-2-58 gives the Commission authority to investigate any matter relating to any public utility with or without giving notice of such investigation. However, the Commission does not have the authority to issue orders based solely on the investigation. Sizemore v. Public Service Commission (1961), 133 Ind.App. 51, 177 N.E.2d 743, 747-48. The Commission must give notice to the utilities of the matters under investigation and must set a time and place for public hearing before acting on the investigation. Id. IC 8-1-2-60 provides that notice of the time and place for such hearing shall be given to the public utility and to such other interested person as the Commission shall deem necessary, as provided in § 56. Section 56 provides that the Commission shall give ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. Additionally, IC 8-1-1-8 provides:
Sec. 8. (a) Notwithstanding any other statute relative to the publication of notice of hearings to be held by the utility regulatory commission publication of notice of hearings to be held by the commission shall be made only in accordance with this chapter. *
(b) Whenever the utility regulatory commission shall order a hearing in any proceeding instituted by or against any public utility, except a motor vehicle carrier, notice of such hearing shall be given by one (1) publication appearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing in two (2) newspapers of general circulation published in one (1) county wherein reside patrons or customers of said public utility who might be affected by an order made by the commission pursuant to said hearing. If two (2) newspapers of general circulation are not published in any such county, then one (1) publication appearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing in one (1) newspaper of general circulation published in such county shall be sufficient. If no newspaper of general circulation is published in any such county, then the commission shall cause notice of such hearing to be given by one (1) publication appearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing in two (2) newspapers of general circulation published in a county adjoining any county wherein reside patrons or customers of said public utility who might be affected by such order.
Generally, administrative notice statutes are strictly construed and notice in accordance with their provisions is a prerequisite to the validity of the administrative action. Town of Beverly Shores Plan Commission v. Enright (1984), Ind., 463 N.E.2d 246, 248. The cases that espouse this general rule have arisen under circumstances involving notice statutes similar to IC 8-1-1-8, specifying the manner in which notice *186must. be given of a formal hearing. See e.g. Id., LS. Ayres & Co., supra. Thus, in the case before us, the Commission acquired jurisdiction of the subject matter when notice of the time and place of public hearing was given ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing as prescribed by IC 8-1-1-8. See City of New Haven, supra 277 N.E.2d at 363; AFL-CIO v. Southern Indiana Gas & Electric Co. (1983), Ind.App., 443 N.E.2d 1243, 1245; L.S. Ayres & Co., supra 351 N.E.2d at 826.
To the contrary, the notice provision of IC 8-1-2-59, while perhaps necessary to acquire jurisdiction over a particular public utility, is not a prerequisite to the Commission's subject matter jurisdiction of the formal hearing. Because IC 8-1-2-59 applies specifically to the affected public utilities and does not affect the Commission's subject matter jurisdiction, HBAI, as an inter-venor, cannot attack any irregularity, if any, in the manner that notice was given to the utilities pursuant to that statute. See Woerner, supra.
IIL
Pre-Filing
HBAI next raises the issue whether establishing a pre-filing date for evidence nine (9) days after public notice was given deprived the Commission of subject matter jurisdiction over the rest of the proceedings, thereby making the June 1 order null and void. HBAI contends that the pre-fil-ing date for evidence is effectively the hearing date since all evidence had to be submitted at that time. Thus, because the pre-filing date was only nine (9) days after notice was given,2 instead of ten (10) days, the Commission did not have jurisdiction. We are not persuaded by HBAT's argument. Pursuant to 170 IAG 1-1-17(J), parties may be required to pre-file written testimony and exhibits with the Commission, serving copies of the same on all parties. The prepared testimony and exhibits are not offered into evidence until the formal hearing. The pre-filing practice is common in commission proceedings due to the ordinarily complex nature of the testimony and considerable use of expert testimony. The practice is an aid to save hearing time and to assure accuracy in witnesses' testimony. AFL-CIO, supra at 1245. The Commission adopted and published the pre-filing rule pursuant to IC 8-1-2-47, which empowers the Commission to adopt reasonable rules governing the proceedings before it. As noted above, the Commission acquired subject matter jurisdiction of the proceedings when it held the formal hearing after giving proper notice pursuant to IC 8-1-1-8. Requiring the parties to pre-file evidence before the hearing date, pursuant to a properly adopted rule, does not affect its subject matter jurisdiction.
As a consequence, HBAI does not have standing to object to the' pre-filing date set by the commission. The pre-filing date was set for May 4, 1987. The petition to intervene was filed May 6, 1987, and was granted May 11, 1987. An intervenor is bound by all rulings prior to the time he is made a party and must accept the procedural posture at the time of intervention. Sexton, supra at 1297; L.S. Ayres & Co., supra 351 N.E.2d at 824. Furthermore, HBAI has not shown that it was prejudiced by the pre-filing date. Although it was not allowed to introduce evidence at the hearing, it did have the opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses and to file a Statement of Interest with the Commission at the conclusion of the hearing. It is apparent from the Commission's June 1 order that the statement filed by HBAI was considered by the Commission in reaching its determination.
IV.
Contrary to Law
Finally, HBAlI raises the issue whether the Commission's June 1 order as it concerns the treatment of CIAC is contrary to law. When determining whether a *187Commission's order is contrary to law, we use a two-tier standard of review. First, we must determine whether the Commission's basic findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence in the record and then whether the Commission's ultimate conclusions are reasonable based on those findings. Citizens Action Coalition v. Public Service Company (1983), Ind.App., 450 N.E.2d 98, 102, reh. denied.
HBAI contends that the Commission's ultimate conclusion that the Executive Committee's recommendations are reasonable and in the public interest are not supported by its findings of basic fact. Specifically, HBAI argues that the Commission's finding that the "gross up" method may have the effect of impeding growth and development in certain areas by increasing the cost of water and sewer main extensions does not lead to the conclusion that allowing the utilities to use this method is in the public interest. However, HBAI overlooks the fact that the possible impediment to economic growth in some areas was the reason the Commission approved the alternative methods which do not pass the tax liability to the main extension applicant. The order provides greater flexibility in shifting the tax burden to those in the best position to bear it (the developer, the utility, or the rate payer) depending upon the particular circumstances of the case. We conclude the Commission's order is reasonable and in the public interest based on the evidence in the record.
HBAI's real complaint is with Rule 25 because it does not account for the tax related benefit to the utility in the form of depreciation of the main extension or for the situations where the utility's effective tax rate may be less than 34%. These concerns were raised at the hearing and in HBAI's Statement of Interest. Such considerations were beyond the scope of the hearing resulting in the June 1 order. As a result, the Commission initiated a formal proceeding to address these concerns and other possible changes in Rule 25 in light of TRA-86. Consequently, HBAl's issue regarding the technical application of Rule 25 is not properly before us.
The Commission's June 1 order is affirmed.
GARRARD, P.J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion.
. That rule-making proceeding was initiated by the Commission on November 4, 1987, as Cause No. RM3-1987.
. The majority of the public notices were published on April 25, 1987, nine days before the pre-filing date of May 4, 1987.