=== CASE 9741584 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:34.265339+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I disagree with the majority that plaintiff’s disability pension payments under the Public School Employees Retirement Act (psera)1 are not excepted from coordination with worker’s compensation payments under the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca).2 I would reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals, because the Legislature has failed to express an intention that coordination occur.
The Court of Appeals opinion relied on the fact that the Legislature chose the phrase “plan or program” in § 354(1) and the term “plan” in § 354(14). It used the distinction to support its position that all publicly created pension plans are subject to coordination, while some privately negotiated pensions may not be subject to coordination. The majority in this Court has wisely declined to rely on the plan/program distinc*400tion. It nonetheless perpetuates it in its distorted reading of § 354(14).
The majority maintains that the Legislature’s choice of “created” and “amended” in § 354(14) evidences a legislative intent that only pension plans established through collective bargaining be free of coordination. It fails to recognize that even statutorily created pension plans are subject to contractual negotiation and, in some cases, the Legislature has made them mandatory bargaining subjects. For example, MCL 38.556e; MSA 5.3375(6.5) provides that the pension system sections of the Fire Fighters and Police Officers Retirement Act are a mandatory subject of bargaining.
In light of this fact, I disagree that the Legislature intended the distinction the majority draws between statutorily and privately created pension plans. Had the Legislature wished to draw a line between privately and publicly created systems in § 354(14), it easily could have, and most likely would have, done so in a far less confusing manner.
I conclude, that the better view is that the Legislature utterly failed to consider the interaction of the psera with the wdca’s coordination provisions. I note that, while the psera does not, the State Police Retirement Act (spra)3 does contain its own coordination provision. Specifically, under its disability retirement section, the SPRA states:
The retirement allowance payable under this section, when added to the statutory worker’s compensation benefits applicable in the case, shall not exceed the average annual salary paid to the member for the 2 years immedi*401ately before the duty disability retirement allowance effective date. [MCL 38.1626(4); MSA 5.4002(26)(4).]
The Fire Fighters and Police Officers Retirement Act4 also contains its own specific provision requiring coordination of disability benefits with worker’s compensation benefits.5 Had the Legislature intended to include such a provision in the psera, it could easily have done so. The lack of such a provision, coupled with the ambiguous language of § 354(1) and § 354(14), shows that the Legislature did not consider the effect of those sections on the psera.
Even if the Legislature had addressed coordination in the context of the instant case with the intent of preventing double recovery, the majority’s decision does not comport with such an intent. The majority assumes that coordination requires that plaintiffs worker’s compensation payments be decreased by the amount of the pension benefits received under the psera. As indicated under MCL 38.1626(4); MSA 5.4002(26)(4), there is a more proper way to prevent double recovery. It is to reduce the total benefits only enough to ensure that the psera allowance, added to *402worker’s compensation benefits, does not exceed the average annual salary paid before disability. Requiring offset of wdca benefits in the full amount of PSERA benefits does not comport with the goal that worker’s compensation benefits should “ ‘restore wage-earning capacity lost in on-the-job accidents.’ ” Franks v White Pine Copper Div, 422 Mich 636, 654-655; 375 NW2d 715 (1985).
Where the Legislature has ambiguously expressed itself, we may be called on to inteipret its intent. However, as my colleagues in the majority have frequently pointed out in other contexts, it is improper for us to engage in result-oriented judicial legislation. If the Legislature wishes to amend § 354(1), § 354(14), or the language in the psera to cause coordination of benefits, it knows how to accomplish that. Rather than awaiting legislative amendment of the statute, the majority elects to do it itself through a tortured reading of § 354(1) and § 354(14). I decline to join in it.
For the above reasons, I respectfully dissent.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
MCL 38.1301 et seq.; MSA 15.893(111) et seq.
MCL 418.354(14); MSA 17.237(354)(14).
MCL 38.1601 et seq.-, MSA 5.4002(1) et seq.
MCL 38.551 et seq.; MSA 5.3375(1) et seq.
The Fire Fighters and Police Officers Retirement Act specifically provides:
Amounts paid under Act No. 317 of the Public Acts of 1969 [MCL 418.101 et seq.; MSA 17.237(101) et seq.] to a retired member shall be offset against and payable in place of benefits provided under this act. If the benefits under Act No. 317 of the Public Acts of 1969 are less than the benefits payable under this act, the amount to be paid out of the funds of the retirement system shall be the difference between the benefits provided under Act No. 317 of the Public Acts of 1969 and the benefits provided in this act. Upon the termination of benefits under Act No. 317 of the Public Acts of 1969, the benefits shall be paid pursuant to this act. [MCL 38.556(2)(f); MSA 5.3375(6)(2) (0. ]

=== CASE 9741585 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:35.981495+00 ===

OPINION
BRADFORD, Judge.
Appellant/Defendant Gloria Benefield appeals following her conviction for Class C felony Forgery.1 Benefield contends that the State failed to produce sufficient evidence to sustain her conviction, that the trial court abused its discretion in instructing the jury, that the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing her, and that her sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of her offense and her character. We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On March 23, 2005, Benefield applied for a health-care provider position with Re-geney Place in Greenwood and interviewed with Sabra Stark. Specifically, Benefield applied for a position as a Qualified Medication Aide ("QMA"), for which one needs certification from the Indiana Department of Health To that end, Benefield produced a document that appeared to be an "Aide Registry" issued by the Department of Health. Although the document indicated that Benefield was certified as a QMA, Stark noticed that both the QMA certification number and QMA expiration date listed on the document appeared to be in a typeface inconsistent with the rest of the document.
After the interview, Stark called an automated telephone service to verify Bene-field's certifications, only to learn that Benefield was not certified as a QMA. In fact, neither the QMA certification number nor the expiration date listed on the "Aide Registry" were valid. Moreover, the Department of Health does not issue corrected "Aide Registry" letters with the corrections in a different typeface, instead preparing new documents when information has changed.
On September 2, 2005, the State charged Benefield with Class C felony forgery and with being an habitual offender. Before Benefield's jury trial on August 8, 2007, both parties stipulated to the admissibility of several exhibits, including Aide Registry letters from the Department of Health dated May 18, 2005, and August 1, 2007, which were tentatively identified as State's Exhibits 4 and 5 respectively. At trial, Department of Health Program Director of Administration Darlene Jones testified regarding the Aide Registry letters without objection, although they were not, in fact, actually admitted into evidence. Jones's testimony regarding the May 13, 2005, Aide Registry letter was generally comparing it to the Aide Registry letter produced by Benefield to point out differences in typeface, and her testimony regarding the August 1, 2007 letter was generally to establish that it was an example of an original Aide Registry letter. Jones also testified regarding a document that was marked as State's Exhibit 7, *244but which was not actually entered into evidence. Jones testified that State's Exhibit 7 was a document from the Department of Health establishing that Benefield had taken and failed the QMA certification test twice in 2004.
After the presentation of evidence, the trial court instructed the jury, inter alia, that " 'Defraud means to make a misrepresentation of an existing material fact, knowing it to be false, or making it recklessly without regard to whether it is true or false." Appellant's App. p. 74. Bene-field unsuccessfully objected to this instruction only on the basis that it was apparently drawn from Black's Law Dictionary. After the jury found Benefield guilty as charged, she agreed to plead guilty to the forgery charge (thereby forfeiting the right to challenge her conviction) in exchange for the State agreeing not to seek the habitual offender enhancement. On October 1, 2007, Benefield moved to withdraw her guilty plea to forgery, which motion the trial court granted. On March 25, 2008, the parties stipulated that Benefield had the required prior unrelated felonies necessary to support an habitual offender enhancement. On March 28, 2008, the trial court sentenced Bene-field to eight years of incarceration for forgery, enhanced by six years by virtue of the habitual offender finding. The trial court found Benefield's criminal history and the failure of less-harsh correctional measures to be aggravating circumstances and found no mitigating cireumstances.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Whether the Trial Court Abused its Discretion in Admitting Testimony Regarding Documents that Were Not Entered into Evidence
Benefield contends that the State's failure to offer into evidence its Exhibits 4, 5, and 7 prevented any witness from properly testifying regarding the contents of those exhibits.2 Benefield, however, did not object to any witness testimony regarding the documents in question and has therefore waived the issue for appellate review. The purpose of the contemporaneous objection rule is to promote a fair trial by preventing a party from sitting idly by and appearing to assent to an offer of evidence or ruling by the court only to ery foul when the outcome goes against him.3 Purifoy v. State, 821 N.E.2d 409, 412 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trams. denied (citation omitted).
In any event, Benefield points to no authority providing that a witness may not testify regarding a document not admitted into evidence. Benefield cites to Harris v. Primus, 450 N.E.2d 80, 83 (Ind.Ct.App.1983), for the proposition that a witness may not discuss a document that has not been admitted into evidence. Benefield's reliance on Harris, however, is misplaced. Harris stands only for the proposition that a fact-finder may not consider testimonial evidence, such as a deposition, if it has not been admitted into evidence, but not that a fact-finder cannot consider testimony re*245garding items that have not been admitted. Id. Benefield also contends that State's Exhibit 3, which is apparently a third-generation copy of the Aide Registry letter produced by Benefield during her interview with Stark, violates the best evidence rule and should not have been admitted. We need not address this argument, however, because Benefield again failed to object to the admission of this exhibit and has therefore waived the issue for appellate consideration. See Purifoy, 821 N.E.2d at 412.
II. Whether the Trial Court Abused its Discretion in Instructing the Jury
As previously mentioned, Final Instruction 6 provided that " 'Defraud means to make a misrepresentation of an existing material fact, knowing it to be false, or making it recklessly without regard to whether it is true or false." Appellant's App. p. 74. Benefield contends on appeal that this definition of "defraud" given to the jury impermissibly lowers the mens rea for forgery, which requires, as charged here, an intent to defraud.
It is well-established that instructing the jury is within the discretion of the trial court. White v. State, 846 N.E.2d 1026, 1032 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied. Jury instructions are to be considered as a whole and in reference to each other; error in a particular instruction will not result in reversal unless the entire jury charge misleads the jury as to the law in the case. Id. As previously mentioned, Benefield objected at trial to Final Instruction 6 on the ground that it was a definition apparently taken from Black's Law Dictionary, a different ground than the one she advances on appeal. As such, Benefield has waived the issue for appellate review. See Proffit v. State, 817 N.E.2d 675, 685 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trams. denied.
Benefield attempts to avoid the effects of her waiver by contending that Final Instruction 6 amounted to fundamental error. Fundamental error is defined as an error so prejudicial to the rights of a defendant that a fair trial is rendered impossible. White, 846 N.E.2d at 1032. To be considered fundamental, an error "must constitute a blatant violation of basic principles, the harm, or potential for harm must be substantial, and the resulting error must deny the defendant fundamental due process." Spears v. State, 811 N.E.2d 485, 489 (Ind.Ct.App.2004).
A. Whether Final Instruction 6 was Erroneous
We conclude that Final Instruction 6 is deficient in two distinct ways. First, it suggests to the jury that the State is required to prove that the instrument in question was false, which is not required by the Indiana Code section 85-48-5-2. Because knowledge of the falsity of the instrument not an essential element of forgery, it follows that actual falsity is not an essential element. Wendling v. State, 465 N.E.2d 169, 170 (Ind.1984) ("'Knowledge of falsity of a written instrument is not a separate essential element of the present crime of forgery."). In other words, while a defendant's knowledge of the falsity of the instrument may be relevant to show intent to defraud, it is not an essential element of forgery. To the extent that Final Instruction 6 indicated that the State was required to prove something that the statute itself did not require, it was an incorrect statement of the law.
Moreover, Final Instruction 6 impermis-sibly suggested to the jury that it could convict Benefield upon finding merely a "reckless" state of mind, when the forgery statute requires that the making, uttering, *246or possession of the written instrument in question be done with the "intent to defraud[.]" Ind.Code § 85-48-5-2(b). A merely reckless state of mind is simply not compatible with a specific intent to defraud. To the extent that Final Instruction 6 suggests that a person recklessly making a representation may have the intent to defraud, we conclude that it is not a proper statement of the law.
B. Whether Final Instruction 6 Necessitates Reversal
As previously mentioned, Bene-field contends that Final Instruction 6 constituted fundamental error, denying her due process. As for Final Instruction 6's first flaw, we conclude that it did not prejudice her, much less constitute fundamental error. We do not see how an instruction requiring the State to prove more than the statute actually requires could have done anything but help Benefield.
As for the second flaw, 4.e., the instruction's misstatement of the mens rea, we also conclude that the flaw does not rise to the level of fundamental error. In some cases, a jury instruction that misstates the mens rea amounts to fundamental error. See, eg., Greer v. State, 643 N.E.2d 324, 327 (Ind.1994) (concluding that instruction that a defendant could "knowingly" commit attempted murder was fundamental error). Such an error can be cured, however, where the jury was otherwise sufficiently informed of the proper mens rea. Id. at 826-27.
When determining whether a defendant suffered a due process violation based on an incorrect jury instruction, we look not to the erroneous instruction in isolation, but in the context of all relevant information given to the jury, including closing argument, and other instructions[.] There is no resulting due process violation where all such information, considered as a whole, does not mislead the jury as to a correct understanding of the law.
Boesch v. State, 778 N.E.2d 1276, 1279 (Ind.2002) (citations omitted).
Here, preliminary jury instructions included the charging information, which read, in part, that "[oJn or about March 283, 2005, in Johnson County, Indiana, Gloria Benefield, with intent to defraud, did make or utter a written instrument, to-wit: an Indiana Aide Registry Letter, in such a manner that it purported to have been made with different provisions." Appellant's App. p. 52 (emphasis added). Final Instruction 4 first tracked the language of Indiana Code section 35-48-5-2(b) and then specifically informed the jury of the elements that it must find beyond a reasonable doubt, thereby informing the jury twice more that Bene-field must have had the "intent to defraud" in order to be guilty of forgery. Appellant's App. p. 72. Additionally, the State, in its opening statement, recited the statutory definition of forgery, including the required "intent to defraud[.]" Tr. p. 30. In summary, even though the jury was misinformed onee regarding the proper mens rea for forgery, it was properly informed four times, including three times by the trial court. This repetition of the proper mens rea, especially because it came mostly from the trial court, very likely would have cured the error by itself. See Perez v. State, 872 N.E.2d 208, 212 (Ind.Ct.App.2007) (concluding that trial court's two instructions stating proper mens rea for attempted murder cured instruction that defendant could "knowing, ly" commit attempted murder), trans. denied. There is more, however.
The jury was also instructed that it was "to consider all the instructions as a whole and [] to regard each with the others given to you" and not to "single out any certain sentence, or any individual point or *247instruction and ignore the others." Appellant's App. p. 49. Finally, we would note that while the jury was instructed on the legal meaning of the term "intentionally," it was not given the legal meaning of "recklessly." In our view, the lack of any elaboration on the concept of recklessness made it even less likely that the jury was focused on it. We conclude that, while Final Instruction 6 misstated the law, the repeated statements of the proper mens rea, the trial court's instruction not to consider any one instruction in isolation, and the lack of any other mention of "recklessness" prevented the occurrence of fundamental error in this case.4
III. Sentence
A. Abuse of Discretion
Under Indiana's current sentencing scheme, "the trial court must enter a statement including reasonably detailed reasons or circumstances for imposing a particular sentence." Anglemyer v. State, 868 N.E.2d 482, 490 (Ind.2007). We review the sentence for an abuse of discretion. Id. An abuse of discretion occurs if "the decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and cireumstances." Id.
A trial court abuses its discretion if it (1) fails "to enter a sentencing statement at all[,]" (2) enters "a sentencing statement that explains reasons for imposing a sentence-including a finding of aggravating and mitigating factors if any-but the record does not support the reasons," (8) enters a sentencing statement that "omits reasons that are clearly supported by the record and advanced for consideration," or (4) considers reasons that "are improper as a matter of law." Id. at 490-91. If the trial court has abused its discretion, we will remand for resentencing "if we cannot say with confidence that the trial court would have imposed the same sentence had it properly considered reasons that enjoy support in the record." Id. at 491. However, under the new statutory scheme, the relative weight or value assignable to reasons properly found, or to those which should have been found, is not subject to review for abuse of discretion. Id.
Benefield contends that the trial court abused its discretion in declining to find, as a mitigating cireumstance, the hardship her incarceration would work on her mother. A trial court is not obligated to find a cireumstance to be mitigating merely because the defendant advances it. Felder v. State, 870 N.E.2d 554, 558 (Ind.Ct.App.2007). In particular, a trial court is not required to find that a defendant's incarceration would result in undue hardship on her dependents. Roney v. State, 872 N.E.2d 192, 204 (Ind.Ct.App.2007), trans. denied. Many persons convicted of crimes have dependents and, absent special circumstances showing that the hardship to them is "undue," a trial court does not abuse its discretion by not finding this to be a mitigating factor. Id. at 204-05.
While acknowledging that Benefield's incarceration would be difficult on her mother, the trial court also concluded that the "burden must be unusual" for it to be a mitigating cireumstance. Tr. p. 258. This view is consistent with our jurisprudence that special cireumstances must establish the hardship as "undue." The record indicates that while Benefield has been shouldering much of the load of caring for her mother, it does not indicate that her moth*248er will be entirely without assistance without Benefield. Benefield's mother, in a letter to the trial court, noted that Bene-field was the only one who took her to her doctor's appointments, but not that she was the only one who could. The record also indicates that Benefield has a sister who lives in Johnson County, and while that sister indicated that Benefield was a "tremendous help when it comes to taking care of [their] mother{,]" she did not indicate that such care would be impossible without Benefield. Defendant's Sentencing Ex. C. We recognize, of course, that incarceration almost always works a hardship on others, but, as Benefield failed to show special cireumstances, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding that the hardship was not undue.
Benefield also argues that her vision problems and her participation in a nursing and criminal justice program at the University of Indianapolis should have been found to be mitigating circumstances. Benefield, however, does not claim that her eye surgery could not be performed by private individuals while she was incarcerated, only that the Department of Correetion would not provide it. Additionally, Benefield was allowed to post an appeal bond, and although the trial court placed her on home detention, she does not argue that she was denied the opportunity to receive the necessary medical care, or even that she requested such an opportunity. As for Benefield's participation in higher education, she does not claim that she will be unable to pursue her studies while incarcerated or, for that matter, explain why her studies should be considered mitigating. Benefield has not established that the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing her.
B. Appropriateness
Benefield also contends that her maximum eight-year sentence for forgery is inappropriate. We "may revise a sentence authorized by statute if, after due consideration of the trial court's decision, the Court finds that the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender." Ind. Appellate Rule 7(B). "Although appellate review of sentences must give due consideration to the trial court's sentence because of the special expertise of the trial bench in making sentencing decisions, Appellate Rule 7(B) is an authorization to revise sentences when certain broad conditions are satisfied." Shouse v. State, 849 N.E.2d 650, 660 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trams. denied (citations and quotation marks omitted).
Benefield's character is that of a perpetual perpetrator of crimes of dishonesty who has yet to conform her behavior to the norms of society. Benefield's eriminal history begins in 1979, when she was thirty or thirty-one years old, and she has prior convictions for felony grand theft, two counts of check deception, two counts of Class A misdemeanor check deception, Class A misdemeanor eriminal conversion, Class C felony forgery, five counts of Class D felony fraud, and two federal counts of credit card fraud. It is worth noting that the total amount of money involved in the federal case was $112,000.54. Benefield's numerous contacts with the criminal justice system, including her several incarcerations and stints on probation, have not caused her to reform herself. Benefield's character justifies her eight-year maximum sentence.
The nature of Benefield's crime also strikes us as somewhat more serious in nature than a typical forgery, in that it had the potential to place others at risk. Had Benefield's forgery had its intended effect, she would have been working in a healthcare position for which she was not legally *249qualified. We cannot take lightly an attempt to evade Indiana's requirements for the licensing of health-care providers. Benefield has failed to convince us that her eight-year sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of her offense and her character.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
MAY, J., concurring in result with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-43-5-2(b)(3) (2004).
. Benefield frames this issue as a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain her conviction for forgery. Benefield, however, only challenges the admission of certain evidence and does not claim that the evidence, if properly admitted, was insufficient to sustain her conviction. As such, we shall consider Benefield's argument as a challenge to the admission of evidence.
. This case is one in which application of the contemporaneous objection rule seems particularly appropriate. Given that Benefield had already stipulated to the admissibility of State's Exhibits 4 and 5, it seems certain that they would have promptly been admitted had it been pointed out that they had not been. Benefield also makes no claim that State's Exhibit 7 was in any way inadmissible.
. An instruction erroneously informing the jury on the required mens rea can also be cured if the defendant's intent is not a central issue at trial, although we need not reach the issue in this case. See Williams v. State, 737 N.E.2d 734, 737 (Ind.2000).

=== CASE 9741586 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:35.986162+00 ===

MAY, Judge,
concurring in result.
Although I agree with the majority's outcome, I respectfully concur only in result with its analysis of the second issue.
The heart of my disagreement is this statement by the majority: "Because knowledge of the falsity of the instrument [is] not an essential element of forgery, it follows that actual falsity is not an essential element." (Op. at 245.) The majority relies on this deduction to hold Final Instruction 6 was an incorrect statement of law because "the State was required to prove something that the statute itself does not require." (Id.) The "something" that the majority asserts the State erroneously was required to prove was an "actual falsity" in the instrument. (Id.)
As a general premise, 1 am opposed to making broad general holdings that are not required by the facts of the case before us. See, e.g., State ex rel. Clemens v. Kern, 215 Ind. 515, 526, 20 N.E.2d 514, 519 (1939) ("Courts of appeal should exercise care not to discuss questions which are unnecessary to a full and final disposition of the case under consideration."), reh'g denied 215 Ind. 515, 21 N.E.2d 141 (1939). The majority asserts we are reviewing this alleged instructional error for fundamental error because Benefield failed to object to this instruction on this basis at trial. The majority concludes in Section B of Issue 2 that this alleged error could not have been fundamental because it increased the State's burden of proof. Accordingly, the majority could have decided this issue on the ground Benefield was not prejudiced, and did not need to address the merits of this argument. Neither party raised this argument on appeal, and neither party was prejudiced thereby; there accordingly was no reason for the majority to address it sua sponte.
Nor is the majority's deduction supported by its premise. Wendling noted Indiana law does not require the State to prove a defendant's knowledge of the falsity of the instrument, 465 N.E.2d at 179, and I agree with this premise. However, it does not follow that actual falsity is not an element of forgery. The State cannot obtain a conviction of forgery without demonstrating some "actual falsity." Ind.Code § 35-43-5-2 provides: "A person who, with intent to defraud, makes, utters, or possesses a written instrument in such a manner that it purports to have been made: (1) by another person; (2) at another time; (8) with different provisions; or (4) by authority of one who did not give authority; commits forgery ..." That language indicates the State cannot obtain a conviction unless the instrument is made in a manner that makes it false as to the maker, the time made, a provision therein, or the authority on which it was made, or unless there is a falsity in the manner in which the instrument is uttered or possessed. With no falsity in the making, possession, or uttering, a forgery cannot occur. Accordingly, I believe the majority's broad holding mischaracterizes the State's burden to obtain a conviction of forgery.
Finally, even if the statutory language could be read to relieve the State of any obligation to demonstrate actual falsity, I *250still would not hold Instruction 6 was "an incorrect statement of law." (Op. at 245.) Instruction 6's definition of "defraud" requires only that a person "make a misrepresentation of an existing material fact." (Id. at 245.) That instruction does not require actual falsity as to the instrument itself. It requires only a misrepresentation as to an "existing material fact"which could include a falsity in the manner in which the instrument is uttered or possessed. As such, the instruction does not conflict with the statute and is not an inaccurate statement of law.
Nevertheless, as I agree with the majority that Final Instruction 6 was not fundamental error, I concur in the majority's result.

=== CASE 9741587 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:36.290761+00 ===

OPINION
STRINGER, Justice.
We granted review to determine whether the amendment and relation back principles generally applicable to pleadings under the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure apply to a wrongful death claim brought under Minn. Stat. ch. 573 (1998). The trial court concluded that the statutory time limit of three years for bringing the action in the name of the trustee in Minn.Stat. § 573.02 (1998) was a condition precedent to maintaining a wrongful death action and therefore the consequences of failing to bring the action as required by the statute could not be circumvented by application of the amendment and relation back rules. The court of appeals reversed. We reverse the court of appeals and reinstate the ruling of the trial court.
Israel Ortiz was severely injured on September 24, 1993 when the motorcycle he was driving collided with a truck driven by Bryan Gavenda and owned by Gavenda’s employer, Frito Lay, Inc. Israel Ortiz died from those injuries on December 11, 1993. On June 6, 1995 his widow, Frances Ortiz (Ortiz), served a complaint on Gavenda and Frito Lay (collectively Gavenda) asserting a wrongful death claim and seeking damages as the “Trustee for the heirs of Israel Ortiz.” Ga-venda’s answer to the complaint denied liability and alleged that Ortiz’s claim “failed to comply with the provisions of Chapter 573 of *121Minnesota Statutes” — the chapter governing wrongful death actions.
On November 15, 1995 Ortiz signed a petition to have herself appointed trustee for the next of kin of her deceased husband as required by Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 3 (1998). Although the petition and an accompanying Consent and Oath form were properly signed and duly notarized, a legal assistant for Ortiz’s attorney inadvertently failed to submit the documents to the court and, as a consequence, Ortiz was not appointed trustee. The mistake went unnoticed when Ortiz’s complaint was filed with the Anoka County District Court on December 6,1995.
The oversight came to light and Ortiz filed her petition to be appointed trustee on January 8, 1997, but by then more than three years had elapsed since her husband’s death. The trial court appointed Ortiz trustee on January 16, 1997 and Ortiz then moved to amend her complaint to reflect the appointment arguing that the amended complaint should relate back to the date of her original complaint. Gavenda acknowledged that no prejudice would be suffered from the requested amendment, but argued that the statute of limitations in Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 1 was jurisdictional and could not be waived for equitable reasons. Gavenda moved to dismiss arguing (1) that Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 1, required Ortiz to bring the suit as trustee for her deceased husband’s next of kin within three years of his death and (2) that because Ortiz was not appointed trustee within this time period, she lacked standing to bring the action and the trial court lacked jurisdiction to hear her claim.
The trial court denied Ortiz’s motion to amend and granted Gavenda’s motion to dismiss. The court concluded that “because Plaintiff had not been duly appointed trustee by the court within three years of decedent’s death for prosecution of the Complaint, this action is barred pursuant to a § 573.02 subd. 1 statute of limitations, particularly in light of Regie de l’assurance du Quebec v. Jensen, 399 N.W.2d 85 (Minn.1987).” (emphasis in original).
On review, the court of appeals reversed and remanded the case for trial, concluding that Gavenda would suffer no prejudice by reason of amending the complaint and, as the duly appointed trustee, Ortiz was the real party in interest in any wrongful death action arising out of her husband’s death. Ortiz v. Gavenda, 574 N.W.2d 764, 766-69 (Minn.App.1998). The court rejected Gavenda’s assertion that the time limit in Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 1 was an absolute jurisdictional bar as calling for “too technical an application of the [statute’s] limitations period” and held that Ortiz’s amended complaint could relate back to the date of filing of her original complaint. Id. at 766, 769.
On appeal to this court Gavenda argues that compliance with the 3-year time limit of Minn.Stat. § 573.02 is an absolute condition precedent to bringing a wrongful death action and that because Ortiz was never appointed trustee, no wrongful death claim was commenced within the statutory time period. Therefore the trial court lacked jurisdiction to hear her suit.
A wrongful death claim is purely statutory, as common law recognized no such actions on the theory that a claim for personal injuries died with the victim. See Fussner v. Andert, 261 Minn. 347, 350-53, 113 N.W.2d 355, 357-58 (1961); Cashman v. Hedberg, 215 Minn. 463, 466, 10 N.W.2d 388, 390 (1943). In Minnesota, actions for wrongful death are prohibited by Minn.Stat. § 573.01 except as provided for in Minn.Stat. § 573.02:
Subdivision 1. When death is caused by the wrongful act or omission of any person or corporation, the trustee appointed as provided in subdivision 3 may maintain an action therefor if the decedent might have maintained an action, had the decedent lived * * *. [An] action under this section may be commenced within three years after the date of death provided that the action must be commenced within six years after the act or omission. The recovery in the action is the amount the jury deems fair and just in reference to the pecuniary loss resulting from the death, and shall be for the exclusive benefit of the surviving spouse and next of kin * * *.
If an action for the injury was commenced by the decedent and not finally determined *122while living, it may be continued by the trustee * * *.
* * * ⅝;
Subdivision 3. Upon written petition by the surviving spouse or one of the next of kin, the court having jurisdiction of an action falling within the provisions of subdivisions 1 or 2, shall appoint a suitable and competent person as trustee to commence or continue such action and obtain recovery of damages therein.
Minn.Stat. § 573.02 (1998) (emphasis added).
Ortiz concedes that she did not bring her wrongful death action as the duly-appointed trustee for her husband’s next of kin within three years of his death, but argues that she should be allowed to amend her complaint to reflect her current capacity as the now duly-appointed trustee and that, based on the provisions of Minn. R. Civ. P. 15.03 and 17.01, her amendment should relate back to the date of her original complaint. Rule 15.03 provides that “[wjhenever the claim or defense asserted in the amended pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading, the amendment relates back to the date of the original pleading.” Rule 17.01 requires that “[e]very action shall be prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest.” Rule 17.01 further states:
No action shall be dismissed on the ground that it is not prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest until a reasonable time has been allowed after objection for ratification of commencement of the action by, or joinder or substitution of, the real party in interest; and such ratification, joinder, or substitution shall have the same effect as if the action had been commenced in the name of the real party in interest.
In common law claims we have applied these rules to permit untimely amendments to relate back to the date of the original complaint so long as the defendants had adequate notice of the new claim and would not be unfairly prejudiced by the amendment. See Grothe v. Shaffer, 305 Minn. 17, 22-23, 232 N.W.2d 227, 231 (1975) (affirming the trial court’s use of Rule 15.03 to permit relation back of an untimely amendment adding a plaintiff).
We begin our analysis with the observation that the limitation provisions in a statutorily created cause of action are jurisdictional, requiring dismissal for failure to comply — they do not have flexible parameters permitting them to be ignored if their application is “too technical,” as the court of appeals held. Over one hundred years ago we held that because the wrongful death statute itself made no exceptions to the time limit for bringing a wrongful death action, no exceptions could be made by construction. See Rugland v. Anderson, 30 Minn. 386, 15 N.W. 676 (1883). Since Rugland, we have consistently reaffirmed the importance of filing a wrongful death action within the time fixed by Minn.Stat. § 573.02:
This period fixing the time within which the right of action for wrongful death may be exercised is not an ordinary statute of limitations. It is considered a condition precedent to the right to maintain the action, and the lapse of such period is an absolute bar. It conditions the right.
Berghuis v. Korthuis, 228 Minn. 534, 536, 37 N.W.2d 809, 810 (1949); see also Bonhiver v. Fugelso, Porter, Simich and Whiteman, Inc., 355 N.W.2d, 138, 141 (Minn.1984); Cashman, 215 Minn. at 469, 10 N.W.2d at 391-92. Similarly, in Bonhiver, we emphasized the high standard of strict compliance with the statute: “Because the right to maintain an action for wrongful death is created by statute and is in derogation of the common law, the requirements of the statute have generally been strictly construed.” 355 N.W.2d at 141. Moreover, as a general rule, mere mistake does not toll a statute of limitations. See Sollar v. Oliver Iron Mining Co., 237 Minn. 170, 175, 54 N.W.2d 114, 117 (1952).1
Strict compliance with § 573.02 is the underpinning of our decision in Regie de I’assurance Auto, du Quebec v. Jensen, 399 N.W.2d 85 (Minn.1987), where we held that because appointment of a trustee was a con*123dition precedent to bringing a wrongful death action under Minn.Stat. § 573.02, an action filed without it was a “legal nullity.” In Regie an insurance company (the Regie) had filed an equitable subrogation action in its own name to recover from the appellant certain payments it had made to the surviving spouse of a Minnesota woman killed when riding in a car struck by the appellant’s truck. Id. at 86. Although the Regie’s original equitable subrogation action was commenced within three years of the decedent’s death, the Regie had brought the action in its own name rather than as trustee as required by Minn.Stat. § 573.02. Id. at 87. The trial court ruled that because the Regie’s claim for damages resulting from the death of its insured was governed by Minn.Stat. § 573.02, the Regie lacked capacity to bring the suit in its own name. Id. Relying on Minn. R. Civ. P. 17.01, the court allowed the Regie a reasonable time to petition to become the appointed trustee and permitted the suit to continue even though more than three years had passed since the decedent’s death. Id. We reversed on appeal, holding that the relation back doctrine was inapplicable because when the Regie initially brought suit in its own name rather than as trustee for the decedent’s next of kin, the suit was a “legal nullity” — therefore “nothing existed to which the attempted amendment, now brought in the name of the Regie as trustee, could ‘relate back.’ ” Id. at 92.
Ortiz argues that Regie should be distinguished on equitable grounds of lack of prejudice, but no matter how compelling the circumstances for equitable intervention, equity cannot breathe life into a claim that has never been anything more than a “nullity.” The court of appeals’ effort to distinguish Regie on the basis of its origins in subrogation is equally without substance because the nature of the clam is immaterial where the original filing has no legal effect. See Regie, 399 N.W.2d at 92; see also Shumway v. Nelson, 259 Minn. 319, 323-24, 107 N.W.2d 531, 534 (1961) (rejecting an assertion that the decedent’s sole beneficiary rather than the trustee was the real party in interest in a wrongful death action).
We reaffirmed Regie’s holding in In re Gilliard, No. C2-91-1811, 1992 WL 121622 (Minn.1992), where we again ruled that “Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 3 (1990) requires the appointment of a trustee prior to the expiration of the 3-year statute of limitations, not the mere filing of a petition therefor within the statutory period.” Id. at *1 (emphasis in original).2 We observe that in the 11 years since Regie, and indeed in the hundred-plus years since Rugland, the legislature has never indicated dissatisfaction with our consistent interpretation of Minn. Stat. § 573.02’s time limit as a strict condition precedent to maintaining a wrongful death action.
Finally, our emphasis on historical precedent should not obscure the sound legal and policy reasons for requiring the commencement of a wrongful death action by a court-appointed trustee. Rule 144 of our General Rules of Practice provides a comprehensive framework for the appointment of a trustee to bring a wrongful death action under Minn.Stat. § 573.02 and to protect the interests of those entitled to share in a monetary recovery. The trustee should not have interests conflicting with those entitled to a recovery, see Bachman v. Lieser, 289 Minn. 298, 299-300 n. 1, 184 N.W.2d 11, 13 n. 1 *124(1971), and Minners v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 284 Minn. 343, 344 n. 2 170 N.W.2d 223, 224 n. 2 (1969), and should be removed if not acting in the best interests of the heirs and next of kin. See In re Wrongful Death of Carlson, 427 N.W.2d 752, 754-55 (Minn.App.1988). The appointment of a trustee under Minn.Stat. § 573.02 is an exercise of the fundamental legal principle that those entitled to recovery as a result of the wrongful death shall be represented by the trustee without compromise.
The court of appeals is reversed.
. Circumstances may be different where a defendant has fraudulently concealed the existence of a course of action. See DeCosse v. Armstrong Cork Co., 319 N.W.2d 45, 52 (Minn.1982).
. The dissent acknowledges that this court’s rulings in Regie and Gilliard cannot be distinguished, but argues that despite the doctrine of stare decisis, in the interests of justice they should be overruled. Reference to Mr. Justice Harry Blackmun’s quote in Flood v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258, 92 S.Ct. 2099, 32 L.Ed.2d 728 (1972), from a dissent of Mr. Justice Felix Frankfurter seems particularly appropriate:
The Court decided as it did in the Toolson [v. New York Yankees Inc., 346 U.S. 356, 74 S.Ct. 78, 98 L.Ed. 64 (1953)] case as an application of the doctrine of stare decisis. That doctrine is not, to be sure, an imprisonment of reason. But neither is it a whimsy. * * * If stare decisis be one aspect of law, as it is, to disregard it in identic situations is mere caprice.
Id. at 277, 92 S.Ct. 2099 (quoting United States v. International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. 236, 249-50, 75 S.Ct. 259, 99 L.Ed. 290 (1955) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting)). Ortiz’s failure to comply with the clear dictate of the wrongful death statute is indeed regrettable, but to overrule over one hundred years of jurisprudence in order to provide relief for the unfortunate consequences of failing to file the petition for trustee appointment is surely “mere caprice.”

=== CASE 9741588 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:36.297324+00 ===

PAUL H. ANDERSON, J.
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I agree with the majority’s conclusion that our holdings in Regie de l’assurance Auto, du Quebec v. Jensen, 399 N.W.2d 85 (Minn.1987), and In re Gilliard, No. C2-91-1811, 1992 WL 121622 (Minn. May 15, 1992), stand in the way of granting Ortiz the relief she seeks. Accordingly, I do not, as the court of appeals did, believe Regie and Gilliard can be sufficiently distinguished from the present case to avoid a conflict in our case law should we hold that Ortiz is free to proceed with her amended claim. However, I do agree with the result reached by the court of appeals.
As a lower appellate court, the court of appeals is bound to follow our court’s precedents, even when the court of appeals regards those precedents as violative of fairness and justice and at variance with legislative intent. Here, the court of appeals knew it was bound by the precedent established in Regie and followed in Gilli-ard, but still in good faith concluded that this precedent was wrong when applied to the facts of this case. Therefore, the court of appeals took the only avenue open to it and strove to distinguish those cases. The court of appeals’ effort was doomed to failure — as the majority points out, Regie and Gilliard simply cannot be distinguished from the present case. However, as a member of our state’s highest court, I am in a position to advocate directly that which the court of appeals was without authority to change. Accordingly, I conclude that Regie and Gilliard, insofar as their holdings would preclude application of the relation back doctrine to claims brought under Minn.Stat. § 573.02 — the Wrongful Death Act — should be overruled.
I do not reach this conclusion lightly. The doctrine of stare decisis ensures stability in our law by advocating adherence to decided case law. See In re Gardner’s Trust, 266 Minn. 127, 134, 123 N.W.2d 69, 74 (1963). I agree with this doctrine and do not suggest that we should, without justification, overturn the learning, wisdom, and experience of the past, especially when we have recently spoken on an issue. Further, I recognize that a change in the law should not be based upon a change in the membership of the court because “[a] basic change in the law upon a ground no firmer than a change in our membership invites the popular misconception that this institution is little different from the two political branches of the Government.” Mitchell v. W.T. Grant Co., 416 U.S. 600, 636, 94 S.Ct. 1895, 40 L.Ed.2d 406 (1974) (Stewart, J., dissenting). My belief in these precepts and my desire to honor them cause me to come to my conclusion in this case with great reluctance.
But the doctrine of stare decisis “is not an inflexible rule of law but rather a policy of the law.” Toetschinger v. Ihnot, 312 Minn. 59, 83, 250 N.W.2d 204, 217 (1977) (Yetka, J., dissenting) (citing Johnson v. Chicago, B. & Q. R.R. Co., 243 Minn. 58, 68, 66 N.W.2d 763, 770 (1954)). On the topic, Mr. Justice Benjamin Cardozo once wrote:
[W]hen a rule, after it has been duly tested by experience, has been found to be inconsistent with the sense of justice or with the social welfare, there should be less hesitation in frank avowal and full abandonment. * * * “Change of this character should not be left to the legislature.” If judges have wofully [sic] misinterpreted the mores of their day, or if the mores of their day are no longer those of ours, they ought not to tie, in helpless submission, the hands of their successors.
Benjamin N. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process, 150-152 (1921) (internal citation omitted). Stare decisis should not require us to be bound by an unsound principle. In the words of an early decision of the California Supreme Court, “the mere fact *125that an error has been committed is no reason or even apology for repeating it, much less for perpetuating it.” Hart v. Burnett, 15 Cal. 530, 600-01 (1860). As with past rules to which we adhered too long, I believe that the rule of law we announced in Regie and Gilliard runs contrary to fairness, justice, and equity and therefore should be overruled.
In Regie, we held that an amendment seeking to reflect the appointment of an insurance company as trustee in a wrongful death action could not relate back to the date of the original filing of the action because the original action, having been initiated before the insurance company was duly • appointed trustee, was a “legal nullity,” a term which we neither elaborated upon nor defined. 399 N.W.2d at 92. In Gilliard, a summary reversal order, we similarly held that the Wrongful Death Act “requires the appointment of a trustee prior to the expiration of the 3-year statute of limitations, not the mere filing of a petition therefor within the statutory period.” 1992 WL 121622, at *1.
While both Regie and Gilliard find some support in a long line of cases beginning with Rugland v. Anderson, 30 Minn. 386, 15 N.W. 676 (1883), where we established that adherence to the statute of limitations is a condition precedent to maintaining a wrongful death claim, I fail to see how prohibiting application of the relation back doctrine to wrongful death claims necessarily flows from those earlier eases. In this regard, I want to make it quite clear that I do not advocate overturning one-hundred plus years of case law and reasoning. But, even if we take the long-held proposition advocated in Rugland and its progeny to be true, we are left with the undeniable fact that in the present case a complaint asserting a wrongful death claim was filed within three years of Ortiz’s husband’s death, thereby satisfying the condition precedent. Although Ortiz filed that complaint in the wrong capacity, nothing in the language or purpose of the Wrongful Death Act requires us to ignore the fact that a wrongful death claim was timely filed by the surviving spouse.
The language of the Wrongful Death Act does not mandate the result reached by the majority. The Act provides that a trustee “may maintain ” a wrongful death action and that, at the beneficiary’s request, the court shall appoint “a suitable and competent person as trustee to commence or continue [the] action.” Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subds. 1 and 3 (1998) (emphasis added). Black’s Law Dictionary recognizes that the term “maintain” has numerous meanings, including “carry on; commence; continue; * * * hold or preserve in any particular state or condition; keep from falling, declining, or ceasing; keep in existence or continuance.” Black’s Law Dictionary 953 (6th ed.1990). Garner’s Dictionary of Modem Legal Usage provides that maintain “is not synonymous with begin or institute; it embraces the idea of continuing or upholding.” Bryan A. Garner, A Dictionary of Modem Legal Usage 541 (2d ed.1995). Thus, the Act could be interpreted as leaving open the possibility that a wrongful death action may be initiated prior to the appointment of a trustee, but that appointment of a trustee is necessary to continue with the action. In any event, the language of the Act does not inevitably lead to the conclusion that a wrongful death action brought before the appointment of a trustee is nothing more than a “legal nullity.”
We have long recognized that the remedial purpose behind the Wrongful Death Act is to rectify the inequity that existed in common law where civil recovery was permitted for torts causing injury, but not for those causing death. See Fussner v. Andert, 261 Minn. 347, 350, 113 N.W.2d 355, 357 (1961). To deny to Ortiz application of the relation back doctrine — a corrective remedy generally available to common law tort actions — simply because her complaint asserts a wrongful death claim perpetuates this inequity in violation of the Act’s purpose.
Furthermore, there is no merit to the assertion that the Wrongful Death Act’s statute of limitations is jurisdictional. As the majority points out, if the statute of limitations in Minn.Stat. § 573.02 were truly jurisdictional, then even the most compelling notion of equity could not resurrect an expired claim. However, we have in the past allowed equity to circumvent the statutory time limit for bringing a wrongful death claim. See De-*126Cosse v. Armstrong Cork Co., 319 N.W.2d 45, 52 (Minn.1982) (applying to a wrongful death claim the common law rule tolling a statute of limitations in cases where the delay in bringing the action was by reason of fraud on the part of the defendant). DeCosse effectively precluded further argument that the Act’s statute of limitations is jurisdictional and opened the door for equitable arguments to circumvent the Act’s three-year limit.
In Regie itself, we relied on equity to help justify our harsh rule. We acknowledged in Regie that the vast majority of other jurisdictions do allow the relation back doctrine to apply to wrongful death claims and then distinguished those cases by stating that they frequently involved “blameless errors”; i.e., the party seeking to amend the complaint was not at fault for the delay in bringing the action. 399 N.W.2d at 90. We then spent a paragraph highlighting the inequity of allowing the insurance company’s amendment to relate back, pointing out that the insurance company was not appointed trustee until 14 months after the statute of limitations had expired and then waited an additional eight months to amend its complaint. Id. Thus, under the facts and equities of Regie, use of the relation back doctrine in that case may indeed have been inappropriate. However, our reliance on Regie to justify a blanket prohibition of the relation back doctrine in all wrongful death cases has proven to be anything but equitable. Since Regie, we have applied this harsh rule twice, and neither time has fairness and justice been served. Using the words of Justice Cardozo, this rule “has been tested by experience [and] has been found to be inconsistent with the sense of justice.”
Gilliard, for example, was clearly a case where equity did not support the application of Regie’s harsh rule of law. There, the respondent had properly signed and filed her application to be appointed trustee with the clerk of court. In re Gilliard, No. C2-91-1811, 1992 WL 48044, at *1 (Minn.App. March 17, 1992). The court of appeals concluded that respondent’s failure to be appointed trustee was through no fault of her own, but instead was “caused by the court administrator’s failure to bring the application to the court’s attention and the attorney’s failure to ensure that an order appointing a trustee was considered and signed.” Id. Moreover, the court of appeals recognized that the rules of civil procedure specifically allowed the lower court to correct such clerical errors. Id. (citing Minn. R. Civ. P. 60.01). Despite the equities favoring the respondent, we summarily disallowed the respondent’s claim without citing to anything in the Wrongful Death Act’s language or underlying policy that required us to do so. Gilliard, 1992 WL 121622.
Likewise, in the present case, there can be no doubt that equity urges a result different from that reached by the majority. Ortiz timely completed all documents necessary to secure her appointment as trustee. She brought her claim to an attorney well within the statute of limitations, signed and returned all of the documents required for her to be appointed trustee, and, believing that she had been so appointed, timely served and filed a complaint specifically raising a wrongful death claim. Only a mistake by an assistant of Ortiz’s attorney precluded Ortiz’s claim from continuing. A review of our case law shows that in nearly any other context such a mistake would not be fatal to Ortiz’s claim because the district court could simply apply the amendment and relation back doctrine espoused in Minn. R. Civ. P. 15 and 17.01.
Rules 15.03 and 17.01 of the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure permit amendments substituting or adding a party to a cause of action to relate back to the date of original filing of the complaint in order to circumvent an expired statute of limitations. The purpose of this relation back doctrine is to prevent meritorious cases from being dismissed for technical, procedural violations. See Carlson v. Hennepin County, 479 N.W.2d 50, 57 (Minn.1992) (citing Buysse v. Baumann-Furrie & Co., 448 N.W.2d 865, 871 (Minn.1989)).
Historically, we have applied these rules and have permitted the relation back of amendments so long as the defendant has adequate notice of the claim against him and would not be unfairly prejudiced by the relation back of the amendment. See Grothe v. *127Shaffer, 305 Minn. 17, 22, 232 N.W.2d 227, 231 (1975). Where these equitable factors have not been met, we have denied application of the doctrine. See, e.g., Bigay v. Garvey, 575 N.W.2d 107 (Minn.1998); Johnson v. Soo Line R.R. Co., 463 N.W.2d 894 (Minn.1990). In Regie, we forbid application of the relation back doctrine to wrongful death claims on the ground that the original claim was a “legal nullity,” but we have repeatedly applied the relation back doctrine in cases where the original unamended complaint could not have withstood a motion for judgment on the pleadings. See, e.g., Carlson v. Hennepin County, 479 N.W.2d 50 (Minn.1992) (holding that an amendment changing the identity of the defendant to the party actually liable for the injuries could relate back to the date of original filing); Fore v. Crop Hail Management, 270 N.W.2d 13 (Minn.1978) (same); Nelson v. Glenwood Hills Hospitals, 240 Minn. 505, 62 N.W.2d 73 (1953). We have also applied the relation back doctrine to permit the addition and substitution of plaintiffs. See Grothe v. Shaffer, 305 Minn. 17, 232 N.W.2d 227 (1975). Moreover, despite our reluctance in Regie to apply the relation back doctrine to purely statutory causes of action, we have previously applied Rule 15.03 to permit the relation back of amendments to statutory claims. See Sivenson v. Emerson Elec. Co., 374 N.W.2d 690 (Minn.1985) (applying the relation back doctrine to permit the addition of a claim seeking damages under the federal Consumer Products Safety Act); Heyn v. Braun, 239 Minn. 496, 59 N.W.2d 326 (1953) (applying the relation back doctrine to a mechanic’s lien action).
Here, the amendment Ortiz seeks clearly falls within the equitable parameters of Rules 15.03 and 17.01. Gavenda concedes that it would suffer no prejudice from the amendment. The amendment would merely correct Ortiz’s complaint to reflect her appointment as trustee. Even with the amendment, Ortiz would still be the person pursuing the suit, Gavenda would still be the defendant, and the factual and legal issues would be unchanged. Thus, Gavenda received effective notice of Ortiz’s suit by means of the original complaint. Still, the majority continues to deny application of the relation back doctrine to Ortiz’s complaint simply because we denied application of the doctrine to wrongful death claims in Regie and affirmed that reasoning in Gilliard, To continue this anomalous treatment of wrongful death claims without statutory or policy justification is to ignore justice for the sake of continuity. Accordingly, I would hold that Regie and Gilliard are overruled to the extent that they preclude application of the amendment and relation back principles of Minn. R. Civ. P. 15 and 17 to wrongful death claims, and would permit Ortiz to amend her complaint and proceed with her claim.

=== CASE 2227782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:44.763915+00 ===

590 N.W.2d 840 (1999)
256 Neb. 479
NEBRASKA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, appellee,
v.
NEBRASKA PUBLIC POWER DISTRICT, appellant, and
Nebraska Independent Telephone Association et al., intervenors-appellees.
No. S-97-1367.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 19, 1999.
*843 James A. Eske and Kile W. Johnson, of Barlow, Johnson, Flodman, Sutter, Guenzel & Eske, Lincoln, and Harold L. Hadland, Columbus, for appellant.
Jack L. Shultz and Gregory D. Barton, of Harding, Shultz & Downs, Lincoln, for intervenors-appellees.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, McCORMACK, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
CONNOLLY, J.
Appellee the Nebraska Public Service Commission (PSC) initiated an investigation to determine whether it had jurisdiction over appellant, the Nebraska Public Power District (NPPD). The PSC determined that the NPPD was providing intrastate telecommunications services for hire as a contract carrier and that such carriers fell within the PSC's jurisdiction. We conclude that the PSC does not have jurisdiction over telecommunications contract carriers, and therefore, we reverse, and dismiss.
BACKGROUND
NPPD'S INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK
The NPPD is a public corporation and political subdivision of the State of Nebraska, SID No. 1 v. Nebraska Pub. Power Dist., 253 Neb. 917, 573 N.W.2d 460 (1998), which operates an electrical utility system and generates, transmits, distributes, and sells electricity within its chartered territory, Omaha Pub. Power Dist. v. Nebraska Dept. of Revenue, 248 Neb. 518, 537 N.W.2d 312 (1995). To operate its electrical system, the NPPD requires an internal communications network, which is primarily designed to assist the NPPD in operating its protective equipment. The communications network is also used to transmit voice and data between the NPPD's offices. In the past, the NPPD and other utilities used 2 gigahertz band frequencies for analog microwave communications pursuant to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licenses. However, in 1993, the FCC issued new rules providing policies and procedures for the mandatory and voluntary relocation of 2 gigahertz users to other frequencies on the spectrum. In response to the new FCC rules, the NPPD began converting its analog microwave network to a combination of digital microwave and fiber optics.
The fiber optics were integrated into the NPPD's overhead protection ground wire, or "shield wire." The high voltage lines used by the NPPD generally have three conductors, or "phase wires." A shield wire is situated above the phase wires to protect them from lightning strikes. The shield wire is metal and generally contains no fiber optics. However, since the NPPD and other utilities were required by the FCC to relinquish their 2 gigahertz microwave communications systems, shield wire manufacturers have put fiber optics on the inside of their metal shield wires. Shield wire containing fiber optics is thus able to protect phase wires from lightning strikes and transmit communications.
NORTHEAST COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTANCE LEARNING NETWORK
The Northeast Community College (NCC) campus is located in Norfolk, Nebraska. *844 Through affiliation agreements with public and private schools, community organizations, municipal entities, business and industry, and other organizations, the NCC provides educational and training offerings throughout northeast Nebraska. The NCC's outreach program offers instruction to off-campus students via television, onsite instruction, and interactive video distance learning programs.
In 1994, a consulting firm was hired by secondary and post-secondary educational institutions in the northeast Nebraska area to conduct a feasibility study of the region's telecommunications needs. As a result of the study, an interactive video distance learning program was developed to deliver educational programming from the NCC to the Niobrara Valley Partnership, consisting of 13 school districts; the Northeast Nebraska Telepartnership, consisting of 8 school districts; and the Elkhorn Valley Partnership, consisting of 8 school districts. The distance learning programs were delivered to these partnerships by U S West at a cost of $18,420 per year.
However, the consulting firm's study indicated that the cost of providing distance learning programs to the South Sioux City area was prohibitive, since that area was in another local access transport area, or LATA. See Neb.Rev.Stat. § 86-802(9) (Reissue 1994). See, also, State ex rel. Spire v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., 233 Neb. 262, 445 N.W.2d 284 (1989) (explaining LATA's). Due in part to the toll charges involved in crossing a LATA "boundary," it was expected to cost $47,148 a year to provide distance learning programs to South Sioux City. Thus, according to the NCC's calculations, it would have cost 2.6 times more to provide distance learning programs to one site than it cost to reach 29 other sites.
During the course of the consulting firm's study, it was discovered that the NPPD was upgrading and replacing a service line running from its Norfolk substation to the IBP plant substation in Dakota City and that the shield wire in the NPPD's upgraded line would contain fiber optics. The NPPD's new fiber optic line would cross the LATA boundary and would not be subject to toll charges.
The NCC contacted the NPPD to determine whether there would be enough reserve capacity in the NPPD's fiber optic network to accommodate the NCC's distance learning program needs. Meetings were held between the NPPD, the NCC, the city of South Sioux City, and other educational partners, and it was determined that there was enough excess capacity in the fiber optic network to transmit educational programs between Norfolk, Wayne, and South Sioux City.
The NPPD and the NCC entered into an agreement on July 29, 1996, to provide the NCC with access to the NPPD's fiber optic network between Norfolk and South Sioux City. The NCC, Wayne State College, and South Sioux City were to provide the connection from their facilities to "splice points" on the NPPD's fiber optic network. In addition, the NCC was to pay the NPPD an annual fee of $6,576 for the use of the NPPD's fiber optic network, which fee was designed to recover the NPPD's costs and would not result in any profit to the NPPD.
The NCC established a fiber optic line from its campus to a midspan splice point on the NPPD's network, and South Sioux City established a fiber optic line from its technology center to the NPPD's IBP substation in Dakota City. Wayne State College had not yet connected to the NPPD's network as of March 25, 1997, but planned to do so later that year.
CITY OF NORFOLK'S INTERNET CONNECTION
The city of Norfolk's public library provides Internet access to its patrons, which patrons include a significant number of nonresidents. The city of Norfolk determined that its Internet service provider was unreliable, so it began looking for an alternative mechanism by which it could provide reliable, highspeed Internet access. The city of Norfolk also sought to develop an internal communications network linking its various offices.
The city of Norfolk discovered that the NPPD was providing the NCC and the city of South Sioux City with access to the NPPD's fiber optic network and asked the NPPD for similar access. On February 3, 1997, the NPPD agreed to provide Norfolk with access to the NPPD's fiber optic network *845 on substantially the same terms as the NPPD provided such access to the NCC and South Sioux City. CableCom of Norfolk would install fiber optic lines in Norfolk that linked the city's offices to develop an internal communications network. CableCom would also connect this network to the NPPD's fiber optic network. The city of Norfolk would then use South Sioux City's fiber optic line running from the NPPD's IBP substation to South Sioux City's technology center, where U S West would install a frame relay connection linking the technology center with Pioneer Internet. Pioneer Internet, a subsidiary of Longlines Phone Company, would act as the city of Norfolk's Internet service provider.
As of March 25, 1997, the only line that had been completed was the connection between the city of Norfolk and the NPPD's fiber optic network.
PSC'S INVESTIGATION
Based on the NPPD's agreements with the NCC and the city of Norfolk, the PSC, on its own motion, opened an investigation to determine whether the NPPD was offering intrastate telecommunications services on a for-hire basis, such that the NPPD would be subject to the PSC's jurisdiction. Petitions for formal intervention were then filed by the Nebraska Independent Telephone Association; Benkelman Telephone Company, Inc.; Wauneta Telephone Co.; Henderson Cooperative Telephone Co.; AT & T Communications of the Midwest, Inc.; and the Nebraska Telephone Association.
The Nebraska Telephone Association asked that the PSC address whether the NPPD was eligible to receive a certificate of public convenience and necessity, considering Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 75-604 and 70-625 (Reissue 1996) and the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 to 614 (1994 & Supp. II 1996), and that the PSC order the NPPD to cease and desist from providing telecommunications services.
The PSC held a hearing on March 25, 1997, and concluded that it had jurisdiction over the NPPD pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 75-109 (Reissue 1996). The PSC issued an order finding that the NPPD was providing telecommunications services to the NCC and the city of Norfolk on a for-hire basis, not as a common carrier but as a contract carrier, and that the NPPD was offering these services without a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as required by § 75-604. The PSC also found that it should seek the opinion of the Attorney General as to whether the NPPD, if granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity, could continue to provide the above-described services. Accordingly, the PSC ordered that the investigation remain open until further guidance was received from the Attorney General.
The Attorney General issued an opinion on September 4, 1997, which indicated that the NPPD lacked the statutory authority to provide telecommunications services for hire under §§ 75-604 and 70-625, and that this absence of authority precluded the PSC from issuing a certificate of public convenience and necessity to the NPPD. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 97045 (Sept. 4, 1997).
On October 20, 1997, the PSC held another hearing, this time to determine which certificated carriers, if any, would be able to offer telecommunications services in place of those services being provided by the NPPD to the NCC and the city of Norfolk, and to ascertain when a carrier could do so and at what price. After hearing evidence concerning the ability of other carriers to provide services similar to those provided by the NPPD, the PSC found that U S West could provide similar services to the NCC and South Sioux City for an annual charge of $24,300.72. The PSC likewise concluded that U S West could provide similar services to the city of Norfolk. Based on the Attorney General's opinion, the PSC also concluded that the NPPD lacked statutory authority to provide telecommunications services and ordered the NPPD to cease and desist from offering such services no later than December 31.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
The NPPD asserts that the PSC erred in (1) finding that the NPPD was offering telecommunications services to the NCC and the city of Norfolk as a contract carrier on a for-hire basis; (2) finding that the NPPD's contracts with the NCC and the city of Norfolk fell within the PSC's jurisdiction under *846 § 75-109; (3) finding that the NPPD's contracts with the NCC and the city of Norfolk were invalid in the absence of a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued to the NPPD by the PSC under § 75-604; (4) concluding that public power districts do not have statutory authority to provide telecommunications services; and (5) issuing the cease and desist order without proper notice and hearing contrary to due process of law, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 75-134 (Reissue 1996) and 84-915 (Reissue 1994).
SCOPE OF REVIEW
This court has held that in an appeal from a decision of the PSC, an appellate court examines the record to determine whether the PSC acted within the scope of its authority and whether the evidence shows that the order in question is unreasonable or arbitrary. See, e.g., In re Application of Northland Transp., 239 Neb. 918, 479 N.W.2d 764 (1992); Union Transfer Co. v. Bee Line Motor Freight, 150 Neb. 280, 34 N.W.2d 363 (1948). However, this court has also held that the PSC is an "agency" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and that the APA's provisions apply to the PSC. See Yellow Cab Co. v. Nebraska State Railway Commission, 175 Neb. 150, 120 N.W.2d 922 (1963). In an appeal under the APA, this court's standard of review is for errors appearing on the record. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 84-918 (Reissue 1994). Accordingly, we must address which standard of review applies to appeals from the PSC.
Under Neb.Rev.Stat. § 84-919 (Reissue 1994), the APA is the exclusive means of judicial review of an agency decision in a contested case, except as otherwise provided by law. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 84-917 (Reissue 1994), which governs agency appeals to the district court, is inapplicable where other provisions of law prescribe the method of appeal. Thus, if the Legislature has provided an appellate procedure other than the APA for appeals from an administrative agency, the APA does not apply, see R.D.B., Inc. v. Nebraska Liquor Control Comm., 229 Neb. 178, 425 N.W.2d 884 (1988); but to the extent that another method of appeal has not been provided, the APA controls, see § 84-919.
The Legislature has indeed provided a specific method of appeal from the PSC. See Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 75-136 to 75-137 (Reissue 1996). Section 75-136 authorizes appeals from the PSC to the Nebraska Court of Appeals when civil penalties have not been imposed, and § 75-137 prescribes the procedure for perfecting such an appeal. However, both sections are silent as to the standard of review to be applied by an appellate court. When the APA is inapplicable because another method of appeal has been prescribed and the standard of review has not otherwise been specified, the standard of review will be to search only for errors appearing on the record. Tri-County Landfill v. Board of Cty. Comrs., 247 Neb. 350, 526 N.W.2d 668 (1995). Thus, the appropriate standard of review for appeals from the PSC is a review for errors appearing on the record.
When reviewing an order for errors appearing on the record, the inquiry is whether the decision conforms to the law, is supported by competent evidence, and is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor unreasonable. See Vinci v. Nebraska Dept. of Corr. Servs., 253 Neb. 423, 571 N.W.2d 53 (1997).
The meaning of a statute is a question of law, and a reviewing court is obligated to reach its conclusions independent of the determination made by the administrative agency. Baker's Supermarkets v. State, 248 Neb. 984, 540 N.W.2d 574 (1995).
The determination of a jurisdictional issue which does not involve a factual dispute is a matter of law which requires an appellate court to reach its conclusions independent from a trial court. State v. Dvorak, 254 Neb. 87, 574 N.W.2d 492 (1998).
ANALYSIS
The PSC concluded that it had regulatory jurisdiction over the NPPD under § 75-109 because the NPPD was acting as a telecommunications contract carrier for hire. The NPPD contends that § 75-109 does not, in and of itself, grant the PSC the power to regulate all providers of communications services for hire in Nebraska intrastate commerce. Section 75-109 states:
*847 [T]he [PSC] shall regulate and exercise general control as provided by law over all common carriers, which term is hereby defined as all carriers, including contract carriers, engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers for hire or furnishing communication services for hire in Nebraska intrastate commerce.
(Emphasis supplied.) Thus, § 75-109 does not provide the PSC with general statutory jurisdiction over all common and contract carriers; rather, such jurisdiction may be exercised only as "provided by law."
PROVIDED BY LAW
The phrase "provided by law" means prescribed or provided by statute. Peile v. Skelgas, Inc., 242 Ill.App.3d 500, 610 N.E.2d 813, 182 Ill.Dec. 944 (1993), reversed on other grounds 163 Ill.2d 323, 645 N.E.2d 184, 206 Ill.Dec. 179 (1994); Manchin v. Browning, 170 W.Va. 779, 296 S.E.2d 909 (1982). See Holzendorf v. Bell, 606 So.2d 645 (Fla.App.1992). Accordingly, the PSC's statutory authority over any particular common or contract carrier must be derived from some statute other than § 75-109. To hold otherwise would be to render the phrase "provided by law" superfluous, since § 75-109 would provide general authority in and of itself. See SID No. 1 v. Nebraska Pub. Power Dist., 253 Neb. 917, 922, 573 N.W.2d 460, 465 (1998) (in construing statute, "a court must attempt to give effect to all of its parts, and if it can be avoided, no word, clause, or sentence will be rejected as superfluous or meaningless; it is not within the province of a court to read anything plain, direct, and unambiguous out of a statute"). Thus, the PSC may regulate and exercise general control over common and, by definition, contract carriers, only when such authority is provided for by some statute other than § 75-109.
Accordingly, we must determine whether the Legislature has enacted statutes to regulate telecommunications contract carriers. If so, the PSC would administer such statutes and, thus, exercise regulatory and general control over such carriers, by virtue of § 75-109.
Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 75-604 to 75-616 (Reissue 1996) and 86-801 to 86-811 (Reissue 1994) generally govern telecommunications providers in this state. These sections, by their plain language, purport to apply to all telecommunications carriers without distinction. Nonetheless, we can only conclude that the Legislature's failure to distinguish between various types of telecommunications carriers indicates that the Legislature intended these statutes to apply only to common carriers. Indeed, if we were to interpret these sections as providing the PSC with jurisdiction over telecommunications contract carriers, they would be of doubtful constitutional validity.
CONSTITUTIONAL LIMITATIONS ON CONTRACT CARRIER REGULATION
Where a statute is susceptible of two constructions, under one of which the statute is valid while under the other it is unconstitutional or of doubtful validity, that construction which gives it validity should be adopted. Nebraska P.P. Dist. v. City of York, 212 Neb. 747, 326 N.W.2d 22 (1982), citing Union Stock Yards Co. v. Nebraska State Railway Commission, 103 Neb. 224, 170 N.W. 908, modified on other grounds 103 Neb. 224, 172 N.W. 528 (1919). Both this court's and the U.S. Supreme Court's precedents indicate that to interpret Nebraska's telecommunications statutes as providing the PSC with the authority to regulate contract carriers as strictly as common carriers would render the statutes unconstitutional. Thus, the statutes' ambiguity must be resolved in favor of the NPPD. See, Michigan Commission v. Duke, 266 U.S. 570, 45 S.Ct. 191, 69 L.Ed. 445 (1925); Frost Trucking Co. v. R.R. Com., 271 U.S. 583, 46 S.Ct. 605, 70 L.Ed. 1101 (1926); Smith v. Cahoon, 283 U.S. 553, 51 S.Ct. 582, 75 L.Ed. 1264 (1931); Stephenson v. Binford, 287 U.S. 251, 53 S.Ct. 181, 77 L.Ed. 288 (1932); City of Bayard v. North Central Gas Co., 164 Neb. 819, 83 N.W.2d 861 (1957); Rodgers v. Nebraska State Railway Commission, 134 Neb. 832, 279 N.W. 800 (1938).
Michigan Commission v. Duke, supra; Frost Trucking Co. v. R.R. Com., supra; and Smith v. Cahoon, supra, all stand for the proposition that a contract carrier cannot be constitutionally required to meet the same standards as a common carrier. The state statute in each of these cases essentially required both private contract *848 and common motor carriers to obtain a certificate of public convenience and necessity. In each case, the Supreme Court struck down the statute. As stated by the Court in Michigan Commission v. Duke, 266 U.S. at 577-78, 45 S.Ct. 191:
[I]t is beyond the power of the State by legislative fiat to convert property used exclusively in the business of a private carrier into a public utility, or to make the owner a public carrier, for that would be taking private property for public use without just compensation, which no State can do consistently with the due process of law clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Likewise, as we stated in City of Bayard v. North Central Gas Co., 164 Neb. at 832, 83 N.W.2d at 868:
"It is well established that the state cannot, consistent with constitutional guaranties against infringement upon private property rights, by legislative fiat or edict or by the orders of an administrative commission, arbitrarily impose the character or status of a common carrier upon a mere private carrier or other person who has not devoted his property to such a public use."
If we were to read Nebraska's statutes governing telecommunications as requiring all telecommunications providers, whether private, contract, or common, to obtain a certificate of public convenience and necessity, then those statues would likewise be unconstitutional. Accordingly, we conclude that Nebraska's telecommunications statutes apply only to common carriers.
PSC'S CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
Nonetheless, the intervenors contend that the Legislature's failure to specifically define the phrase "contract carrier" in the telecommunications context is of no moment, since the PSC has the right to define that phrase under article IV, § 20, of the Nebraska Constitution. Article IV, § 20, states in part:
The powers and duties of [the PSC] shall include the regulation of rates, service and general control of common carriers as the Legislature may provide by law. But, in the absence of specific legislation, the [PSC] shall exercise the powers and perform the duties enumerated in this provision.
Clearly, the PSC has the inherent constitutional authority to regulate common carriers under this section. See, e.g., State ex rel. Spire v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., 233 Neb. 262, 445 N.W.2d 284 (1989). Indeed, we have stated that in the absence of specific legislation, the powers of the PSC, as enumerated in article IV, § 20, are absolute and unqualified. Myers v. Blair Tel. Co., 194 Neb. 55, 230 N.W.2d 190 (1975); State ex rel. State Railway Commission v. Ramsey, 151 Neb. 333, 37 N.W.2d 502 (1949).
However, the powers enumerated in article IV, § 20, apply only to common carriers. The term "common carriers," as used in article IV, § 20, is coextensive with the meaning of that phrase at common law. See, e.g., State v. Union Stock Yards Co., 81 Neb. 67, 115 N.W. 627 (1908). Contract carriers were not considered common carriers at common law. See City of Bayard v. North Central Gas Co ., supra. Thus, the PSC's constitutional authority over common carriers does not extend to contract carriers. Kopf v. Public Telephone Co., 173 Neb. 96, 112 N.W.2d 521 (1961). See, also, Consumers P.P. Dist. v. Twin Valleys P.P. Dist., 172 Neb. 315, 109 N.W.2d 372 (1961); City of Bayard v. North Central Gas Co., 164 Neb. 819, 83 N.W.2d 861 (1957); State v. Southern Elkhorn Telephone Co., 106 Neb. 342, 183 N.W. 562 (1921).
In the absence of constitutional authority, an administrative agency has only that power which has been granted to it by the Legislature. Stoneman v. United Neb. Bank, 254 Neb. 477, 577 N.W.2d 271 (1998). When the Legislature grants the PSC jurisdiction over non-common carriers, the PSC must exercise such authority completely within the statutory scheme. See, In re Complaint of Fecht, 216 Neb. 535, 344 N.W.2d 636 (1984); Consumers P.P. Dist. v. Twin Valleys P.P. Dist., supra. Moreover, the meaning of a statute is a question of law, and a reviewing court is obligated to reach its conclusions independent of the determination made by the administrative agency. Baker's Supermarkets v. State, 248 Neb. 984, 540 N.W.2d 574 (1995). Therefore, the intervenors' *849 reliance on the PSC's constitutional authority in the instant case is misplaced.
We do not express any opinion as to whether the NPPD is authorized to provide telecommunications services as a contract carrier or otherwise. The dispositive fact is that the NPPD was not acting as a common carrier as determined by the PSC. Because we have already determined that the PSC's jurisdiction does not extend to telecommunications contract carriers, we conclude that the PSC lacked jurisdiction over the NPPD. Therefore, the PSC had no authority to render any order concerning the NPPD. See City of Bayard v. North Central Gas Co., supra.
CONCLUSION
The PSC had no jurisdiction over the NPPD. Accordingly, the PSC's orders concerning the NPPD are null and void.
REVERSED AND DISMISSED.
STEPHAN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2227796 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:45.304205+00 ===

904 N.E.2d 660 (2009)
In the Matter of David A. COLLINS, Respondent.
No. 53S00-0903-DI-117.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
April 9, 2009.
PUBLISHED ORDER APPROVING STATEMENT OF CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT FOR DISCIPLINE
Pursuant to Indiana Admission and Discipline Rule 23(11), the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission and Respondent have submitted for approval a "Statement of Circumstances and Conditional Agreement for Discipline" stipulating agreed facts and proposed discipline as summarized below:
Stipulated Facts: On October 5, 2008, while serving as a deputy prosecuting attorney in Monroe County, Respondent was *661 arrested for operating a vehicle while intoxicated, a class A misdemeanor. He pled guilty to the charge, reported the incident to the Commission, completed alcohol assessment and education programs, and resigned his position with the prosecutor's office.
Violation: The parties agree that Respondent violated Indiana Professional Conduct Rule 8.4(d), which prohibits engaging in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice.
Discipline: The parties agree the appropriate sanction is a public reprimand. The Court, having considered the submissions of the parties, now APPROVES and ORDERS the agreed discipline. For Respondent's professional misconduct, the Court imposes a public reprimand.
The costs of this proceeding are assessed against Respondent.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2227804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:45.482819+00 ===

590 N.W.2d 679 (1999)
Thomas N. TESTER, et al., Appellants,
v.
AMERICAN STANDARD, INC., Defendant,
Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., Respondent,
MacArthur Company, Respondent.
No. C9-98-999.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 6, 1999.
Richard A. LaVerdiere, Michael R. Strom, Sieben, Polk, LaVerdiere, Jones & Hawn, P.A., Hastings, MN (for appellants).
Bruce Jones, Faegre & Benson LLP, Minneapolis, MN (for respondent Owens-Corning).
Jon P. Parrington, Jeffrey J. Lindquist, Pustorino, Tilton & Parrington, P.A., Minneapolis, MN (for respondent MacArthur Company).
*680 Considered and decided by ANDERSON, Presiding Judge, HUSPENI, Judge[*], and HOLTAN, Judge.
OPINION
HARVEY A. HOLTAN, Judge[**]
Appellants challenge the trial court's judgment in favor of respondents in an asbestos-related products liability action. Appellants challenge the trial court's interpretation of the comparative fault statute, Minn.Stat. § 604 (1998), and argue that fault should be aggregated in asbestos cases involving multiple defendants. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant Thomas Tester worked as a pipe-coverer for 30 years. During this time, he worked with, and was exposed to, asbestos. As a result of this exposure, he contracted mesothelioma, a terminal cancer.
Tester brought a products liability action against various asbestos manufacturers and suppliers. Most settled or were voluntarily dismissed, but remained on the special verdict form. At the end of the trial, the jury found the manufacturers and suppliers negligent for failure to warn, awarded Tester damages of $456,731, and allocated fault among Tester and the various defendants (both those dismissed and those remaining as parties). The jury found Tester to be more at fault than the two remaining defendants, respondents Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation (OCF) and MacArthur Company.
After the jury returned its verdict, both sides moved for entry of judgment in their favor. Although MacArthur and OCF were at fault, the trial judge entered judgment in favor of respondents because Tester was more at fault. This appeal followed. Neither party challenges the jury result. At issue is whether the statutes and cases governing comparative fault allow Tester to collect damages given his degree of fault as compared to respondents' degree of fault.
ISSUES
1. Does Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 3 (1998), apply to the present case?
2. Does Minnesota law allow the aggregation of defendants' fault?
ANALYSIS
The issues in this appeal are questions of law, which this court reviews de novo. Frost-Benco Elec. Ass'n v. Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm'n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn.1984).
1. Application of Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 3
Generally, a plaintiff in a negligence action cannot recover from a defendant if the plaintiff is more at fault than the defendant. Minn.Stat. § 604.01, subd. 1 (1998). But appellants argue that Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 3 (1998), provides an exception to this general rule and allows an at-fault plaintiff to recover from a less-at-fault defendant in products liability cases. Section 604.02, subdivision 3, provides:
In the case of a claim arising from the manufacture, sale, use or consumption of a product, an amount uncollectible from any person in the chain of manufacture and distribution shall be reallocated among all other persons in the chain of manufacture and distribution but not among the claimant or others at fault who are not in the chain of manufacture or distribution of the product. Provided, however, that a person whose fault is less than that of a claimant is liable to the claimant only for that portion of the judgment which represents the percentage of fault attributable to the person whose fault is less.
Id.
Contrary to appellants' assertion, subdivision 3 applies only to a specific situation: the reallocation of uncollectible judgment amounts among parties "in the chain of manufacture and distribution of the product." Id. The plain meaning of these words suggests *681 application when the parties are vertically integrated (the asbestos producer, the asbestos wholesaler, the asbestos retailer, all working together to bring a product to market), not horizontally involved in the same industry (two competing asbestos makers). This interpretation comports with caselaw; the term "chain of manufacture and distribution" has been applied only in those cases where multiple parties worked together to bring a product to market. See Marcon v. Kmart Corp., 573 N.W.2d 728, 732 (Minn. App.1998) (holding that sled manufacturer and sled retailer are in same chain), review denied (Minn. Apr. 14, 1998); Illinois Farmers Ins. Co. v. Brekke Fireplace Shoppe, Inc., 495 N.W.2d 216, 218-19 (Minn.App.1993) (noting that space heater manufacturer, importer, distributor, and retailer are in same chain). Because the jury in the present case was not asked, and did not determine, whether respondents were in the same chain of manufacture or distribution as other defendants, the trial court did not err in holding that Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 3, does not require entry of judgment in favor of appellants.
2. Aggregation of Fault
In the context of determining what party is more at fault, "aggregation of fault" means that "the negligence of plaintiff * * * should be compared to the combined negligence of the defendants rather than to the individual negligence attributed to each individual defendant." Krengel v. Midwest Automatic Photo, Inc., 295 Minn. 200, 210, 203 N.W.2d 841, 847 (1973). Minnesota law generally requires the plaintiff's fault to be compared against each defendant individually, and it does not permit aggregating fault of multiple defendants when applying the comparative fault statute, Minn.Stat. § 604.01, subd. 1. Cambern v. Sioux Tools, Inc., 323 N.W.2d 795, 798 (Minn.1982). The exception to this rule is that aggregation of fault is permissible when the defendants are involved in a joint enterprise. Krengel, 295 Minn. at 208-09, 203 N.W.2d at 846-47 (setting forth the exception and a test for determining a joint enterprise). Appellants admit Krengel is not applicable in the present case because respondents are not engaged in a joint enterprise.
But appellants argue that an extension of the law is necessary because policy considerations warrant aggregation of defendants' fault in asbestos cases. The trial court agreed in theory with appellants, stating that "basic fairness to both plaintiffs and defendants would best be achieved by allowing aggregation of fault in these [asbestos] cases." But the trial court noted that such an extension of law is "properly the province of the appellate courts or the legislature" and declined to rule in favor of appellants.
Because the defendants in this case were not involved in a joint enterprise, the trial court did not err in refusing to aggregate defendants' fault. And while we note the trial court's expertise in matters related to asbestos litigation and the persuasiveness of its arguments for allowing aggregation of fault in asbestos cases, this court cannot extend the doctrine of aggregation because "the task of extending existing law falls to the supreme court or the legislature, but it does not fall to this court." Tereault v. Palmer, 413 N.W.2d 283, 286 (Minn.App. 1987), review denied (Minn. Dec. 18, 1987).
DECISION
Despite the unique circumstances presented by asbestos-related cases, the trial court correctly held that Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 3, does not require entry of judgment in favor of appellants and that the rules of law governing comparative fault do not allow the aggregation of defendants' fault.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. I, § 10.
[**]  Retired judge of the district court, serving as judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. I, § 10.

=== CASE 2227819 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:45.782762+00 ===

904 N.E.2d 1266 (2009)
In re FAILURE TO SATISFY COSTS IN LAWYER DISCIPLINARY CASES OF Timothy A. DOYLE, et al, Respondents.
No. 94S00-0812-MS-629.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
April 27, 2009.
PUBLISHED ORDER DISMISSING ACTION WITH RESPECT TO TIMOTHY A. DOYLE
On December 5, 2008, the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission filed a "Petition for Suspension of Certain Attorneys for Failure to Satisfy Costs Ordered in Connection with Lawyer Discipline Proceedings," asserting each of the Respondents failed to pay costs assessed in a disciplinary action by the due date of the attorney's annual registration fee (October 1), in violation of the requirements of *1267 Indiana Admission and Discipline Rules 23(10)(f)(5), 23(16), and (2)(b).
On March 25, 2009, this Court entered an order suspending from the practice of law in Indiana several attorneys, including Timothy A. Doyle. The Commission now files a "Motion to Dismiss," reporting that Timothy A. Doyle has paid in full the amount owed in unpaid costs. Timothy A. Doyle also filed a "Petition for Reinstatement."
Being duly advised, the Court GRANTS the motion and petition, DISMISSES this action with respect to Timothy A. Doyle, and REINSTATES Timothy A. Doyle to the practice of law in Indiana.

=== CASE 9741590 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:41.011879+00 ===

JUSTICE WRIGHT delivered the opinion of the court: A jury found defendant Spencer Harris guilty of armed robbery (720 ILCS 5/18 — 2(a) (West 2002)). The court sentenced defendant to natural life imprisonment as a habitual criminal (720 ILCS 5/33B — 1 et seq. (West 2002)). Following his first appeal in People v. Harris, No. 3 — 03—0523 (2005) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23), this court issued a mandate to the trial court to consider defendant’s pro se post-trial motion. The trial court then allowed defense counsel to file an amended posttrial motion for new trial. Following an evidentiary hearing, the court denied defendant’s amended motion. Defendant appeals the denial of his amended motion for new trial on grounds that plain error occurred when the use of the stun belt denied defendant his constitutional right to testify. We reverse and remand this case to the trial court on this basis. BACKGROUND On July 11, 2002, the Will County grand jury indicted defendant for the offense of armed robbery, a Class X felony. The court appointed the public defender to represent defendant and the court set the case for a jury trial on January 13, 2003. Defendant asked the court to dismiss his public defender on the day of his jury trial on the grounds that his lawyer had not met with defendant or his witnesses prior to trial to properly prepare his defense. The court addressed defendant’s allegations in open court and denied defendant’s request. The jury trial began on the afternoon of January 14, 2003. The record shows that on January 16, 2003, defense counsel filed a “Motion in Limine” to prohibit the State from using defendant’s prior convictions to impeach the defendant in the event that he testified. The trial court granted the motion in limine at that time. Defendant did not testify at trial but offered other witnesses to testify on his behalf. The jury returned a guilty verdict on January 17, 2003. On February 6, 2003, prior to the sentencing hearing, defendant filed a pro se “Motion to Dismiss Counsel” raising ineffective assistance of counsel claims, including his lawyer’s failure to preserve defendant’s right to a speedy trial. Additionally in that motion, defendant requested the court to dismiss his current public defender and appoint new counsel to assist defendant in the preparation of a “Motion for a New Trial.” Included in his pro se motion to dismiss his appointed attorney, defendant also objected to the use of a stun belt during his trial, stating: “Petitioner was highly intimidated, having to wear a stun power pack wrapped around his waist or leg calf, threats of 50,000 volts of electricity entering his body if he made any sudden moves or outbursts in Court. He has eight (8) screws implanted into his neck, to support cervical discs of his spine, four (4) on either side of neck, due to automobile accident.” The trial court briefly addressed defendant’s pro se motion. The court denied the motion explaining that defendant “had a right to a free lawyer, but not his choice of a free lawyer.” On February 14, 2003, defendant’s previously appointed counsel filed a generic “Motion for New Trial” on behalf of defendant asserting that the State did not prove defendant guilty of the charge beyond a reasonable doubt. The court heard arguments on counsel’s post trial motion, dismissed that motion on April 9, 2003, and set the case for a sentencing hearing. At the sentencing hearing on June 25, 2003, the court revisited the issue of counsel’s performance previously raised in defendant’s pro se posttrial motion. Defendant told the court he had not consulted with his public defender since his jury trial on January 17, 2003. He advised the trial judge that he wanted to bring the issue of the violation of his “120 days speedy trial act” and ineffective assistance of counsel to the court’s attention. Appointed counsel, present for purposes of the sentencing hearing, told the court that he could not properly argue his own ineffectiveness on defendant’s behalf. The court determined that it had already ruled on the earlier motions and then sentenced defendant to natural life imprisonment pursuant to the habitual criminal statute. 720 ILCS 5/33B — 1 et seq. (West 2002). Defendant appealed the court’s decision to summarily deny his pro se posttrial motion. In People v. Harris, No. 3 — 03—0523 (2005) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23), this court determined that the trial court erred in failing to inquire into defendant’s pro se ineffective assistance of counsel claims. The mandate, issued by this court on September 13, 2005, reversed the judgment of the Will County circuit court and remanded the case to the trial court with instructions to conduct an inquiry into defendant’s pro se posttrial claim of ineffective assistance of counsel pursuant to People v. Moore, 207 Ill. 2d 68 (2003). Following remand, on November 22, 2005, the trial court appointed the public defender’s office to represent defendant. On February 6, 2006, defendant retained private counsel, Charles Bretz (Bretz), who requested transcripts from the trial and filed an “Amended Post Trial Motion” on July 18, 2006. The motion challenged the trial court’s decisions denying defendant’s multiple requests to remove the appointed public defender both before and after the jury trial. Additionally, the posttrial motion prepared by defendant’s private counsel requested a new trial based on allegations that the public defender was ineffective for failing to: (1) object to the use of the stun belt, (2) interview and call necessary witnesses, (3) introduce evidence corroborating defendant’s alibi that he could not have been present at the scene of the crime due to the timing of a deposit he made at a Chicago financial institution the same day, (4) subpoena medical records and offer testimony to contradict the State’s witnesses, and (5) file a motion to dismiss based on a speedy trial grounds. Private counsel also filed a brief in support of defendant’s amended posttrial motion and attached copies of transcripts from various proceedings for the trial judge’s consideration. The court conducted the hearing on the amended posttrial motion on May 17, 2007. Assistant public defender Timothy McGrath testified during the hearing on the amended posttrial motion. McGrath stated that he did not see the stun belt. Further, counsel testified that he did not know defendant was wearing the belt during the trial. He also denied any prior knowledge of the Will County sheriff department’s blanket policy that all felony defendants had to wear these devices during jury trials. According to McGrath, defendant did not tell him that jail personnel required him to wear the electronic security belt during the trial. Further, McGrath testified that he did not recall defendant advising him that defendant did not want to testify at trial because of the electronic security belt. McGrath did recall that the court granted his motion in limine that barred the State from impeaching defendant with his prior felony convictions and defendant declined to testify at the trial. Defendant, who was now 72 years old, also testified at this hearing following remand. He explained that the first day the jury trial began, in reference to a question regarding the electronic security devices, the “[djeputy sheriff that placed the stun belt around me advised me that I had to wear it otherwise I couldn’t have a trial. So I had to sign a consent form to wear it.” Defendant said he wore street clothes during the jury trial and the stun belt around his waist caused him to have a large, visible bulge on his back under his clothing. He also stated that the security device on his leg kept “falling down to the floor.” Defendant explained that he decided not to testify during his jury trial because he was afraid the electronic stun belt might “go off accidentally.” He stated he had eight screws in his neck and spine and he did not know how his body would react to it if the stun belt was turned on. Defendant testified that he told McGrath about the stun belt. Defendant stated he knew the trial court ordered that his prior criminal convictions could not be used against him if he testified, but elected not to testify due to the stun belt. On redirect examination, defendant reiterated he told his attorney about the stun belt and further told his attorney he wanted to testify but only without this security belt. Defendant agreed that he did not complain to court personnel that the stun belt was uncomfortable or that it frightened him. Defendant stated his attorney did not discuss the stun belt with the trial judge. When ruling on defendant’s amended posttrial motion on July 16, 2007, the judge stated: “The issue of the stun belt becomes simply this, no one in that trial, not the judge, not the trial lawyer, no one knew that the defendant was wearing a stun belt. And when it came to the assertion, the allegation during the course of this hearing, the defendant stated he didn’t testify because he was afraid of the stun belt or the embarrassment of wearing it. He was, according to the transcripts that I read and the testimony, offered three or four times the opportunity to testify by the original trial attorney, Judge Badger, and each time he declined without ever saying anything about the stun belt, nothing. How can an individual, how can the trial attorney possibly be responsible for ineffectiveness assistance of counsel when he doesn’t even know that that’s what’s going on?” The trial judge found defendant’s attorney’s performance at trial was not so deficient as to fall below an objective standard of reasonableness and, without a finding of deficient performance, defendant was not prejudiced or denied a fair trial. Accordingly, the court denied defendant’s amended posttrial claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. Defendant appeals his conviction on the grounds that plain error resulted from the use of the stun belt at trial because the belt prevented defendant from testifying in his own defense. ANALYSIS I. Scope of the Previous Mandate On appeal, defendant asserts it was plain error for defendant to be forced to wear an electronic security belt (stun belt) during his jury trial, absent a finding of a manifest need for the restraints, in violation of his due process rights. Further, defendant asserts that the reason he elected not to testify before the jury was due to this restraint. The State suggests defendant is attempting to broaden the scope of our original directive on remand. The September 13, 2005, mandate and order in People v. Harris, No. 3 — 03—0523 (2005) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23), directed the trial court to conduct an inquiry consistent with the Illinois Supreme Court’s ruling in Moore, 207 Ill. 2d 68, and consider the allegations set forth in defendant’s pro se motion. In his original February 6, 2003, motion, defendant wrote: “Petitioner was highly intimidated, having to wear a stun power pack wrapped around his waist or leg calf, threats of 50,000 volts of electricity entering his body if he made any sudden moves or outbursts in Court. He has eight (8) screws implanted into his neck, to support cervical discs of his spine, four (4) on either side of neck, due to automobile accident.” The motion included additional allegations of the trial attorney’s ineffectiveness. However, the procedural posture of the case changed after the mandate was issued. First, following remand, the trial court reviewed the pro se motion and appointed a new attorney to represent defendant. Later, defendant replaced his appointed counsel with private counsel. The court then allowed private counsel to file an “Amended Post Trial Motion” on July 18, 2006. The amended motion, filed by private counsel, referred to defendant’s pro se posttrial motion but provided additional details. While defendant’s original motion did not allege defendant suffered actual prejudice based on the ineffective counsel and resulting from the use of a stun belt, the amended motion prepared by private counsel did allege and describe actual prejudice. Specifically, the motion contained additional facts alleging: “[Paragraph] 6. That during the trial[,] the Defendant did not testify even though his criminal history would not have been disclosed to the jury because he was afraid that the jury would see the stun belt he was forced to wear during the trial. * * * [Paragraph] 24. That the introduction of any evidence of the Defendant’s prior criminal history was precluded by the trial judge in the Defendant’s Motion In Limine; however, the Defendant did not testify because of his fear of wearing the stun belt which he conveyed to McGrath.” The State proceeded to a hearing on defendant’s amended motion without objection. Thus, the trial court after remand first conducted the Moore inquiry, appointed counsel for defendant, and then considered the merits of the 2006 amended motion for new trial. These events were consistent with the directive from this court to consider and follow the guidelines set forth in Moore. See People v. Moore, 207 Ill. 2d 68 (2003). We reject the State’s assertion that defendant is broadening the issue now on appeal beyond the scope of the remand. Defendant is appealing the trial court’s ruling on his amended motion for new trial filed in 2006. The trial court properly followed the directive from this court and then went on to consider issues raised in the amended pleadings subsequently filed by new counsel following remand. This decision constituted a reasonable and efficient use of judicial resources. II. Trial Court’s Ruling Defendant’s brief states the trial judge should have found trial counsel ineffective, and then asserts the judge’s decision “should be reversed because, regardless of whether the defendant’s trial counsel knew about the electronic security belt, the use of the belt constituted plain error in this case because it prevented the defendant from testifying.” In response to defendant’s statement of the issue on appeal, the State frames the issue on appeal as follows: “The issue in this case is whether *** the trial court abused his discretion in finding that trial counsel was not ineffective in not objecting to the defendant wearing a stun belt that allegedly resulted in the defendant choosing not to testify.” Thus, each party to this appeal views the error in separate contexts. The State requests us to affirm the conviction because the trial judge properly found the defendant received effective assistance of counsel. To evaluate the State’s assertion that the trial court correctly denied the amended motion for new trial, we must consider the State’s argument using the familiar analysis set forth in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052 (1984). On the other hand, defendant requests us to conclude the use of the electronic stun belt at trial constituted plain error regardless of counsel’s ineffectiveness. We conclude that it is not necessary to consider the propriety of the court’s ruling using a Strickland analysis because plain error is dispositive of the outcome of this appeal. III. Plain Error We may consider whether plain error occurred even though defendant’s appointed attorney did not preserve the restraint issue for our review by including this issue in a posttrial motion. Supreme Court Rule 615(a) provides that “[pjlain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court.” 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a). The Illinois Supreme Court has found that failure to conduct a Boose hearing (People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261 (1977)) can, in some circumstances, constitute plain error and accordingly may be reviewed on appeal, although not challenged at the trial level. See People v. Allen, 222 Ill. 2d 340, 350 (2006). To constitute plain error, a “ ‘defendant must prove there was plain error and that the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of the defendant’s trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process.’ ” (Emphasis omitted.) Allen, 222 Ill. 2d at 352, quoting People v. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d 167, 187 (2005). Our supreme court observed, in People v. Allen, that the defendant had not demonstrated that “his presumption of innocence, ability to assist his counsel, or the dignity of the proceedings was compromised.” Allen, 222 Ill. 2d at 353. Thus, our supreme court has provided at least three factors to be considered when deciding whether a Boose violation, waived in the trial court, constitutes plain error to be considered on review. Focusing on the dignity of the proceedings, long ago, our supreme court set high standards by stating: “In the absence of exceptional circumstances, an accused has the right to stand trial ‘with the appearance, dignity, and self-respect of a free and innocent man.’ ” In re Staley, 67 Ill. 2d 33, 37 (1977), quoting Eaddy v. People, 115 Colo. 488, 492, 174 P.2d 717, 719 (1946). The immeasurable value of the presumption of innocence provides an accused with a reason to justifiably believe the outcome of a trial will not be prejudiced by the State, but will be controlled by a fair and neutral judge. Our supreme court has dictated that the trial court “ ‘must rigorously control its own courtroom procedures and, consistent with the mandates of due process, protect the rights of the parties and the public.’ ” Allen, 222 Ill. 2d at 349, quoting People v. Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d 1001, 1004 (2004). The supreme court has also provided a trial judge with the necessary tools to exercise independent judicial control over the use of restraints within the courtroom by dictating the necessity of a Boose hearing. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266-67. Each individual judge must direct the conditions of restraint to create an atmosphere in the courtroom that is both dignified by neutrality and secure to all concerned. It is undisputed the defendant wore a stun belt without the judge’s approval or a Boose hearing. Consequently, we conclude defendant has shown that his due process rights were violated when sheriffs personnel placed a stun belt on defendant without the hearing required by Boose and satisfies the first prong of the plain error doctrine. Next, we address the second prong of a plain error analysis to determine whether the error is so serious that defendant was denied a substantial right, and thus a fair trial. See Allen, 222 Ill. 2d at 353. We begin by considering the uncontradicted testimony the defense offered to the trial court following remand. First, defendant claimed his testimony would have provided the jury with alibi evidence and information about his physical condition that may have discredited the eyewitness accounts against him. Second, defendant testified at his posttrial motion hearing that he did not testify during his jury trial because he was afraid the electronic stun belt might “go off accidentally.” Finally, it was unrefuted that the trial court was not aware of the stun belts and did not make any findings, during the trial or during the posttrial hearing following remand in this case, that physical restraints were necessary. Defendant testified at his posttrial motion hearing that the deputy sheriff who placed the stun belt on him advised defendant that he “had to wear it otherwise [he] couldn’t have a trial” and made him sign a consent form. In spite of an opportunity to do so, the State did not offer any evidence refuting the defendant’s consent to wear the stun belt was obtained by jail staff as described. Illinois courts have determined that “the period between arraignment and trial is the most critical period of the proceedings during which the accused ‘requires the guiding hand of counsel.’ ” People v. Turner, 367 Ill. App. 3d 490, 497 (2006), quoting Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 69, 77 L. Ed. 158, 170, 53 S. Ct. 55, 64 (1932). Historically, the sixth amendment “guarantees the accused, at least after the initiation of formal charges, the right to rely on counsel as a ‘medium’ between him and the State and that ‘this guarantee includes the State’s affirmative obligation not to act in a manner that circumvents the protections accorded the accused by invoking this right.’ ” People v. Brown, 358 Ill. App. 3d 580, 591 (2005), quoting Maine v. Moulton, 474 U.S. 159, 176, 88 L. Ed. 2d 481, 496, 106 S. Ct. 477, 487 (1985). Neither the court nor counsel had full knowledge of the circumstances affecting defendant’s decision not to testify and did not address that issue when discussing the defendant’s decision to forego his right to testify. As a result, defendant’s concerns regarding the stun belt were not revealed, discussed, or addressed by court or counsel. Consequently, defendant did not testify. Conditioning a jury trial upon defendant’s written consent to wear a concealed electronic stun belt, without the court’s or counsel’s knowledge, challenges the integrity of the judicial process. We conclude that the error in this record is so serious it constituted plain error that denied defendant a substantial right, his right to testify at his own trial. Accordingly, we conclude defendant did not receive a fair trial. See Allen, 222 Ill. 2d at 353-54. CONCLUSION The ruling on defendant’s amended posttrial motion is reversed and the cause remanded to the Will County circuit court for a new trial. Reversed and remanded. LYTTON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741616 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:27.112383+00 ===

Gerrard, J.,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
I concur in the majority’s findings regarding respondent’s conduct and the imposition upon respondent of a 4-year suspension from the practice of law with the conditions for readmission stated therein. In addition, however, I would order respondent to submit to a psychiatric evaluation and further condition his reinstatement to the bar upon satisfactory compliance with all reasonable recommendations of that evaluation.
FACTUAL RECORD
The majority opinion persuasively sets forth several instances that not only demonstrate respondent’s unfitness for the practice of law, but also seem to evidence an apparent mental instability in respondent. For example, in a letter to the referee dated July 24, 1998, respondent indicated that he would not participate in the disciplinary hearing before the referee. Respondent stated:
I have come to the conclusion that perhaps they only intend to trap me somehow by twisting my words if I take the stand, since their evidence is scanty, at best. I think they may be desperate at this point to get me on the stand so they might twist the truth.
Furthermore, they also might try to use their influence to cause further legal difficulties for me. I am not naive enough to think that the NSBA exists in a vacuum in Lincoln. I know full well the depths of this organization as I was once part of the legal community when I lived there several years ago.
My reasons for this should be obvious. I have certain political and personal enemies at the Bar Association who have pursued me ever since I walked out the doors of law school, who already started to attack my character at that point. These enemies cannot prove, and in the past three *507years have failed to prove anything against me, though I know they would like to. I do not know why, though I have my suspicions. I will not state those suspicions at this time, and will not name the individuals I believe are responsible.. ..
Be advised that I will not appear in Lincoln for this hearing if I am expected to take the stand against myself. I will adamantly oppose any requests or attempts to place my life in jeopardy at the hands of false accusers.
The line of thought expressed in respondent’s letter to the referee was also manifested in his reply to the formal charges filed against him. In response to the formal charges, respondent alleged that the Counsel for Discipline “has abused his authority in a way that smacks of fascism” and that he was “hiding behind his cloak of immunity as if he is somehow above the law and can never be sued for this reckless conduct in attempting to destroy my life.” In asserting his “counterclaim,” respondent speculated, “I believe this may have something to do with my latest divorce and the fact that. . . my ex-wife, who has been married three times, is personal friends with several members of the NSBA. . . .”
Respondent later reaffirmed his counterclaim, stating:
Respondent requests an injunction against the NSBA and that they be Ordered to Cease and Desist from contacting Respondent in any manner. Respondent requests that any immunity for these parties be lifted so that private civil suit can be brought against them for damage to Respondent’s business in the amount of $2000.00 per month since October 1997 when the first investigation was started, and for other emotional distress experienced by Respondent because he cannot sleep at night and has experienced severe physical symptoms as a result of being served by the sheriff for charges from the NSBA relating to innocent acts. Respondent has developed an ulcer as a result of this harassment, and considers the actions of [the Counsel for Discipline’s office] extreme and OUTRAGEOUS, because they have evidence in their possession that would tend to exonerate Respondent, but that they *508choose to ignore it. Respondent asks that [the Counsel for Discipline] be removed from his position at the NSBA and made to answer for his outrageous conduct and reverse discrimination. Respondent feels that if he had been a recognized minority, like a black, Hispanic or Asian, this would have been dismissed at the outset.
(Emphasis in original.)
Respondent also sent several letters directly to the Counsel for Discipline. In a letter dated April 15, 1998, respondent stated, “As attorneys, we trust that your office will at least investigate matters that come before it, even though we know there are myriad interpretations and even many more instances of abuse and unethical conduct that teems like maggots in this society.” In the same letter, respondent also attempted to explain his failure to contact or respond to contacts from Einspahr, stating:
The reason I did not discuss these matters with Jan over the phone is because of my negative experiences with women, and especially her, in the past when I talked to her on the phone. ... I would not discuss anything with Jan Einspahr because in my opinion, her belligerent, deceptive nature and her inability and unwillingness to compromise, w[ere] dangerous to my personal and professional position. I was equally, if not more, unwilling to speak with her about the matter until the day of trial and I tend to be quite assertive myself (not aggressive) (I’m a lawyer after all!).
. . . [T]he last thing I needed, or ever need again, is to be accused falsely by a woman (or anyone). Her excuse to the judge was that I didn’t answer the phone. I see no requirement for this anywhere, as this is what a court of law is for, and that is why I filed a petition IN COURT and not a request for a phone discussion! Important matters should NEVER be discussed over the phone. Nothing is ever, or rarely, resolved that way. (I have since sent Jan Einspahr a letter stating my new office policy that I will not speak with her on the phone or take her calls EVER again. Every conversation with her is counterproductive, as all she ever wants to do is argue and twist the truth.... *509I have been married twice before, and this seems to be counterproductive, to say the least. [)]
(Emphasis in original.)
Respondent, in the same letter, explained his failure to appear at the pretrial conference in the Hofmann matter, stating, “I did not attend the pretrial conference, nor would I fall into any unsuspecting trap that was not recorded by a certified court reporter. THIS IS MY RIGHT to be heard AT TRIAL, and not to have to waste my time on unproductive pretrial conferences!!”
Later in the same letter, respondent wrote:
I am tired of the liars and losers getting protection when it is so undeserved. I have spent my life trying to prove that I do not have to be poor, only to regrettably find myself in a messed up society where all one has to do is claim to be a victim, or prove that they are poor, and the rest of us are supposed to cater to them and pay their way in life. The truth has a way of surfacing. This is the TRUTH .... Do what you wish with it. I have lived my life by it, and am sick and tired of pulling others around. I only hope that this stops somewhere and we stop protecting those who don’t deserve so much as the time of day! . ..
... I will take this to a higher court and do whatever I have to do, and name whomever I wish so that this all comes to a halt, if I do not get the result I not only deserve, but that I expect, even if I lose every step of the way, because .. . that is just par for the course for me.
I have lost because it is the victims and the sad-sacks that get their way and win, who are so undeserving of anything, yet receive all they ask for. The government and other organizations are so generous with MY time and MY tax dollars that I would be a fool to continue in this profession when I am double taxed and tread upon. I always find myself writing discourses on why the truth should prevail. I guess I must devote all my attention to this foolishness. I might be angry at those who fail to do the right thing, but I cannot bring myself to it, as I have learned that most people don’t have a clue as to what is right or wrong anymore! It is like being angry at a child who has not yet *510developed the ability to reason. How could I possibly be angry at a child?
In other correspondence addressed to the Counsel for Discipline, respondent attempted to make a complaint about the attorney who had complained about respondent’s conduct in the Hofmann case. Respondent speculated that the complainant “has something to gain by removing me from practice in Norfolk as he is in direct competition for my business and he has alot [sic] more overhead than I do.” Respondent also speculated that the complainant might not be “aware that I have appealed a decision ... to the Intermediate Court of Appeals and the BIG NAMES of this town do not like me because I actually might win.” After the Counsel for Discipline evidently informed respondent that his countercomplaint had no merit, respondent wrote:
If this is not resolved to my satisfaction, then I may press a civil lawsuit against any and all of you who are involved. If you think you are immune from such a suit, think again. The US Supreme Court case of Jones v. Clinton makes it quite clear that immunity from civil suit while serving in any position of authority is an illusion. A complaint against your office, as well as a possible lawsuit against YOU will follow if I don’t get a reasonable answer BASED ON NEBRASKA LAW AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS- NOT YOUR OPINION.
Finally, respondent advanced his theory about discrimination based on his status as a descendent of “Germans from Russia,” as noted in the majority opinion. Respondent concluded that discussion by writing:
I will make a list of the injustices heaped upon the Germans from Russia by this government, including your treatment of me! . . . You have gone too far in your discrimination against me by exhibiting clear favoritism to ... members of the majority class without giving my complaints and requests equal attention, brushing them aside without proper explanation or proper investigation. A new minority class has emerged and I demand recognition, attention and equal protection under the law!!
*511Respondent’s filings in this court also reflect upon his mental fitness to practice law. In his findings, the referee stated that respondent “remains generally unrepentant.” In his brief, respondent stated that “[r]epentance appears to be more in keeping with religious sentiments that have no place in a Court of law.” Respondent continued to argue in his brief:
Thus, for Attorney to repent indicates an improper impingement of religious ideas upon the state’s responsibility to decide cases without religious interference. . . . That repentance seems to be more of an Inquisitional idea that has no bearing on fact finding and truth and will not help to resolve these complex issues is obvious.
Even if a formal repentence [sic] were made, this case would remain controversial, and a decision would still need to be made by this Court. ... If this court finds wrongdoing and orders repentence [sic], Attorney is prepared to do so. Until that time, that Attorney should have earlier begged the forgiveness of anyone is absurd. It has never been Attorney’s attitude that he should grovel on his knees begging the forgiveness of others when they question his motives and principles, else he might have lived his entire life on his knees begging repentance.
Taken as a whole, respondent’s behavior reveals a current incapacity to practice law by reason of a probable mental illness or disability. Many of respondent’s written submissions demonstrate significant irrationality, and his tone shifts during the course of a single letter from defiance and hostility to outright despair. However, because nobody has specifically complained of respondent’s mental status and respondent has not raised a mental illness defense in his pro se pleadings, we are left with a record devoid of competent medical evidence that would assist us in the ultimate determination of reinstatement in this cause. Nonetheless, based on the record before us, we have the power and obligation to order a psychiatric evaluation as a condition of reinstatement. For the reasons that follow, I conclude that it would be appropriate to order such a psychiatric evaluation in this case.
*512APPROPRIATE REMEDY
Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 11(A) (rev. 1996) provides, in relevant part:
Upon a complaint that a member is incapacitated from continuing the practice of law by reason of physical or mental illness, or because of addiction to drugs or intoxicants, the appropriate Committee on Inquiiy, with the assistance of the Counsel for Discipline, may prepare, verify and submit to the Court an application for the temporary suspension of the member from the practice of law.
It is further provided in Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 11(C):
The Court shall take or direct, consistent with fundamental fairness and due process, such action as it deems necessary and proper to determine whether the member is incapacitated from continuing the practice of law, including a direction for an examination of the member by such qualified medical experts as the Court shall designate at the cost of the Respondent.
While neither the Committee on Inquiry nor the Counsel for Discipline requested a stay of the disciplinary proceedings in order to proceed under rule 11, see Newton v. State Bar of California, 33 Cal. 3d 480, 658 P.2d 735, 189 Cal. Rptr. 372, (1983) (disciplinary proceedings stayed in order to proceed under rule relating to mental illness), the rules of discipline relevant to this proceeding allow us to provide a remedy that will shed light on respondent’s future fitness to practice law and protect the public in doing so. Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 10(N) (rev. 1996) provides that after hearing, “The Court may disbar, suspend, censure or reprimand the Respondent, place him or her on probation, or take such other action as shall by the Court be deemed appropriate.” (Emphasis supplied.) The record before us supports the propriety of ordering a mental health evaluation as a condition of reinstatement.
The Supreme Court of Colorado faced a similar situation in People v. Fagan, 745 P.2d 249 (Colo. 1987) (en banc). In that case, the grievance committee recommended that the respondent undergo a psychiatric evaluation as a condition of reinstatement to practice, even though the initial complaints against *513the respondent were based on accusations of neglect and not mental illness. The court stated:
This recommendation is based on the respondent’s erratic behavior which we find was manifested, in part, by his conduct of the cases leading to the disciplinary action and, in part, by his conduct during the disciplinary proceedings. The hearing board observed that, at times, [respondent] performed normally and effectively but, at other times, he functioned without noticeable expression or affect and was rambling and disorganized. There also is evidence in the record that the respondent exhibited threatening conduct toward the deputy disciplinary prosecutor.
Id. at 253.
The court noted that proceedings in that case had not been initiated under the terms of the Colorado disciplinary rule that explicitly dealt with attorneys suffering from mental illness. Id. Nonetheless, the Colorado court found that it could order a mental evaluation as part of its disposition of the case. Id.
The court noted that an attorney suspended for more than 1 year was required, as part of a reinstatement proceeding, to demonstrate that the attorney met all the requirements set forth for initial admission to the Colorado bar, including a demonstration that the applicant is “ ‘mentally stable.’ ” Id. at 254. The court thus determined that the appropriate penalty in that case was a suspension of 1 year 1 day and that prior to reinstatement, the respondent was required to undergo a psychiatric evaluation in order to demonstrate his mental stability. Id. See, also, In the Matter of Wallace W. Rogers, Jr., 263 Ga. 314, 431 S.E.2d 366 (1993); Attorney Griev. Com’n v. Draper, 307 Md. 435, 514 A.2d 1212 (1986); In re M., 59 N.J. 304, 282 A.2d 37 (1971); In re Richard F. Crist, 258 Or. 88, 481 P.2d 74 (1971) (en banc).
Similarly, this court has held that an applicant for reinstatement to the bar must otherwise be eligible for admission to the bar as in an original application for admission. See State ex rel. Sorensen v. Goldman, 182 Neb. 126, 153 N.W.2d 451 (1967). The Nebraska rules relating to the admission of attorneys provide that an applicant must have the ability to conduct oneself reliably, communicate clearly, reason and analyze information, comply with deadlines, and conduct oneself professionally and *514in a manner that engenders respect for the law and the profession. See Neb. Ct. R. for Adm. of Attys. 3 (rev. 1996). It is specifically provided that further inquiry is required where there is evidence of mental or emotional instability. Neb. Ct. R. for Adm. of Attys. appendix A (rev. 1996).
Taken together, these requirements appropriately empower us to order a respondent to submit to a psychiatric evaluation as a condition of reinstatement to the bar. In order to meet the requirements for reinstatement, a respondent at that time must demonstrate his or her mental fitness for the practice of law, and we would be precluded, as in this case, from properly evaluating a respondent’s mental condition without competent psychiatric evidence on the subject. Compare State ex rel. NSBA v. Barnett, 243 Neb. 667, 501 N.W.2d 716 (1993) (respondent placed on conditional probation based on recommendation of psychiatric report).
We have set forth similar conditions in disciplinary cases where respondents suffered from substance abuse. In State ex rel. NSBA v. Miller, 225 Neb. 261, 404 N.W.2d 40 (1987), we suspended the respondent for 2 years, and conditioned his reinstatement after suspension on his participation in Alcoholics Anonymous; his abstention from alcohol and drugs; and his completion of courses in legal ethics, accounting, and office management procedures. Similarly, in State ex rel. Nebraska State Bar Assn. v. Erickson, 204 Neb. 692, 285 N.W.2d 105 (1979), this court suspended the respondent for 1 year and conditioned his reinstatement in part on an affirmative showing that he had controlled his problem of alcoholism. I see no reason to distinguish the case of an attorney that is likely suffering from a mental illness or disability from our established precedent regarding attorneys afflicted by substance abuse.
CONCLUSION
Therefore, while I concur in the imposition upon respondent of a 4-year suspension from the practice of law, I would, in addition to the conditions already imposed for readmission, also order respondent to submit to a psychiatric evaluation. Based upon the results of the psychiatric evaluation, this court should condition respondent’s reinstatement upon satisfactory compli*515anee with all reasonable recommendations in the evaluation, such that respondent demonstrates the level of character and fitness to practice law enumerated in Neb. Ct. R. for Adm. of Attys. 3(a) through (d) and (j) (rev. 1998).
Hendry, C.J., joins in this concurrence and dissent.

=== CASE 9741617 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:29.159255+00 ===

JUSTICE WOLFSON delivered the opinion of the court: The amended Illinois Supreme Court Rule 431(b) went into effect on May 1, 2007. Jury selection in the murder case against James Anderson began three weeks later, on May 21, 2007. The jury found the defendant guilty of first degree murder and aggravated battery with a firearm. The defendant raises several issues on appeal, but we focus on the question of whether the trial court complied with Rule 431(b) (111. S. Ct. R. 431(b) (eff. May 1, 2007)) and, if not, whether the defendant’s convictions should be reversed for another trial. We reverse and remand. FACTS On May 3, 2003, defendant agreed to drive the codefendants, Christopher Washington and Sheldon Smith, to a neighborhood where the codefendants shot three individuals. Two of the victims were injured and one died. According to defendant, the codefendants merely asked him to drive them to obtain marijuana. Defendant testified he did not know the codefendants intended to shoot the victims. Defendant said he continued to follow the codefendants’ instructions as they chose their targets because he feared for his safety. Defendant never attempted to withdraw himself from the scene or report the offenses. Codefendant Washington, who pled guilty to his involvement in the offenses and was sentenced to 26 years’ imprisonment, testified he was in a car around midnight on the date in question looking to avenge a fellow gang member’s death. Washington did not know the driver of the car. Washington was armed. He shot three people, in different locations. He said he shot all the victims, but he did not instruct the driver to slow the car in order to do so. The police chased the car, and Washington and the driver left it to run away. Washington was caught and arrested. Although he originally named two rival gang members, Washington eventually implicated defendant and codefendant Smith. Washington said at trial the police forced him to name defendant and codefendant Smith because of their criminal backgrounds. Washington had agreed to videotape his statement. It was introduced into evidence. At trial, he said most of the videotaped statement was untrue. In the videotape, Washington said he, defendant, and Smith were selected by their gang to shoot rival gang members in exchange for drugs and money. Defendant drove the car. Defendant and Smith were armed with handguns and all three shot at different individuals throughout the neighborhood. Washington said he was treated well by the police. At trial, he testified he was “jacked” by the police. Detective John Otto testified he and Assistant State’s Attorney (ASA) William Merritt interviewed defendant on January 30, 2004. Otto advised defendant of his Miranda rights, which defendant waived. Defendant admitted he drove the vehicle involved in the shootings while Smith and Washington rode as passengers. When Otto confronted defendant with inconsistencies between his confession and Washington’s statement, defendant drew a diagram of the shootings as he remembered them. Defendant said he drove the vehicle during each shooting. Defendant never told Otto he was threatened at gunpoint. ASA Merritt’s testimony was consistent with that of Detective Otto, adding defendant said he was the driver, but not a shooter. Defendant consented to have his confession videotaped. The videotape was admitted as evidence. The videotaped statement was consistent with defendant’s oral statement, adding he was in shock after the first shooting, but he continued driving as told. He did not say he was threatened at gunpoint. Defendant testified he did not know Washington and Smith were armed when he agreed to drive them to obtain marijuana. While driving, Washington first instructed defendant to slow down near two men standing on a corner. Washington rolled down the window, asked the men for marijuana, then shot at them. Defendant was shocked, but he was instructed to drive away. He complied. On the way to the next location, Washington and Smith told defendant to slow the car when they saw another individual. Smith asked that individual whether he had marijuana and whether he was a rival gang member. The individual responded no to both questions. Smith shot him. Defendant then drove to the next location as instructed. He was told to stop when they reached a man in an alley. Washington asked the man about marijuana. Then he shot him. On cross-examination, defendant said he did not want to continue driving the car, but he was ordered to at gunpoint. Defendant admitted he did not include that fact in his videotaped statement; however, he said it to the detectives before he gave the videotaped statement. Anderson testified he drove to the second location as instructed because he thought he would be shot if he disagreed. Defendant said he stopped the car during the second shooting, but did not attempt to exit because he was afraid. Defendant denied knowing Washington and Smith intended to shoot the man in the alley, but admitted he drove the car around the block to find the man again. When unsuccessful, Smith and Washington exited the car and approached another individual. Defendant was instructed to wait in the car and he complied. Smith and Washington shot that individual, then told defendant to drive away. Defendant tried to slow the car when the police approached, but was instructed to turn on a dead-end road and speed up. He complied and did not exit the car to run away until instructed. Defendant later moved to Du Page County. Defendant denied evading the police, but admitted he never reported the offenses because he feared for his and his family’s safety. The jury found defendant not guilty of aggravated battery with a firearm of the first victim, but guilty of aggravated battery with a firearm of the second victim and first degree murder of the third victim. Both convictions were based on the theory of accountability. Defendant was sentenced to consecutive terms of 35 years’ imprisonment for the first degree murder count and 10 years’ imprisonment for the aggravated battery with a firearm count. This timely appeal followed. DECISION I. Rule 431(b) We first turn to the issue of whether the court complied with the requirements of Rule 431(b) and, if not, whether lack of compliance may be considered harmless error. Defendant did not make a Rule 431(b) objection. See People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186, 522 N.E.2d 1124 (1988) (in order to preserve an error for appellate review, the defendant must object at trial and include the alleged error in a posttrial motion). The State contends the defendant forfeited the Rule 431(b) issue by failing to make a timely objection and by omitting the issue from his posttrial motion. We recognize, as suggested by the defendant, a “less rigid application of the waiver rule” is applied when the trial court’s conduct is at the center of the claimed error. People v. Nevitt, 135 Ill. 2d 423, 455, 553 N.E.2d 368 (1990); People v. Stevens, 338 Ill. App. 3d 806, 810, 790 N.E.2d 52 (2003). We have chosen to address the defendant’s claim that plain error occurred. We focus our attention on the questioning of the first panel, from which eight jurors were selected. The plain error doctrine allows us to review an issue affecting substantial rights despite forfeiture in either of two circumstances: “First, where the evidence in a case is so closely balanced that the jury’s guilty verdict may have resulted from the error and not the evidence, a reviewing court may consider a forfeited error in order to preclude an argument that an innocent man was wrongly convicted. [Citation.] Second, where the error is so serious that [a] defendant was denied a substantial right, and thus a fair trial, a reviewing court may consider a forfeited error in order to preserve the integrity of the judicial process.” People v. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d 167, 178-79, 830 N.E.2d 467 (2005). See People v. Gilbert, 379 Ill. App. 3d 106, 109, 882 N.E.2d 1140 (2008) (alleged Zehr violation addressed under plain error exception as the claimed error “is of such a magnitude as to deny him a fair and impartial trial”). It is the second Herron circumstance that we consider in this case. Defendant claims the trial court’s failure to comply with Rule 431(b) denied him basic guarantees for obtaining a fair and impartial jury. The right to an impartial jury “is so fundamental to due process that any infringement of that right requires reversal by a reviewing court.” People v. Boston, 271 Ill. App. 3d 358, 360, 648 N.E.2d 1002 (1995). The court conducted voir dire and empaneled the jury. The court first told the entire group of prospective jurors: “The charges in this case, ladies and gentlemen, come by way of a Cook County Grand Jury indictment. They are not any evidence of guilt against [defendant]. He is presumed innocent of the charges and the State has the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.” The first panel of prospective jurors was then brought forward. The judge said: “As I indicated earlier, the defendant is presumed innocent of the charges. The State has the burden of proving the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant is not required to prove his innocence, nor is he required to testify or call witnesses on his own behalf. Should the State meet their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody seated in the jury box who could not or would not go into the jury room with your fellow jurors and the law that governs this case as I give it to you and sign a verdict form of guilty? Anybody who could not or would not do that for any reason? (No audible response.) No response. Should the State fail to meet their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody seated in the jury box who could not or would not go into the jury room with your fellow jurors and the law that governs this case as I give it to you and sign a verdict form of not guilty? (No audible response.) No response.” Eight jury members were selected from this panel. After the eight jury members were selected, they were sent to the jury room and were not present for the voir dire of the remaining panels. When the second panel of potential jurors was brought forward, the judge said: “Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to thank you for your time and patience. As I indicated earlier, the charges against the defendant come by way of a Grand Jury indictment. They are not any evidence against the defendant. The defendant is presumed innocent of the charges against him and the State has the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. He is not required to call witnesses on his own behalf or testify on his own behalf. Is there anybody who has any qualms or problems with those propositions of law? (No audible response.) No response. Should the State meet their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody seated in the jury box who could not or would not go into the jury room with your fellow jurors and follow the law that governs this case as I give it to you and sign a verdict form of guilty? Anybody who could not or would not do that for any reason? (No audible response.) No response. Should the State fail to meet their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody seated in the jury box who could not or would not go into the jury room with your fellow jurors and the law that governs this case as I give it to you and sign the verdict form of not guilty? (No audible response.) No response.” Four jurors were selected to serve from this panel and one juror was selected as an alternate. When the court called the third panel, the judge said: “Again, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to thank you for your time and patience. As indicated in my opening remarks, the defendant is presumed innocent of the charges against him and the State has the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Is there anyone who has any problems or qualms with that proposition of law? (No audible response.) No response. The defendant is not required to prove his innocence. He is not required to call witnesses or testify on his own behalf. If the State meets their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody seated in the jury box who could not or would not go into the jury room with your fellow jurors and the law that governs this case as I give it to you and sign a verdict form of guilty? Anybody who would not or could not do that? (No audible response.) No response. If the State should fail to meet their burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, is there anybody who could not or would not follow the law and sign a verdict form of not guilty. (No audible response.) No response.” One alternate juror was selected from this panel. The defense does not challenge the trial court’s questioning of the second and third juror panels. Nor do we. The canons of statutory construction apply to supreme court rules. Robidoux v. Oliphant, 201 Ill. 2d 324, 332, 775 N.E.2d 987 (2002). Our primary goal is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the drafters by relying on the plain and ordinary language of the rule. Robidoux, 201 Ill. 2d at 332. The supreme court has said: “The rules of court we have promulgated are not aspirational. They are not suggestions. They have the force of law, and the presumption must be that they will be obeyed and enforced as written.” Bright v. Dicke, 166 Ill. 2d 204, 210, 652 N.E.2d 275 (1995). Construction of supreme court rules is a question of law, which we review de novo. Robidoux, 201 Ill. 2d at 332.  Rule 431(b), as amended effective May 1, 2007, provides: “The court shall ask each potential juror, individually or in a group, whether that juror understands and accepts the following principles: (1) that the defendant is presumed innocent of the charge(s) against him or her; (2) that before a defendant can be convicted the State must prove the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt; (3) that the defendant is not required to offer any evidence on his or her own behalf; and (4) that the defendant’s failure to testify cannot be held against him or her; however, no inquiry of a prospective juror shall be made into the defendant’s failure to testify when the defendant objects. The court’s method of inquiry shall provide each juror an opportunity to respond to specific questions concerning the principles set out in this section.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. S. Ct. R. 431(b) (eff. May 1, 2007).  Before the 2007 amendment, the court was required to admonish the jurors and ascertain whether they understood and accepted the enumerated principles announced in People v. Zehr, 103 Ill. 2d 472, 469 N.E.2d 1062 (1984), “[i]f requested by the defendant.” 177 Ill. 2d R. 431(b). Before that, in 1997, Rule 431 was amended to ensure compliance with the Zehr principles by changing the court’s voir dire requirements from discretionary to compulsory by amending the word “may” to “shall.” See People v. O’Brien, 197 Ill. 2d 88, 93, 754 N.E.2d 327 (2001) (use of the word “shall” is “construed as a clear expression of legislative intent to impose a mandatory obligation”). It is axiomatic that amendments to rules are designed to serve some purpose. In re Application of the County Collector, 356 Ill. App. 3d 668, 670, 826 N.E.2d 951 (2005). We must construe the rule consistent with the purpose of the amendments, relying on the presumption that the supreme court intended to change the law in 1997 and 2007. See In re Application of the County Collector, 356 Ill. App. 3d at 670. The clear language of Rule 431(b) requires the court to ensure jurors are qualified to know, understand, and accept the enumerated principles and are provided with an opportunity to respond. See Zehr, 103 Ill. 2d at 477. The rule “seeks to end the practice where the judge makes a broad statement of the applicable law followed by a general question concerning the juror’s willingness to follow the law.” 177 Ill. 2d R. 431, Committee Comments, at lxxix. When the 2007 amendment deleted the language “[i]f requested by the defendant,” the rule charged trial courts with an affirmative sua sponte duty to ask potential jurors whether they understand and accept the Zehr principles in each and every case. People v. Stump, 385 Ill. App. 3d 515, 520, 896 N.E.2d 904 (2008). Moreover, the court must provide each juror with “an opportunity to respond to” the specific Zehr principles. We find Rule 431(b) was amended to send a clear message to trial and appellate courts: it is the courts’ responsibility to enforce the rules as written. Compliance with Rule 431(b) is a judicial duty. The incomplete voir dire conducted in this case is the practice the amended rule seeks to end. See 177 Ill. 2d R. 431, Committee Comments. With regard to the first panel of prospective jurors, from which eight were selected, the court provided three of the four Zehr principles in narrative form, not in questions. Asking the first panel members as a group whether they would sign the appropriate verdict form if the State had or had not met its burden of proof was a “general question concerning the juror’s willingness to follow the law.” 177 Ill. 2d R. 431, Committee Comments, at lxxix. The court did not determine whether the majority of empaneled jurors understood and accepted the Zehr principles. The court addressed those principles but did not satisfy the stringent requirements of Rule 431(b). The questions set out in Rule 431(b) are “essential to the qualifications of jurors in a criminal case.” Zehr, 103 Ill. 2d at 477. Instructing the jury properly at the end of trial does not address the question of whether a fair and impartial jury has been selected. The supreme court said: “If a juror has a prejudice against any of these basic guarantees, an instruction given at the end of the trial will have little curative effect.” Zehr, 103 Ill. 2d at 477. See People v. Starks, 169 Ill. App. 3d 588, 596, 523 N.E.2d 983 (1988) (“Zehr teaches that admonitions and instructions are no substitute for interrogation” (emphasis added)). The decisions cited by the State do not apply to this case. All of them involved the preamendment versions of Rule 431(b). See People v. Yarbor, 383 Ill. App. 3d 676, 686, 889 N.E.2d 1225 (2008); People v. Williams, 368 Ill. App. 3d 616, 623, 858 N.E.2d 606 (2006); People v. Benford, 349 Ill. App. 3d 721, 733, 812 N.E.2d 714 (2004). We have found one case decided under the amended version of Rule 431(b). In Stump, the Fourth District held the trial court’s error in failing to fully comply with the rule was harmless where each juror was “addressed” with all of the Zehr principles “at some point during voir dire” either by the judge or by defense counsel, and the evidence against defendant was overwhelming. Stump, 385 Ill. App. 3d at 522. Stump is distinguishable from this case because, here, neither defense counsel nor the court “addressed” each juror with all four of the Zehr principles during voir dire. Moreover, despite acknowledging that “the mandatory nature of the rule” signified presumptive prejudicial error, the Stump court used a harmless error analysis. Stump, 385 Ill. App. 3d at 520-21. We decline to do so. We recognize the evidence against the defendant was substantial. But the weight of the evidence is not something we are obliged to consider. We have found the plain error described in the second circumstance of the Herron test. That is, the Rule 431(b) error “is so serious that [a] defendant was denied a substantial right, and thus a fair trial.” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 178-79. Once having said that, there is no need to inquire into the harmfulness of the error or the measure of prejudice incurred by the defendant. Plain error is reversible error. See People v. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d 1, 17, 660 N.E.2d 901 (1995). There is no need for further inquiry. II. Remaining Contentions Because of our disposition of the Rule 431(b) issue, we see no need to consider defendant’s other contentions. CONCLUSION We reverse the judgment of the trial court and remand this case for a new trial. Reversed and remanded. HALL, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741618 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:29.163452+00 ===

JUSTICE GARCIA, specially concurring: I add two reasons to find plain error and reverse. First, while the Stump court concluded that the Zehr principles were substantially “addressed” before the prospective jurors, I find the analysis, guided by the holding in People v. Houston, 226 Ill. 2d 135, 874 N.E.2d 23 (2007), regarding compliance fails to consider the broader policy implications embodied in amended Rule 431(b). Stump, 385 Ill. App. 3d at 520 (“we find guidance in our supreme court’s decision in *** Houston, *** where the court failed to give full effect to the principle of strict compliance with the mandatory nature of the Illinois Supreme Court rules” regarding the recording of jury selection (emphasis in original)). See In re Marriage of Fotsch, 139 Ill. App. 3d 83, 87, 487 N.E.2d 84 (1985) (policy considerations expressed in similar case not present in instant case, thus prior case not controlling). In Houston, when asked whether he wanted a court reporter present during voir dire, defense counsel stated, “I don’t need it recorded.” The prosecutor immediately followed with, “People waive.” Houston, 226 Ill. 2d at 138. Houston is an ineffective assistance of counsel case, where a remand was ordered to assess the prejudice prong in the context of a Batson claim. If not for a Batson claim, Houston might well have been addressed as a stipulation case. See Smith v. Freeman, 232 Ill. 2d 218, 228 (2009) (individuals may waive “substantive rules of law, statutory rights and even constitutional rights” through counsel’s stipulation or agreement). Of course, the rule involved in Houston, mandating the recording of jury selection, did not place the decision to have a court reporter present expressly on the trial judge. I read amended Rule 431(b) before us to embody the public policy in Illinois to ensure the selection of fair and unbiased jurors in criminal cases. Prior to the amendment, the burden fell solely on the defendant to request the voir dire questioning now mandated by the amended rule. The amended rule now places the legal obligation that fair and unbiased jurors are selected directly on the shoulders of the trial judge. Cf. United States v. Rowe, 106 F.3d 1226, 1230 (5th Cir. 1997) (“trial court’s actions *** cut off the vital flow of information from venire to court” during voir dire process warranting reversal). Under the amended rule, she must “ask each potential juror, individually or in a group, whether that juror understands and accepts” the principles of certain basic constitutional guarantees. Ill. S. Ct. R. 431(b) (eff. May 1, 2007). When a judge fails to comply with her obligations set out in amended Rule 431(b) to ensure the right of a defendant to a trial before fair and impartial jurors, our judicial system falls short and, I submit, the integrity of the judicial process is impacted. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 178-79. Second, to the extent the rule in its current form places any burden on the defense to timely point out a trial judge’s failure to abide by the rule, the rule places that same burden on the prosecution. The prosecution should not be heard to claim forfeiture by the defendant when the prosecution itself failed to correct the trial judge’s omission. The prosecutor, as a representative of the people of Illinois, is there to ensure that those subject to our criminal justice system receive justice, as reflected in our rules and laws. As a representative of the people, the prosecution must know the rules and laws and do its part to ensure that the rules and laws are followed. When a trial judge falls short on what amended Rule 431(b) requires, the prosecutor cannot sit mute. The prosecutor must have an incentive to speak up.

=== CASE 9741591 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:41.01767+00 ===

JUSTICE HOLDRIDGE, dissenting: As the majority points out, defendant’s trial judge never knew that he wore a stun belt during trial. Therein lies the problem. In People v. Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d 1001 (2004), the evidence revealed that the Will County sheriff had a policy of requiring all felony defendants to wear an electronic security belt in the courtroom. The trial judge deferred to this policy, stating that “he did not want to disrupt the sheriff’s standard operating procedure.” Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1003. Although the instant judge did not knowingly defer to the sheriff’s policy, the same concerns are triggered when law enforcement personnel require a defendant to wear an electronic security belt without the judge’s knowledge. Our supreme court has declared that trial judges must control their own courtroom procedures in regards to security belts. See People v. Allen, 222 Ill. 2d 340 (2006). Such control involves conducting a hearing under People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261 (1977). As I have stated elsewhere (see People v. Johnson, 356 Ill. App. 3d 208 (2005); People v. Johnson, 387 Ill. App. 3d 768, 773 (2009) (Hold-ridge, J., dissenting)), I believe the appropriate remedy in cases of this type is to remand for a retrospective Boose hearing. This approach affords judges the opportunity to fix improprieties, where possible, without undoing an entire trial. Accordingly, I disagree with the majority’s decision to reverse defendant’s conviction outright and remand for a new trial. I would remand with instructions for the circuit court to conduct a hearing and determine whether it was necessary, under the factors outlined in Boose, for this defendant to wear an electronic security belt at trial.

=== CASE 9741592 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:42.010711+00 ===

OPINION
HARTEN, Judge
A representative of the Commissioner of Economic Security reviewed sua sponte and reversed the decision of a reemployment insurance judge that relator did not commit misconduct and was therefore entitled to reemployment insurance benefits. Because we hold that relator did commit misconduct within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 6 (1998), we affirm.
FACTS
Relator Abdulahi Isse was employed by respondent Alamo Rent-a-Car, Inc., to clean cars. In January 1998, while relator was on an office phone making a medical appointment for his wife, a co-worker approached relator and asked him to return to work because there were cars to clean. Relator responded with an obscenity. After relator finished the phone call, he and the co-worker began arguing. An altercation ensued; relator grabbed the co-worker by the shirt and pushed him against a wall. A third employee separated them. Prior to this incident, there had been no problems with relator’s employment. Relator was suspended and later dis*139charged for grabbing and pushing the coworker.
Relator then sought reemployment insurance benefits. A Department of Economic Security claims representative held that relator had been discharged for reasons other than misconduct and was entitled to benefits. The employer appealed, and a reemployment insurance judge affirmed, relying on Hamilton v. International Dairy Queen, Inc. 346 N.W.2d 138 (Minn.1984), and Oman v. Daig Corp., 375 N.W.2d 533 (Minn.App.1985), to hold that neither an isolated use of strong language nor an isolated confrontation with another employee constitutes misconduct.
Hamilton relies on a contemporaneously filed decision, Windsperger v. Broadway Liquor Outlet, 346 N.W.2d 142 (Minn.1984), which quoted the definition of misconduct adopted in Tilseth v. Midwest Lumber Co., 295 Minn. 372, 204 N.W.2d 644 (1973). That definition excludes from misconduct “inad-vertencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances.” Windsperger, 346 N.W.2d at 144 (quoting Tilseth, 295 Minn. at 374, 375, 204 N.W.2d at 646). Windsperger holds “that an isolated hotheaded incident which does not interfere with the employer’s business is not misconduct * * * justifying a denial of unemployment compensation benefits.” Id. at 145. Oman reiterates the holding:
Applying the Tilseth standard, the supreme court [in Windsperger ] has also held that “an isolated hotheaded incident which does not interfere with the employer’s business is not misconduct * * * justifying a denial of unemployment compensation benefits.”
375 N.W.2d at 536 (quoting Windsperger, 346 N.W.2d at 145).
The reemployment insurance judge’s decision was reviewed sua sponte by a commissioner’s representative, who reversed on the ground that the new statutory definition of misconduct effective July 1, 1997, did not exclude from misconduct isolated outbursts such as relator’s. Relator appeals from the denial of benefits.
ISSUE
Is an isolated workplace outburst during which an employee angrily grabs and pushes a co-worker misconduct within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 6 (1998)?
ANALYSIS
The determination that an employee committed misconduct is a mixed question of fact and law. A reviewing court will affirm if the findings of fact are “not without support in the evidence” and if the conclusion on those facts is not contrary to the statutory mandate. Colburn v. Pine Portage Madden Bros., 346 N.W.2d 159, 161 (Minn.1984).
The commissioner’s representative based the findings that relator uttered an obscenity and grabbed and pushed a co-worker on the testimony of an employee who witnessed the altercation and the statement of the employee who separated relator and the co-worker, noting that both sources were persuasive. The commissioner’s representative’s findings are manifestly not without support in the evidence and must be affirmed.
Nor is the conclusion on those facts contrary to the statutory mandate. The conclusion is based on Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 6 (1998):
Misconduct is intentional conduct showing a disregard of:
(1) the employer’s interest;
(2) the standards of behavior that an employer has the right to expect of the employee; or
(3) the employee’s duties and obligations to the employer.
The commissioner’s representative found that grabbing and shoving another employee “unquestionably violates the standard of behavior the employer had a right to expect of [relator].”
The recently enacted statutory definition of misconduct closely resembles the common-law definition adopted in Tilseth, 295 Minn. 372, 204 N.W.2d 644 (1973). The statute, however, excludes from misconduct only “inefficiency, inadvertence, simple unsatisfactory conduct, or poor performance as a result of inability or incapacity.” Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 6. Tilseth excluded “mere *140inefficiency, unsatisfactory conduct, failure in good performance as the result of inability or incapacity, inadvertencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances * * 295 Minn. at 374-75, 204 N.W.2d at 646, and this “isolated instances” language was the basis for the holding that “an isolated hotheaded incident which does not interfere with the employer’s business is not misconduct * * *.” Windsperger, 346 N.W.2d at 145.1
We are not free to supply an “isolated instances” exception to the statutory definition of misconduct.
[W]hen a statutory question involves the failure of expression rather than the ambiguity of expression, this court is not free to substitute amendment for construction and thereby supply the omissions of the legislature. * * * Moreover, this court is prohibited from adding words to a statute and cannot supply what the legislature either purposely omitted or inadvertently overlooked.
Tracy State Bank v. Tracy-Garvin Coop., 573 N.W.2d 393, 395 (Minn.App.1998) (citations omitted). Because the phrase the legislature omitted was the basis for considering “hotheaded incidents” as an exception to misconduct, that exception is no longer Minnesota law.2
DECISION
The commissioner’s representative correctly concluded that relator’s conduct fell within the statutory definition of misconduct, i.e., disregard of “the standards of behavior that an employer has the right to expect of the employee,” and that relator was not entitled to benefits.
Affirmed.
. See also McCoy v. Spicer Off-Highway Axle Div., 412 N.W.2d 24, 27 (Minn.App.1987) (throwing hammer at the floor during dispute with supervisor did not disqualify); Norman v. Rosemount, Inc. 383 N.W.2d 443, 444 (Minn.App.1986) (throwing crumpled piece of paper at supervisor and walking away did not disqualify) review denied (Minn. May 22, 1986); Oman, 375 N.W.2d at 535 (isolated confrontation in which claimant threw a small plastic object at co-worker, pushed co-worker’s chair and pulled co-worker’s cap did not disqualify). But see McGowan v. Executive Express Transp. Enters., 420 N.W.2d 592, 595 (Minn.1988) ("We believe that [Windsperger] reachfes] into the outer limits of eligibility. We decline to liberalize further the granting of benefits contained in [it.]”)
. We note that caselaw interpreting those elements of the Tilseth definition that are reflected in the statute remains good law.

=== CASE 9741593 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:42.015796+00 ===

RANDALL, Judge
(concurring specially).
I concur in the result, but write separately to clear up what may have been a misunderstanding by the commissioner’s representative on the state of the law in defining disqualifying “misconduct.”
The reemployment insurance judge first determined that relator Isse did not commit misconduct and, thus, was entitled to reemployment benefits. The commissioner’s representative who ordered a review, sua sponte, of the reemployment insurance judge’s decisions stated in part:
We note the reemployment insurance judge referenced some Court of Appeals’ decisions regarding common law definition of misconduct annunciated by the Supreme Court in Tilseth v. Midwest Lumber Co., 295 Minn. 372, 204 N.W.2d 644 (1973). We note, however, that the Minnesota Legislature adopted the statutory definition of misconduct effective July 1, 1997. This abrogated the common law definition and therefore the Court of Appeals’ decisions in regard to that common law definition are no longer the law in Minnesota. The statutory definition of misconduct controls.
First of all I note, and the commissioner’s attorney at oral argument agreed, that the commissioner’s representative, if writing accurately, should have said:
This abrogated the common law definition, and, therefore, the Minnesota Supreme Court’s decisions in regards to that common law definition are no longer the law in Minnesota.
The Minnesota Court of Appeals did not write Tilseth. The Minnesota Supreme Court did, and all this court did was “rean-nunciate” the definition of misconduct “an-nunciated by the supreme court.”
*141Secondly, I take issue with the commissioner’s flat statement that Tilseth is no longer the law in Minnesota. Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 6 (1998), defines “misconduct” as:
Misconduct is intentional conduct showing a disregard of:
(1) the employer’s interest;
(2) the standards of behavior that an employer has the right to expect of the employee; or
(3) the employee’s duties and obligations to the employer. Misconduct also includes negligent conduct by an employee demonstrating a substantial lack of concern for the employment. Inefficiency, inadvertence, simple unsatisfactory conduct, or poor performance as a result of inability or incapacity are not misconduct.
Before this statute was enacted, the Tilseth definition of misconduct, in relevant part, was
conduct evincing such wilful or wanton disregard of an employer’s interests as is found in deliberate violations or disregard of standards of behavior which the employer has the right to expect of his employee, or in carelessness or negligence of such degree or recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interests or of the employee’s duties and obligations to his employer. On the other hand mere inefficiency, unsatisfactory conduct, failure in good performance as the result of inability or incapacity, inadvertencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances, or good-faith errors in judgment or discretion are not to be deemed “misconduct.”
McGowan v. Executive Express Transp. Enters., Inc., 420 N.W.2d 592, 595 (Minn.1988) (quoting Tilseth v. Midwest Lumber, 295 Minn. 372, 374-75, 204 N.W.2d 644, 646 (1973) (quotation omitted)).
It is obvious that the statute tracked Til-seth with only minor variations. For instance, the statute uses the term “intentional conduct” and Tilseth uses the term “wilful or wanton disregard.” In other areas the statute tracks Tilseth almost word-for-word. Thus, if perhaps 80% to 90% of Tilseth was codified in the statute at issue, it can hardly be said that Tilseth and its progeny are no longer good law.
Tilseth did contain the phrase “inadverten-cies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances * * * are not to be deemed ‘misconduct.’ ” Tilseth, 295 Minn. at 375, 204 N.W.2d at 646. That part of Tilseth is not in the statute, but there is nothing affirmative in the statute to specifically exclude inadver-tencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances from becoming a defense by the employee to a charge of disqualifying misconduct by the employer. In fact, the statute seems to indicate otherwise, meaning that the concept has been retained. The statute specifically states that “[inefficiency, inadvertence, and simple unsatisfactory conduct” are the types of poor performance that (although they might get you fired) do not disqualify an employee from receiving reemployment benefits. And logic dictates that an inadvertent act or an act of ordinary negligence by an employee on one occasion (the isolated instance) fits easily within the statute’s definition of “non-misconduct,” e.g., inefficiency or inadvertence or simple unsatisfactory conduct.
On the other hand, if the inefficiency, inadvertence, or simple unsatisfactory conduct continues for a length of time, it might well turn into intentional disqualifying misconduct as defined in the statute. But exactly the same is true, and was true, under Tilseth. If you have unsatisfactory conduct, or inadvertent conduct, or ordinary negligent conduct over a sustained period of time, then, of course, that would not be conduct in an “isolated instance.” Thus, the statute tracks with Tilseth and Tilseth tracks with the statute. I suggest that once the statute is read, the interpretation of the facts can be done under the guidance of the Minnesota Supreme Court’s Tilseth and its progeny, unless and until Tilseth is overruled. It has not been to this point, and I conclude it is unlikely that it will be overruled because Minnesota Statute § 268.095, subd. 6, tracks Tilseth with only minor changes.

=== CASE 9741594 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:42.841377+00 ===

Markey, J.
Defendant appeals as of right a declaratory judgment in favor of plaintiffs. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
In 1982, the state of Michigan, through defendant, deeded the wetland at issue to Michigan National Bank (mnb) in exchange for a parcel of land owned by mnb. The deed from the state to mnb included a condition that the land be used for peat farming and that if the condition were violated, the state had the right to reenter and retake the land. Plaintiffs later became owners of the wetland after mnb assigned its mortgage interest in the land to plaintiffs, and plaintiffs foreclosed the mortgage. Plaintiffs seek to construct a 200-acre, $6 million cranberry farm. The construction will consist of, among other things, building dikes, *191digging ditches, and constructing a reservoir. The proposal also calls for some excavating and filling in of the wetland. Plaintiffs sought, but were denied, a wetland permit from defendant to begin the project, so they initiated the instant declaratory judgment action claiming, inter alia, that the proposed activity was exempt from the permit requirement of the wetland protection act (wpa), MCL 324.30301 et seq.) MSA 13A.30301 et seq., and that the state’s interest in the wetland was void because the condition placed in the deed is of nominal value to the state. The trial court agreed.
i
First, defendant claims that the trial court should have denied plaintiffs’ claims because of plaintiffs’ failure to exhaust the available administrative remedies. We disagree.
Plaintiffs applied for a permit to construct the cranberry farm. Defendant denied the application. Plaintiffs initiated contested case proceedings to challenge the denial of the permit, but before the conclusion of the contested case proceedings, plaintiffs filed the instant action in the circuit court.1 Michigan courts have long recognized the importance of the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies. Int’l Business Machines Corp v Dep’t of Treasury, 75 Mich App 604, 608; 255 NW2d 702 (1977). Exhaustion of administrative remedies is not an inflexible condition precedent to judicial consideration, however, and will not *192be required if review of the agency’s final decision would provide an inadequate remedy. Id.
In Inti Business Machines Corp, this Court allowed the plaintiff to seek relief in the circuit court even though the available administrative remedies had not been exhausted because the plaintiff did not challenge the propriety of the agency action taken (declaration of tax liability). Instead, the plaintiff argued that the agency had no authority to take any action in the first place. Because the plaintiff sought to avoid submitting the dispute to the agency procedures, the “very harm that plaintiff seeks to avoid would inevitably occur if plaintiff were required to exhaust administrative remedies before access to judicial review.” Id. at 610. This Court also considered whether the agency’s statutory authority to act was clearly framed for the circuit court, whether extensive findings of fact were unnecessary, and whether a resolution of the issue did not demand special technical expertise. Id.; see also Universal Am-Can Ltd v Attorney General, 197 Mich App 34, 38-39; 494 NW2d 787 (1992) (holding that where the plaintiff claimed that the agency lacked statutory authority to regulate the plaintiff’s activity, “both judicial economy and the interests of justice supported the plaintiff’s actions in filing a complaint in the circuit court for declaratory relief”).
In the case at bar, we believe that plaintiffs’ claim in the circuit court was proper even though they had not exhausted the available administrative remedies. In the circuit court, plaintiffs did not challenge the propriety of defendant’s denial of the permit but sought a declaration that defendant had no statutory *193authority to require a permit in the first place. Plaintiffs’ argument is that the Legislature exempted the proposed activity from defendant’s regulation. While copious testimony was admitted at trial, the issue was clearly framed for the court as one of law (statutory interpretation) that did not call for extensive findings of fact or technical expertise. Under these circumstances, requiring exhaustion of the available administrative remedies would have been “nothing more than a formal step on the way to the courthouse.” Michigan Supervisors Union OPEIU Local 512 v Dep’t of Civil Service, 209 Mich App 573, 577; 531 NW2d 790 (1995). The trial court therefore did not err in failing to require plaintiffs to exhaust administrative remedies.
n
Next, defendant claims that the trial court improperly ruled that plaintiffs’ proposed activities were exempt from the permit requirements of the WPA. With regard to this issue we agree with defendant.
MCL 324.30304; MSA 13A.30304 prohibits placing fill material in a wetland, dredging or removing soil from a wetland, draining surface water from a wetland, and constructing, operating, or maintaining any use in a wetland without a permit; however, MCL 324.30305; MSA 13A.30305 exempts certain uses from the permit requirement. The exemption at issue here is MCL 324.30305(2)(e); MSA 13A.30305(2)(e) (referred to as the “farming exemption”):
Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering, and ranching activities, including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding, cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the *194production of food, fiber, and forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetland altered under this subsection shall not be used for a purpose other than a purpose described in this subsection without a permit from the department.
The trial court opined that this farming exemption “is not limited in scope to existing farming operations nor limited by the size of the project but includes all activities necessary to commence and to continue farming in a commercially viable manner and to bring land into agricultural production.” We disagree.
The fundamental purpose of statutory construction is to assist the court in discovering and giving effect to the intent of the Legislature. Ansell v Dep’t of Commerce (On Remand), 222 Mich App 347, 355; 564 NW2d 519 (1997). Statutory exceptions operate to restrict the general applicability of legislative language and are strictly construed. See People v Brooks, 184 Mich App 793, 797; 459 NW2d 313 (1990), citing Grand Rapids Motor Coach Co v Public Service Comm, 323 Mich 624; 36 NW2d 299 (1949).
According to Senate Bill Analysis, SB 3, January 17, 1980, and House Legislative Analysis, HB 4049, February 6, 1979, the wpa was intended to enable the state to assume authority to administer the federal Clean Water Act to Michigan’s wetlands.2 In order for *195Michigan to assume administration of the Clean Water Act, Michigan’s analogous statute, the wpa, must be enforced in accordance with, and be just as or more stringent than, its federal counterpart. See 40 CFR 233.1(d). The analogous, similarly worded federal farming exemption statute, 33 USC 1344(f),3 applies only to ongoing, established farming operations; activities that convert an area into farmland or bring an area into farming use are not exempted. See 40 CFR 232.3(c)(1); Avoyelles Sportsmen’s League v Alexander, 473 F Supp 525 (WD La, 1979). Therefore, because the intent behind the WPA was to confer authority over the Clean Water Act, and because in order to assume such authority the wpa must be consistent with, and at least as stringent as, its federal counterpart, the wpa farming exemption must apply only to established uses and not to activities necessary to create new farmland.
The conclusion that the farming exemption was intended to apply to land in established use for agriculture, and was not intended to refer to new farming activities, is also supported by the language of the statutory exemption itself. The farming exemption lists “minor drainage” as an example of a permissible farming activity. According to the definition section of the WPA, MCL 324.30301(b); MSA 13A.30301(b), “minor drainage” refers to activities on “land in established use for agriculture.” Further, it appears that the *196other examples of permissible farming activities listed in the farming exemption are “activities that would only occur on a continuing basis as part of an ongoing farming or forestry operation.” See Alexander, supra at 535 (interpreting the analogous federal statute in the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344[f]).
Also, Michigan courts recognize the principle of statutory construction that express mention in a statute of one thing implies the exclusion of other similar things. Jennings v Southwood, 446 Mich 125, 142; 521 NW2d 230 (1994). The exemption statute, MCL 324.30305; MSA 13A.30305, in the WPA specifically exempts some farm-related construction. Subsection 2(g) allows construction of farm ponds, and subsection 2(i) allows construction of farm roads. No other farm-related construction is specifically allowed. As a result, we are of the opinion that it would be improper to infer that other farm-related construction activities are implied or that the word “farming” implicitly includes construction activities not explicitly enumerated in the exemption statute. In conclusion, the legislative intent behind the wpa, as well as the language of the exemption statute, require us to interpret the farming exemption as applying only to currently existing farmland.4 Because plaintiffs’ land *197was not already in agricultural use, the exemption does not apply.5
m
Next, defendant claims that the issue whether the state of Michigan’s interest in the land is nominal and unenforceable was barred by res judicata because there was a stipulation in a prior proceeding that the state had an interest in the land superior to plaintiffs. We agree.
Before the instant action, plaintiff Huggett sued the state and a mortgagee seeking to foreclose on the interest of the mortgagee and also asking that the court “enter its order determining the rights of any of [sic] defendants Robert Bolline and State of Michigan and the United States Treasury, if any.” Subsequently, the parties stipulated that the state had an interest superior to any other party at bar. This stipulation was recited in the trial court’s final order, where the trial court ruled, in part, that plaintiffs’ rights were subject to the state’s interests.
Res judicata bars relitigation of claims actually litigated and those claims arising out of the same transaction that could have been litigated. Eaton Co Bd of Co Rd Comm’rs v Schultz, 205 Mich App 371, 376; 521 NW2d 847 (1994). The test for determining whether two claims are identical for res judicata purposes is whether the same facts or evidence are essential to *198the maintenance of the two claims. Jones v State Farm Ins Co, 202 Mich App 393, 401; 509 NW2d 829 (1993).
Plaintiff Huggett’s complaint in the prior proceedings sought the court’s determination of the state’s rights in the land. Plaintiff Huggett then stipulated the superiority of the state’s interest. In the case at bar, plaintiffs sought to litigate the validity of the condition placed in the deed; however, plaintiff Huggett did not limit the prior proceeding to foreclosure. He specifically asked for a determination of the state’s rights in the land. Because the rights of the state are essentially dependent on the validity of the condition in the deed, the same facts or evidence were essential to the maintenance of both claims, and the validity of the condition could have been litigated in the prior proceeding. It is inequitable to allow plaintiff Huggett to clearly set out a quiet-title claim against the state in a prior proceeding, concede the issue, and then subsequently argue that he did not have the ability to challenge the state’s interest in the first place. Consequently, we find that in the instant action plaintiffs should have been precluded from challenging the state’s interest in the property.
Moreover, even if the doctrine of res judicata did not apply, the condition placed on the land at issue is not nominal, and the state’s interest in the land is enforceable. MCL 554.46; MSA 26.46 provides:
When any conditions annexed to a grant or conveyance of lands are merely nominal and evince no intention of actual and substantial benefit to the party to whom or in whose favor they are to be performed, they may be wholly disregarded, and a failure to perform the same shall in no *199case operate as a forfeiture of the lands conveyed subject thereto.
In Barrie v Smith, 47 Mich 130, 135; 10 NW 168 (1881), our Supreme Court stated:
The fair construction of this statute is that conditions in a conveyance which evince no intention of actual or substantial benefit to the grantor are merely nominal. Where the observance of the condition is an existing substantial benefit, or its breach works an actual substantial injury to the grantor it cannot be considered as nominal....
Barrie also states that adjoining landowners may place conditions on adjoining lands they transfer to protect their interest in preventing “noxious business from being carried on thereon, or in having it improved in a certain manner.” Id. at 134. We interpret Barrie as holding that adjoining landowners have a special interest in enforcing use conditions placed upon adjoining land they transfer, and that these conditions are not nominal. Because the land at issue adjoins state land, and the state put the condition on land adjoining land it owns, the state has a special interest in enforcing the condition, and the condition is not nominal.
IV
On cross appeal, plaintiffs claim that the state’s interest in the land is unenforceable because it violates the rule against perpetuities. As previously discussed, plaintiffs are precluded from challenging the validity of the state’s interest in the land at issue. Moreover, even if plaintiffs were not precluded from raising this issue, the claim must fail. Generally speaking, rights of entry are not subject to the com*200mon-law rule against perpetuities, see 61 Am Jur 2d, Perpetuities and Restraints on Alienation, § 47, pp 58-59; 1 Restatement Property (Donative Transfers), 2d, § 1.4 comment c, p 49, and because plaintiffs’ terminable interest was initially created in a conveyance from the state, Michigan’s statutory limitation placed on rights of entry is inapplicable, MCL 554.61; MSA 26.49(11).
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
Saad, J., concurred.
The contested case proceedings have been held in abeyance pending the resolution of this case.
We acknowledge that while a Senate bill analysis is not an official statement of legislative intent, it is a helpful tool in statutory interpretation. See People v Link, 225 Mich App 211, 217; 570 NW2d 297 (1997). The fact that Michigan became the first state to receive authority to enforce and administer the federal Clean Water Act lends support to the assertion in the Senate bill analysis. See 2 Haynes & Smary, Michigan Environmental Law Deskbook, Land Use Controls and State Lands, § 12.3 (1992 & Supp 1997).
33 USC 1344(f)(1)(A) provides that discharge of dredged or fill material from “normal farming, silviculture, and ranching activities such as plowing, seeding, cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices” is not prohibited by the act.
In addition, on the basis of the agreement between the state and the federal government, defendant has been interpreting the wpa in accordance with the Clean Water Act. While an agency’s interpretations of statutes it administers are not binding on courts, longstanding interpretations are entitled to great weight unless clearly wrong. See In re Storm, 204 Mich App 323, 327; 514 NW2d 538 (1994). Therefore, we give some deference to defendant’s interpretation.
Whether plaintiffs’ proposed farm should be allowed is a separate issue and is not before this Court. We were simply asked to determine whether plaintiffs must seek a permit, and we answered that question in the affirmative. We offer no opinion with respect to the propriety of plaintiffs’ proposed use of a wetland.

=== CASE 9741595 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:42.845513+00 ===

White, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). While it is clearly consistent with the public policy of this state, as expressed in subsection 30302(l)(c) of the wetlands protection act, MCL 324.30302(l)(c); MSA 13A.30302(l)(c), to permit and facilitate operation of a commercial cranberry-growing facility in a wetland area, I agree that the farming exception to the permit requirement, MCL 324.30305(2)(e); MSA 13A.30305(2)(e), when construed in the context of the entire act, does not evince a legislative intent to except from the permit requirement “all activities necessary to commence . . . farming in a commercially viable manner and to bring land into agricultural production,” without regard to the scope or nature of those activities. I agree that plaintiffs’ proposed alterations in preparation for farming were subject to the permit requirement.
I do not agree that plaintiffs’ challenge to the state’s reversionary interest in the property is barred by res judicata. The prior proceeding was a foreclosure action. The state was included as a party because of its reversionary interest in the property. Huggett stipulated the superiority of the state’s interest. In so stipulating, Huggett acknowledged that the state’s interest would survive the foreclosure proceeding and that his *201interest in the property was subject to the state’s reversionary rights under the deed from the state to Michigan National Bank. Acknowledging the superiority of the reversionary rights in the deed (whatever their scope and interpretation) over Huggett’s interest as the mortgagee, and after foreclosure, fee owner, is not tantamount to acknowledging that the reversionary rights themselves are valid and not subject to challenge on the basis of mistake1 or because based on nominal conditions. In sum, the stipulation in the prior action was a concession that the state’s reversionary interest would survive the foreclosure action as superior to Huggett’s rights; it was not a concession that the interest is valid and enforceable.
I agree, however, that the state’s reversionary interest is not based on conditions that are “merely nominal” “evinc[ing] no intention of actual and substantial benefit to” the state, and that the interest is not unenforceable as violative of the rule against perpetuities.
This was one of the claims asserted below.

=== CASE 9741596 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:43.405519+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Fitzgerald and Justices Kilbride, and Burke concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Garman dissented, with opinion, joined by Justices Thomas and Karmeier. OPINION Defendant, Larry J. Van Schoyck, was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (625 ILCS 5/11— 501(a)(1) (West 2004)) after a bench trial in the circuit court of Champaign County. The appellate court affirmed the conviction in an unpublished order (No. 4 — 07—0024 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23)). This court allowed defendant leave to appeal (210 Ill. 2d R. 315), and we now reverse the conviction. Background On November 13, 2004, at about 1:17 a.m., defendant received three uniform traffic citations from Champaign County Sheriffs Deputy J.E Reifstock. Defendant was cited for driving under the influence (625 ILCS 5/11— 501(a)(2) (West 2004)), driving with a blood-alcohol content of over 0.081 (625 ILCS 5/11 — 501(a)(1) (West 2004)), and driving on a revoked license (625 ILCS 5/6— 303 (West 2004)). Defendant posted bond several hours later and was released from custody with a December 20, 2004, court date. The record reveals that the tickets were filed in the circuit court of Champaign County on November 16, 2004, as case Number 04 — DT—688. Defendant appeared in court on December 14, at which time his attorney filed an appearance. Defendant entered a plea of not guilty and demanded a speedy trial, along with a demand for a jury trial.2 The court file sheet indicates that the next court date was set for January 31, 2005. On January 24, 2005, the State sent defendant a form letter, on which it noted, “No offer pending felony review.” On January 31, 2005, the State filed its appearance in the case and told the trial court that it would file the charge as a felony by the next court date. The court continued the case six times at the State’s request. On each of those dates, the State informed the court that it was seeking to file felony charges against defendant. On September 19, 2005, the State, over defendant’s objection, dismissed the three citations and recharged defendant, in an information, with driving with a blood-alcohol content over 0.08, noting in the charge the existence of the sentence-enhancing factor (driving on a revoked license), which elevated the DUI offense to a felony. On November 29, 2005, defendant filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that the State had not tried him within 160 days of his speedy-trial demand, which had been filed on December 14, 2004. The trial court denied the motion. The matter proceeded to trial where defendant was found guilty and then sentenced to six years of imprisonment. The appellate court affirmed, holding that the trial court did not err in denying the motion to dismiss. Relying on People v. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d 179 (1987), overruled on other grounds by People v. Stefan, 146 Ill. 2d 324 (1992), the appellate court concluded that defendant’s written demand for a speedy trial, filed before the State had sought felony charges against him, had no effect on defendant’s felony case because the charges were not required to have been joined under the rules of compulsory joinder. No. 4 — 07—0024 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). Analysis The sole issue in this case is whether defendant’s motion for dismissal, based on the speedy-trial provisions of section 103 — 5(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/103 — 5(b) (West 2004)), should have been granted. The right to a speedy trial, guaranteed to a defendant under both the sixth amendment and the due process clause of the federal constitution (Klopfer v. North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1, 87 S. Ct. 988 (1967)), and by article I, section 8, of our state constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §8), is fundamental. An additional statutory right can also be found in section 103 — 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which specifies periods of time within which an accused must be brought to trial. See 725 ILCS 5/103 — 5 (West 2004). Section 103 — 5(b) mandates that every person on bail or recognizance “shall be tried by the court having jurisdiction within 160 days from the date defendant demands trial unless delay is occasioned by the defendant.” 725 ILCS 5/103— 5(b) (West 2004). This court has held that the provisions of section 103 — 5 are to be liberally construed in favor of the defendant, and that the State cannot improperly manipulate criminal proceedings or purposefully evade the operation of the section’s provisions. People v. Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d 157, 169 (1990). In this case, whether defendant’s rights under section 103 — 5(b) were contravened is a pure question of law, which this court reviews de novo. Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 169. The parties do not dispute that section 103 — 5 applies to those charged with DUI offenses, but disagree as to how many charges were involved in this case and to which of those charges defendant’s December 14 speedy-trial demand applied. According to defendant, there is only “one charge involved, to-wit: driving under the influence of alcohol in violation of 625 ILCS 11/ 501(a)(1).” Defendant argues that the dismissal of the citation which alleged defendant drove with a blood-alcohol content over 0.08 and the refiling of that same charge in the information constituted a “continuation of the same case” to which his original speedy-trial demand should apply. According to the State, however, there were four different charges in the case, three misdemeanors and one felony. The State maintains that defendant’s speedy-trial demand pertained only to the misdemeanor charges and not to the subsequent felony charge. To resolve the parties’ contentions, this court must consider two specific statutory schemes: the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure which address how charges are to be brought in criminal prosecutions and section 11 — 501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, which addresses the offense of driving under the influence (DUI). Section 11 — 501 of the Vehicle Code Section 11 — 501 of the Vehicle Code makes it a crime to drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 625 ILCS 5/11 — 501 (West 2004). Section 11 — 501(a) provides: “A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within this State while: (1) the alcohol concentration in the person’s blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in Section 11 — 501.2; (2) under the influence of alcohol; (3) under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of driving safely; (4) under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; (5) under the combined influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; or (6) there is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person’s breath, blood, or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the Cannabis Control Act, a controlled substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or intoxicating compound listed in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act.” 625 ILCS 5/11 — 501(a) (West 2004). The statute designates a violation of any of the above as a Class A misdemeanor. Subsection (c) of section 11 — 501 then provides a list of factors which enhance the misdemeanor to various different classes of felonies. 625 ILCS 5/11 — 501(c) (West 2004). At the time of defendant’s arrest, subsection (c — 1)(1) of section 11 — 501 provided that a violation of section 11 — 501(a)(1) while on a revoked license upgraded the offense to a Class 4 felony. Under the plain language of the statute, there is only one offense of driving under the influence. People v. Quigley, 183 Ill. 2d 1, 11-12 (1998). Subsection (a) sets forth the elements for the offense and classifies the offense as a Class A misdemeanor. The enhancing factors in subsection (c) do not create a new offense, but rather serve only to enhance the punishment. Quigley, 183 Ill. 2d at 11. In Quigley, this court discussed the operation of section 11 — 501(d), stating: “ [Aggravated DUI occurs when an individual commits some form of misdemeanor DUI, in violation of paragraph (a), and other circumstances are present. The legislature added aggravating factors that change the misdemeanor DUI to a Class 4 felony. The essential and underlying criminal act, however, remains the same: driving while under the influence.” Quigley, 183 Ill. 2d at 10. Section 11 — 501 therefore operates just as any other statute which initially sets forth the elements of the offense, and then, in a separate section, provides sentencing classifications based on other factors. See People v. Green, 225 Ill. 2d 612 (2007) (robbery statute); People v. Robinson, 232 Ill. 2d 98 (2008) (involuntary manslaughter statute). Article 111 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Article 111 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governs how criminal offenses are to be charged. Section 111 — 1 sets forth three different methods of prosecution: complaint, indictment, and information. 725 ILCS 5/111 — 1 (West 2002). Section 111 — 2 provides that all felonies be prosecuted by either information or indictment. 725 ILCS 5/111 — 2(a) (West 2002). When a misdemeanor DUI is charged by way of uniform traffic ticket, “the copy of such Uniform Ticket which is filed with the circuit court constitutes a complaint to which the defendant may plead, unless he specifically requests that a verified complaint be filed.” 725 ILCS 5/111 — 3(b) (West 2002). Subsection (c) of section 111 — 3 governs how the State is to seek enhanced sentences for offenses and provides in relevant part: “When the State seeks an enhanced sentence because of a prior conviction, the charge shall also state the intention to seek an enhanced sentence and shall state such prior conviction so as to give notice to the defendant. However, the fact of such prior conviction and the State’s intention to seek an enhanced sentence are not elements of the offense and may not be disclosed to the jury during trial unless otherwise permitted by issues properly raised during such trial.” 725 ILCS 5/111 — 3(c) (West 2002). Application In this case, defendant faced conviction for the offense of DUI on two possible bases: driving with a blood-alcohol content over 0.08 and driving while intoxicated. These two charges were brought by complaint pursuant to section 111 — 3(b) of the Code. After the filing of the tickets with the circuit court and after defendant’s speedy-trial demand, the State desired that, upon conviction, defendant be sentenced as a Class 4 felon under section 11 — 501(c—1)(1) (driving while on a revoked license due to a previous DUI). To this end, the State was required to upgrade the misdemeanor to a felony, and felonies can only be charged by information or indictment (725 ILCS 5/111 — 2(a) (West 2002)). The State therefore dismissed the two pending DUI charges against defendant and recharged defendant, in an information, with driving with a blood alcohol content over 0.08, noting in the charge the existence of the sentence-enhancing factor (driving on a revoked license), which elevated the DUI offense to a felony. Under section 111 — 3(c), a prior conviction such as the revoked license in this case is not an element of the underlying offense. People v. DiPace, 354 Ill. App. 3d 104, 114 (2004). Thus, the information did not charge anything new. The information merely elevated the misdemeanor DUI, initially charged by way of a traffic citation, to a felony. Under section 111 — 3(c), the information is a request for an enhanced sentence, which the legislature has defined as a “sentence which is increased by a prior conviction from one classification of offense to another higher level classification of offense.” 725 ILCS 5/111 — 3(c) (West 2004); DiPace, 354 Ill. App. 3d at 114. Although the information amounted to a new way of charging the DUI offense, it did not allege a different offense than did the previously dismissed ticket. Since the offenses alleged in both the ticket and the information were the same, compulsory joinder principles, the subject of cases like People v. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d 179 (1987), overruled on other grounds by People v. Stefan, 146 Ill. 2d 324 (1992), do not apply to this case. The appellate court incorrectly concluded that compulsory joinder principles rendered defendant’s speedy-trial demand inapplicable to the refiled charge. The State has the discretion not only to decide what charges to bring, but to decide whether charges should be dismissed. People v. Rhodes, 38 Ill. 2d 389, 396 (1967). The State may not avoid a speedy-trial demand by dismissing a charge only to refile the identical charge for the identical offense based on the identical acts. People v. Fosdick, 36 Ill. 2d 524 (1967). Defendant contends that, in this case, the State improperly used its power of dismissal to avoid the effect of his speedy-trial demand. The voluntary dismissal of criminal charges before trial is, in effect, a nolle prosequi. People v. Guido, 11 Ill. App. 3d 1067, 1069 n.2 (1973), citing Commonwealth v. Brandano, 359 Mass. 332, 334-35, 269 N.E.2d 84, 86-87 (1971). The effect of a nolle prosequi is “to terminate the charge to which it is entered and to permit the defendant to go wherever he pleases, without entering into a recognizance to appear at any other time. If it is entered before jeopardy has attached, it does not operate as an acquittal, so as to prevent a subsequent prosecution for the same offense.” People v. Watson, 394 Ill. 177, 179 (1946). Although the State may refile dismissed charges before jeopardy attaches, its ability to do so may be complicated by speedy-trial concerns. For that reason, voluntary dismissal and the subsequent refiling of identical charges do not toll the statute. Fosdick, 36 Ill. 2d at 528-29. We hold, therefore, that defendant’s speedy-trial demand filed with respect to the offenses charged by complaint was applicable to the same offense refiled by the State in its information. As noted, defendant filed his written demand for a speedy trial on December 14, 2004, and the 160-day period was thus set to expire on May 23, 2005. The parties have agreed that no amount of delay from December 14, 2004, until May 23, 2005, was attributable to defendant. Defendant’s trial, which took place on November 29, 2005, was outside the limitations set forth in section 103 — 5(b) (725 ILCS 5/103 — 5(b) (West 2004)). The circuit court therefore incorrectly denied defendant’s motion to dismiss. Conclusion For the reasons set forth above, the judgments of the circuit court and the appellate court are reversed. Appellate court judgment reversed; circuit court judgment reversed.  Defendant’s Breathalyzer test showed his blood-alcohol content to be 0.197.   The certificate of service indicates that the demands for a speedy trial and jury trial were mailed to the State’s Attorney’s office on that same date.

=== CASE 9741597 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:43.410271+00 ===

JUSTICE CARMAN, dissenting: The majority concludes that defendant’s speedy-trial demand, filed in the misdemeanor traffic case, precludes prosecution on the subsequently filed felony charge. For the following reasons, I believe that the majority opinion is in error and, therefore, dissent. Defendant’s current interaction with the criminal justice system began on November 13, 2004, when a Champaign County sheriff’s deputy issued him three uniform citations. It is undisputed that the Champaign County State’s Attorney’s office had no prior knowledge of, or involvement in, the issuance of these citations. Defendant’s traffic citations were filed in the Champaign County circuit court under case number 04 — DT—688 (traffic case). Defendant filed a written speedy-trial demand in the traffic case. On September 19, 2005, the State dismissed the traffic case and charged defendant by information with felony DUI under section 11 — 501(c—1)(1) of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11 — 501(c—1)(1) (West 2002)). The felony charge was brought in Champaign County case number 05 — CF—1760 (felony case). Defendant did not file a speedy-trial demand in the felony case. On November 29, 2005, 71 days after the felony charge was filed, defendant filed a motion to dismiss the felony case on the basis that the 160-day speedy-trial period had expired. The trial court denied defendant’s motion. On November 8, 2006, following a stipulated bench trial, defendant was convicted of felony DUI. He was subsequently sentenced to six years’ imprisonment in the Department of Corrections. Defendant appealed, arguing that he was charged with only one offense and that, therefore, the speedy-trial demand he filed in the traffic case was applicable to the later-filed felony case. The appellate court rejected this argument, holding that the traffic case and felony case were not subject to compulsory joinder. As a result, the appellate court held that the speedy-trial demand defendant filed in the traffic case did not apply to the later-filed felony case. Defendant appealed to this court alleging that his speedy-trial rights were violated. In Illinois, there is both a statutory and a constitutional right to speedy trial. People v. Cordell, 223 Ill. 2d 380, 385 (2006). See also U.S. Const., amends. VI, XIV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §8; 725 ILCS 5/103 — 5 (West 2002). While the speedy-trial act (725 ILCS 5/103 — 5 (West 2002)) “implements the constitutional right to a speedy trial, the statutory right and the constitutional right are not coextensive.” Cordell 223 Ill. 2d at 385-86, citing People v. Gooden, 189 Ill. 2d 209, 217 (2000). The present case implicates only defendant’s statutory right to a speedy trial. The majority accurately states that the sole question in this case is whether defendant’s motion for dismissal, based on speedy-trial grounds, should have been granted. This court has never previously addressed this precise issue. For the reasons that follow, I believe that the trial court was correct in denying defendant’s motion for dismissal, and that the appellate court was correct in affirming that denial. Ordinarily, we think of compulsory joinder in terms of the joinder of related offenses and not the number of cases or charges. See People v. Mauricio, 249 Ill. App. 3d 904, 911 (1993) (“[t]he statutory language of section 3 — 3 would seem to require the State to have brought all of the charges against defendant in one proceeding”). Indeed, the statutory language of the compulsory joinder statute requires inter alia that the “several offenses” in question be “known to the proper prosecuting officer at the time of commencing the prosecution.” 720 ILCS 5/3— 3(b) (West 2002). The majority, having initially concluded that misdemeaner DUI and felony DUI are the same offense, relies on the term “offenses” in the statute to find that defendant’s case should have been dismissed. Under the majority’s reasoning, the traffic case and felony case were merely two different methods of charging defendant with the same crime, thus there is no reason to discuss compulsory joinder because there was nothing to join. Because the majority treats the felony case as merely the continuation of the traffic case, the majority concludes that the speedy-trial demand defendant filed in the traffic case is equally applicable to the felony case. I disagree with this conclusion. What the majority overlooks is that even if there was only one offense, there were still two charges and each charge was initiated by a different charging authority. These separate charges, initiated by different charging authorities, are not subject to compulsory joinder and are not otherwise subject to the same speedy-trial period. The first charging authority involved in this case is the Champaign County sheriff. The sheriff charged defendant through the issuance of three uniform citations. Uniform citations are “intended to be used by a police officer in making a charge for traffic offenses and certain misdemeanors and petty offenses.” People v. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d 179, 192 (1987). These uniform citations constitute a complaint to which a defendant may plead. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d at 192, citing People v. Pankey, 94 Ill. 2d 12, 17 (1983). Thus, the issuance of a citation constitutes the charging of a defendant with the commission of an offense without any involvement of the State’s Attorney’s office whatsoever. The second charging authority was the State’s Attorney. The State’s Attorney had to initiate separate proceedings against defendant to try him for the Class 4 felony, as uniform citations cannot be used to charge a person with a felony. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d at 192, citing Pankey, 94 Ill. 2d at 17. A separate charge had to be filed because all felony prosecutions must “be by information or by indictment.” 725 ILCS 5/111 — 2(a) (West 2002). Thus, in order for defendant to be charged/convicted/ sentenced as a Class 4 felon, the State’s Attorney had to file a separate case as the traffic citations would not allow defendant to be tried or sentenced as a felon. In the ordinary case of compulsory joinder, the State’s Attorney files two or more charges that are based on the defendant’s same actions. In such a case, the analysis conducted by a court focuses on whether the three conditions of the compulsory-joinder statute have been met. See People v. Williams, 204 Ill. 2d 191 (2003). If the conditions are met, all the various cases are subject to the same speedy-trial period. In this case, the two separate charges cannot be subject to compulsory joinder as it would have been impossible for the sheriffs deputy to charge defendant with the felony offense. It would be an inherent contradiction for this court to hold that separate charges brought by different charging authorities had to be joined when the authority initiating the first charge is expressly prohibited from filing the second charge. Thus, because there were two charging authorities, and because the initial charge in the traffic case could not have included the later-filed felony, the two charges are not subject to compulsory joinder. Therefore, the speedy-trial period must be determined as to each individual case. The compulsory joinder discussion in People v. Quigley, 183 Ill. 2d 1 (1998), supports this conclusion. In Quigley, this court stated that, “[i]f the charges are required to be brought in a single prosecution, the speedy-trial period begins to run when the speedy-trial demand is filed, even if the State brings some of the charges at a later date.” Quigley, 183 Ill. 2d at 13. In Quigley, the State’s Attorney dismissed the ordinance violations and directly brought both the misdemeanor and felony charges by information. However in the present case, unlike in Quigley, the relevant charges in this case could not have been brought in a single prosecution because the sheriff was limited to charging defendant with misdemeanor offenses. Further support for this reasoning is found in this court’s opinion in Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d 179. In Jackson, this court was asked to examine whether a defendant charged with reckless homicide following a drunk driving accident could raise double jeopardy or compulsory joinder as a defense to his homicide prosecution where he had already pled guilty to underlying traffic offenses. Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d 179.3 This court held that “the compulsory-joinder provisions of section 3 — 3 do not apply to offenses that have been charged by the use of a uniform citation.” Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d at 192. In reaching that conclusion, this court stated that “[w]e hold today that the compulsory-joinder provisions of section 3 — 3 do not apply to offenses that have been charged by the use of a uniform citation and complaint form provided for traffic offenses.” Jackson, 118 Ill. 2d at 192. Thus, the court allowed the defendant’s felony conviction to stand because joinder of the felony and traffic offenses was not required. It is true that Jackson dealt with compulsory joinder in the context of double jeopardy concerns and the instant case deals with speedy-trial issues. However, neither the majority nor defendant cite any reason why compulsory joinder should be treated differently for speedy-trial purposes than it is for double jeopardy purposes. Though this court has never specifically addressed whether a speedy-trial demand filed in a case initiated by uniform citation applies against a subsequent felony prosecution brought by the State’s Attorney, the lower courts have. Moreover, every court that has examined this issue over the past 20 years has adopted the position I advance in this dissent. See People v. Sandoval, 381 Ill. App. 3d 142, 152 (2008) (“traffic offenses that are charged by the use of a uniform citation or complaint form completed by a police officer rather than a prosecutor are not subject to compulsory joinder with charges brought under an indictment, and their viability under speedy trial rules must be determined individually”); People v. Kizer, 365 Ill. App. 3d 949, 955 (2006) (“section 3 — 3 does not require the State to prosecute a felony charge in the same proceeding as a related traffic offense charged by uniform citation and complaint, it must follow that a demand for a speedy trial in the traffic case has no effect in the felony case”); People v. Mauricio, 249 Ill. App. 3d 904, 911 (1993) (“[t]he statutory language of section 3 — 3 would seem to require the State to have brought all of the charges against defendant in one proceeding. However, our courts have held that sections 3 — 3 and 3 — 4(b)(1) do not apply to offenses that have been charged in a uniform traffic citation”); People v. Hoskinson, 201 Ill. App. 3d 411, 414 (1990) (“[t]he compulsory joinder provisions of these sections do not apply to offenses that have been charged by the use of uniform citation and complaint forms used by police officers in charging traffic offenses”); People v. Crowe, 195 Ill. App. 3d 212, 218 (1990) (“[i]t is the commencement of prosecution by the State’s Attorney which invokes application of the compulsory-joinder provisions”); People v. Hogan, 186 Ill. App. 3d 267, 269 (1989) (“[t]he compulsory joinder provisions of sections 3 — 3 and 3 — 4 do not apply to offenses charged by uniform citation and complaint forms”). Despite this wealth of contrary authority, the majority, without comment, would implicitly overrule 20 years of settled law. The only authority cited by the majority to support its conclusion that the State’s Attorney’s “dismissal and the subsequent refiling of identical charges do not toll the statute” is People v. Fosdick. 232 Ill. 2d at 340, citing People v. Fosdick, 36 Ill. 2d 524, 528 (1967). However, Fosdick does not apply to the present case, as Fosdick did not involve a prosecution initiated by uniform citation. Instead, the various charges filed, dismissed, and refiled in Fosdick were by either information or indictment. Fosdick, 36 Ill. 2d at 526-27. It is undisputed that the State may not avoid a speedy-trial demand by dismissing a charge only to refile the identical charge for the identical offense based on the identical acts. In People v. Woolsey, this court reasoned that “[t]he decision to nol-pros a charge is within the discretion of the prosecution and, thus, can be used to improperly manipulate criminal proceedings or to purposefully evade the operation of the speedy-trial statute.” People v. Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d 157, 169 (1990). However, Woolsey and other cases that have considered this issue have all been cases where the State’s Attorney initiated the prosecution, dismissed the case, and then filed a new case for the identical offense. See Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 160. See also People v. Watson, 394 Ill. 177, 178 (1946) (cited by the majority, 232 Ill. 2d at 340). Furthermore, nothing in the record of this case demonstrates that the State was attempting to “manipulate criminal proceedings” or “purposefully evade the operation of the speedy-trial statute.” Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 169. There is no indication that the State derived any benefit whatsoever from the delay in bringing defendant to trial on the felony charge. The record reflects that the State had the evidence needed to prosecute the felony offense at the time the citations were issued. (A citation was issued for operating a motor vehicle with a blood-alcohol content over 0.08 and a citation was issued for driving on a revoked license.) While this fact makes the State’s delay in bringing the felony case less understandable, it also demonstrates that the State had nothing to gain by delaying the felony prosecution. Likewise, the State did not evince any evasion of the operation of the speedy-trial statute. Unlike in Woolsey, the State in this case did not wait until defendant had brought a motion to dismiss on speedy-trial grounds to file the felony charge. The State dismissed the traffic case and filed the felony case before defendant had filed a motion to dismiss. However, despite the delay in bringing the felony charge, the State still brought the felony case within the three-year statute of limitations. See 720 ILCS 5/3 — 5 (West 2002). Further, the defendant never filed a speedy-trial demand in the felony case, and, even if he had, the State prosecuted defendant on the felony charge within the time allowed by the speedy-trial act. In this case, there are two separate protections at issue. First, there is the protection of the speedy-trial act. The speedy-trial act helps ensure that a defendant’s constitutional right to a speedy trial is observed and respected by the State. The current facts do not present a violation of this right. The second protection at issue is the statute of limitations. The statute of limitations (720 ILCS 5/3 — 5 (West 2002)) limits the time period during which the State may bring a criminal prosecution. This limitation is “ ‘designed to protect individuals from having to defend themselves against charges when the basic facts may have become obscured by the passage of time and to minimize the danger of official punishment because of acts in the far-distant past. Such a time limit may also have the salutary effect of encouraging law enforcement officials promptly to investigate suspected criminal activity.’ ” People v. Strait, 72 Ill. 2d 503, 506 (1978), quoting Toussie v. United States, 397 U.S. 112, 114-15, 25 L. Ed. 2d 156, 161, 90 S. Ct. 858, 860 (1970). Because the State met its obligation with regard to the statute of limitations, defendant’s prosecution was timely and his conviction should be affirmed. I would hold that since the State’s Attorney did not bring the initial traffic case, the speedy-trial demand filed in the traffic case did not affect the latter filed felony prosecution. I would, therefore, affirm the judgment of the trial and appellate courts and uphold defendant’s conviction. JUSTICES THOMAS and KARMEIER join in this dissent.  People v. Jackson’s double jeopardy analysis was subsequently overturned by People v. Stefan, 146 Ill. 2d 324 (1992). However, Jackson’s analysis of compulsory joinder, relevant to the present opinion, remains good law.

=== CASE 9741598 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:47.966991+00 ===

OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE1
Appellants-Plaintiffs, Drew and Donna Dickerson (collectively, the Dickersons), *713appeal from the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Appellees-De-fendants, Donna Strand (Strand) and Gloria German (German), on the Dickersons' claim for fraud arising from the sale of a house.
We affirm.
ISSUE
The Dickersons present several issues for our review, which we consolidate and restate as the following single issue: Whether the Dickersons had the right to rely on representations by Strand and German as to the quality of the house when the Dickersons had a reasonable opportunity to inspect the house for themselves.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In 1995, Strand and German purchased a house in Ladoga, Indiana. At that time, S S Pest Control inspected the house for visual evidence of infestation and damage caused by termites or other wood-destroying organisms. SS Pest Control's inspection report noted visual evidence of active termite infestation in the "erawl space north foundation wall and base sill plate." (Appellants' App. p. 140). The seller paid to have S S Pest Control treat the house.
In early 2000, Strand and German wanted to sell the house and hired Central Indiana Home Inspections to inspect it. In its report, under the heading "Major Structural Defects," Central Indiana Home Inspections stated, "Some floor joists & the box sill on the north side by the deck have termite damage. Some re-enforcement has been done to the joists but not the box sill." (Appellants' App. p. 162).
On March 17, 2000, after having toured the house "a couple of times" with Strand and German's agent, the Dickersons signed an agreement to purchase the house. (Appellants' App. p. 129). Under "Further Conditions," the agreement provided, "Sellers to repair items listed on inspection report from Central Indiana Home Inspections/Phil Smith, re-enforcement of sill plates." (Appellants' App. p. 183). The agreement also gave the Dick-ersons the right to have the house inspected and to terminate the contract if their inspection revealed major defects that Strand and German were unable or unwilling to remedy.
Later in March of 2000, Strand and German hired Jim Dawson (Dawson) to repair the termite damage disclosed in the Central Indiana Home Inspections report. Dawson described his work as follows: "I saw some termite damage in that north floor system, and the best I can remember, I put a couple of four by four supports under those walls to try to help keep them from moving downward, like collapsing because of the weak perimeter joist." (Appellants' App. p. 202). He provided Strand and German a bill for $92.00 for "[tJotal material and labor for raising a termite damaged section of floors and wall on the north foundation walll.]" (Appellants' App. p. 186). Strand gave Dawson a check for the bill.
On May 19, 2000, the date of closing, Strand signed a Seller's Residential Real Estate Sales Disclosure form. In the row asking, "Are there any structural problems with the buildings?" Strand had checked the "NO" box. (Appellants' App. p. 179). Also at the time of closing, all of the parties signed a Purchaser's Response Regarding Inspection that stated that Dawson had "reinforced the floor and wall on the North of the property." (Appellants' App. p. 187). The Dickersons never had their own inspection done.
*714In October of 2003, the Dickersons hired Rob Wethington (Wethington) to replace the siding on the house. Wethington uncovered significant termite damage. Specifically, he determined that "the sill around the majority of the building had been completely destroyed by termite damage[.]" (Appellants' App. p. 190). Wethington believed that the damage was "old" and "could not possibly have occurred after March 17, 2000." (Appellants' App. p. 190). Wethington later swore in an affidavit that, after discovering the damage, he spoke with Dawson, who said that he was only asked by Strand and German "to prop up the floor, and that he had never been given the inspection report or told to reinforce or replace the beams or joints." (Appellants' App. p. 191). We-thington's affidavit further provided:
7. I found that no repairs had been made at all, simply the props, no new wood had been installed and no nailing or scabbing had been done and the entire area was structurally worthless.
8. In my opinion as a contractor, this area had not in any sense "been repaired" but had simply been propped to prevent immediate collapse while leaving the structural failure in place.
(Appellants' App. p. 191).
On April 12, 2004, the Dickersons filed a Complaint against Strand and German alleging, among other things, fraud.2 The Dickersons claimed that Strand and German "falsely represented that the property had not suffered structural termite damage" and that the Dickersons had relied upon that representation in purchasing the house. (Appellants' App. p. 51). On March 16, 2007, Strand and German filed a motion for summary judgment. On May 23, 2008, the trial court issued an order granting summary judgment in favor of Strand and German.
The Dickersons now appeal. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION 3
On appeal, the Dickersons argue that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Strand and German on the Dickersons' claim for fraud. In reviewing summary judgment rulings, we apply the same standard as the trial court. Kopczynski v. Barger, 887 N.E.2d 928, 930 (Ind.2008). We affirm summary judgment unless there is a genuine issue as to a material fact or the moving party is not entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id. All facts and reasonable inferences from them are to be construed in favor of the nonmoving party. Id.
Before turning to the merits, we pause to note our concern that the trial court, in its order granting summary judgment, made "Findings of Fact" on several factual issues that appear to us to have been the subject of genuine dispute. For example, the trial court found that Dawson "repaired" the damage in question, but whether Dawson's work in this case amounted to a total "repair" of the damage seems to be a classic question of fact, especially since his bill was for only $92.00 and structural damage still existed after his work. (Appellants' App. p. 11). Likewise, the trial court found that "[the ter*715mite damage would not have been discovered had it not been necessary to remove the old siding from the house to install the new siding." (Appellants' App. p. 11). But that finding is contradicted by evidence that Central Indiana Home Inspections discovered the damage without removing any siding. At the summary judgment stage, it is not the role of the trial court to weigh evidence or judge the credibility of witnesses and then make findings of fact. Wilson v. Royal Motor Sales, Inc., 812 N.E.2d 133, 135 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), reh'g denied. Where the evidence is in conflict, or undisputed facts lead to conflicting inferences, summary judgment should not be granted, even if it appears that the nonmovant will not sue-ceed at trial. Id. In short, "[slummary judgment should not be used as an abbreviated trial." Id.
As for the Dickersons' contentions, to establish a cause of action for fraudulent misrepresentation, the plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) that the defendant made false statements of past or existing material facts; (2) that the defendant made such statements knowing them to be false or recklessly without knowledge as to their truth or falsity; (8) that the defendant made the statements to induce the plaintiff to act upon them; (4) that the plaintiff justifiably relied and acted upon the statements; and (5) that the plaintiff suffered injury. Verrall v. Machura, 810 N.E.2d 1159, 1162 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied. The Dickersons contend that Strand and German made fraudulent statements in two different documents: in the Seller's Residential Real Estate Sales Disclosure form, where they indicated that the house had no structural problems at the time of closing, and in the Purchaser's Response Regarding Inspection, where they indicated that Dawson had re-enforced the floor and wall on the north side of the house. But we need not decide whether Strand and German's representations were fraudulent because, under Indiana law, the Dickersons had no right to rely on those representations.
As recently as three years ago, we stated that "a purchaser of property has no right to rely upon the representations of the vendor of the property as to its quality, where he has a reasonable opportunity of examining the property and judging for himself as to its qualities." McCutchan v. Blanck, 846 N.E.2d 256, 265 (Ind.Ct.App.2006). We traced this rule back to 1881, when it was first stated by our supreme court in Cagney v. Cuson, 77 Ind. 494, 1881 WL 6689 (1881). In that case, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant made certain fraudulent statements in order to induce the plaintiff to buy land and farm equipment. The plaintiff had "a suitable opportunity of examining both the lands and the personal property" but failed to do so. Id. at 497, 1881 WL 6689 *2. Our supreme court held that, even as to fraud-uwlent representations operating as an inducement to the sale or exchange of property, "the purchaser has no right to rely upon the representations of the vendor as to the quality of the property, where he has a reasonable opportunity of examining the property and judging for himself as to its qualities." Id. at 497, 1881 WL 6689 *2. As such, the court reversed the judgment in favor of the plaintiff. Id. at 494, 1881 WL 6689*2.
Though we had to dust it off, Cagney is still good law, and the Dickersons offer us no way around it. The Dickersons, like the plaintiff in Cagney, had a reasonable opportunity to inspect the house. In fact, they specifically contracted for the right to inspect the house. The fact that the Dick-ersons did not actually inspect the house is irrelevant; under Cagney, it is the opportunity to inspect that matters. We en*716courage our supreme court to reevaluate the social value of a rule allowing a seller of property to lie with impunity as long as the prospective buyer had a reasonable opportunity to inspect the property. But until then, we are bound by that rule. Therefore, we hold that the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of Strand and German.4
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of Strand and German on the Dickersons' fraud claim.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., concurs.
VAIDIK, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. In their opening brief, the Dickersons argue that Special Judge J. Jeffrey Edens lacks subject matter jurisdiction over this case. The Dickersons filed their Complaint in Montgomery Superior Court I, but they quickly asked for a change of judge. On June 4, 2004, Judge Steve David of the Boone Circuit Court accepted his appointment as special judge. However, in the summer of 2007, Judge David was called to active duty with the United States Army. As such, the Indiana Supreme Court appointed Mr. Edens judge pro tempore of the Boone Circuit Court. In their brief, the Dickersons suggest that Judge Pro Tempore Edens does not have subject maiter jurisdiction in this case because the limited authority granted him by the Indiana Supreme Court did not extend to the cases in which Judge David was serving as special judge. In response, Strand and German filed an appendix containing the actual order from the Indiana Supreme Court, which specifically stated that Judge Pro Tempore Edens, if not otherwise disqualified, "may hear those cases in which Judge David is serving as special judge." (Appellees' App. p. 7). Seemingly appeased by this reminder, the Dickersons' counsel, who no doubt had access to this information before filing his opening brief, *713did not return to this argument in his reply brief. We consider this matter settled.
. The Dickersons also brought claims of breach of warranty and criminal deception. However, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Strand and German on those claims, and the Dickersons do not challenge those rulings on appeal.
. Indiana Appellate Rule 46(A)(7) provides that the Summary of Argument in a brief should contain a "succinct" statement of the arguments made in the body of the brief. The "summary" of the Dickersons' argument is three pages long and does little to help focus our review.
. We might have reached a different result if the Dickersons had directed us to evidence tending to show that a reasonable inspection of the house would not have revealed the termite damage in question. In Shepherd v. Goben, 142 Ind. 318, 322, 39 N.E. 506, 507 (1895), a case written shortly after Cagney, our supreme court emphasized the importance of a jury instruction that provided that "'the vendor could not defeat a recovery by showing an inspection of the land, if it appeared that an inspection would not disclose the deceit in the alleged false representations{.]" Here, it is true that the termite damage was partially concealed by the siding on the house. Nonetheless, given the Dicker-sons' prior knowledge of the extensive termite damage, a reasonable inspection on their part would have no doubt included an inspection of the crawlspace, much like the inspection performed by Central Indiana Home Inspections before Strand and German sold the house. Such an inspection would have revealed Dawson's re-enforcement job and the continued existence of structural termite damage.

=== CASE 9741599 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:47.972844+00 ===

VAIDIK, Judge,
dissenting.
1 respectfully dissent. However, I wholeheartedly join with my colleagues in asking that our Supreme Court examine the common law rule that a residential real estate buyer may not rely upon a seller's assertions regarding the property where the buyer has the reasonable opportunity to inspect the property in light of Indiana's disclosure form statute.
The majority is correct that Indiana common law long placed the burden upon buyers of real property to inspect the property and bear the risk when they fail to do so:5 "It is well settled that 'a purchaser of property has no right to rely upon the representations of the vendor of the property as to its quality, where he has a reasonable opportunity of examining the property and judging for himself as to its qualities'" McCutchan v. Blanck, 846 N.E.2d 256, 265 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) (quoting Kashman v. Haas, 766 N.E.2d 417, 422 (Ind.Ct.App.2002)). See also Shepherd v. Goben, 142 Ind. 318, 39 N.E. 506, 507 (1895), reh'g denied; Cagney v. Cuson, 77 Ind. 494, 497 (1881); Pennycuff v. Fetter, 409 N.E.2d 1179, 1180 (Ind.Ct.App.1980); Anderson Drive-In Theatre, Inc. v. Kirkpatrick, 123 Ind.App. 388, 110 N.E.2d 506, 508 (1953). Nevertheless, in some cases, we have recognized that a seller has the duty to disclose material facts about the property "where the buyer makes inquiries about a condition on, the qualities of, or the characteristics of the property," Fimbel v. DeClark, 695 N.E.2d 125, 127 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied, and that, once a seller undertakes to disclose facts within his or her knowledge, the seller must disclose the whole truth, Thompson v. Best, 478 N.E.2d 79, 84 (Ind.Ct.App.1985) (citing Ind. Bank & Trust Co. v. *717Perry, 467 N.E.2d 428, 481 (Ind.Ct.App.1984)), reh'g denied.
Against this backdrop of difficult-to-ree-oncile approaches, in 1993 the Indiana Legislature enacted Indiana Code §§ 24-4.6-2-1 to -18, creating a statutory obligation for sellers of certain residential real estate to complete disclosure forms informing prospective buyers of certain types of defects in the property. See P.L. 209-1993, See. 1 (1998). Later recodified at Indiana Code §§ 32-21-5-1 to -18, this legislation requires sellers of certain residential real estate 6 to provide prospective buyers with a written form disclosing known conditions of the property's foundation, mechanical systems, roof, structure, water and sewer systems, and any other appropriate components required by the Indiana Real Estate Commission. ILC. § 32-21-5-7. In other words, this statute requires disclosure of the kinds of defects that will most significantly affect the value and use of a home. While Indiana Code § 32-21-5-9 provides that "[a] disclosure form is not a warranty by the owner ... and the disclosure form may not be used as a substitute for any inspections or warranties that the prospective buyer or owner may later obtain[,]" sellers nonetheless have the affirmative duty to disclose relevant conditions about which they are aware. 1.C. § 32-21-5-7(1) (requiring disclosure of "known" conditions). Further, a seller must affirm the representations made in the disclosure form at the time of closing, which leaves no opportunity for the buyer to subsequently inspect the property. Ind.Code § 32-21-5-12(a). And our Legislature expressly contemplated that the disclosure form statute would create liability for sellers under certain cireumstances:
The owner is not liable for any error, inaccuracy, or omission of any information required to be delivered to the prospective buyer under this chapter if:
(1) the error, inaccuracy, or omission was not within the actual knowledge of the owner or was based on information provided by a public agency or by another person with a professional license or special knowledge who provided a written or oral report or opinion that the owner reasonably believed to be correct; and
(2) the owner was not negligent in obtaining information from a third party and transmitting the information.
Ind.Code § 82-21-5-11. Thus, for transactions covered by § 32-21-5-1, Indiana's disclosure form statute abrogates the common law rule that buyers cannot rely upon sellers' representations regarding the absence of defects in those things included in Indiana Code § 32-21-5-7(1) and places the onus on a seller to refrain from knowingly making misrepresentations about those conditions.
Since the legislative creation of the disclosure form requirement, cases from different panels of this Court have analyzed a seller's liability under it in several ways. In Reum v. Mercer, 817 N.E.2d 1267, 1272 *718(Ind.Ct.App.2004), and Verrall v. Machura, 810 N.E.2d 1159, 1162-64 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied, we recognized a buyer's statutory cause of action in cases where the buyer alleges that a seller made misrepresentations on the form, and we did not deem the seller's resulting liability affected by the buyer's traditional common law duty to inspect. On the other hand, in Kashman v. Haas, 766 N.E.2d 417, 422 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), the panel held that a seller was precluded from liability based upon the buyer's common law duty to inspect the property and the bar upon buyers relying upon sellers' representations, even though the panel also wrote that, "Because Buyers failed to designate evidence demonstrating that Sellers had actual knowledge of termite damage, Ind[ianal Code § [82-21-5-11] excuses Sellers from any liability based upon their answers on the Disclosure Form." Kashman, 766 N.E.2d at 423. Finally, in McCutchan, 846 N.E.2d at 264-65, a panel of this Court cited the disclosure form statute but did not reach the question of whether the sellers had actual knowledge of a defect, instead denying relief to the buyers based upon the buyers' duty to inspect the property.
From my reading of Indiana Code §§ 32-21-5-1 to -18, I agree with Reum, 817 N.E2d at 1272, and Verrall, 810 N.E.2d at 1162-64, that the relevant question now is whether the seller of covered residential real estate actually knew about the property's defects when filling out the disclosure form. Pursuant to the plain language of Indiana Code § 82-21-5-11, this should be the relevant inquiry in evaluating the sellers' liability in the case before us. A contrary reading of Indiana Code § 32-21-5-11 would contradict the Legislature's intent to protect buyers, in limited cireumstances, as they purchase what is typically one's largest and most important asset: a home. Because the record in this case reflects a genuine issue of fact regarding whether Donna Strand and Gloria German, the sellers, had actual knowledge of the structural damage to the property at the time they completed the disclosure form,7 I believe that summary judgment in favor of the sellers was improperly granted. I would reverse the trial court's grant of summary judgment and remand for further proceedings.
. In 1972, our Supreme Court expressly held that the rule of caveat emptor does not apply to purchases of residential real estate from a builder-vendor. Theis v. Heuer, 264 Ind. 1, 280 N.E.2d 300, 306 (1972).
. My a reading of the disclosure form statute should not be construed to open a floodgate of litigation. The disclosure form requirement "applies only to a sale of, an exchange of, an installment sales contract for, or a lease with option to buy residential real estate that contains not more than four (4) residential dwelling units." Ind.Code § 32-21-5-1(a) (emphasis added). A number of different kinds of residential real estate transfers are excluded, including the purchase of a new home that has not yet been inhabited. IC. § 32-21-5-I(b)(8). Further, the disclosure requirement is limited to those components of a home that most affect its habitability. Ind. Code § 32-21-5-7(1). Neither will my reading of the statute discourage buyers from inspecting property before a closing. After all, most buyers do not purchase a home with an eye toward creating legal problems.
. The record reveals that although Strand and German were made aware of termite damage to the house through an inspection performed by Central Indiana Home Inspections, and the professional inspector listed this damage under the heading "Major Structural Defects," the only repairs made by Strand and German after this inspection cost $92. Appellant's App. p. 162, 186.

=== CASE 2227924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:47.636152+00 ===

590 N.W.2d 661 (1999)
Adrienne J. BLOSS, f/k/a Adrienne J. Swanson, Respondent,
v.
The UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA BOARD OF REGENTS, Appellant.
No. CX-98-1787.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 6, 1999.
*662 Robert Bennett, Eric Hageman, Bennett, Brown & McNeil, P.A., Minneapolis, MN (for respondent).
Charles T. Patterson, Heideman, Redmond, Fredregill, Patterson, Plaza & Dykstra, L.L.P., Sioux City, IA (for respondent).
Clifford M. Greene, Andrew M. Luger, Jeanette M. Bazis, Greene Espel, P.L.L.P., Minneapolis, MN (for appellant).
Considered and decided by TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge, LANSING, Judge, and FOLEY, Judge.[*]
OPINION
LANSING, Judge
The University of Minnesota appeals the denial of statutory immunity for sexual-assault injuries of a student enrolled in a cultural immersion program in Cuernavaca, Mexico. Because the University's challenged conduct required the balancing of educational, economic, political, and social considerations, it was acting within the scope of its discretionary function, and we reverse.
FACTS
During participation in a University-sponsored cultural immersion program in Cuernavaca, Mexico, a student traveling to meet friends for a social evening was raped at knifepoint by a taxi driver. The student was participating in the University's Spanish in Cuernavaca Program at the Cemanahuac Educational Community. The University contracts with Cemanahuac to instruct the students and administer the program. The student was housed with a host family that lived approximately 2.5 miles from Cemanahuac, 30 minutes by bus or ten minutes by car. She took the bus to and from school and to attend social and cultural events. She and her roommate had taken a taxi to school *663 approximately three times when they were running late.
On the night of the assault, the student left her host-family home on her own and hailed a taxi about one-half block down the street. She was planning to meet friends at the host home of several fellow students and then to go to a bar or restaurant. The taxi driver told her the back door was broken and that she should get in the front seat. The student got in the front seat. En route to her friends' home, the driver pulled over to the side of the road and raped her.
The University offers more than 175 programs for students to fulfill academic requirements with overseas study. Approximately 1,000 University students annually earn credits by studying in more than 60 different countries. The University offers two types of overseas study experiences: programs in which students live in dormitories, and cultural immersion programs in which students live with and among the people of the host country, with host families or in apartments.
The Global Campus is the University's primary programming, advising, and administrative office for the study-abroad programs. Program decisions are made by working with on-site organizations and the relevant academic departments. The Global Campus staff has discretion in making program arrangements. Cemanahuac has a list of criteria used in the selection of host families. Students are permitted to select another host family if they were unhappy with the housing. The University has no written guidelines governing the distance of host families from schools or transportation for the program.
Cemanahuac provides instruction in the Spanish language and Mexican history and arranges for family homestays for each of the participating students. Students' host-family homes are located throughout the city and are either within walking distance from the school or located on a bus line. The students attend mandatory orientation sessions at which they receive explicit oral and written warnings relating to safety in Cuernavaca. The Cuernavaca program is designed to allow students to travel independently on the weekends and for an additional week during the program. In the 18-year history of the program that preceded the assault in this case, the University knew of no student or tourist who had been raped.
The student sued the University for negligence in its failure to secure housing closer to the Cemanahuac campus, failure to provide transportation to and from campus, failure to adequately warn about risks, and failure to protect students from foreseeable harm. The University moved to dismiss, arguing that it was statutorily immune from suit; that the claims were barred by the students signing an "Acceptance, Release, and Waiver" document; that the University did not have a legal duty to warn the students about the criminal acts of third parties; that failure to warn is not actionable when an attack is not preceded by a threat; and that the student had acknowledged that she was given specific warnings, which, had she heeded them, would have prevented the attack.
The district court denied summary judgment, holding that the University's challenged conduct was ministerial and not subject to discretionary immunity and that the Acceptance, Release, and Waiver was overbroad. The University appealed the denial of its motion for summary judgment on immunity and requested discretionary review on the remaining issues. A special-term panel denied discretionary review of the related issues. See Bloss v. Univ. of Minn. Bd. of Regents, No. CX-98-1787 (Minn.App. Oct.20, 1998) (order).
ISSUES
I. Is the University statutorily immune from liability for claims relating to housing and transportation decisions in its Spanish in Cuernavaca program?
II. Is statutory immunity limited to written policy decisions?
ANALYSIS
I
The University of Minnesota is generally subject to liability for its torts under circumstances in which the University, *664 "if a private person, would be liable to the claimant." Minn.Stat. §§ 3.736, subd. 1 (1998) (waiving governmental immunity for state and its employees); 3.732, subd. 1(1) (1998) (specifically including University within definition of "state" for purposes of statutory immunity). But if a claim is for "a loss caused by the performance or failure to perform a discretionary duty, whether or not the discretion is abused," the University has statutory immunity. Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 3(b) (1998); Janklow v. Minnesota Bd. of Exam'rs, 552 N.W.2d 711, 716 (Minn.1996) (clarifying that state's "discretionary function" immunity will be called "statutory" immunity). The statutory immunity exception is narrowly construed and aimed at preventing courts from passing judgment on "policy decisions entrusted to coordinate branches of government." Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 231 (Minn.1988). Whether an immunity defense applies is a question of law, subject to independent review. Johnson v. State, 553 N.W.2d 40, 45 (Minn.1996). The burden is on the party asserting an immunity defense to demonstrate that it is entitled to immunity. Rehn v. Fischley, 557 N.W.2d 328, 333 (Minn.1997).
The University maintains that the conduct at issue in all of the student's claims is the decision to sponsor study-abroad programs that offer students the opportunity to immerse themselves in local culture by living with host families instead of dormitories and by using the available local transportation. The student counters that the challenge is not to the program itself but to the operational acts that are the day-to-day implementation of the policy, unprotected by statutory immunity.
The distinction between "planning level" activity (protected by statutory immunity) and "operational level" activity (not protected by statutory immunity) was fashioned as an aid to determine what constitutes a discretionary decision. Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 232. The framework impedes analysis, however, when it is envisioned as a funnel-shaped structure with a horizontal line dividing "higher level" decision-making from "lower level" decision-making. See Berkovitz by Berkovitz v. United States, 486 U.S. 531, 536, 108 S.Ct. 1954, 1958, 100 L.Ed.2d 531 (1988) (fact that determination is made at relatively low level does not prevent application of discretionary immunity). Whether consequences of a planning decision are immune from liability depends on whether the consequential conduct itself involves the balancing of public policy considerations in the formulation of the policy. Pletan v. Gaines, 494 N.W.2d 38, 44 (Minn.1992). "Sometimes the implementation of a policy itself requires policymaking." Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 234 (citation omitted).
The lens through which we analyze each immunity claim is the precise alleged conduct giving rise to the plaintiff's claim. Once we identify this conduct, we ask whether it legitimately involves the balancing of public policy considerations. See Nusbaum v. Blue Earth County, 422 N.W.2d 713, 722 (Minn.1988) (first step in statutory immunity analysis is to identify precise governmental conduct in question).
The conduct specifically identified in the student's complaint is (1) "failure to secure student housing closer to Cemanahuac"; (2) "failure to provide safe transportation to and from Cemanahuac"; (3) "failure to warn about various serious risks including the use of taxicabs in Cuernavaca"; and (4) "failure to take other reasonable measures to protect its students from foreseeable harm while studying away from home in a foreign country." We analyze each claim in turn.
Failure to secure student housing closer to Cemanahuac
The complaint's allegation that the University was negligent in failing to secure housing closer to the Cemanahuac education center does not squarely connect with the apparent causation factors. The University moved for summary judgment in the district court on nonimmunity grounds that could have provided a more direct focus for review. See Gleason v. Metropolitan Council Transit Operations, 563 N.W.2d 309, 315 n. 1 (Minn. App.1997) (encouraging motion practice to test sufficiency of claim in order to preserve narrow operation of immunity), aff'd in part, 582 N.W.2d 216 (Minn.1998). Our rejection of the University's request for discretionary *665 review on the alternative bases suggests too superficial an analysis of whether the rulings involved interdependent issues, but we are limited, at this juncture, to a review of only the immunity issues.
To the extent the student challenges the University's use of host families to provide housing, her claim is aimed at policy-making conduct and barred by statutory immunity. A university's decision whether to provide housing is generally viewed as a discretionary decision that involves cost balancing, housing market considerations, and social and educational consequences. Nero v. Kansas State Univ., 253 Kan. 567, 861 P.2d 768, 779 (1993) (university's decision to build, maintain, and operate housing units discretionary).
The decision on how to provide housing in an overseas cultural immersion program involves even more balancing factors than providing adjoining campus housing. The University's decision to offer a cultural immersion program in Cuernavaca that housed students with host families as part of the cultural immersion requires a balancing of academic, financial, political, economic, and social considerations. The University must allocate financial resources among housing, academic, and transportation needs; consider student safety considerations; evaluate the social and political climate of host countries; determine housing availability; identify students' interests and goals; and evaluate the academic effects of cross-cultural interaction.
We can, of course, envision circumstances involving safety of students, particularly school children on school premises, that might not allow an exercise of "discretionary" duty. See S.W. v. Spring Lake Park Sch. Dist. No. 16, 580 N.W.2d 19, 23 (Minn. 1998) (denying discretionary immunity when no requirement of identification or monitoring of visitors on premises of school complex that included high school, elementary school, and day-care center); Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 723 (when challenged activity involved only safety considerations rather than public policy, rationale for immunity does not apply and government is liable); see also W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 131, at 1048 (5th ed.1984) (negligent supervision of playground or school usually involves no issue of discretion). The history of the Cuernavaca program indicates no danger so great that safety could not be balanced against other policy considerations. Nothing in the facts or allegations suggests that the middle-class neighborhood in which the student was housed had a high crime rate, and no student in the 18-year history of the program had been the victim of a rape.
We can also envision specific allegations that might be aimed at the selection of an individual host family that would not be protected by statutory immunity. See Nero, 861 P.2d at 779 (university not statutorily immune from landlord's duty to use reasonable care to protect tenants from foreseeable harm in college dormitory). But the student has not alleged a cause of action in negligence based on selecting the particular host family and has alleged no injury from any other aspect of the housing selection except its distance from the education center. None of the conduct addressed in the complaint is predicated on nonimmune implementation that would involve applying established policy to a particular fact situation. The conduct identified by the complaint reduces either to the decision to use host families, the presentation of program information, or the method of providing transportation, which we turn to next.
Failure to provide safe transportation to and from Cemanahuac
The University has demonstrated that the Spanish in Cuernavaca program, designed as a cultural immersion program, incorporated independent travel decisions and required students to select their own means of transportation to and from Cemanahuac.
The decision of whether or not to provide transportation to students involves the balancing of competing public policy considerations. It is a discretionary decision that involves the weighing of cost, safety, and its impact on the students' cross-cultural interaction. See Pletan, 494 N.W.2d at 44 (school district's formulation of transportation *666 policy is a multifactored policy decision including safety, cost, and the educational goal of instilling responsibility in the elementary students). Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 233 (crucial question is whether conduct involves balancing of public policy considerations in formulation of policy).
The considerations involved in formulating a transportation policy in the context of a cultural immersion program implicate even more factors. Providing transportation to individual students in a foreign country for educational classes and recreational activities would involve substantial costs and create a structure contrary to the specific educational goals of cultural immersion. Statutory immunity protects the University's decision not to provide transportation for the students in the program.
Failure to warn about various risks including the use of taxis in Cuernavaca
The indisputed evidence shows that the program materials, the release form and program orientation, and Cemanahuac's orientation materials all warn students about their safety. The student testified that she received explicit oral and written warnings relating to safety in Cuernavaca at mandatory orientation sessions prior to the start of the program. The warnings included specific admonitions that it was dangerous for women to go out alone at night, that she should call for a taxi at night rather than hail a taxi on the street, and that women should never sit in the front seat of taxis. These warnings specifically addressed the circumstances under which the student sustained her injuries. Because it is not disputed that the University provided these warnings, the conduct at issue in the complaint is the University's failure to provide more extensive warnings about potential dangers.
The University demonstrated that at its orientation session it provides information about academic, health, travel, financial, safety, and social issues. To rebalance the extent of the warnings would represent judicial interference with executive policy-making and affect the program's design, a University decision protected by statutory immunity. See Rasivong v. Lakewood Community College, 504 N.W.2d 778, 782 (Minn.App.1993) (level of security provided by college for community celebration was discretionary decision protected by statutory immunity), review denied (Minn. Oct. 19, 1993).
Failure to take other reasonable measures to protect students from foreseeable harm while studying away from home in a foreign country
Although the University has the burden to demonstrate that immunity applies, a nonspecific allegation that does not reasonably identify what conduct is at issue impedes immunity analysis. Beyond protecting a governmental entity's discretionary decision, immunity also protects a governmental entity from having to defend claims. Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 526, 105 S.Ct. 2806, 2815, 86 L.Ed.2d 411 (1985) (immunity entitles a governmental entity to "immunity from suit rather than a mere defense to liability") (emphasis in original); Anderson v. City of Hopkins, 393 N.W.2d 363, 364 (Minn.1986) (immunity to suit effectively lost if case erroneously permitted to go to trial). Because no specific act or failure to act is identified, we must conclude that what is at issue is the same core conduct relating to decisions on housing, transportation, or additional warnings that has already been determined to come within the scope of the University's immunity.
The litigation appears to be premised on a belief that the University is the guarantor of the student's safety. Unfortunately, this is neither physically possible nor realistic. The student has suffered a grave injury, but the gravity does not create liability. The University is liable for its torts only to the same degree that a private person would be in the same circumstances. Moreover, it is protected from litigation that seeks to interfere with its discretionary functions in designing and constructing an academic program.
II
At the hearing on the summary judgment motion and in the response brief on appeal, the student has relied primarily on an argument that statutory immunity cannot attach to a policy that is unwritten. We think this argument misconstrues the statute by substituting a common but nonessential attribute *667 of discretionary duty for the function itself. See Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 3(b) (state not liable for loss caused by performance or by failure to perform discretionary duty).
Nothing in the statute or the cases interpreting statutory immunity indicates that a governmental unit's statutory immunity is contingent on whether a policy has been reduced to writing. See Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 722 n. 6 (unnecessary to show decision precipitating conduct when challenged government conduct facially involves balancing of policy objectives). Nor do we accept the argument, advanced by the student, that S.W. v. Spring Lake Park School District No. 16 requires that a policy must be in writing in order to be protected by statutory immunity. See S.W., 580 N.W.2d at 23 (finding immunity did not apply when school had no policy, either written or unwritten).
The absence of a written policy may make it more difficult for a governmental entity to sustain its burden of proof, but a written policy is not essential. See Steinke v. City of Andover, 525 N.W.2d 173, 175 (Minn. 1994) (government must produce evidence that conduct was of policy-making nature); Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 234 (adoption of standards or regulations almost inevitably balances policy considerations). The record in this case sufficiently demonstrates that the University, expressing its policies through a combination of written and unwritten policies, balanced multiple competing factors in designing the cultural immersion Spanish in Cuernavaca program.
DECISION
The University demonstrated that it is entitled to statutory immunity in the exercise of its discretionary decision to create a cultural immersion program that placed students in host homes, relied on available public transportation, and provided a variety of student warnings and information. We reverse the district court's denial of statutory immunity for the claims against the University set forth in the complaint.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 10.

=== CASE 9741600 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:00.086348+00 ===

*108OPINION
STRINGER, Justice.
We granted review to consider whether the Civil Damage Act, Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1 (1998), applies to a noncommercial host who imposes a nominal charge for beer provided to a guest. Appellant Joseph Koehnen was injured by a guest who had consumed alcohol at respondent Rachel Paul’s party after having paid a $4 charge. Appellant commenced this action against respondent, claiming that she violated the Civil Damages Act because she charged for beer at a party she hosted. The district court granted respondent’s motion for summary judgment and held that the statute, as interpreted by this court in Cady v. Coleman,1 applied only to commercial vendors and that as a social host, respondent was immune from liability. The court of appeals affirmed on the same grounds.2 We likewise affirm.
The facts are not in dispute. On September 20, 1991, respondent, then 17 years old, hosted a party at her father’s townhouse in Minnetonka, Minnesota. Respondent prepared for the party by inviting some of her close school friends, drew a map for several other friends who didn’t know where she lived, and gave an adult acquaintance money to purchase a keg of beer for the party. Respondent planned to recoup the expense by charging her guests $2 to $4 for a glass which her guests could use for unlimited refills of beer, a practice common at parties she had attended. She paid a friend between $10 to $20 to collect the money and help control the guests if necessary. It apparently was no surprise to her that a number of uninvited guests arrived at her party throughout the course of the evening, including then 18-year-old David Ray Anderson and his friends Gil Bukrinsky and Daniel R. Dufour, none of whom were known to respondent. Anderson drank at least six glasses of beer after paying his $4 charge.
On the same evening, appellant was drinking beer at a party at his adult sister’s residence nearby. Noting the large group milling around outside respondent’s home, appellant went outside to check on his expensive pickup truck parked in his sister’s driveway. A confrontation occurred between appellant and a group including Anderson, Bukrinsky and Dufour as they departed from respondent’s party. Anderson punched appellant in the face and appellant fell, hitting his head on the pavement and sustaining severe injuries.
Appellant sued respondent’s parents, Duf-our and his parents, Bukrinsky and his father, and Anderson on various theories of negligence, and sued respondent on a single statutory claim alleging a violation of the Civil Damages Act, Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd.l. All claims were resolved except those against Anderson — who was uninsured, judgment-proof and in default — and the claim against respondent.3 The district court granted respondent’s motion for summary judgment holding that the statute applied only to “commercial vendors” of alcohol and that as a “social host” respondent was immune from liability. The court of appeals affirmed,4 and this appeal followed.
When reviewing a grant of summary judgment, this court will affirm unless there is a genuine issue of material fact or the court below erred in applying the law.5 The parties disagree on the interpretation of the *109Civil Damages Act as applied to respondent, a question of law which we review de novo.6
At early common law, no cause of action existed for injury resulting from the sale of intoxicating beverages but in 1911 it was created by the adoption of Minnesota’s Civil Damages Act (the Act).7 The first version of the Act was entitled “An Act giving a right of action to certain persons, for injuries caused by any intoxicated person, or by the intoxication of any person, against any person causing the same in certain cases.”8 The language of the Act remained unchanged from its adoption until 1977 and provided:
Every husband, wife, child, parent, guardian, employer, or other person who is injured in person or property, or means of support, by any intoxicated person, or by the intoxication of any person, has a right of action, in his own name, against any person ivho, by illegally selling, barteying or giving intoxicating liquors, caused the intoxication of such person * * *.9
The Act did not define the term “person” as it related to the provider, but in Ross v. Ross we determined that the Civil Damages Act applied to an adult brother who provided alcohol to a minor brother because the legislature intended the act to apply to “the casual donor who, as a host dispensing hospitality or in other social situations, dispenses liquor illegally.” 10 We noted the broad sweep of the Act: “the conditions under which the act was adopted [in 1911] indicate a clear intent that it apply to everyone who violates the liquor laws.”11 The argument that a social host should be treated differently than a vendor under the statute was dismissed as being contrary to the legislative intent:
We have concluded that the circumstances surrounding the adoption of the Civil Damage [sic] Act in 1911 compel a finding that the legislature intended to create a new cause of action against every violator whether in the liquor business or not. It is significant that at that session the legislature seemed preoccupied with strengthening and tightening the liquor laws, using * * * the words ‘any person’ and making no mention anywhere of persons in the liquor business. Since the act applies only to illegal transactions, it is not unreasonable to assume that the legislature intended to include persons other than the licensed vendors * * *. While the act applies to those invited to wedding receptions and company picnics as well as to other gatherings where supervision may be onerous, no reason occurs to us why those who furnish liquor to others, even on social occasions, should not be responsible for protecting innocent third persons from the potential dangers of indiscriminately furnishing such hospitality.12
In affirming the district court ruling that the Act applied to a social host, the Ross court prophetically remarked that “[i]t may well be that the legislature in light of our present holding will amend the Civil Damage [sic] Act * * *. This, however, is not our prerogative.” 13
In 1977 the legislature did indeed amend the Act by deleting the word “giving” from the statute, limiting liability to “any person who, by illegally selling or bartering intoxicating liquors, causes * * * intoxication.” 14 Five years later in Cole v. City of Spying *110Lake Park we reviewed several consolidated cases brought under the Act, one involving a “kegger” hosted by two brothers at their parents’ home at which several guests “contributed to the cost of the keg.”15 In dismissing the case against the hosts, the district court assumed that the intoxicated guest who injured the third party was served free beer.16 On appeal we held that the amended Act “preempted any action against social hosts who give liquor to guests”17 based on the history of the Act and the 1977 amendment.
The transcript of the floor debate in the State Senate on the proposed amendment to delete “giving” from the Civil Damages Act clearly shows that the legislators know [sic] of the Ross decision, knew what results its application would produce, and purposefully proposed the amendment to change the law so that this court’s interpretation of the Civil Damages Act would no longer be correct.18
We affirmed without addressing the issue of a social host who received a contribution toward the cost of the alcohol.
Just three weeks later we addressed the issue of a social host who provided alcohol in exchange for a contribution in Cady v. Coleman.19 There an attorney bought drinks for a client’s employee-manager who became intoxicated and caused an automobile accident in which the plaintiff was injured.20 The district court denied defendant’s motion for summary judgment “holding that the furnishing of liquor to [the employee-manager] could have been a barter, since [the attorney] provided him with entertainment with the expectation that he would continue to refer business to the law firm.”21 Two issues were raised on appeal to this court: “whether social hosts who barter or sell liquor to their guests may be liable under the Civil Damages Act,” and, if so, whether buying drinks for a client was a form of barter.22
The Cady court reaffirmed Cole, holding that the Civil Damages Act exempted social hosts from liability and went on to further refine its analysis of the legislative intent behind the Act, this time relating to social hosts providing intoxicating beverages in exchange for consideration:
We hold in this case that the Legislature intended to insulate social hosts from liability regardless of the terms under which they ‘provide their guests ioith liquor. It is illogical to impose liability under the Act upon a social host who sells or barters liquor to a minor or an intoxicated person, but not upon one who gives it away. The argument that commercial vendors should be subject to liability because they profit by their sales and therefore should bear some of the risks created by their business does not apply with equal force to a social host, who is unlikely to make any profit even if he barters or sells liquor to guests. Moreover, it would be extremely difficult in a social setting to determine whether a barter or sale was either intended or consummated, and the results could be absurd in some cases. Would the Act apply, for example, if the host of a party accepted contributions from guests to pay for the liquor? Would a barter occur if guests were asked to bring food to a party where liquor was served?23
The court held that liability applied to any “person in the business of providing liquor, and not a social host who happens to receive some consideration from his guests in return for drinks he provides.”24 The Act simply was not applicable to the attorney as a social host and “because we have' held that the statutory cause of action against social hosts ‘was eliminated with the word “giving”,’ * * * respondents may not maintain their *111claim against appellants even if they could prove that a sale or barter had taken place.”25
In 1985 the Civil Damages Act, which had been codified at Minn.Stat. § 340.95 (1984), was repealed and replaced by a new Civil Damages Act, Minn.Stat. § 340A.801 (1986).26 The relevant portion of the Act was again amended, this time eliminating the term “bartered” and limiting liability exclusively to the sale of alcoholic beverages:
Right of action. A spouse, child, parent, guardian, employer or other person injured in person, property, or means of support, by an intoxicated person or by the intoxication of another person, has a right of action in the person’s own name for all damages sustained against a person ivho caused the intoxication of that person by illegally selling alcoholic beverages.27
Most significantly however, the neiv 1985 Civil Damages Act left untouched the sweeping holding of our 1982 decision in Cady that only persons in the business of providing liquor are covered by the Act, and this court’s flat-out rejection of appellant’s argument, so energetically embraced by the dissent, that the status of a social host is lost if consideration is given in return for the drinks.
The Act was judicially reviewed again in Rambaum v. Swisher in the context of the sale of alcoholic beverages by a private club to a non-member.28 We applied a two-part test to determine whether the particular sale was illegal.29 The first part — whether the sale was in violation of Chapter 340A — was met since the sale of alcoholic beverages by a private club to a non-member violated the terms of the club’s license.30 Only the second part of the test was at issue — whether the violation “substantially related to the purposes sought to be achieved by the Civil Damages Act.”31 We held that it was substantially related because the sale “impact[ed] on the public’s access to and consumption of alcoholic beverages” — therefore it was an illegal sale.32 But the court’s holding was limited:
We do not by this opinion purport to characterize what further violations of Chapter 340A, if any, might be covered under the Civil Damages Act. Our decision is limited to club licenses under section 3k.0A.k0k, subd. 1(3).33
The evolution of the Act continued in 1985 when in Holmquist v. Miller we held that the Act preempted any common law action against social hosts who negligently served alcohol to a minor and that any expansion of coverage should be by legislative amendment.34 The legislature responded by amending the Act as part of a 1990 tort reform package:
Subd. 6. Common law claims. Nothing in this chapter precludes common law tort claims against any person 21 years old or older who knowingly provides or furnishes alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years.35
The import of this long history of legislative action/court interpretation “duet” is this: liability for injuries caused by illegal sale of liquor was unknown to the common law and is a part of our jurisprudence solely as a *112creature of the legislature. Where the legislature has perceived this court’s holdings to have strayed from its intent, it has reacted by amending the Act accordingly.36 This court’s holding in Cady in 1982 clearly and unequivocally limited application of the Act to commercial vendors, and despite a recodi-fication of the Act in 1984, a restatement in 1985 and an additional amendment in 1990, the Cady holding remains unchanged. Fundamental logic leads to the undeniable conclusion that Cady expresses the will of the legislature and legislative rules of construction so provide.37
Nonetheless, sweeping Cady aside as dictum, the dissent would take the law full circle. It would revert to Ross v. Ross where we held that social hosts were intended to be covered by the Act, ignoring the fact that the legislature nullified Ross when it amended the Act to delete coverage of those who give away alcoholic drinks. In stark contrast to the legislative response to Ross, after 17 years there has been no legislative response to Cady.
Appellant offers a number of contentions as to why, despite this procedural history, respondent should not be exempt from the Act. First appellant argues that a plain language reading of Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1 sustains a cause of action against respondent because liability attaches to “a person” who “illegally sell[s]” alcohol and under a “plain language” interpretation, respondent, as “a person,” should be liable. She charged a fee for the beer, therefore a sale took place — so appellant’s argument goes.38 But the interplay between decisions of this court and legislative enactments makes it clear that no such conclusion can be drawn. This is not an area of the law which suffers from legislative neglect. The Act is no stranger to the legislature; it has repealed, replaced, and subsequently amended it in the years since we ruled in Cady that the legislature intended to create immunity for social hosts, even if the host received consideration for the alcohol served.39 The legislature amended the Civil Damages Act in 1985 and 1990 without extending liability to social hosts, and the rule of construction applies: “[w]hen a court of last resort has construed the language of a law, the legislature in subsequent laws on the same subject matter intends the same construction to be placed upon such language.”40 The legislature thus presumptively adopted the Cole and Cady rulings.
Appellant next argues that in Rambaum we held that any exchange of consideration for alcohol would constitute a “sale” without a license in violation of § 340A.702 (1) and consequently civil liability under the Act *113would attach. This assertion ignores our explicit statement in Rambaum that our ruling was limited to club licenses,41 and we decline to extend it here. Further, it is directly at odds with Cady’s holding that the threshold between “social host” and “commercial vendor” requires more than the mere giving of consideration.
Last, appellant cites changes to other sections of Ch. 340A increasing the criminal penalties for the illegal sale of alcohol to minors as establishing a legislative intent to repudiate Cady and extend civil liability under the Act to social hosts. This argument is unpersuasive in the context of the Act being twice amended since Cady without any suggestion of discontent with our holding in that case.
While the legislature may decide that the reach of the Civil Damages Act needs to be revisited and amended, it is not our prerogative to do so as we said in Ross v. Ross.42 Our court precedent and respect for the separation of powers doctrine dictates no other result. Accordingly, we conclude that as a social host, respondent is immune from liability under the Civil Damages Act, Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1, and affirm the court of appeals.
Affirmed.
. 315 N.W.2d 593 (Minn.1982).
. Koehnen v. Dufour, C7-97-1820, 1998 WL 188865 (Minn.App. Apr.21, 1998).
. Respondent and appellant attempted to settle the claim against respondent using a Miller v. Shugart stipulation which provided that the settlement was only recoverable against respondent's mother’s insurer. See Miller v. Shugart, 316 N.W.2d 729, 734 (Minn.1982) (validating stipulated tort judgment which limited liability to insurer). Respondent's mother's insurer removed the resulting garnishment proceeding to federal court where the stipulation was vacated and the claim remanded back to state district court. See Koehnen v. Herald Fire Ins. Co., 89 F.3d 525, 527 (8th Cir.1996).
. Koehnen, 1998 WL 188865 at *4.
. Art Goebel, Inc. v. North Suburban Agencies, Inc., 567 N.W.2d 511, 515 (Minn.1997).
. See Dairyland Ins. Co. v. Starkey, 535 N.W.2d 363, 364, (Minn.1995)
. See Beck v. Groe, 245 Minn. 28, 33, 70 N.W.2d 886, 891 (1955); Michael K. Steenson, With the Legislature's Permission and the Supreme Court’s Consent, Common Law Social Host Liability Returns to Minnesota, 21 Wm. Mitch. L.Rev. 45, 50 n. 14 (1995).
. Civil Damages Act, ch. 175, § 1, 1911 Minn.Laws 221 (codified as Minn.Stat. § 3200 (1913)); see also Ross v. Ross, 294 Minn. 115, 118, 200 N.W.2d 149, 151 (1972).
. Minn.Stat. § 3200 (1913) (emphasis added).
. Ross, 294 Minn. at 117, 200 N.W.2d at 150. The younger brother in Ross had become intoxicated and was subsequently killed in a traffic accident caused by the intoxication. Id.
. Id.
. Id., 294 Minn. at 121-22, 200 N.W.2d at 152-53 (footnote omitted).
. Id., 294 Minn. at 120, 200 N.W.2d at 152.
. Act of June 2, 1977, ch. 390, § 1, 1977 Minn. Laws 887 (emphasis added) (codified as Minn.Stat. § 340.95 (1978)).
. 314 N.W.2d 836, 837-38 (Minn.1982).
. Id. at 838.
. Id. at 837.
. Id. at 839.
. 315 N.W.2d 593 (Minn.1982).
. Id. at 594-95.
. Id. at 595.
. Id.
. Cady, 315 N.W.2d at 595 (emphasis added).
. Id. at 596 (emphasis added).
. /¿.(citation omitted).
. See Act of June 5, 1985, ch. 305, 1985 Minn. Laws 1454, 1454-1505 (repealing and replacing entire Liquor Act, including Civil Damages Act).
. Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1 (1986) (emphasis added) In 1987 the legislature added the phrase "or who incurs other pecuniary loss” after "means of support." Act of May 15, 1987, ch 152, art. 2, § 3, 1987 Minn. Laws 320, 321. Otherwise the statute has remained the same to date.
. 435 N.W.2d 19, 21 (Minn.1989).
. Id.
. Id.
. Id. (emphasis in original).
. Id. at 22.
. Id. (emphasis added).
. 367 N.W.2d 468, 472 (Minn.1985).
. Act of May 3, 1990, ch. 555, § 10, 1990 Minn. Laws 1557, 1561 (codified as Minn.Stat. § 340A.801). Since the Act as amended applied only to adult social hosts, it does not apply to respondent here, who was a 17-year old high school student at the time she hosted her party.
. Compare Ross, 294 Minn. at 120, 200 N.W.2d at 152, with Act of June 2, 1977, ch. 390, § 1, 1977 Minn. Laws 887.
. See Minn.Stat. § 645.17, subd. 4 (1998) (stating that the proper presumption once a court of last resort has interpreted the language of a statute is that the legislature intends the same meaning in subsequent laws on the same subject).
. The dissent agrees with the appellant and apparently chooses to interpret the court’s plain language in Cady that liability applied to any "person in the business of providing liquor, and not a social host who happens to receive some consideration from his guests in return for drinks he provides," Cady, 315 N.W.2d at 596, as not necessarily precluding liability for those not in the business of providing liquor. The dissent's conclusion that because Paul received consideration, she was subject to liability is a significant departure from, our holding in Cady. Despite the dissent's efforts to characterize Paul’s party as a commercial enterprise, that is simply not the case — the party was at her father's home, friends were invited, the costs were off-set by a token charge of $2 to $4 charge for a glass with no charge for refills, and as might be expected, uninvited guests attended. That she may have more than recovered her costs by a nominal amount hardly puts Paul "in the business of providing liquor.” The facts here are virtually indistinguishable from those in Cole where we affirmed the dismissal of dram shop claims against hosts who charged for beer at a "kegger" without even addressing the contention raised by the dissent that receiving consideration should change the host’s status under the Civil Damages Act.
Nor is it the case that the Cady holding is mere dicta — based on the court's extensive analysis of the clear legislative intent, it unequivocally ruled: "respondents may not maintain their claim against appellants even if they could prove that a sale or barter had taken place." Cady, 315 N.W.2d at 596.
. Cady, 315 N.W.2d at 595.
. Minn.Stat. § 645.17, subd. 4.
. 435 N.W.2d at 22.
. Ross, 294 Minn. at 120, 200 N.W.2d at 152.

=== CASE 9741601 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:00.092342+00 ===

PAGE, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. A person is a person is a person ... ,1 and an illegal sale is an illegal sale is an illegal sale ...
GILBERT, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. By insulating the respondent, Rachel Paul, from any liability for her participation in illegally selling intoxicating beverages to minors, the majority opinion not only ignores the plain language of the Civil Damages Act, but also expands the term “social host” to include a person who admittedly made an illegal sale of intoxicating beverages.
The majority’s reasoning focuses on the lengthy legislative history of the Civil Damages Act. However, legislative history is only to be used as a tool for construing statutory language when the legislative language is ambiguous or not explicit. When the words of the law are clear and free from all ambiguity, “the letter of the law shall not be disregarded under the pretext of pursuing the spirit.”1 The language of the Civil Damages Act clearly and unambiguously provides that a cause of action exists “against a person who caused the intoxication of [one who injures another person] by illegally selling alcoholic beverages.”2 The majority opinion disregards the letter of the law under the pretext of pursuing the spirit of the judicially-created social host exception to this statute.
Paul collected approximately $190 and made a $70 profit by selling alcohol to 50 to 70 minors present at her father’s home on the night in question. Those sales were illegal: not only did Paul lack a liquor license,3 but Paul, herself a minor, sold alcohol to others under the age of 21.4 At oral argument, Paul’s counsel conceded that the furnishing of alcoholic beverages was an illegal sale under these facts.
While it is undisputed that Paul, herself a minor, illegally provided other minors with intoxicating beverages, the majority nonetheless insulates her from liability under the judicially-created “social host” exception to the Act. We have previously held that a social host is not liable under the Act.5 However, we have yet to define the term “social host,” and have previously applied the term only to situations where intoxicating beverages were given away. We have never held that the Act applies only to commercial vendors. Without defining the term social host *114or even analyzing whether Paul falls within that category, the majority summarily concludes that summary judgment is appropriate because Paul was a social host. For several reasons, I have difficulty with that conclusion.
First, the Act provides a cause of action against “a person who causes the intoxication of [one who injures another] by illegally selling alcoholic beverages.”6 As Justice Page’s dissent so eloquently reminds us, Paul is a person. Just a few short months ago, we addressed the definition of the phrase “other person” as used in reference to determine who is eligible to bring a cause of action under the Act.7 We held that the Act is to be liberally construed in order to further its purpose of suppressing “the illegal furnishing of liquor causing a person’s intoxication,” and thus that the phrase “other person” meant any person injured by an intoxicated individual.8 Yet today the majority ignores our recent holding and instead effectively holds that Paúl is not a “person” within the scope of the Act. It seems to me if we are to construe the' term “person” in a way that furthers the purpose of the Act, at a minimum that term should be construed to impose liability on a “person” such as Paul, who profited by illegally selling alcoholic beverages to a large number of minors. Any other interpretation of the word “person” destroys the plain meaning of this word in this remedial statute, and thereby violates our long established rule of interpreting an unambiguous statute in accordance with its plain language. 9
Even more troubling than the majority’s exclusion of Paul from the category of “persons” is the majority’s summary classification of her as a “social host.” While this might be an appropriate determination in other contexts, this classification is erroneous under the facts of this case. When we have previously applied the definition of “social host,” it has been limited to those giving away intoxicating beverages. In Cole, we emphasized the legislature’s removal of the word “giving” from the Civil Damages Act.10 We thus applied the term “social host” to a sister who gave alcohol to her brother, to an individual who provided free beer to a guest at a party where other guests contributed to the cost of the beer, and to an individual who served alcohol “gratuitously” to a guest at a wedding reception.11 Despite this limited holding of Cole, the majority’s use of the term today suggests that “social host” means anyone other than a commercial vendor. Considering the fact-specific nature of the Cady and Cole decisions, this construction of the term “social host” constitutes a major change in the law.
It is true that Paul did not have a liquor license and was not in the business of regularly selling alcoholic beverages out of her father’s home. The majority relies on dicta from Cady to conclude that because Paul is not “in the business of providing liquor,” she qualifies as a social host.12 However, this conclusion ignores the true holding of Cady and the consideration paid in this ease. In Cady, we held that an exemption applied to “a social host who happened] to receive some consideration from his guests in return for drinks he provided.”13 This phrase can not, and should not, be read to insulate all people except commercial vendors from liability. In Cady, we also specifically held that “no barter took place because no consideration was given in exchange for appellant’s liquor. * * * * Consideration requires the voluntary assumption of an obligation by one *115party on the condition of an act or forbearance by the other.”14
The facts of this case simply do not support the conclusion that Paul gave away intoxicating beverages and only “happened” to receive consideration from those present at her father’s home. Instead, she planned and organized this party, had an adult purchase kegs of beer and hired an adult to collect money and essentially serve as a bouncer for the party. Rather than merely accepting contributions from friends or relatives to cover costs, Paul gained a profit by charging strangers admission to enter the home. Paul admitted that she was personally acquainted with only 5 of the 50 to 70 people present. No one was permitted to enter or to partake of the beverages unless they paid this admission fee. Not only did Paul recoup her costs for the evening, she also profited $70, no small sum for a 17-year-old providing two kegs of beer to minors. Under these facts, I have difficulty reaching the conclusion that Paul was merely a social host who just happened to receive some consideration.
To ignore the simple and basic facts' of this case and hold that Paul is a social host is to offer other minors a consequence-free means of earning a profit while providing alcohol to friends and strangers alike.15 The facts before us are not analogous to a social situation such as a football party, card game, or weekend gathering where friends gather to socialize and, to help cover costs, the host accepts contributions from social acquaintances. Paul did not invite friends and acquaintances into her home with the intention of socializing; instead, she charged admission to strangers who came to her father’s home to drink intoxicating beverages. As' could be expected, one of these strangers who bought beer from Paul became intoxicated and severely injured another person. Insulating Paul from liability under these circumstances is a result likely unintended by the legislature and violative of the purposes of the Act. The majority opinion uses dicta from prior cases to override the plain language of this statute. It may well be that, in light of the majority’s holding, the legislature will amend the Civil Damages Act to address the liability gap resulting from this judicially-created immunity doctrine.
.See Dr. Seuss, Horton Hears a Who! (1954).
. Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (1998).
. Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1 (1998).
. Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 1 (1998).
. Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, subd. 1 (1998).
. Cady v. Coleman, 315 N.W.2d 593, 595 (Minn.1982).
. Minn.Stat. § 340A.801, subd. 1 (emphasis added).
. Lefto v. Hoggsbreath Enterprises, Inc., 581 N.W.2d 855, 857 (Minn.1998).
. Id.
. See Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (1998); Peterson v. Halvorson, 200 Minn. 253, 255, 273 N.W. 812, 813 (1937).
. Cole v. City of Spring Lake Park, 314 N.W.2d 836 (Minn.1982). This removal followed our de-cisión in Ross v. Ross, 294 Minn. 115, 200 N.W.2d 149 (1972), where we imposed liability on a 19-year-old who gratuitously provided two minors, including his younger brother, with intoxicating beverages. Id. at 120, 200 N.W.2d at 152.
. Cole, 314 N.W.2d at 837-38.
. See Cady, 315 N.W.2d at 596.
. Id.
. id.
. The notion that other minors might participate in similar activities with similar consequences is not unfounded. Paul herself admitted that the idea to charge admission came from other parties that she had attended at which admission was charged.

=== CASE 2227971 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:48.584943+00 ===

904 N.E.2d 661 (2009)
In the Matter of Constance L. Runner BUEHNER, Respondent.
No. 98S00-0812-DI-651.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
April 10, 2009.
PUBLISHED ORDER IMPOSING RECIPROCAL DISCIPLINE
The Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission filed a "Verified Notice of Foreign Discipline and Petition for Issuance of an Order to Show Cause," advising that Respondent was disciplined by the State of Kentucky and requesting, pursuant to Indiana Admission and Discipline Rule 23(28), that reciprocal discipline be imposed in this state. On December 22, 2008, this Court issued an "Order to Show Cause." Respondent filed a response admitting to the Commission's allegations and consenting to reciprocal discipline. This case is now before this Court for resolution.
Respondent was admitted to practice law in Indiana and in Kentucky. On November 26, 2008, the Supreme Court of Kentucky found Respondent's conduct violated that jurisdiction's rules of professional conduct. For this misconduct, Respondent was suspended from the practice of law in Kentucky for 30 days, stayed subject to compliance with the terms of a one-year probation.
The Court finds that there has been no showing, pursuant to Admission and Discipline Rule 23(28)(c), of any reason why reciprocal discipline should not issue in this state.
Being duly advised, the Court suspends Respondent from the practice of law in this state as of the date of this order, stayed subject compliance with the terms of Respondent's probation in Kentucky as determined by the Supreme Court of Kentucky. Respondent shall report to this Court and to the Commission any change in the status of Respondent's probation in Kentucky.
When Respondent is reinstated unconditionally to practice in the foreign jurisdiction, Respondent may file a "Motion for Reinstatement," attaching documents demonstrating such reinstatement, requesting this Court to release Respondent from probation and reinstate Respondent unconditionally to the practice of law in Indiana. Respondent shall remain under probation in Indiana until released from probation by order of this Court.
*662 The costs of this proceeding are assessed against Respondent.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2227977 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:48.680922+00 ===

590 N.W.2d 726 (1999)
SHELTER GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellee,
v.
Kara LINCOLN, Administrator of the Estate of Rona Lynn Muehlenthaler, Deceased; and Keith Muehlenthaler, Executor of the Estate of Morris Jacob Muehlenthaler, Deceased, Appellants.
No. 97-1443.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 24, 1999.
*727 Glenn L. Norris and George F. Davison, Jr., of Hawkins & Norris, Des Moines, for appellant Lincoln.
Kasey W. Kincaid of Faegre & Benson, Des Moines, for appellant Muehlenthaler.
Roy M. Irish of Patterson, Lorentzen, Duffield, Timmons, Irish, Becker & Ordway, L.L.P., Des Moines, for appellee.
Considered by LARSON, P.J., and LAVORATO, SNELL, TERNUS, and CADY, JJ.
SNELL, Justice.
This is an appeal from a grant of summary judgment in a declaratory judgment action. The appellants ask us to overrule our prior decisions recognizing the validity of a family member exclusion in an automobile liability insurance policy. We decline to do so and affirm the summary judgment order.
I. Background Facts and Proceedings
In September, 1995, Morris Muehlenthaler was driving his truck when it collided with a train. Both Morris and his wife, Rona, a passenger in the vehicle, were killed. Defendant Kara Lincoln was appointed as the administrator of Rona's estate, and defendant Keith Muehlenthaler is the executor of Morris's estate.
At the time of the accident, the plaintiff, Shelter General Insurance Company, provided *728 insurance to the Muehlenthalers under three motor vehicle liability insurance policies and a personal umbrella liability policy. The motor vehicle liability policies provided bodily injury coverage up to $250,000 per person and $500,000 per occurrence. The policies also provided uninsured motorist coverage up to $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. The personal umbrella liability policy included a coverage limit of $2,000,000 for each occurrence.
Each of the policies contained language excluding liability coverage for "[b]odily injury to the insured or any member of the family of the insured residing in the same household as the insured." With one exception, Shelter denied coverage for the Muehlenthalers' claims arising from the collision. Shelter conceded Rona's estate was entitled to the $100,000 policy limit for uninsured benefits under the policy covering the truck.
The defendants objected to Shelter's decision to deny coverage beyond the $100,000 in uninsured benefits. Shelter filed a petition for declaratory judgment. The defendants challenged the family member exclusion claiming it had no factual basis, was an unconstitutional restriction on the parties' freedom to contract, violated public policy regarding contractual freedom, and interfered with public policy supporting the family.
Shelter filed a motion for summary judgment. The defendants presented evidence indicating that most companies providing automobile liability insurance in Iowa included the family member exclusion and did not give insurance consumers the option of removing the exclusion. There was evidence a few companies with a limited market share in Iowa did provide liability coverage without the exclusion.
The district court granted Shelter's motion. Relying on our decisions in Walker v. American Family Mutual Insurance Co., 340 N.W.2d 599 (Iowa 1983), and Rodman v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 208 N.W.2d 903 (Iowa 1973), it upheld the family exclusion provision. The court declared there was no coverage for the accident other than the $100,000 policy limit for uninsured benefits under the policy for Morris's truck.
II. Scope of Review
Where the facts are not in dispute, our review in a declaratory judgment action is to determine whether the district court correctly determined the legal consequences arising from the terms of the insurance policy. See Principal Cas. Ins. Co. v. Blair, 500 N.W.2d 67, 68 (Iowa 1993). To the extent constitutional issues are implicated, we consider the totality of the circumstances under a de novo review standard. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Department of Revenue & Fin., 564 N.W.2d 431, 434 (Iowa 1997).
III. Validity of Family Member ExclusionPrior Case law
We first recognized the validity of a family member exclusion in an automobile insurance liability policy in 1973. See Rodman, 208 N.W.2d at 909. In Rodman, we declined to extend the principle of reasonable expectations to cases in which an ordinary lay person would not misunderstand the extent of his coverage from a reading of the policy unless there were other circumstances attributable to the insurer which would cause such expectations. Id. at 908.
The issue was raised again in 1983 when it was argued the family member exclusion violated Iowa public policy. Walker, 340 N.W.2d at 600-01. In Walker we rejected the claim that chapter 321A (Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility) evidenced a broad public policy to protect persons injured in motor vehicle accidents from financially irresponsible motorists. Id. at 601. We also rejected the argument that our recent decisions abrogating interspousal and parental immunity and finding the guest statute unconstitutional marked a general judicial pronouncement that courts should protect individuals and the public from the financial burdens imposed by automobile accidents. See id. at 602.
In Walker we also rejected the invitation to follow the lead of other states which had invalidated family member exclusions. Id. We distinguished those cases because they arose in states which had mandatory automobile insurance laws. Id. We also distinguished cases arising in states in which there was a judicially recognized public policy of *729 assuring protection to the innocent victims of automobile accidents and no insurance policy without the clause was available. Id. at 602-03.
In 1993, we addressed the issue of whether a family member exclusion in a homeowners liability policy was invalid. Principal Cas. Ins. Co., 500 N.W.2d at 68-69. We held neither public policy nor the constitutional guarantee of equal protection invalidated the family exclusion. Id. at 69-70.
In 1998 we cited with approval two of our prior decisions upholding a family member exclusion. See United Fire & Cas. Co. v. Victoria, 576 N.W.2d 118, 121 (Iowa 1998) (citing Walker and Principal Cas. Ins. Co.). We reaffirmed this position most recently in Krause v. Krause, 589 N.W.2d 721, 724 (Iowa 1999), where we noted the futility of challenging a family exclusion clause.
We point out that [the appellee] does not challenge the validity of the family member exclusion in the policy. Indeed, such a challenge would fail because we have upheld the validity of family member exclusions in the past.
Krause, 589 N.W.2d at 724 (citing Victoria, Principal Cas. Ins. Co., and Walker).
In asking us to reverse this long line of prior decisions, the defendants argue the reasonable expectations of insurance consumers are frustrated by the family member exclusion. They contend the family member exclusion has no basis in fact (actuarially or otherwise), is an unconstitutional restriction on the ability of parties to freely contract, violates the public policy of Iowa, and is contrary to the public policy of encouraging family units.
IV. Reasonable Expectations
We have previously rejected the application of the principle of reasonable expectations to invalidate a family member exclusion in an automobile liability policy. Rodman, 208 N.W.2d at 908. The policies in this case clearly excluded coverage for bodily injury to the insured or any member of the insured's family who resided in the same household. An ordinary lay person would not misunderstand the scope of the coverage. The defendants have not made any claim of circumstances attributable to Shelter which would have fostered different coverage expectations. The defendants' claim that the insureds' reasonable expectations were frustrated is without any support in the record and was properly subject to summary judgment.
V. Basis in Fact
The defendants claim our decisions in Rodman and Walker were based on the erroneous assumption that consumers had the freedom to negotiate the terms and conditions of their liability insurance policies. They contend the vast majority of automobile policies sold in Iowa contain family member exclusions and the insurers will not provide policies without them.[1] The defendants argue we should invalidate the exclusions because of the insurer's unwillingness to provide coverage without them.
We were confronted with a similar argument in Principal Casualty Insurance Co. which involved a family member exclusion in a homeowners policy. We rejected the argument, noting:
No statutes or court cases have been cited that require a private citizen to obtain homeowners insurance that provides coverage for negligently injuring family members. We disagree with the [appellants'] contention that the lack of insurers willing to provide the type of coverage they seek in this case should cause us to act. We believe that this is a policy decision for the legislature, not the judiciary.
Principal Cas. Ins. Co., 500 N.W.2d at 69.
Our reasoning in Principal Casualty Insurance Co. is equally applicable in the context of family member exclusions in automobile liability policies. Any policy decisions mandating the availability of such coverage should come from the legislature.
VI. Restriction on Ability to Contract
The appellants claim the district court erred when it refused to find the family *730 member exclusion was an impermissible and unconstitutional restriction on the ability of the parties to freely contract. They argue this court's willingness to allow tort claims between family members was premised on the assumption that insurance would be available to cover such risks but family member exclusions prevent insurance consumers from obtaining such coverage.
Our decision to abrogate interspousal immunity was not based on any presumption that insurance coverage would be available. In fact, we expressly stated that the absence of insurance would not detract from the arguments favoring the recognition of interspousal claims. See Shook v. Crabb, 281 N.W.2d 616, 619-20 (Iowa 1979). Furthermore, we specifically noted that to the extent insurers feared such claims might lead to fraud or collusive actions, they could limit the scope of the coverage they provided. Id. at 620.
Similar to our decision in Principal Casualty Insurance Co., we note this is not a case in which there is an obligation for a consumer to obtain automobile liability insurance which would cover interfamily tort claims. To the extent a party wants to obtain such coverage, Shelter correctly points out that it is available through the acquisition of uninsured motorist coverage. See Rodman, 208 N.W.2d at 910 (family member exclusion not applicable to uninsured motorist coverage). The defendants' claim of an unconstitutional restriction on their right to contract is without merit, and summary judgment was appropriate.
VII. Public Policy
The defendants argue the family member exclusion violates the public policy of the State of Iowa. To some extent, their public policy arguments rely on their constitutional, freedom-to-contract claim which we have already rejected. They also make public policy claims based on our abrogation of interspousal immunity. We have previously rejected those arguments in Walker, 340 N.W.2d at 600, and the defendants provide no persuasive reasons for us to revisit those claims.
Finally, the defendants contend the family member exclusion discourages and interferes with family units because the availability of coverage depends upon where persons reside. They argue the exclusion encourages spouses to live apart and to engage in fictions in an attempt to obtain financial relief for injuries caused by a family member.
Whenever a court considers invalidating a contract on public policy grounds it must also weigh in the balance the parties' freedom to contract. Id. at 601. We will not eviscerate a contractual provision unless the preservation of the general public welfare imperatively demands it. See id. Therefore, the power to invalidate a contract on public policy grounds must be used cautiously and exercised only in cases free from doubt. Id.
The extent of insurance coverage is often conditioned on one's residence or familial status. We are not convinced the existence of a family member exclusion in automobile liability policies will result in the family discord and collusion predicted by the defendants. This is not a case in which it is imperative that a contractual provision be eviscerated in order to further a public policy. We affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  In fact, the record reveals a few auto insurers do provide coverage without the family exclusion.

=== CASE 2227980 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:48.723979+00 ===

590 N.W.2d 827 (1999)
256 Neb. 362
In re Interest of ANDRE W., a child under 18 years of age.
State of Nebraska, appellee,
v.
Andre W., appellant.
No. S-98-1169.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 5, 1999.
*828 Dennis R. Keefe, Lancaster County Public Defender, and Jenny R. Witt, Lincoln, for appellant.
Gary Lacey, Lancaster County Attorney, and Marcie Hagerty, Lincoln, for appellee.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, STEPHAN, McCORMACK, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
STEPHAN, J.
In an adjudication order entered on November 3, 1997, the separate juvenile court of Lancaster County concluded that Andre W. was a child as defined by Neb.Rev.Stat. § 43-247(2) (Supp.1997), because he had knowingly or intentionally possessed a controlled substance, crack cocaine, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-416(3) (Reissue 1995). In his appeal from this order, Andre contended that the juvenile court erred in failing to grant his motion to suppress certain evidence. The Nebraska Court of Appeals affirmed, *829 and we granted Andre's petition for further review. We affirm.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A juvenile petition was filed in this case on September 18, 1997. The State alleged that Andre was a child as defined by § 43-247(2) because he had possessed cocaine, in violation of § 28-416(3). Andre filed a motion to suppress all evidence recovered as a result of a search and seizure of his person, contending that his constitutional rights were violated. A suppression hearing was held on October 27. Dennis W. Miller, the police officer who discovered the cocaine on Andre's person during a pat-down search for weapons, testified for the State. Andre also testified.
Miller is a detective sergeant with 18 years' experience assigned to the specialized drug unit of the Lincoln Police Department. On September 17, 1997, at approximately 9:50 p.m., Miller was supervising the execution of a search warrant at a Lincoln apartment. The warrant was a nighttime, no-knock warrant authorizing a search for controlled substances, other drug-related evidence, and an individual known as Crumb who was described in the warrant as a "black male 5'7", thin build, wearing a white T-shirt and blue slacks."
The officers gained forcible entry into the apartment. Andre, then 15 years old and dressed in a white T-shirt, blue jeans, and high-top tennis shoes, was found in a bedroom of the apartment. He told the officers that he did not live at the apartment. Andre and other occupants of the apartment were handcuffed and taken outside so that a canine sniff of the apartment could be conducted. Miller testified that the occupants were handcuffed and removed for safety purposes and that this was standard procedure for his unit.
After Andre was taken outside, Miller conducted a pat-down search of Andre's person. At the time of the search, Miller suspected that Andre was involved in distribution of crack cocaine. Informants had indicated that no one actually lived in the apartment and that it was used solely for the distribution of controlled substances. Andre fit the general description of the person referred to in the search warrant as "Crumb." Miller testified: "My purpose of searching was for officer safety, to make sure he didn't have any weapons on him because I didn't know who he was at the time."
As part of the pat-down search, Miller had Andre remove his high-top tennis shoes in order to search for weapons. Miller stated that he did so because people encountered in similar circumstances "frequently hide weapons in their socks and in their shoes." He stated that he had found knives and razor blades concealed in shoes on prior occasions but admitted that he had not personally found such weapons concealed within a person's sock. Miller further testified that persons who are removed from premises being searched for drugs are handcuffed for the safety of police but are also searched for weapons because "on several occasions I've had people that were able to slip the handcuffstheir arms from behind up to the front which gives them access to any weapons they may have on their person." While patting down Andre's socks, Miller felt an object inside one sock that he "immediately" recognized as crack cocaine, based on his training and experience. Miller then removed the crack cocaine and arrested Andre.
Following the hearing, the juvenile court overruled Andre's motion to suppress. On October 30, 1997, the case was tried on stipulated facts, and Andre preserved his objection to the receipt of the evidence obtained as a result of the search and seizure. Thereafter, the court found beyond a reasonable doubt that Andre had illegally possessed cocaine and exercised its jurisdiction over him. Andre appealed, and the Court of Appeals affirmed on the basis that the detention of Andre, the subsequent pat-down search, and the seizure of the crack cocaine were all constitutionally permissible. In re Interest of Andre W., 7 Neb.App. 539, 584 N.W.2d 474 (1998). We granted Andre's petition for further review.
II. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
On appeal, Andre assigned that the juvenile court erred in overruling his motion to suppress and in finding there was sufficient evidence to adjudicate him under the provisions of the Nebraska Juvenile Code. In his *830 petition for further review, Andre assigns that the Court of Appeals erred in affirming the judgment of the juvenile court.
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
A trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress, apart from determinations of reasonable suspicion to conduct investigatory stops and probable cause to perform warrantless searches, is to be upheld on appeal unless its findings of fact are clearly erroneous. In making this determination, an appellate court does not reweigh the evidence, but, rather, recognizes the trial court as the finder of fact and takes into consideration that it observed the witnesses. State v. Chitty, 253 Neb. 753, 571 N.W.2d 794 (1998), cert. denied ___ U.S. ___, 119 S. Ct. 139, 142 L. Ed. 2d 112.
A trial court's ultimate determinations of reasonable suspicion to conduct an investigatory stop and probable cause to perform a warrantless search are reviewed de novo. However, findings of fact are reviewed for clear error, giving due weight to the inferences drawn from those facts by the trial judge. See, State v. Craven, 253 Neb. 601, 571 N.W.2d 612 (1997); State v. Soukharith, 253 Neb. 310, 570 N.W.2d 344 (1997).
IV. ANALYSIS
Andre contends that the actions of the police in detaining him constituted a seizure or an arrest within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment and that such a seizure or arrest was impermissible because the police did so without probable cause. The State contends that the detention was a permissible investigatory stop pursuant to Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889 (1968). Andre argues that the actions of the police in detaining him, conducting a search which included the removal of his shoes, and seizing narcotics from inside his sock were beyond the scope of a permissible Terry stop and constituted a warrantless search done without probable cause. Thus, Andre argues that the warrantless seizure of cocaine from his sock violated his rights under U.S. Const. amend. IV, which protects citizens against unreasonable searches and seizures by the government. See Craven, supra.
1. APPLICABILITY OF FOURTH AMENDMENT
A seizure in the Fourth Amendment context occurs when "` "in view of all of the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he was not free to leave."'" Soukharith, 253 Neb. at 320, 570 N.W.2d at 353. Further, "[w]henever a police officer restrains an individual's liberty by force or some show of authority, the officer has `seized' that person for purposes of the fourth amendment." State v. Caples, 236 Neb. 563, 566, 462 N.W.2d 428, 430 (1990).
It is undisputed that Andre was handcuffed immediately before and during the pat-down search. Under such circumstances, a reasonable person clearly would not believe he or she was free to leave. Thus, the protection against unreasonable searches and seizures guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment applies to this case, necessitating an examination of whether Andre's constitutional rights were violated.
2. DETENTION
Andre contends that the detention during which he was handcuffed and searched was an arrest without probable cause and therefore constitutionally impermissible. The Court of Appeals determined that the detention was a permissible investigatory stop pursuant to Michigan v. Summers, 452 U.S. 692, 101 S. Ct. 2587, 69 L. Ed. 2d 340 (1981). In re Interest of Andre W., 7 Neb.App. 539, 584 N.W.2d 474 (1998). We agree and adopt the reasoning of the Court of Appeals that under Summers, supra, the detention did not rise to the level of an arrest without probable cause and that the detention was a permissible investigatory stop pursuant to Terry, supra.
3. PAT-DOWN SEARCH
Andre argues that under Ybaira v. Illinois, 444 U.S. 85, 100 S. Ct. 338, 62 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1979), the officers were not justified in searching his person based upon his mere presence in the apartment when the search warrant was executed. The Court of Appeals held that Ybarra, which involved a pat down of tavern patrons during *831 the execution of a search warrant, was not controlling under the circumstances of this case, which involved patting down occupants of a private residence during the execution of a search warrant. Based upon the reasoning of Summers, supra, and People v. Thurman, 209 Cal. App. 3d 817, 257 Cal. Rptr. 517 (1989), and noting the evidence indicating that the apartment in which Andre was found had been used solely for the distribution of crack cocaine, the Court of Appeals determined the pat down was justified on the basis of a reasonable belief that persons in the apartment were engaged in criminal activity and were armed and dangerous. In re Interest of Andre W., supra. We agree with and adopt the reasoning of the Court of Appeals on this issue.
4. SCOPE OF PAT-DOWN SEARCH
Andre next contends that even if the police were justified in conducting a pat-down search, the actions of the police in asking him to remove his shoes and patting down his socks exceeded the permissible scope of a pat down for weapons under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889 (1968).
The standard has long been that an officer who reasonably believes that a person is armed and dangerous is entitled for the protection of himself or herself and others to conduct a carefully limited search of the outer clothing of such person in order to discover weapons which may be used to assault him or her. See id.; State v. Craven, 253 Neb. 601, 571 N.W.2d 612 (1997).
The majority of states which have addressed the issue have found that a pat-down search involving the removal of a shoe is permissible under Terry if the officer acted with the intent of finding concealed weapons. See, C.G. v. State, 689 So. 2d 1246 (Fla.App. 1997); Stone v. State, 671 N.E.2d 499 (Ind. App.1996); Hodges v. State, 678 So. 2d 1049 (Ala.1996). But see State v. Mitchell, 87 Ohio App. 3d 484, 622 N.E.2d 680 (1993) (search of shoes impermissible absent sufficient articulable facts indicating that reasonably prudent person would believe defendant to be armed and dangerous); Thompson v. State, 551 So. 2d 1248, 1249 (Fla.App.1989) ("[a]n officer may not continue to search the inside of a suspect's shoes in the hopes of finding contraband unless the officer reasonably believes the object concealed might be a weapon"); Commonwealth v. Borges, 395 Mass. 788, 482 N.E.2d 314 (1985) (search of shoes beyond scope permitted by Terry, absent evidence that officers feared for their safety in asking defendant to remove his shoes).
For example, in Stone, supra, police investigating a possible drug transaction conducted a pat-down search of a suspect that included the removal of his high-top tennis shoes. Noting that the officer's motivation in looking in the shoes was to uncover weapons that might be hidden there and not to look for drugs, the Indiana Court of Appeals held that such a search was permissible pursuant to Terry, supra. In particular, the court stated:
[The officer] asked [the suspect] to remove his shoe solely for the purpose to ensure the safety of the situation. It is not unreasonable for a reasonable and prudent person to suspect a weapon could be hidden in an untied high top athletic shoe. Requesting the removal of a shoe is not overly intrusive given a situation where the officer sincerely fears a hidden weapon might be concealed. The nature of determining the appropriate scope of police action in any given situation is extremely fact sensitive.
Stone, 671 N.E.2d at 503. Likewise, in Hodges, supra, the court determined that police officers could lift a suspect's pant leg and look in the suspect's boot when the officers had a reasonable fear that the suspect could easily have hidden weapons there.
Miller testified that on the basis of his training and experience, persons encountered during execution of a warrant to search premises for controlled substances were known to conceal weapons in their socks and shoes, and that his search of Andre was for the specific purpose of finding concealed weapons. At the time of the search, Miller had a reasonable basis for suspecting that Andre was involved in illegal narcotics distribution, since Andre was encountered in what an informant had essentially described as a "crack house" and generally fit the description of the suspected drug dealer set forth in the search warrant. Under the totality of *832 the circumstances reflected in this record, we agree with the Court of Appeals that Miller had a reasonable and articulable suspicion that Andre might have a concealed weapon in his shoe or sock and that the removal of Andre's shoes and pat down of his socks constituted a reasonable, nonintrusive search for weapons which did not violate Andre's rights under the Fourth Amendment.
5. SEIZURE OF COCAINE
Andre's final argument is that the police could not seize the cocaine based on what has been referred to as the "plain-feel" doctrine as established by Minnesota v. Dickerson, 508 U.S. 366, 113 S. Ct. 2130, 124 L. Ed. 2d 334 (1993), and adopted by this court in State v. Craven, 253 Neb. 601, 571 N.W.2d 612 (1997). Noting that Miller testified that he "`immediately'" perceived the lump in Andre's sock to be crack cocaine and citing to our opinion in Craven, supra, the Court of Appeals determined that the seizure was appropriate pursuant to the plain-feel doctrine. In re Interest of Andre W., 7 Neb.App. 539, 548, 584 N.W.2d 474, 480 (1998). We agree and adopt the reasoning of the Court of Appeals on this issue.
Finding no error, we affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9741603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:04.250311+00 ===

OPINION
BARNES, Judge.
Case Summary
Ahmed Habibzadah appeals the denial of his motion to dismiss criminal charges following the determination that he was incompetent to stand trial. We affirm.
Issue
Habibzadah raises two issues, which we consolidate and restate as whether the trial court properly denied his motion to dismiss.
Facts
According to the probable cause affidavit, on November 11, 2005, Habibzadah allegedly stabbed his wife B.Z. in the chest and head and then "stabbed himself in the stomach and sliced his neck." App. p. 36.
On November 16, 2005, the State charged Habibzadah with Class A felony attempted murder. On November 21, 2005, the State amended the information to include a charge of Class B felony aggravated battery.
*368On June 22, 2007, Habibzadah was committed to the Indiana Department of Mental Health after a determination that he was not competent to stand trial because he did not "have sufficient comprehension to understand the nature of the criminal action against him and the proceedings therein and to make his defense." Id. at 87. Habibzadah has been diagnosed with receptive expressive language disorder because as a child Habibzadah sustained a traumatic brain injury and has "severe hearing difficulties." Tr. p. 15. Habibza-dah is "essentially deaf" and has "some cognitive impairment that ... extends beyond any hearing deficits." Id.
On January 28, 2008, Habibzadah's doe-tors informed the trial court that Habib-zadah had not attained competency and "would not retain competency in the foreseeable future." App. p. 105. Accordingly, civil commitment proceedings were initiated. While the civil commitment proceedings were pending, Habibzadah moved to have the pending eriminal charges dismissed. Following a hearing, the trial court determined that it did not have the authority to dismiss the charges and that it would be premature to grant the motion because of the possibility that Habibzadah could become competent. Habibzadah now appeals.
Analysis
Initially, we address Habibzadah's argument that the trial court did have authority to dismiss the charges. This issue was addressed in State v. Davis, 898 N.E.2d 281 (Ind.2008). On February 21, 2004, Davis was charged with Class D felony criminal recklessness after she walked into a bank, waved a knife in the air, and demanded money from a closed account. Davis was later determined to be incompetent to stand trial and was committed to an appropriate psychiatric institution. Davis's doctor advised the trial court that she "cannot be restored to competence" and that she "is too guarded and paranoid to ever be able to work for her legal counsel." Davis, 898 N.E.2d at 284. On March 27, 2007, Davis filed a motion to dismiss the pending criminal charges arguing that she had already been hospitalized more days than the maximum possible confinement she could have received if she was eventually convicted. The trial court granted her motion, and the State appealed.
In addressing Davis's claims, our supreme court recognized a trial court's "inherent authority to dismiss eriminal charges where the prosecution of such charges would violate a defendant's constitutional rights." Davis, 898 N.E.2d at 285. The court also recognized the statutory authority to dismiss provided by Indiana Code Section 385-34-1-4. In addressing this statute, the Davis court observed, "the open ended eatchall provision of subsection (a)(11) [1] is recognition that there may be additional reasons for the dismissal of criminal charges. A violation of a defendant's constitutional right to due process certainly fits in that category." Id.
Having determined that the trial court is inherently and statutorily authorized to dismiss charges, the Davis court then considered "whether there is an inherent denial of due process in holding pending cerimi-nal charges indefinitely over the head of one who will never have a chance to prove her innocence." Id. at 287 (emphasis added). The court concluded:
Because Davis' pretrial confinement has extended beyond the maximum period of *369any sentence the trial court can impose, and because the State has advanced no argument that its interests outweigh Davis' substantial liberty interest, we conclude it is a violation of basic notions of fundamental fairness as embodied in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to hold criminal charges over the head of Davis, an incompetent defendant, when it is apparent she will never be able to stand trial.
Id. at 290.
In making his claim that the charges pending against him should be dismissed, Habibzadah contends that his "right to fundamental fairness and substantial justice is an adequate basis for dismissal as a matter of law." Appellant's Br. p. 6. Based on Davis, we conclude that a trial court has inherent authority and statutory authority to dismiss eriminal charges where the prosecution would violate a defendant's constitutional due process rights. See id. at 285. However, whether permitting the charges to remain pending in this case violates Habibzadah's due process rights is another question.
Under the facts of this case, we conclude that Habibzadah has not established a violation of his due process rights. First, unlike Davis, there has not been a determination that Habibzadah will never be restored to competency. Although the evidence suggests that such restoration is unlikely, the possibility exists. See Tr. pp. 19-20. Moreover, unlike Davis, Habibza-dah has not been confined beyond the maximum period of any sentence that the trial court could impose if he were conviet-ed of the pending charges. The maximum possible sentence that Habibzadah faces for Class A felony attempted murder is fifty years. Assuming Habibzadah has been confined since he allegedly committed the offense in November 2005, with good time credit Habibzadah would not be eligible for release until 2080.
Because it is possible that Habibzadah may be restored to competency and because he has not been confined for longer than the potential maximum sentence he faces, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying his motion to dismiss. See Davis, 898 N.E.2d at 285 ("Abuse of discretion is the appropriate standard for appellate review of a trial court's decision to dismiss a charging information"). Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that due process, which includes the concepts of equity and fundamental fairness, requires the dismissal of the charges against Habibzadah.
Conclusion
Although a trial court has the inherent and statutory authority to dismiss charges where the prosecution would violate a defendant's constitutional rights to due process, the facts of this case do not warrant dismissal. We affirm.
Affirmed.
BAILEY, J., concurs.
MATHIAS, J., concurs with separate opinion.
. Indiana Code Section 35-34-1-4(a)(11) permits dismissal upon "[alny other ground that is a basis for dismissal as a matter of law."

=== CASE 9741604 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:04.255509+00 ===

MATHIAS, J.,
concurring.
I concur in the majority's decision to affirm the trial court, but believe that our current criminal justice procedures are inadequate to consider and resolve issues presented by defendants suffering from long-term or permanent mental illness. I write separately to highlight the issues raised in this case regarding the dismissal of charges against a defendant who has been civilly committed because he is mentally incompetent to stand trial.
The psychiatrists in this case uniformly determined that Habibzadah was not com*370petent to assist in his own defense.2 However, one of the two psychiatrists testified that the chances that Habibzadah would be restored to competency were less than fifty percent based on the level of improvement shown after being committed. Tr. pp. 19-20. The testimony of this psychiatrist provides the basis for the majority's decision that Habibzadah has not established that he will never be restored to competency.
In State v. Davis, 898 N.E.2d 281, 290 (Ind.2008), our supreme court determined:
Because Davis' pretrial confinement has extended beyond the maximum period of any sentence the trial court can impose, and because the State has advanced no argument that its interest outweigh Davis' substantial liberty interest, we conclude it is a violation of basic notions of fundamental fairness as embodied in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to hold criminal charges over the head of Davis, an incompetent defendant, when it is apparent she will never be able to stand trial.
The issue left untouched in Davis is what happens to charges filed against a defendant who has not yet been civilly committed for the full length of the maximum sentence allowed under the charges against him or her but who is considered mentally incompetent without a chance of recovering competence. Mental health diagnoses are imprecise at best. The difference between indeterminate civil commitment with the underlying charges dismissed and continued pending of charges during that commitment is the word "never," or words to that effect, in a psychiatrist's report.3 In Davis, our supreme court was presented with facts that allowed them to easily dispense with the case based on the length of pre-trial confinement, rather than on an in-depth analysis of the effect of the defendant's competency on the dismissal of charges.
A large and ironic lapse in the logic of our criminal justice system is that its initial imperative is to determine the competency of defendants prospectively, to assist counsel at trial. And the courts can determine whether the defendant is able to assist in his or her own defense at any time, whether relatively soon after arrest, or long thereafter, sometimes years after arrest. Only after a defendant is determined competent is the issue of competency at the time of the crime raised, and only along with the trial of the facts of the offense alleged.
The problem arises that if a defendant is not competent to assist in his or her own defense, under our current system, the defendant will never be able to go to trial and present evidence relating to his or her culpability at the time of the crime. Without more guidance, Davis requires that an incompetent defendant be civilly committed for the maximum sentence allowed under the crimes he or she was charged with unless he or she becomes competent to stand trial during that time period. Hypothetically, an incompetent defendant charged with murder could be held for life if that defendant never regained competency to stand trial for the crime allegedly committed. Even more troublesome is the *371possibility of a defendant who regains competency during civil commitment over a period of decades. It is quite likely that such a person will have no memory of the crime charged and be horrified upon learning of it. Even worse, that defendant might then be convicted for the underlying crime, in part because his demeanor is now that of a competent person.
Habibzadah does not have the benefit of a psychiatrist's statement that he will never return to competence. One can wonder whether a psychiatrist's statement that a defendant has a five, ten or twenty percent chanee of returning to competency would preclude the release to civil commitment and dismissal of criminal charges under Davis. In this case, a less than fifty percent chance that Habibzadah would be returned to competence prevented the dismissal of charges. Habibzadah is charged with a Class A felony that carries a maximum sentence of fifty years. Under Davis, the time frame for determining a return to competency for Habibzadah is therefore fifty years, during which time Habibzadah will be civilly committed. Every year that Habibzadah is held, the evidence grows stale and the memories both of witnesses and of the mentally handicapped Habibzadah dim.
Our eriminal justice system has a mechanism to deal with temporary incompetence as it pertains to criminal eulpability, or scienter, but fails miserably when faced with the likely long-term or permanent mental illness of a eriminal defendant. Even Davis acknowledges that confinement of an incompetent person may be a violation of due process, but only after the defendant has been civilly committed for the maximum sentence allowed under the charges filed, when the State does not have an interest that outweighs the defendant's liberty interest.
Our criminal justice system needs an earlier and intervening procedure to determine competency retroactively to the time of the alleged crime. Perhaps we as a society need to consider the concept of a defendant being unchargeable because of mental illness under Indiana Code section 35-41-3-6, and not just guilty but mentally ill under Indiana Code section 35-86-2-1, et. seq. In either case, the commitment proceedings provided for in Indiana Code section 35-86-2-4 would both protect society and best care for the defendant involved.
Whether such a procedure is promulgated by the Indiana Supreme Court through its rule-making process or by the Indiana General Assembly through statute, it is time for the truly long-term, incompetent criminal defendant to have an earlier and intervening opportunity for a determination of his or her competency at the time of the crime alleged. Such a procedure convened soon after arrest, rather than years later when stale evidence and dim or non-existent memories are all that are left, or never, would best serve society and the defendant.
. One of the psychiatrists who examined Ha-bibzadah initially believed that he was not competent, but later determined that Habib-zadah was "malingering." I would note that if the charges were dismissed based on a fraudulent determination of incompetency, the State would be well within its rights to seek to reopen the case based on the fraud perpetrated upon the court by the defendant.
. The defendant in Davis also received a psychiatrist's determination that she would never return to competence. Davis, 898 N.E.2d at 284.

=== CASE 9741605 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:05.021104+00 ===

JUSTICE TOOMIN delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial, defendant Nicole Harris was found guilty of first degree murder of her four-year-old son and sentenced to a term of 30 years’ imprisonment. On appeal, she asserts that: (1) the trial court erred in denying her motion to suppress statements; (2) the court abused its discretion in finding a key defense witness incompetent to testify; (3) in the absence of proof of the corpus delicti, the evidence was insufficient to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; and (4) she was denied effective assistance of counsel. For the following reasons, we affirm. BACKGROUND The instant prosecution stemmed from the strangulation of defendant’s four-year-old son, Jaquari Dancy. In the afternoon of May 14, 2005, his father, Sta-Von Dancy, discovered Jaquari’s lifeless body on the floor of his bedroom. An elastic cord or band dangling from a fitted sheet on the top bunk was wrapped repeatedly around Jaquari’s neck. Sta-Von unwrapped the band and began mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. When Jaquari failed to respond, Sta-Von picked him up and ran outside. He encountered defendant, who had returned from the laundromat and was parking her car. They rushed off in search of a hospital, with defendant driving and Sta-Von continuing his CPR efforts. An ambulance eventually met them and Jaquari was taken to Resurrection Hospital on the Northwest side of Chicago, where he was pronounced dead. The Initial Investigation In the evening of May 14, Chicago police officers were summoned to Resurrection to begin their investigation into Jaquari’s death. Detective Randall Wo met with defendant and Sta-Von in a family room about 7:15 p.m. and after expressing sympathies had a brief conversation with the parents. Wo testified that it was customary in child death investigations to ask parents to assist in the investigation and both Sta-Von and Nicole agreed to come to the station. Although defendant was given the option of driving her own car to Area 5 headquarters, she was too emotional and instead elected to ride in a police car. The parents arrived at the station between 8 and 9 p.m. Detective Anthony Noradin was among the team of officers assigned to the death investigation. Initially, he was basically told that “there was a four-year-old child they found with an elastic band wrapped around his neck.” There was no indication that this was a murder investigation. Detective Noradin and his partner, Detective Kelly, interviewed defendant at 9 p.m. in the “quiet room,” a sensitive room used mainly for victims of sexual assaults. The room is approximately 18 by 12 feet, with a table and chairs, a television, telephone and a computer. Defendant was not restrained; her five-year-old son Diante was seated on her lap. The detectives asked questions concerning background information as well as the family’s activities during the day. Her responses gave the officers no reason to believe that Jaquari’s death was the result of anything but an accident. Following this 25- to 30-minute conversation, the detectives left defendant and Diante in the room with the door open. Defendant was not told she was under arrest nor was she told that she was free to leave. The detectives passed the results of their conversation to other detectives who were about to interview Sta-Von. It is customary interviewing practice to separate witnesses during investigations. Defendant’s Arrest and Custodial Interrogation1  As the investigation continued, Detectives Balodimas and Landando left the station to re-canvas the family’s apartment building at 2004 North LaPorte in Chicago. After speaking with other tenants, they returned to the station to confront defendant with some of the inconsistencies between her earlier comments and what they had learned from her neighbors. Detective Balodimas told defendant that contrary to her earlier statement, the neighbors said that she had struck her children that day with a belt, rather than with her hands. They spoke for about 15 minutes and toward the end of the conversation, defendant told the officers that when she returned from the laundromat, she got mad when she saw Jaquari and Diante outside. She then broke down, started crying, and spontaneously stated, “I wrapped the phone cord around Jaquari’s neck and then I wrapped the elastic band from the bed sheet around his neck to make it look like an accident.” Detective Landando immediately stopped the questioning and read defendant her Miranda rights from his Fraternal Order of Police book. According to Noradin, defendant acknowledged them, saying: “I understand my rights. I have a degree from Southern University of Illinois. I understand my rights.” She was then placed under arrest and moved to Interview Room A, a secure room. Although the room has a metal bench and handcuff bar, defendant was not restrained. The questioning did not resume at this time. At 1:40 a.m., Noradin and Kelly returned to the interview room and again spoke with defendant. Noradin informed her that an assistant State’s Attorney would be coming out to memorialize her statement. In turn, defendant recanted, denying that she caused Jaquari’s death. The conversation lasted but five minutes. The detectives next spoke to defendant at about 2:25 a.m. at which time she agreed to take a polygraph examination. Arrangements were made to do the examination later that morning. At 11:30 a.m., Nora-din took defendant to the polygraph section located at 1819 West Pershing Road. Sta-Von was taken there in another car having likewise agreed to the examination. Investigator Bartik, the polygraph examiner, first spoke to the detectives concerning the facts of the case. He met with defendant at 12:45 p.m., at which time she signed the polygraph consent, which included her Miranda waiver. At no time did she elect to remain silent or request an attorney. The examination took about an hour and a half and defendant answered the questions coherently. Although Bartik could not determine whether defendant was telling the truth, he informed the detectives that she had made certain statements that were inconsistent with earlier accounts as well as information provided by Sta-Von. In turn, the detectives reinterviewed defendant at the polygraph section and were then told that after defendant took Jaquari back into the bedroom, she spanked him again, grabbed the elastic band from the top bed sheet, put it around his neck, laid him on the top bunk and then left. Defendant was returned to Area 5 and again placed in the “quiet room.” At 7:10 p.m., she again spoke with Balodimas, Landando and Noradin. After being reminded of her rights, defendant was confronted with the fact that because there was a bed rail around the bunk, there was no way Jaquari could have rolled off the bed and fallen to the floor. The defendant then stated she wanted to tell the truth; that she wrapped the elastic band around Jaquari’s neck three to four times and pulled it until he stopped crying. She saw blood coming from his nose, laid him down and then left. In turn, Noradin called the State’s Attorney’s office and asked for a felony review assistant to come to the station. Assistant State’s Attorney Lawrence O’Reilly had been summoned earlier to Area 5 on another investigation. Because the detectives on that matter did not need him immediately, he agreed to help with this case. O’Reilly, together with Detectives Noradin and Cordero, met with defendant around 8:30 p.m. in the “quiet room,” which O’Reilly described as an office, a yellow room “with butterflies and ladybugs and things” painted on the wall. After introducing himself and making it clear that he was an assistant State’s Attorney and not defendant’s lawyer, O’Reilly “Mirandized” the defendant. She acknowledged her understanding and agreed to tell him what had happened to Jaquari. According to defendant, on the prior day, she and Sta-Von left for the laundromat late in the afternoon, instructing both children to remain inside. They spent 30 to 40 minutes there and on returning home found Jaquari outside with older boys, kids who were 7 and 8. She took Jaquari to his bedroom, pulled down his pants and spanked him with a belt. She spanked her other son too and left both children in the bedroom. Jaquari would not stop crying so defendant told him: “There’s nothing wrong with you. Stop crying.” The crying continued. She reentered the children’s bedroom and grabbed the elastic portion of the fitted sheet from the top bunk and wrapped it around Jaquari a number of times. He had a little bit of blood coming from his nose and eventually he stopped crying and squirming. She left Jaquari in the bed with the elastic band around him. Her boyfriend was asleep in their bedroom and defendant then went back to the laundromat to finish her laundry. She returned about 30 minutes later, and after double parking in front of the house, brought the laundry to the door and rang the bell. Her boyfriend responded and took the laundry and defendant went back to park the car. When she returned, the boyfriend was holding Jaquari, who was discolored and not breathing. They then got into the car and started to the hospital, calling 911 en route. Toward the end of the interview, and out of the presence of any police officers, O’Reilly asked defendant how she had been treated by the police. In response, defendant stated that she had been treated well. He then explained various ways to memorialize her statement and defendant agreed to do a videotaped statement. O’Reilly then left to make arrangements and secure the consents and paperwork. As he walked out he was met by Andrea Grogan, the felony review assistant who had actually been called on Jaquari’s death investigation. He turned the case over to Ms. Grogan and returned to the investigation to which he had originally been assigned. Assistant State’s Attorney Grogan interviewed defendant at 9:20 p.m. in the “quiet room” with Noradin, Balodimas and Cordero. After explaining her role as an assistant State’s Attorney, Grogan advised defendant of her Miranda rights, which defendant acknowledged. They then spoke for about 40 minutes, and toward the end of the interview, the detectives were asked to leave the room. In response to Grogan’s inquiries, defendant then told her that she had not been forced or threatened to speak, that she had been treated fine by the detectives, provided food and drink and allowed to use the bathroom. In a second conversation at about 11:45 p.m., defendant chose to give a videotaped statement and appropriate arrangements were made. The statement was actually videotaped at 1:06 a.m. on May 16, and lasted about 20 minutes. The videotape, together with its transcription were admitted during the trial and were likewise reviewed by this court. In the pretrial proceedings, defendant filed a motion to suppress statements wherein she alleged inter alia that she was never given her Miranda warnings, that she was incapable of understanding them and that she was subjected to physical and mental coercion. Responding to those allegations, all of the police personnel and assistant State’s Attorneys involved in the investigation testified that defendant was duly admonished of her rights, acknowledged her understanding and agreed to waive them. Likewise, all of the officers denied any physical or mental coercion, specifically, that defendant had been shoved, poked or handcuffed to a wall, berated or called names, made promises or subjected to any threats. Further, the witnesses testified that defendant was provided food, drink, and water and allowed to use the bathroom. She made no complaints about her treatment during the course of the investigation. The defendant offered no evidence on the motion, choosing to reserve her challenges to the statements for presentation before the jury. In turn, the motion to suppress was denied. The Trial Proceedings At trial, the State introduced the evidence previously recounted encompassing the initial investigation, defendant’s arrest and custodial interrogation. Assistant State’s Attorneys Grogan and O’Reilly also related their involvement in the investigation, and the videotape of defendant’s confession was introduced and published before the jury. Additionally, the State presented Sta-Von Dancy whose testimony focused on the events of the tragic day, culminating in his discovery of Jaquari’s lifeless body. Sta-Von testified that as he approached Jaquari, he saw that his face was purple. He observed elastic wrapped tightly on his neck, close to 10 times, and succeeded in unwrapping it before taking Jaquari in his arms. Sta-Von had seen the elastic before, hanging from the sheet on the top bunk reaching almost to the bottom bed. Jaquari had played with the sheet before, wrapping it around his neck. The prosecution also offered testimony from Assistant Cook County Medical Examiner John Scott Denton, who conducted the postmortem examination of Jaquari. Dr. Denton had performed 2,000 to 2,500 autopsies of which 30 were strangulation cases. Among Den-ton’s significant findings were petechiae or pinpoint hemorrhages in both eyes, indicative of increased pressure around the neck. There were also impression or ligature marks on Jaquari’s neck, most prominent on the left side and somewhat fainter on the right. Dr. Denton testified that a ligature causes arterial pressure to rise, but prevents the blood from returning back down. As a result, the head becomes very congested, causing blood vessels to burst. Accompanying the body was a blue fitted sheet with a protruding elastic cord. The cord was consistent with and completely covered the ligature mark, an exact fit to its horizontal and vertical ridges. Although Denton was also provided a telephone cord, it did not have the horizontal marks consistent with the elastic band. Dr. Denton formed two opinions relative to cause and manner of death. The first opinion was formed during the autopsy on May 15: “My opinion at the time was that this was a tragic accident, that this was a boy who was in his upper bunk bed who had become entangled with an elastic bed fitted sheet and had fallen to the ground from his upper bunk and that this was just a tragic accident that occurred and it was a hanging.” Several days later, a detective informed the doctor of defendant’s confession. In turn, Denton was provided with the confession, detective reports and scene photographs of the room and the bunk bed. Initially, he had understood that Jaquari had been in the top bunk, but later learned that Jaquari was actually in the bottom bed. Scene photographs also depicted what appeared to be a small amount of blood on the sheets of the lower bunk. He also learned that the defendant had struck Jaquari with a belt the afternoon of his death. Based on that information, Dr. Denton issued a new opinion concluding that the cause of death was strangulation due to elastic ligature; it was an intentional injury and, therefore, homicide. The State then rested, and following the denial of defendant’s motion for a directed verdict, the defense offered evidence comporting with its theory that the cause of Jaquari’s death was accidental strangulation. Consistent with that defense, defendant challenged the foundation and veracity of her confession, asserting that it was falsely contrived and forced upon her by police threats and promises. At trial, several family members offered testimony supporting the defense theory of accidental death. Defendant’s cousin, Wanda Harris, described Diante as inquisitive and Jaquari as playful. The boys would spend weekends with her playing video games and pretending to be superheroes. They were constantly flipping each other and jumping up and down on the couch. However, she never saw Jaquari wearing a cape or anything like that when they were playing superheroes. StaVon testified that the boys acted out things they had seen in Spider-man movies. Also, as noted, he had earlier seen the elastic protruding from the top sheet in the boy’s bedroom. Jaquari had played with the sheet before, wrapping it around his neck. Defendant’s sister-in-law, Audrey Harris, also testified that when the boys played at her house, Jaquari “would be into things.” On one occasion, she had left a laundry bag hanging in her car and when she looked up, Jaquari “had that thing all over his face.” Additionally, the defense sought to offer the testimony of five-year-old Diante, that while the boys were alone in their bedroom on the afternoon of the occurrence, he was playing his videogame, and Jaquari was “playing with that string and wrapping it around his neck.” However, following a hearing, the court found that Diante was incompetent to testify in accordance with section 115 — 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/115 — 14 (West 2004)). Defendant testified that she was 23 years old and had graduated from Southern Illinois University with a bachelor’s degree in psychology. She recently began working as a psychiatric rehabilitation service coordinator at Winston Manor Nursing Home, doing group assessments with mentally ill patients. The family, which included Sta-Von, herself, Diante and Jaquari, had just moved into the LaPorte Street apartment. The apartment consisted of two bedrooms, a front room and a kitchen. The boys shared one of the bedrooms, which contained a bunk bed, dresser and a television set. Defendant related that in the afternoon of May 14, she washed her clothes in the laundromat across the street. While the clothes were drying, she returned home and discovered Diante in the hallway. The back door was open and Jaquari was outside. She scolded the children for being out of the house without permission and ordered them to their room. Jaquari was crying, but after Sta-Von went into the bedroom to comfort him, the crying stopped. When he returned, Sta-Von fell asleep on the couch until defendant woke him and helped him to their bedroom, where he again fell asleep. Defendant then went back to the laundromat and, after gathering the clothes, returned home. She rang the doorbell for Sta-Von to take the clothes while she parked the car. As defendant was parking, StaVon came running out with Jaquari in his hands and she asked what had happened. Sta-Von said he did not know and to just get to the hospital. As defendant drove, Sta-Von was giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Eventually, an ambulance met them and took Jaquari to the hospital. Before joining him, they returned home to pick up Di-ante. Upon arriving at the hospital, defendant and Sta-Von were told that Jaquari was dead. They were then taken to the chapel, where they met with the doctor, a grief counselor and several detectives. After about an hour, a detective asked them to come to the station for questioning, saying that it was procedure because this was not a natural death. Although the police offered to let defendant drive her own car, she declined because she was too emotional to drive and instead rode with Diante in a police car. When they arrived at the station, defendant and Diante were escorted to a room that had a desk, chairs, a cabinet and computer. Detectives were in and out asking her questions about when she got up, whether she washed her clothes and other activities of the day. Initially, the police treated her “okay” and she continued cooperating with them. At some point they left, leaving defendant and Diante in the room. After several hours passed, a man from the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services named Scott Peterson came and asked if there was anywhere for Diante to go. Defendant told him that Diante could go to his grandmother’s home and then signed papers giving temporary guardianship to the grandmother, Patricia Dancy. As Di-ante was leaving, Detective Noradin removed defendant from the initial interview room to another room with a steel bench and a bar over it. Noradin shoved her into the room and “he was, like, you’re under arrest for murdering your f g son.” He handcuffed defendant to the bar, telling her “I’m sick of your BS lies, you are sitting here playing games with us, you can’t sit here and say you didn’t do it because we already found the cord.” Defendant started crying and said she was telling the truth. She asked for an attorney, but was told she did not need one, she needed to cooperate. The detectives remained in the room with her for about 20 minutes. They then removed the handcuffs and left. In turn, another detective arrived and told defendant to tell the truth; he said that he had talked to Sta-Von, who thought it was possible that defendant had done it. Later, the detectives returned and asked defendant if she would be willing to take a lie detector test and she agreed. The test was scheduled for the morning and defendant remained in the interrogation room, leaving only once to use the bathroom. Although she had a blanket with her, defendant was unable to sleep. Noradin took her to the polygraph place, where Detective Bartik provided a consent form for her to sign and then gave the examination. When it was over, Bartik began to ask questions and repeatedly accused her of lying. According to defendant, Bartik told her, “You know what, Nicole, you are pissing me off. I’ve been very patient with you and you are still sitting up here, you are lying to us, you know what, you’re acting like a monster.” Defendant said she wanted an attorney because she was telling the truth. Another detective threatened to “turn this stuff over to the state” and Bartik warned that she would “spend the rest of your life behind bars because you won’t cooperate.” Bartik continued asking what happened and how many times she wrapped the string around Jaquari’s neck. Defendant continued shaking her head and crying and then she said, “I was, like one time,” at which point Bartik left the room. He returned and told defendant that Sta-Von said he found the string wrapped around Jaquari’s neck four or five times. Bartik then produced a picture of the children’s bunk bed and asked defendant how she did it. She said that she continued shaking her head, “And then I started agreeing.” Defendant testified that Noradin then took her back to the station, where a detective named “Bobby” arranged for her to talk with an assistant State’s Attorney and rehearsed the police version of events that she should tell the prosecutor. The detective urged her to “do the videotape because it shows lots of emotion and you are very upset, they need to see that you’re upset.” “Bobby” assured her that because defendant was cooperating, she would be charged with something like voluntary manslaughter, rather than murder. Detective Noradin also joined in telling defendant that “even if you had to go to jail for a minute, bond won’t be that high; your parents could come get you out, and you can fight it from the outside.” When Assistant State’s Attorney O’Reilly entered the room with Noradin and “Bobby,” defendant provided the rendition of events she had rehearsed. At one point the detectives were asked to leave the room and defendant told the prosecutor that she “had been shoved and stuff,” but not by “Bobby,” and the attorney took note of it. She also told this to the female assistant State’s Attorney who videotaped her statement. As she concluded her testimony, defendant recalled that the blue sheet on Diante’s bed was ripped, but the elastic that was hanging out was still attached. She denied wrapping anything around Jaquari’s neck, telling the jury that she gave the statement: “Because I was scared, and they told me I would be able to go home; and that I wasn’t cooperating, and if I didn’t cooperate with them, that they were going to turn the stuff over to the state and the state was going to slam my ... ass.” On rebuttal, Detective Landando acknowledged that the secure room to which defendant was taken upon her arrest had a metal bench with a hook on the wall; however, defendant was not handcuffed. Detective Cordero, “Bobby,” likewise testified and denied rehearsing defendant’s videotaped statement or telling her she could go home if she cooperated with the police. Additionally, Assistant State’s Attorney O’Reilly denied that defendant ever told him that she had been pushed, poked or in any way mistreated by the police. Similarly, Assistant State’s Attorney Grogan denied that defendant told her she had been poked by any detectives. According to both Grogan and O’Reilley, had that happened, the accusation would have been investigated. On the fourth day of trial, following closing argument, the jury retired to deliberate. The defense proved unavailing. The jurors arrived at a guilty verdict after 2 hours and 20 minutes of deliberation, presumably including lunch. Thereafter, motions for new trial were filed by the defendant pro se, her trial attorneys, and substitute counsel who appeared for posttrial proceedings. All motions eventually were denied and defendant was sentenced to a term of 30 years’ imprisonment. The present appeal follows. ANALYSIS Denial of Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Statements Defendant’s suppression motion alleged that her statements were involuntary and that she was not advised of her constitutional rights prior to questioning. The motion encompassed two separate statements; defendant’s oral confession on May 15, 2005, at 12:45 a.m., and her videotaped statement recorded the following night. Evidence was received, and at the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court determined by a preponderance of the evidence that both statements were voluntary. Additionally, while recognizing that the first statement was not “Mirandized,” the trial court nonetheless concluded that admonishments were not required because the statement was spontaneously offered by the defendant. On appeal, defendant submits that the initial statement was indeed the product of custodial interrogation and in the absence of Miranda admonishments should have been suppressed. Defendant further argues that suppression of the videotaped statement was mandated by Missouri v. Seibert, 542 U.S. 600, 159 L. Ed. 2d 643, 124 S. Ct. 2601 (2004), because the “question-first, warn later” tactics employed by the detectives rendered her subsequently administered Miranda warnings meaningless. In response, the State asserts that because the defendant was not in custody when she made her spontaneous statement, she was not entitled to Miranda’s protections. Even assuming a Miranda violation, the State argues that defendant was not thereby disabled from waiving her constitutional rights and confessing after the requisite admonishments were given. In determining whether a trial court has properly ruled on a motion to suppress, findings of fact and credibility determinations made by the trial judge are accorded great deference and will be reversed only if they are against the manifest weight of the evidence. A court, on review, may also consider trial evidence in determining whether the trial court’s decision denying a motion to suppress was correct. People v. Slater, 228 Ill. 2d 137, 149, 886 N.E.2d 986, 994 (2008); People v. Caballero, 102 Ill. 2d 23, 36, 464 N.E.2d 223, 229 (1984). However, the ultimate question of whether the evidence should be suppressed is subject to de novo review. People v. Pitman, 211 Ill. 2d 502, 512, 813 N.E.2d 93, 101 (2004). The threshold of our inquiry logically begins with Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602 (1966), where the Supreme Court held: “[W]hen an individual is taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom by the authorities in any significant way and is subjected to questioning, the privilege against self-incrimination is jeopardized. *** He must be warned prior to any questioning that he has the right to remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and that if he cannot afford an attorney[,] one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478-79, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 726, 86 S. Ct. at 1630. Miranda instructs that the hallmark of custodial interrogation is “questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 706, 86 S. Ct. at 1612. The finding of custody is essential, as Miranda’s prophylactic rule was intended to assure that any inculpatory statement made by a defendant is not simply the product of “ ‘the compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings.’ ” Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U.S. 652, 661, 158 L. Ed. 2d 938, 949, 124 S. Ct. 2140, 2147 (2004), quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 458, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 714, 86 S. Ct. at 1619. The Supreme Court has recognized that two discrete inquiries impact upon the determination of whether a defendant is “in custody” for Miranda purposes. First, “ ‘what were the circumstances surrounding the interrogation; and second, given those circumstances, would a reasonable person have felt he or she was not at liberty to terminate the interrogation and leave.’ ” People v. Braggs, 209 Ill. 2d 492, 505-06, 810 N.E.2d 472, 481 (2004), quoting Thompson v. Keohane, 516 U.S. 99, 112, 133 L. Ed. 2d 383, 394, 116 S. Ct. 457, 465 (1995).  When examining the circumstances of an interrogation, our supreme court in Slater identified a number of factors relevant in determining whether a statement was made in a custodial setting, including: (1) the location, time, length, mood, and mode of the questioning; (2) the number of police officers present during the interrogation; (3) the presence or absence of family and friends of the individual; (4) any indicia of a formal arrest procedure, such as the show of weapons or force, physical restraint, booking or fingerprinting; (5) the manner by which the individual arrived at the place of questioning; and (6) the age, intelligence, and mental makeup of the accused. Slater, 228 Ill. 2d at 150, 810 N.E.2d at 995. After examining and weighing these factors, courts must then make an objective determination as to whether, under the facts presented, “a reasonable person, innocent of any crime,” would have believed that he or she could terminate the encounter and was free to leave. Braggs, 209 Ill. 2d at 506, 810 N.E.2d at 482. See also People v. Croom, 379 Ill. App. 3d 341, 349, 883 N.E.2d 681, 688 (2008).  Transposing the relevant factors to the instant case, we first consider the location, length, mode and mood of the questioning. Here, we share in the trial court’s observation that at its inception this was a death investigation. Although a four-year-old child tragically had been found with an elastic band wrapped around his neck, there was nothing to suggest that this was not an accidental death; certainly nothing suggesting a homicide. As the trial correctly observed, defendant was not a suspect or target; the detectives were simply attempting to determine the circumstances surrounding Jaquari’s death. As parents, defendant and Sta-Von were the logical starting point of that investigation. Given the customary practices of the police, it was reasonable to request that the parents come to the station to assist in the investigation. We do not perceive any action taken by the detectives suggesting that defendant and Sta-Von were compelled to accompany them. Rather, it is clear from the evidence that the parents concurred in the detectives’ request and voluntarily accompanied the officers to Area 5. Here, as in People v. McKinney, 277 Ill. App. 3d 889, 894, 661 N.E.2d 408, 411 (1996), there is no indicia of an arrest; certainly no formal declaration or any routine arrest procedures such as the show of force or physical restraint. Moreover, as in McKinney, given that the cause of the child’s death was still unknown, it is unlikely that any intention to effect an arrest existed. Voluntariness also resonates from the fact the detectives offered the defendant the opportunity to drive her own car to the station. As noted, the defendant rejected the offer because, as she testified, she was too emotional to drive. In turn, she accepted the detective’s offer of transportation and, together with her son, was driven to the station by the police. Contrary to the defendant’s argument, upon arrival at the station, defendant was not placed in an “interrogation room” but, rather, in the “quiet room,” a sensitive setting with butterflies and ladybugs painted on the wall, used primarily to accommodate victims of sexual assaults. Any room within a police facility might lend itself to questioning of witnesses, and although defendant implies that an interrogation room in a police station is inherently coercive, we have found no case holding that the place of the interview, in itself, is dispositive. See People v. Calhoun, 382 Ill. App. 3d 1140, 1147, 889 N.E.2d 795, 801 (2008). Addressing the age, intelligence and mental makeup of the accused, we find significance attaches to defendant’s testimony that she was 23 years old, a high-school graduate, and had recently graduated from Southern Illinois University with a bachelor’s degree in psychology. She was also gainfully employed in a nursing home as a “Psychiatric Rehabilitation Service Coordinator” making group assessments of mentally ill patients. Although the defendant was visibly upset during her initial meeting with Noradin and Kelly, the trial evidence reflects no mental impairment or intellectual deficiencies. Nor was she subjected to prolonged questioning. Detective Noradin testified that the initial interview at 9 p.m. lasted only 30 minutes. At that time, the detectives were essentially seeking background information concerning Jaquari’s death and the defendant was fully cooperating with them. The door was left open after the officers moved on to continue their investigation. Defendant remained in the room with her child, neither handcuffed nor in any way restrained. Moreover, when the second interview was convened in the “quiet room” over three hours later, defendant’s status remained unchanged. Notably, she had earlier chosen to voluntarily accompany the detectives from the hospital and manifested no intention to forego her cooperation, at least up to the point of her spontaneous admission. Thus, given the circumstances surrounding both interviews and considering what a reasonable person would have perceived, we are unable to conclude that defendant was in custody for Miranda purposes prior to her arrest. Because defendant’s custodial interrogation did not begin until Miranda warnings were given, a Seibert violation could not have occurred. Calhoun, 382 Ill. App. 3d at 1147, 889 N.E.2d at 801. In making this determination, we are mindful of defendant’s argument that because the second questioning directly related to the alleged crime at issue it sufficed to trigger Miranda’s protection. Relying upon Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 303, 64 L. Ed. 2d 297, 309, 100 S. Ct. 1682, 1691 (1980), defendant contends that the detectives should have known that their words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. However, Innis tacitly provides that Miranda’s safeguards came into play only where a person is in custody and we have already determined that custody had not as yet attached. Moreover, defendant misconstrues the purpose of the second interview. Although Detective Noradin candidly acknowledged that Balodimas and Landando entered the room to confront defendant with what they perceived as inconsistencies in her earlier statement, those inconsistencies did not imply a change in status from interested parent to murder suspect or otherwise go to the heart of the investigation. Rather, the inquiry remained a death investigation certainly up to the time of defendant’s spontaneous admission. Even were we to assume that defendant was subjected to custodial interrogation at the inception of the second interview, we are not persuaded that a different result would obtain under Seibert or its progeny. In Seibert, following a suspect’s arrest, the officers made a calculated decision to secure an unwarned incriminating statement and then, after administering Miranda admonishments and obtaining a waiver, confronted the suspect with his prewarned statement and obtained additional admissions. Seibert, 542 U.S. at 605-06, 159 L. Ed. 2d at 651, 124 S. Ct. at 2606. The Seibert plurality reasoned that the employment of this two-step strategy frustrated the intent of Miranda because, “Upon hearing warnings only in the aftermath of interrogation and just after making a confession, a suspect would hardly think he had a genuine right to remain silent, let alone to persist in so believing once the police began to lead him over the same ground again.” Seibert, 542 U.S. at 613, 159 L. Ed. 2d at 655-56, 124 S. Ct. at 2611. However, earlier, in Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298, 84 L. Ed. 2d 222, 105 S. Ct. 1285 (1985), the Court recognized that suppression of all statements made after police failed to follow Miranda’s mandate was not always required. In Elstad, following his arrest the defendant was first questioned in his home without the benefit of Miranda warnings. After making an incriminating statement, he was taken to the police station and admonished, and after waiving his rights, he made a second inculpatory statement. In considering whether the postwarning statement should have been suppressed, the Supreme Court focused on the difference between consequences flowing from confessions coerced through physical violence as against those freely given in response to an unwarned but noncoercive question. The Court concluded: “[A]bsent deliberately coercive or improper tactics in obtaining the initial statement, the mere fact that a suspect has made an unwarned admission does not warrant a presumption of compulsion. A subsequent administration of Miranda warnings to a suspect who has given a voluntary but unwarned statement ordinarily should suffice to remove the conditions that precluded admission of the earlier statement.” Elstad, 470 U.S. at 314, 84 L. Ed. 2d at 235, 105 S. Ct. at 1296. We recognize that in Seibert, the Supreme Court replaced the voluntariness test of Elstad with a presumptive rule of exclusion where a deliberate two-step interrogation technique was employed. However, as the Seventh Circuit reasoned in United States v. Steward, 388 F.3d 1079, 1090 (7th Cir. 2004), where the initial violation of Miranda “was not part of a deliberate strategy to undermine the warnings, Elstad appears to have survived Seibert.” Moving forward, in People v. Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d 322, 892 N.E.2d 1047 (2008), the Illinois Supreme Court concurred in the Seventh Circuit’s analysis, holding that in applying Seibert, courts must first determine whether the detectives deliberately employed a question-first, warn-later strategy when interrogating a defendant. The court concluded: “If there is no evidence to support a finding of deliberateness on the part of the detectives, our Seibert analysis ends. If there is evidence to support a finding of deliberateness, then we must consider whether curative measures were taken, such as a substantial break in time and circumstances between the statements, such that the defendant would be able ‘to distinguish the two contexts and appreciate that the interrogation has taken a new turn.’ ” Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d at 360-61, 892 N.E.2d at 1069, quoting Seibert, 542 U.S. at 622, 159 L. Ed. 2d at 661, 124 S. Ct. at 2616 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Here, as in People v. Lowenstein, 378 Ill. App. 3d 984, 993, 883 N.E.2d 690, 697 (2008), we cannot infer that the detectives deliberately employed a two-step strategy to undermine Miranda or to evade its requirements. There simply is no evidence that the questioning was “ ‘systematic, exhaustive and managed with psychological skill.’ ” Lowenstein, 378 Ill. App. 3d at 993, 883 N.E.2d at 697, quoting Seibert, 542 U.S. at 616, 159 L. Ed. 2d at 657, 124 S. Ct. at 2612. Instead, the credible and persuasive evidence demonstrates that, during the course of rather routine questioning, the detectives were understandably surprised by defendant’s spontaneous admission. After immediately responding by administering the Miranda warnings, the detectives appropriately ceased further questioning and placed the defendant under arrest. Post -Miranda questioning did not resume until the following afternoon at the polygraph section and later upon defendant’s return to Area 5. In the proceedings below, at the conclusion of the suppression hearing the court found the testimony of the police witnesses Noradin and Bartik to be credible and believable. The trial judge also had the opportunity to review defendant’s videotaped confession and observe her demeanor. The court’s inquiry properly focused upon whether defendant’s statements were made freely and voluntarily without compulsion or inducement. In denying the motion, the court concluded that although the defendant was duly admonished, at no time did she invoke her constitutional rights. Nor did the court find any credible evidence of physical or psychological coercion or any police misconduct. Although defendant certainly offered contrary evidence at trial, in denying her various posttrial motions, the judge gave no credence to that testimony, instead reaffirming his earlier findings. Based upon the record, we find no cause to disturb that determination. We agree that defendant’s motion to suppress was properly denied. Brief comment should be made on the dissent’s conclusion that the evidence, when viewed in its entirety, supports an inference that the detectives engaged in some form of “question first, warn later interrogation.” Curiously, in reaching this conclusion, the dissent gives greater credence to the defendant’s version of what transpired during the investigation, rather than the determination made by the fact finders in the proceedings below. The dissent’s analysis thus fails to accept the function of a reviewing court to give deference to the fact finder’s assessment of the evidence: “Once a defendant has been found guilty of the crime charged, the factfinder’s role as weigher of the evidence is preserved through a legal conclusion that upon judicial review all of the evidence is to be considered in the light most favorable to the prosecution.” (Emphasis in original.) Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789 (1979). See also People v. Lee, 209 Ill. 2d 194, 209, 808 N.E.2d 939, 947 (2004). Contrary to this well-settled guidepost, the dissent chooses to accept the defense version of the evidence. For example, the dissent boldly states that defendant, around 1 a.m., was questioned and confronted by the same detectives that had questioned her earlier and left her in the room. The statement we note is clearly contradicted by the State’s evidence showing that it was not the original detectives, Noradin and Kelly, that questioned the defendant at 1 a.m., but rather, a second team consisting of Balodimas and Landando. The dissent also asserts that the detectives felt compelled to continually encourage defendant to modify her statement until they were satisfied it conformed to the evidence. Again, that was the defendant’s version of the evidence; the fact finder found otherwise, crediting Detective Cordero’s denial of rehearsing defendant’s videotaped confession. It is not the function of this court to retry the defendant. People v. Hall, 194 Ill. 2d 305, 329-30, 743 N.E.2d 521, 536 (2000). Diante’s Competency to Testify  Defendant next asserts that the trial court abused its discretion and violated her constitutional rights when it ruled that Diante Dancy was incompetent to testify as a defense witness. By the court’s ruling defendant argues the jury was prevented from hearing that Diante, the sole eyewitness to Jaquari’s death, saw his brother wrap a cord around his neck the day he died. Defendant submits that the court misallocated the burden of proof at the competency hearing, based its analysis on factors outside of Illinois statutory law, and made findings unsupported by the record. In response, the State defends the trial court’s ruling on three grounds: (1) the court’s factual findings are entitled to deference; (2) the incorrect assignment of the burden of proof did not affect the outcome; and (3) the exclusion of Diante’s testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Precedent instructs that the question of a witness’s competency is to be determined by the trial judge, and a reviewing court may not disturb that determination absent a clear abuse of discretion. People v. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d 1117, 1125, 743 N.E.2d 1007, 1013 (2000). This deference is given because the trial court, unlike the reviewing court, has the opportunity to observe the demeanor, appearance, and conduct of the witness. People v. Cookson, 335 Ill. App. 3d 786, 789, 780 N.E.2d 807, 809 (2002). In the instant case, Diante Dancy had just become six years old at the time he was offered as a defense witness. Nonetheless, irrespective of age, section 115 — 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that every person is qualified to testify unless he or she is incapable of: (1) expressing himself concerning the matter so as to be understood, either directly or through interpretation; or (2) understanding the duty of a witness to tell the truth. 725 ILCS 5/115 — 14 (West 2004). Defendant submits that the court abused its discretion when the court misallocated the burden of proof in stating that “since it’s defense counsel’s wish to call Diante as a witness, it will be the defense’s burden of establishing his competency in accordance with 725 ILCS 5/115 — 14.” We agree with the defendant that because the party challenging Diante’s competency was the State, the court’s pronouncement contravened the provisions of the statute mandating that the burden of proving incompetency devolves on the party challenging the witness’s ability to testify. 725 ILCS 5/115 — 14(c) (West 2004). The parties voiced no objection to the court’s directive and the hearing progressed with the defense conducting the direct examination of Diante, followed by examination by the State and the court. Although the trial judge candidly acknowledged his error in denying defendant’s motion for new trial, the judge nonetheless stated that he would have found Diante incompetent regardless of which side had the burden. Defendant argues that the court’s statement is suspect in light of the degree to which the judge emphasized the defense failure to satisfy its burden of proof when he announced his original ruling. Thus, defendant boldly claims that the court based its decision on a finding “that the defendant failed to give the court any ‘insight into whether or not Diante knows what is the truth and what is a lie or not true.’ ” Defendant misstates the record as the page designated in the brief makes no reference to the defense failing to provide such insight or for that matter, anything else. Moreover, we fail to perceive that any prejudice inured to the defense because of the court’s procedural error. Clearly, this was not a situation where the burden of proof was outcome determinative. The parties and the court examined Diante, and after weighing the evidence the court made its ruling. Thus, we attach little significance to this claim of error. We next address defendant’s argument that the trial court based its analysis on factors outside Illinois statutory law. We observe from the record that at the inception of its findings, the court referenced the controlling statute, namely, section 115 — 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (725 ILCS 5/115 — 14 (West 2004)), paraphrasing its requirement: “A person is disqualified to be a witness if he is incapable of expressing himself or herself concerning the matter, either directly or through interpretation by one who can understand or is incapable of understanding the duty that the witness has to tell the truth.” Additionally, the court recited the criteria set forth in People v. Puhl, 211 Ill. App. 3d 457, 466, 570 N.E.2d 447, 452 (1991), directing trial courts to consider: “(1) the ability of the witness to receive correct impressions from [his] senses; (2) the ability to recollect these impressions; (3) the ability to understand questions and express answers; and (4) the ability to appreciate the moral duty to tell the truth.” Defendant argues that the Puhl decision was based on a competency test established by the Illinois Supreme Court prior to the enactment of section 115 — 14. Those factors, it is claimed, are more rigid and extensive than those required by the statute and cannot be a basis for upholding the trial court’s decision. We discern that defendant’s argument elevates form over substance as the factors set forth in Puhl are synonymous with the statutory requirement that the witness be capable of expressing himself in a manner in which he can be understood and be capable of understanding the duty to tell the truth. 725 ILCS 5/115 — 14 (West 2004). Moreover, we find it ironic that defendant’s argument significantly relies upon Sutherland, a decision that includes within the rubric of competency the nonstatutory factor of a child’s ability to distinguish between fantasy and reality. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d at 1125, 743 N.E.2d at 1013-14. Therefore, we find little merit to this claim. Defendant further submits that the trial court’s findings are unsupported by the record. Addressing this argument we note that in its determination of incompetence the court found that Diante did not satisfy the first requirement of the statute because he lacked the ability to recall the events of the date in question and to be able to communicate them effectively in court. At the hearing, Diante recalled that the last time he was at his old house he was in his bedroom with Jaquari. He was playing a spider game. “Jaquari was playing with that string and wrapping it around his neck.” The string was on a blue sheet and nobody else was around. He did not remember the date but it was the time “when my mom and dad picked Jaquari up and me in the house.” Diante also remembered talking to Karen Wilson, a child protection investigator. He did not tell her that Jaquari wrapped the elastic band around his neck. He told her that he was asleep when his brother got hurt. In response to the court’s inquiry, the following colloquy occurred: “Q. Diante, you tolled [sic] me you remember playing Spiderman in your bedroom with your brother, is that right? A. Yes. Q. Do you remember anything else that happened that day? A. No. Q. Nothing at all? A. No.” In summarizing Diante’s ability to perceive and relate events, the court stated that it had considerable question as to that issue:. “He’s indicated that the only thing that he recalls is playing Spiderman with his brother, the aspect with the cord and the neck, but he remembers nothing else at all from that day.” Although defendant faults the court’s determination asserting that Di-ante remembered many key details about the events of the day, defendant’s argument ignores the obvious — the court’s comment was simply a summary; key details were not required. Defendant also challenges the trial court’s finding that Diante lacked the understanding and acceptance of his duty to testify truthfully in the case. Here, the sole answer given by Diante demonstrating the difference between the truth and a lie was: “Telling a lie, you might get in trouble. Telling the truth, you might get a star.” Yet, the trial judge was troubled by Diante’s denial that he had spoken with any of the lawyers before coming to court, when the judge had been apprised that the prosecutor and defense counsel had met with him earlier. Additionally, Diante related that Spiderman was real and that he had seen him in person, that he had seen Jaquari, his other brother Junior, and his cousin in heaven, and that Jaquari said “my mommy killed my brother, and my mommy didn’t.” Based upon Diante’s responses, the court had legitimate concerns as to Diante’s ability to differentiate between truthfulness and falsehood. It has often been said that the cold black and white of the record is a poor substitute for the personal observations of the fact finder in determining credibility, and the same is equally true for competency. People v. Mack, 216 Ill. App. 3d 239, 246, 576 N.E.2d 1023, 1027-28 (1991). The demeanor of the witness, while apparent to the trial court, is hidden from a court of review. People v. Dempsey, 242 Ill. App. 3d 568, 584, 610 N.E.2d 208, 218 (1993). In the instant case, the court’s appraisal of Diante was not based solely upon the answers he provided, but also took into account his demeanor, his delay in answering questions as well as his uncertainty in formulating responses. Given all of these considerations, we cannot conclude that the court’s determination of incompetency is unsupported by the record. Finally, the State argues that even assuming the trial court erred in finding Diante to be an incompetent witness, any error in excluding his testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We agree. See Washington v. Recuenco, 548 U.S. 212, 218-19, 165 L. Ed. 2d 466, 474, 126 S. Ct. 2546, 2551 (2006) (an error is amenable to harmless error analysis except where the error is “structural” in nature in that it necessarily renders a criminal trial unfair or an unreliable vehicle for determining guilt or innocence). Here, we discern that the evidence in this case, based essentially upon a detailed and corroborated videotaped confession, was indeed overwhelming. See Elstad, 470 U.S. at 312, 84 L. Ed. 2d at 234, 105 S. Ct. at 1294-95 (recognizing a voluntary confession as highly probative evidence). We likewise reject the viewpoint that the proposed testimony of Diante was likely to have any significant impact upon the strength of the State’s case. The inherent weakness in the Diante proffer was confirmed at the hearing and shown to have a minimal basis in fact. At best, the defense might have placed before the jury Diante’s observation of Jaquari wrapping an elastic band around his neck. However, the jurors had learned from other witnesses that Jaquari had done such things before. Moreover, the proposed testimony likely would have been negated or otherwise diminished by Diante’s admission to Ms. Wilson the day following the murder, that “he was asleep when his brother got hurt.” That admission of course was corroborated by Sta-Von’s testimony that Diante indeed was asleep when he discovered Jaquari’s lifeless body on the bedroom floor. If the court’s determination was conceivably error, it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Sufficiency of the Evidence  The defense submits that under the rule of corpus delicti the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to establish defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Notwithstanding defendant’s detailed confession, the defense argues that the absence of independent evidence tending to show the commission of a crime undermines her conviction. It is of course an abiding principle that where a conviction is based on a confession, it is axiomatic that the confession be corroborated. People v. Willingham, 89 Ill. 2d 352, 358-59, 432 N.E.2d 861, 864 (1982). As defendant correctly notes, the corroboration requirement stems from a historical mistrust of extrajudicial confessions: (1) that confessions are unreliable, if coerced; and (2) for various psychological reasons, persons “confess” to crimes that either have never occurred or for which they are not legally responsible. People v. Dalton, 91 Ill. 2d 22, 29, 434 N.E.2d 1127, 1131 (1982). In Illinois, the corroboration requirement is satisfied by the corpus delicti rule, which requires proof of injury or loss coupled with proof of criminal agency. People v. Lambert, 104 Ill. 2d 375, 378, 472 N.E.2d 427, 428 (1984). See also E. Cleary, McCormick on Evidence §158, at 347 (2d ed. 1972). The State’s independent evidence need not rise to the level of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, but must only tend to confirm a defendant’s confession. People v. Cloutier, 156 Ill. 2d 483, 503, 622 N.E.2d 774, 784 (1993). As our supreme court noted in People v. Perfecto, 26 Ill. 2d 228, 229, 186 N.E.2d 258, 258-59 (1962), the corpus delicti is not required to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt exclusively by evidence aliunde the confession. Rather: “ ‘If there is evidence of corroborating circumstances which tend to prove the corpus delicti and correspond with the circumstances related in the confession, both the circumstances and the confession may be considered in determining whether the corpus delicti is sufficiently proved in a given case.’ ” Perfecto, 26 Ill. 2d at 229, 186 N.E.2d at 259, quoting People v. Borrelli, 392 Ill. 481, 493 (1946). Nor is there any requirement that the independent evidence and details of the confession correspond in every particular. People v. Furby, 138 Ill. 2d 434, 451, 563 N.E.2d 421, 428 (1990). The independent evidence need only tend to inspire belief in defendant’s confession or statement. People v. Curry, 296 Ill. App. 3d 559, 565, 694 N.E.2d 630, 636 (1998). In support of its argument, the defense relies upon People v. Lueder, 3 Ill. 2d 487, 488, 121 N.E.2d 743, 744 (1954), wherein an arson conviction was reversed for failure to prove the corpus delicti. In Lueder, although the defendant confessed to burning down a tool shop in the cemetery, the sole evidence independent of the confession consisted of the burned building and the fact that defendant was employed by the cemetery. Absent the confession, there was no evidence that any person wilfully torched the structure. However, in the instant case, the independent evidence not only established Jaquari’s death, but also provided a cause of death that tended to corroborate the details of defendant’s confession. Defendant also places reliance on People v. Ehlert, 211 Ill. 2d 192, 811 N.E.2d 620 (2004), a case that is clearly distinguished from the facts at bar. In Ehlert, there was no confession, but more importantly, the decision did not rest upon the State’s failure to satisfy the corpus delicti rule. Rather, the court’s construct focused upon an additional requirement, that where the State alleges that defendant killed her newborn, it must prove that the infant was born alive. That proof was found to be lacking. Ehlert, 211 Ill. 2d at 209-10, 811 N.E.2d at 630. In the instant case, we find that the independent evidence did indeed tend to inspire belief in defendant’s confession. First, although Dr. Denton initially believed that Jaquari’s strangulation resulted from an accidental hanging, additional evidence led him to change his opinion to an intentional killing or homicide. Denton earlier had been led to understand that Jaquari had fallen from the top bunk and become entangled in the elastic band. However, new evidence established that Jaquari slept on the bottom bed. Dr. Denton also learned that Jaquari had been physically punished by his mother, struck with a belt and sent to his room. In our opinion, the significance of these revelations cannot be overlooked or underestimated. The initial understanding of Dr. Den-ton that Jaquari fell from the top bed did not come from Sta-Von, for he unequivocally told the police that when he discovered Jaquari, his brother Diante was asleep on the top bunk. The genesis for the earlier version was the defendant and she persisted in that story until confronted with the detectives’ discovery that the guardrail would have prevented Jaquari from falling from the top bunk, if indeed he had been there. Although defendant’s story then changed, her original version may well be viewed as a false exculpatory statement having an independent value as evidence of consciousness of guilt. People v. Milka, 211 Ill. 2d 150, 181, 810 N.E.2d 33, 51 (2004); People v. Muhammad, 257 Ill. App. 3d 359, 368, 629 N.E.2d 106, 113 (1993); People v. Houseton, 141 Ill. App. 3d 987, 994, 490 N.E.2d 1354, 1360 (1986). See also R Ruebner, Illinois Criminal Trial Evidence §5(E)(3), at 234 (4th ed. 2001). That evidence tends to inspire belief in defendant’s candid acknowledgment of guilt. For these reasons we find the corpus delicti has indeed been proved aliunde the confession and reject defendant’s claim. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel  Defendant also contends that she was denied her right to effective assistance of counsel when her attorneys: (1) failed to argue that the competency hearing was procedurally flawed, did not adequately prepare Diante to testify or otherwise present corroborative and expert testimony supporting a finding of competency; (2) failed to present expert testimony on accidental strangulation and false confessions; and (3) improvidently withdrew her meritorious motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. Defendant also argues her right to effective assistance was abridged by other cumulative, but unspecified, errors. The question of whether defense counsel provided ineffective as-stance requires a bifurcated standard of review, wherein we defer to the trial court’s findings of fact unless they are against the manifest weight of the evidence, but make a de novo assessment of the ultimate legal issue of whether counsel’s actions support an ineffective assistance claim. People v. Berrier, 362 Ill. App. 3d 1153, 1166-67, 841 N.E.2d 1117, 1128-29 (2006); People v. Davis, 353 Ill. App. 3d 790, 794, 819 N.E.2d 1195, 1200 (2004). Because the facts surrounding defendant’s claim here are undisputed, our review is de novo. Berrier, 362 Ill. App. 3d at 1167, 841 N.E.2d at 1128-29. To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance a defendant must establish: (1) the attorney’s performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, and (2) this deficient performance prejudiced the defendant. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687-88, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064 (1984); People v. Albanese, 104 Ill. 2d 504, 526, 473 N.E.2d 1246, 1255 (1984). A defendant’s failure to satisfy either prong of the Strickland test defeats a claim of ineffectiveness. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064; People v. Morgan, 187 Ill. 2d 506, 529-30, 719 N.E.2d 681, 698 (1999). When reviewing an attorney’s performance, this court “must indulge a strong presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable professional assistance; that is, the defendant must overcome the presumption that, under the circumstances, the challenged action ‘might be considered sound trial strategy.’ ” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 694-95, 104 S. Ct. at 2065, quoting Michel v. Louisiana, 350 U.S. 91, 101, 100 L. Ed. 83, 93, 76 S. Ct. 158, 164 (1955). “Generally, matters of trial strategy will not support a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel unless counsel failed to conduct any meaningful adversarial testing.” People v. Patterson, 217 Ill. 2d 407, 441, 841 N.E.2d 889, 910 (2005). Further, counsel’s strategic decisions will not be second-guessed. Indeed, to ruminate over the wisdom of counsel’s advice is precisely the kind of retrospection proscribed by Strickland and its progeny. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 694, 104 S. Ct. at 2065 (“[a] fair assessment of attorney performance requires that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of hindsight”); see also People v. Fuller, 205 Ill. 2d 308, 330-31, 793 N.E.2d 526, 541-42 (2002) (issues of trial strategy must be viewed, not in hindsight, but from the time of counsel’s conduct, and with great deference accorded counsel’s decisions). Moreover, “the fact that another attorney might have pursued a different strategy is not a factor in the competency determination.” People v. Palmer, 162 Ill. 2d 465, 476, 643 N.E.2d 797, 802 (1994), citing People v. Hillenbrand, 121 Ill. 2d 537, 548, 521 N.E.2d 900, 904 (1988). To show prejudice “[t]he defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068; People v. Erickson, 183 Ill. 2d 213, 224, 700 N.E.2d 1027, 1032 (1998). “A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome” of the proceeding. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068. A court need not consider whether counsel’s performance was deficient prior to examining the prejudice suffered by the defendant as a result of the alleged deficiencies. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 699, 104 S. Ct. at 2069. Where ineffectiveness can be disposed of on the ground that the defendant did not suffer sufficient prejudice, the court need not determine whether counsel’s performance constituted less than reasonably effective assistance. People v. Flores, 153 Ill. 2d 264, 283-84, 606 N.E.2d 1078, 1087 (1992). Addressing first the competency hearing arguments, defendant faults trial counsel for failing to challenge the trial court’s improper placement of the burden of proof on the defense and failing to adequately prepare Diante to testify. Yet, as the trial judge noted in denying defendant’s posttrial motions, his ruling would have been the same had the burden been properly placed. Also, the record reflects that defense counsel as well as the prosecutor spoke with Diante before he testified and counsel makes no showing that a different result would have obtained had there been more extensive preparation. We likewise find it ironic that defendant posits this claim of inadequate preparation given her earlier argument that Diante’s testimony at the hearing was sufficient to establish his competency. Accordingly, defendant suffered no prejudice because of counsel’s purported deficiencies. Defendant next claims counsel was ineffective for failing to present the testimony of Ale Levy and a child psychiatrist such as Dr. Robert Galatzer-Levy. Defendant argues that Ms. Levy’s observations together with her professional opinion regarding Diante’s competency were of vital importance to the defense case. Similarly, a witness such as Dr. Galatzer-Levy could have assisted the court by sharing his expertise regarding how children of Diante’s age perceive truth and falsity and how they express themselves regarding a recollection of traumatic events. However, decisions concerning which witnesses to call and which evidence to present are considered to be trial strategies or tactics and ordinarily are not reviewable in the determination of whether counsel was ineffective. People v. Munson, 206 Ill. 2d 104, 139-40, 796 N.E.2d 155, 175 (2002); People v. Adams, 338 Ill. App. 3d 471, 477, 788 N.E.2d 252, 257 (2003). Moreover, although the trial judge later had the benefit of these proffers, in denying defendant’s motions for new trial he nonetheless rejected the notion that the opinions of these experts would have changed his opinion concerning Diante’s competency. Defendant further challenges trial counsel’s effectiveness for failing to present opinion evidence on the key issues of accidental strangulation and false confessions. Defendant argues that reasonably competent counsel would have supported the defense theory of the case by presenting expert testimony: (1) explaining the frequency with which and the circumstances under which children accidentally strangle themselves; and (2) explaining the nature of false confessions, the circumstances that may give rise to such confessions and the aspects of defendant’s specific psychological profile that make her highly susceptible to giving a false confession. However, as noted, decisions concerning which evidence to present and which witnesses to call generally fall within the rubric of trial strategy and cannot form the basis for a claim of ineffectiveness unless a strategy is so unsound that counsel can be said to have entirely failed to conduct any meaningful adversarial testing. People v. Negron, 297 Ill. App. 3d 519, 538, 697 N.E.2d 329, 342 (1998). Additionally, the teaching of People v. Whittaker, 199 Ill. App. 3d 621, 628, 557 N.E.2d 468, 472 (1990), is instructive; it is the defendant’s burden to overcome the presumption that a decision to not call a witness is within the realm of trial strategy. Although we are mindful that the subject of accidental strangulation is well within the expertise of forensic pathologists, defense counsel could well discern that given the changing opinions of Dr. Denton, the subject was adequately presented before the jury. However, as to the theory of false confessions, defendant has offered no Illinois decisions holding that such opinions are admissible. To be sure, expert testimony may be received under the helpfulness standard where it involves knowledge or experience that a juror generally lacks. Kimble v. Earle M. Jorgenson Co., 358 Ill. App. 3d 400, 409, 830 N.E.2d 814, 823 (2005). However, we do not find any support for admissibility of false confession evidence in the authorities cited by defendant. See People v. Miller, 173 Ill. 2d 167, 186-88, 670 N.E.2d 721, 730-31 (1996) (DNA evidence admissible where generally accepted in the relevant scientific community); People v. York, 312 Ill. App. 3d 434, 437, 727 N.E.2d 674, 677-78 (2000) (counsel ineffective in failing to present exculpatory DNA evidence); People v. Smith, 236 Ill. App. 3d 35, 42, 603 N.E.2d 562, 566 (1992) (upholding admissibility of child psychologist’s opinion as to victim’s truthfulness). We recognize that opinions concerning false confessions have been admitted in other jurisdictions. See United States v. Hall, 93 F.3d 1337, 1345 (7th Cir. 1996), aff’d, 165 F.3d 1095 (1999); Miller v. Indiana, 770 N.E.2d 763, 774 (Ind. 2002); Boyer v. Florida, 825 So. 2d 418, 419 (Fla. App. 2002). However, absent a threshold determination that such evidence meets Frye’s general acceptance requirement, we have no position as to the admissibility of such evidence had it been offered. See Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013, 1014 (D.C. Cir. 1923); In re Commitment of Simons, 213 Ill. 2d 523, 529-30, 821 N.E.2d 1184, 1188-89 (2004). Finally, defendant faults trial counsel for “inexplicably” withdrawing her motion to quash arrest without argument or comment. Prejudice is said to have inured to the defendant as the motion purportedly had a reasonable probability of succeeding. We disagree. The record clearly reflects that the parties elected to proceed jointly on the motion to suppress statements as well as the motion to quash arrest. When the State rested on both motions, the defendant elected not to present evidence and likewise rested. To sustain a claim of ineffectiveness deriving from failure to litigate a motion to quash and suppress, a defendant must establish that the motion would have been granted, thereby assuring a different result at trial. People v. Rodriguez, 312 Ill. App. 3d 920, 925, 728 N.E.2d 695, 702 (2000). Yet, here when both sides rested, the uncontroverted testimony offered utterly no support for the defense position. First, the evidence clearly established a voluntary accompaniment to Area 5. People v. Eddmonds, 101 Ill. 2d 44, 61, 461 N.E.2d 347, 355 (1984) (a person is not under arrest where he volunteered to meet with the police and was prepared to accompany them to the station). Second, upon arrival at the station defendant was not placed in an interrogation room, but rather in the “quiet room,” a setting used for victims of sexual assault. Third, although defendant was questioned by the detectives, she was not a suspect or target; her status as a cooperating parent did not change until her spontaneous admission of guilt. Fourth, there was no custodial interrogation before defendant’s lawful arrest. Given the state of the record, we fail to discern how defendant’s motion to quash arrest had any semblance of success. Finally, defendant contends that trial counsel’s cumulative, but unspecified, errors also rendered the results of her trial unreliable as a matter of law. Trial counsel’s failure to exhibit even a rudimentary understanding of trial advocacy is claimed to have compounded counsel’s other noted deficiencies. However, defendant’s failure to alert this court to the specifics of counsel’s lack of understanding and how it impacted the results of the trial offers little insight into the merits of defendant’s claim. As against defendant’s claim of general deficiencies, we find that trial counsel did indeed subject the State’s case to meaningful adversarial testing, even if it was not perfect. Cf. United States v. Cronic, 466 U.S. 648, 80 L. Ed. 2d 657, 104 S. Ct. 2039 (1984). Counsel filed and litigated a motion to suppress and thereafter invoked defendant’s right to a speedy trial consistent with her desires. Counsel’s opening and closing remarks before the jury conveyed an understanding of the defense theory as did their examination of State and defense witnesses. Overall, we find that counsel’s representation fell within the wide range of reasonable performance. People v. Griffin, 178 Ill. 2d 65, 86, 687 N.E.2d 820, 833 (1997). Having given full consideration to defendant’s ineffective assistance claim, in each of its particulars, we find that it has not been sustained. For the reasons stated, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court and grant the State’s request for fees in the amount of $100 for defending this appeal. Affirmed. FITZGERALD SMITH, EJ., concurs.   What transpired next is the subject of conflicting testimony. We will proceed first with the State’s evidence followed by the defendant’s version offered at trial.

=== CASE 9741606 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:05.029477+00 ===

JUSTICE TULLY, dissenting: The majority hold that defendant’s motion to suppress her statements was properly denied. I disagree as to that portion of their holding and respectfully dissent. People v. Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d 322 (2008), is not only legally instructive, but also factually. The defendant in Lopez was brought to a police station at approximately 1 p.m. regarding a murder. He was questioned and advised that someone had implicated him. He provided the detectives with information and was left alone in the same room for four to five hours while the detectives continued their investigation. Although defendant was unhandcuffed, he was never told he was free to leave the police station. Furthermore, he was later questioned by the same detectives that had brought him in, questioned him, and left him in the interview room. After being questioned again, the defendant made an oral confession whereupon the detectives stopped questioning him, gave him his Miranda warnings, and then terminated the interview. Two hours later, the defendant gave a handwritten statement memorializing his confession. This objective evidence, despite subjective evidence consisting of a detective’s testimony denying that he used the “question first, warn later” technique or that defendant was a suspect, was sufficient to warrant suppression of defendant’s subsequent handwritten confession. Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d. at 363. In the case at bar, defendant was brought to a police station at around 8 or 9 p.m. regarding her son’s death. She was questioned for about 30 minutes concerning the events of the incident. After providing the detectives with information, she was left alone in the room for about four hours as the detectives continued their investigation. Defendant was also unhandcuffed but never told she was free to leave the police station. Defendant, around 1 a.m., was questioned and confronted by the same detectives that had questioned her earlier and left her in the room. It was at this point that the defendant made an oral confession and was read her Miranda rights. Questioning was terminated and defendant was transferred to another room. After recanting shortly thereafter, defendant was subjected to an inconclusive polygraph test and multiple interrogations over the next 24 hours. She confessed a second time, was then told her confession was inaccurate, and then modified her confession once again, finally memorializing it through videotape. The objective evidence between Lopez and the instant case is similar and therefore helpful in evaluating the case at bar. Furthermore, despite the State’s argument, it is difficult to see how defendant’s statement could have been “spontaneous” after four hours and two separate interview sessions. Moreover, the exchange in which defendant ultimately made her statement was one in which the detectives admitted to “confronting” defendant about inconsistencies in her information and accused her of lying. Moreover, the facts suggest that the detectives continually informed defendant of various inconsistencies and details overlooked by defendant several times. Despite defendant confessing to the same result, the detectives felt compelled to continually encourage her to modify her statement until they were satisfied it conformed to the evidence. In any event, after considering the factors outlined in Lopez, this court should find that the evidence when viewed in its totality supports an inference that the detectives engaged in some form of “question first, warn later” interrogation. The next question now is whether, after receiving midstream Miranda warnings, “a reasonable person, in defendant’s situation, would have understood that he retained a choice about continuing to talk to police.” Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d at 364. The relevant facts to consider are: “[T]he passage of time between the unwarned and warned statements, the location where those statements were taken, whether the same person questioned the suspect during the unwarned and warned statements, whether details obtained during the unwarned phase were used during the warned phase, and whether the suspect was advised that the unwarned statement could not be used against the suspect.” Lopez, 229 Ill. 2d at 364-65. Approximately 20 hours passed between defendant’s unwarned and warned statements which I acknowledge is not an exceptionally long or short period of time. Next, both statements were taken at the police station in interview rooms. The interrogations preceding both statements, as well as all other interviews, were conducted by the same detective, often with other detectives present. Details obtained during the unwarned phase were clearly used during the warned phase, and nothing in the record indicates that defendant was advised that her unwarned statement could not be used against her. In Lopez, the defendant was a juvenile who was questioned by an assistant State’s Attorney and not a detective, had received Miranda warnings twice, and had his father present during his inculpatory statement as well. Despite this, his statement was ruled inadmissible because the same detective was present at both statements, they were taken near each other in time, and the defendant was never advised his oral statement was inadmissible. Here, despite a longer period of time in between the statements, defendant was treated similarly and experienced added stress where the same detective, with other detectives present, continuously questioned her. Under these circumstances, I cannot conclude that a reasonable person, in defendant’s situation, would have understood that she retained a choice about continuing to talk to police, especially where she was never warned that her prior statement could not be used against her. For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9741607 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:05.852771+00 ===

OPINION
PAUL H. ANDERSON, Justice.
Oluseyi Harris appeals his conviction for fifth-degree possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute. Saint Paul narcotics officers arrested Harris in the course of a drug interdiction operation at the Saint Paul Greyhound Bus Depot. At the time of his arrest, Harris was a passenger on an interstate bus that had made a scheduled stopover in Saint Paul. During the stopover, Harris exited the bus, entered the depot, acted in a manner that the narcotics officers characterized as suspicious, and then re-boarded the bus. The officers followed Harris onto the bus and asked for consent to search his person, his carry-on bag, and then his person for a second time. Harris complied with each of these requests to search. During their searches, the officers found marijuana and marijuana packaging materials. They then arrested Harris and charged him with possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute.
Harris sought to suppress all evidence gathered against him on the grounds that: (1) under the Minnesota Constitution, he was illegally seized when the officers boarded the bus and (2) he did not consent to the searches. The district court denied Harris’ request, holding that the searches were consensual and that there was no illegal seizure. The court went on to state that, even if Harris did not consent to the searches, the evidence was still admissible because the officers had reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. The Minnesota Court of Appeals affirmed, holding that Harris consented to the searches and that the officers had reasonable articulable suspicion. But the court of appeals concluded that the officers seized Harris when they confronted him at his seat in the bus. We affirm, but on different grounds.
In an effort to curb the flow of controlled substances coming into Saint Paul from other states, members of the Saint Paul Police *95Department’s narcotics unit periodically engage in drug interdiction operations. These drug interdiction operations often target buses arriving from or leaving for Detroit, Chicago, Madison, or Minneapolis. Two or three narcotics officers, plainclothes K-9 officers with dogs trained to detect controlled substances, and uniformed officers are usually involved in each interdiction. According to one of the officers who arrested Harris, officers involved in interdictions generally look for persons who get off the bus with only a small carry-on bag or with no luggage at all, look around to see if any police and drug dogs are present, enter the bus depot, and appear extremely nervous. Sometimes these persons make a telephone call, leave the depot by another means of transportation, or reboard the bus.
Officers Michael Bratsch and John Pyka are members of Saint Paul’s narcotics unit. Bratsch has been a Saint Paul police officer for eight years and regularly participates in the police department’s bus-based drug inter-dictions. In describing the process he uses as an interdiction officer, Bratsch explained that he does not use warrants to perform these interdictions because “[i]t’s all consensual.” When Bratsch believes that a bus passenger may be transporting a controlled substance, Bratsch and another officer first approach the passenger. Bratsch then shows his badge to the passenger, introduces himself as a Saint Paul narcotics officer, and explains to the passenger that Saint Paul is experiencing problems with narcotics entering the city via the bus. Bratsch next asks the passenger if he or she is transporting any narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of currency and then advises the passenger that any cooperation is purely consensual. At this time, Bratsch also requests permission to search the passenger. If the passenger consents to this search, Bratsch asks for permission to search the passenger’s bags as well. According to Bratsch, approximately 99% of passengers he approaches during these interdictions consent to his requests to search their persons and bags.
At trial, Harris stipulated to the facts of his arrest as set out in the court file, which file included Bratsch’s and Pyka’s police reports, and to Bratsch’s pretrial Rasmussen hearing testimony. These stipulated facts as set forth below are critical to our analysis of the legal issues raised in this case. On the morning of May 23, 1996, Bratsch and Pyka were on duty at the Saint Paul Greyhound Bus Depot, investigating information provided to them by a concerned citizen that controlled substances were being transported on buses traveling between Chicago and Minneapolis. When a Greyhound bus traveling from Chicago to Minneapolis made a scheduled stopover at the depot at approximately 10:30 a.m., Bratsch and Pyka observed appellant Oluseyi Harris and another man exit the bus and enter the depot. Another plainclothes officer, but no uniformed officers, were present in the depot at that time. It also appears that a K-9 officer and his dog were present in the depot. Pyka told Bratsch that Harris and the other man were conducting “counter surveillance” in the depot. Bratsch then observed what he, as a result of his police training, described as counter surveillance activities. He described the activities as follows:
They got off the bus. They kind of looked around to see who’s inside the depot. They didn’t use a phone. They didn’t get a can of pop. They wanted to see who was around and they boarded the bus * * * [I]t appeared to me that they wanted to see who was inside. They were kind of looking at us, um, looking at Sergeant Pica [sic], um, looking at the dog.
Bratsch stated that, unlike Harris, no other passengers who exited the bus appeared to be as concerned with the presence of Bratsch, Pyka, and the narcotics dog.
After Harris and the other man reboarded the bus, Bratsch and Pyka also boarded the bus. Bratsch stated that he walked to the rear of the bus, stood in the middle of the aisle, and showed his badge to all the passengers. Bratsch then told all the passengers that there was a drug problem in Saint Paul, that many narcotics- were entering the city from cities outside Minnesota via bus, and that he and Pyka would like to speak with them individually to inquire whether anyone might be transporting any weapons, narcotics, or large amounts of currency. Bratsch *96testified that he was “pretty sure” that he then informed the passengers that “this is consensual.” Both Bratseh and Pyka were in plainclothes and, while both were armed, neither displayed his weapon to any of the passengers.
Bratseh next approached Harris, who had chosen to sit in the back row of the bus. Harris stands approximately 5’7” tall and weighs around 145-150 pounds. Bratseh stands 5’9” tall and weighs approximately 200 pounds. Bratseh first asked Harris where he was coming from, where he was going, and how old he was. Bratseh then advised Harris that “this was all consensual” and asked Harris if Harris was transporting any narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of currency. Harris responded that he was not. In a “low key * * * easy-going tone,” Bratseh next asked for permission to search Harris’ person. According to Bratseh, Harris consented to this search. Bratseh then conducted a thorough pat-down search of Harris’ person, including the outsides of the front and rear pockets of Harris’ pants and the outsides of the pockets of Harris’ jacket. Finding no narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of currency, Bratseh advised Harris that he could “have a seat.”
Bratseh then asked Harris whether he had any luggage on board. Harris stated that he had a carry-on bag in one of the overhead compartments. Bratseh retrieved Harris’ carry-on bag, confirmed that the bag belonged to Harris, and asked Harris for permission to search the bag. Again, according to Bratseh, Harris consented to the search.
Upon searching Harris’ bag, Bratseh found two baggies, each containing approximately 40 to 75 plastic bindles — small sealable plastic bags commonly used to package marijuana for sale. As soon as Bratseh found the bindles, he confronted Harris, telling Harris that he knew such bindles are used to package narcotics. Bratsch’s police report and testimony differ as to what happened next. Bratseh either told Harris “to tell me where the narcotics are” or said “if you have narcotics on you, to give them up, tell me.” Bratseh testified that, at this point, Harris was extremely nervous, looking around, breathing hard, and trying to hide his left arm.
Bratseh testified that, as a result of Harris’ nervous behavior, he was unsure whether Harris had a gun underneath his seat. Fearing for his own safety, Bratseh told Harris that, “for officer’s safety reasons,” he wanted to see Harris’ left arm, the arm Harris had been trying to hide. Harris laid his arm on his lap, whereupon Bratseh noticed a bulge in the left sleeve of Harris’ jacket. When Bratseh asked Harris what was in the jacket sleeve, Harris responded that he did not know. Bratseh then asked Harris if he could “check it” and Harris held up the left arm of his jacket and said that, yes, Bratseh could search the sleeve of the jacket. Bratseh stated that he next reached into the left sleeve of Harris’ jacket “through the arm and pulled out a large baggy of marijuana.” The baggy contained “eight- or nine-ounce bags” of marijuana. Bratseh stated that he believed the marijuana in one of these smaller bags was packaged in bindles and that those bindles were the same type Bratseh had found in Harris’ carry-on bag. Harris then started to stand up and Bratseh told him to sit down and that he was under arrest. After a short skirmish in which Harris struck Pyka in the chest and Bratseh struck Harris in the eye, Harris was taken into custody and charged with fifth-degree possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 152.025, subs. 1(1) and 3 (1996).
At his pretrial Rasmussen hearing, Harris argued that all evidence gathered against him should be suppressed because he was illegally seized and because he did not voluntarily consent to any of the searches of his person or his carry-on bag. When the district court denied Harris’ motion, Harris submitted his case to the court for a decision on the stipulated facts. As previously noted, the stipulated facts pertinent to our determination were set forth in Bratsch’s and Pyka’s police reports and in Bratsch’s testimony at the Rasmussen hearing.
The district court found Harris guilty as charged. The court concluded that Harris was not illegally seized because, when Bratseh and Pyka observed Harris’ suspi-*97eious behavior in the bus depot, they had reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris might be transporting a controlled substance and that all of the searches were made with the specific consent of Harris. The court also concluded that Harris was not seized until after Bratsch found the marijuana in Harris’ jacket sleeve.
The court of appeals upheld both the district court’s denial of Harris’ motion to suppress and Harris’ conviction. The court of appeals agreed with the district court’s conclusion that Harris was not illegally seized and that Harris consented to all the searches. The court also concluded that, based on their observations of Harris in the depot, Bratsch and Pyka had reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris might be transporting a controlled substance. However, the court of appeals held that, under the Minnesota Constitution, Harris was actually seized when Bratsch and Pyka confronted him at his seat at the back of the bus. Harris appeals both the denial of his motion to suppress and his conviction. Harris asserts that, under the Minnesota Constitution, he was per se seized when Bratsch and Pyka boarded the bus or, alternatively, when they confronted him at his seat, because at neither time did they have reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. He also asserts that he did not voluntarily consent to any of Bratseh’s requests to search.
I.
If Harris was seized at any point before the police officers had reasonable ar-ticulable suspicion to seize him, then he was illegally seized and any evidence gathered thereafter must be suppressed. See State v. Cripps, 533 N.W.2d 388 (Minn.1995). Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution provides “the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated.” This provision is identical to the provision against unreasonable searches and seizures found in the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. U.S. Const, amend. IV.
Initially, it must be noted that the protection Harris seeks — that he was necessarily seized when the officers boarded the bus — is not available to him under the U.S. Constitution. Indeed, the United States Supreme Court decided, in Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 111 S.Ct. 2382, 115 L.Ed.2d 389 (1991), that a seizure does not occur per se, for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, merely because an encounter between a citizen and the police takes place on a bus. Id. at 439-40, 111 S.Ct. at 2388-89. Previously, in I.N.S. v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 104 S.Ct. 1758, 80 L.Ed.2d 247 (1984), the Supreme Court concluded that workers in a factory were not seized under the Fourth Amendment when Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) agents stood at each of the factory doors and other INS agents approached individual workers and asked them questions relating to their citizenship. Id. at 218-220, 104 S.Ct. at 1763-65. Because Harris was not seized under the Fourth Amendment, he asks this court to construe the Minnesota Constitution as providing greater protections against unreasonable searches and seizures than does the U.S. Constitution.
A decision of the Supreme Court interpreting a provision of the U.S. Constitution that is identical to a provision of the Minnesota Constitution is of persuasive authority to this court. See State v. Hamm, 423 N.W.2d 379, 382 (Minn.1988). However, it is well established that a state supreme court may interpret its own state constitution as protecting individual rights to a greater extent than does the U.S. Constitution. See PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 81, 100 S.Ct. 2035, 2040, 64 L.Ed.2d 741 (1980). State supreme courts, as the highest courts in their states, are “the first line of defense for individual liberties within the federalist system,” and are responsible, independent of the U.S. Constitution, for protecting the rights of their states’ citizens. State v. Fuller, 374 N.W.2d 722, 726 (Minn.1985). Indeed, many principled bases have been articulated for state courts to construe their state constitutions as more protective than their federal counterparts, including: variations in text, constitutional history, early state precedent construing the applicable provision of the state constitution, related*98ness of the subject matter to state-level enforcement, presence of issues that are unique to the state, and a determination that a more expansive reading of the state constitution represents the better rule of law. See Terrence J. Fleming and Jack Nordby, The Minnesota Bill of Rights: “Wrapt in the Old Miasmal Mist,” 7 Hamline L.Rev. 51, 63-77 (1984). “This, of course, does not mean that we will or should cavalierly construe our constitution more expansively than the United States Supreme Court has construed the Federal Constitution.” State v. Gray, 413 N.W.2d 107, 111 (citing Fuller, 374 N.W.2d at 726-27). It is within this context that we proceed to review Harris’ contention that he was illegally seized under Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution.
II.
When reviewing pretrial orders on motions to suppress evidence, we may independently review the facts and determine, as a matter of law, whether the district court erred in suppressing — or not suppressing— the evidence. State v. Othoudt, 482 N.W.2d 218, 221 (Minn.1992). Specifically, when the facts are not in dispute, a reviewing court must determine whether a police officer’s actions constitute a seizure and if the officer articulated an adequate basis for the seizure. See State v. Storvick, 428 N.W.2d 55, 58 n. 1 (Minn.1988).
Not all encounters between the police and citizens constitute seizures. In re E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d 779, 781 (Minn.1993). Seizure occurs “when the officer, by means of physical force or show of authority, has in some way restrained the liberty of a citizen.” State v. Cripps, 533 N.W.2d 388, 391 (Minn.1995) (citing Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 19 n. 16, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1879 n.16, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968)). In other words, officers must not “convey a message that compliance with their request is required.” Bostick, 501 U.S. at 435, 111 S.Ct at 2386.
Under the Minnesota Constitution, “a person has been seized if in view of all the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he or she was neither free to disregard the police questions nor free to terminate the encounter.” Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391 (citing Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 497-98, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 1324, 75 L.Ed.2d 229 (1983); United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 554, 100 S.Ct. 1870, 64 L.Ed.2d 497 (1980)). We have adopted the Mendenhall-Royer standard for judging the totality of the circumstances. E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 781-82 (citing Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 554-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870; Royer, 460 U.S. at 501, 103 S.Ct. 1319). Under that standard, some of the circumstances that might indicate a seizure has taken place include: “ ‘the threatening presence of several officers, the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the person of the citizen, or the use of language or tone of voice indicating that compliance with the officer’s request might be compelled.’ ” Id. at 781 (quoting Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 554-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870); see also Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391 (identifying similar circumstances). “ ‘In the absence of some such evidence, otherwise inoffensive contact between a member of the public and the police cannot, as a matter of law, amount to a seizure of that person.’ ” E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 781 (quoting Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 554-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870).1
A person generally is not seized merely because a police officer approaches him in a public place or in a parked car and begins to ask questions. See id. at 782 (cita*99tion omitted). Moreover, seizure does not result when a person, due to some “ ‘moral or instinctive pressure to cooperate,’ ” complies with a request to search because the other person tó the encounter is a police officer. Id. (quoting Wayne R. LaFave, “Seizures” Topology: Classifying Detentions of the Person to Resolve Warrant, Grounds and Search Issues, 17 U. Mich. J.L. Ref. 417, 424-25 (1984) (footnotes omitted)). Further, when a person is seized, courts must suppress evidence gathered as a result of that seizure only when the seizure was unreasonable. See Minn. Const. Art. I, § 10; E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 783. The brief seizure of a person for investigatory purposes is not unreasonable if an officer has a “ ‘particular and objective basis for suspecting the particular person [seized] of criminal activity.’ ” State v. Johnson, 444 N.W.2d 824, 825 (Minml989) (quoting United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S.Ct. 690, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981)). The officer may justify his decision to seize a person based on the totality of the circumstances and “may draw inferences and deductions that might elude an untrained person.” Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391. However, a mere hunch, absent other objectively reasonable articulable facts, will not justify a seizure. See Johnson, 444 N.W.2d at 825-26.
A. Police Officers’ Boarding of the Bus 1. Seizure
Harris first asserts that he was illegally seized when the police officers boarded the bus and announced their intent to search for drugs. He urges us to adopt, for purposes of the Minnesota Constitution, a per se rule that passengers on a bus are seized as soon as officers board a bus and announce their intent to search for drugs. We decline to adopt the position advocated by Harris.
In urging us to adopt the seizure rule that he advocates, Harris asks us to do so notwithstanding the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Florida v. Bostick, 501
U.S. 429, 111 S.Ct. 2382, 115 L.Ed.2d 389 (1991). In Bostick, the Supreme Court held that a seizure does not necessarily occur under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution merely because an encounter between a citizen and the police takes place on a bus. Id. at 439-40, 111 S.Ct. 2382. The facts of Bostick are as follows. Uniformed and visibly armed drug interdiction officers boarded a bus, asked to inspect Bostick’s ticket and identification, inspected Bostick’s ticket and identification, explained their presence as narcotics agents on the lookout for illegal drugs, and gained consent to search his luggage, in which they discovered cocaine. Id. at 431-32, 111 S.Ct. 2382. Although one officer held a “recognizable zipper pouch” which contained a gun, the officer never threatened Bostick with the gun. Id. at 431-32, 111 S.Ct. 2382. Moreover, Bostick was advised of his right to refuse to comply with the officers’ requests. Id. at 432, 111 S.Ct. 2382.
The Florida Supreme Court overturned Bostick’s conviction, holding that the police practice of boarding buses during scheduled stopovers without reasonable articulable suspicion and questioning passengers per se violates the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Id. at 433, 111 S.Ct. 2382. The United States Supreme Court overruled the Florida Supreme Court, stating that an encounter between a citizen and the police does not become coerced on the part of the citizen and, therefore, amount to a seizure, based solely on the fact that the encounter takes place on a bus. Id. at 436-37, 111 S.Ct. 2382.
In support of his argument that, under Minnesota’s Constitution, he was seized when the police officers boarded the bus and announced their intent to search for drugs, Harris cites Ascher v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 519 N.W.2d 183 (Minn.1994). In Ascher, we held that random sobriety checkpoints are unconstitutional under the Minnesota Constitution.2 Id. at 184. We stated *100that, without reasonable articulable suspicion that criminal activity is occurring, even “minimally intrusive” seizures of the “traveling public” are unacceptable. Id. at 187. The constitutional deficiency in Ascher involved impeding, without reasonable articulable suspicion, the progress of motorists who would not otherwise stop their vehicles so the police could randomly screen for intoxicated drivers. Id. at 184. These brief stops were coerced by the police, not voluntary on the part of the motorists, and, therefore, amounted to seizures. The present case presents a fundamentally different situation. Here, there is no indication in the record that the officers impeded the progress of the interstate bus or otherwise used coercion in boarding the bus and questioning passengers during the bus’ regularly scheduled stopover in Saint Paul. Because the record fails to show that the officers impeded the progress of the bus or used coercion in boarding the bus and questioning the passengers, Ascher does not provide a basis to sustain Harris’ argument that he was illegally seized.
Under the circumstances of this case, we find no basis to construe Article I, Section 10 of our constitution, the text of which is identical to the text of the Fourth Amendment, as protecting individual rights to a greater extent than does the U.S. Constitution. Harris bases his argument that he was illegally seized solely on the fact that the officers boarded the bus and announced their intent to search for drugs. We agree with the United States Supreme Court that “[w]here the encounter takes place is one factor, but it is not the only one.” Bostick, 501 U.S. at 437, 111 S.Ct. 2382. Thus, the mode of transportation, which is normally voluntarily chosen by the passenger, is only one factor in the totality of the circumstances to be considered. While we recognize that circumstances may arise that could lead us to conclude that passengers on a bus are seized when officers board the bus, “[w]e cannot agree * * * that this single factor will be dispositive in every case.” Id. at 439, 111 S.Ct. 2382. The circumstances presented here, without more, do not mandate a conclusion that Harris was illegally seized when the officers boarded the bus and announced their intent to search for drugs. Accordingly, we hold that Harris was not seized at this point in the encounter.
2. Reasonable Articulable Suspicion
Because we conclude that Harris was not seized when the police officers boarded the bus, it ordinarily would not be necessary to ascertain whether, prior to boarding the bus, the officers had reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. We note, however, that the district court found and the court of appeals held that when the officers boarded the bus, they had reasonable articu-lable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. Because we disagree with the conclusions of the lower courts and because analysis of this issue is important to issues raised later in this case, we shall address this issue now.
In his report, Bratsch stated that the officers went to the bus depot to interdict passengers who matched the profile of a drug courier. Subsequently, at the Rasmussen hearing, Bratsch testified that no “drug courier profile” exists anymore and that a drug courier “can be anyone.” However, Bratsch testified that when conducting a bus-based drug interdiction, he looks for persons who: (1) exit the bus with only a small carry-on bag or with no luggage at all, (2) look around to see if any police or drug dogs are present, (3) enter the depot, (4) appear nervous, (5) perhaps make a phone call, and then (6) either reboard the bus or leave the depot by another means of transportation. Clearly, using Bratsch’s criteria, a drug courier can be anyone. See State v. Williams, 525 N.W.2d 538, 546-47 (Minn.1994) (stating that an officer may “keep a mental checklist” of factors relevant to determining whether a person might be a drug courier, but that the propriety of the officer’s conduct will be examined in the totality of the circumstances).
Both Bratsch and Pyka stated that their suspicion of Harris was based on their conclusion that he was conducting counter surveillance activities in the depot. However, the activities noted by the officers could be *101consistent with the activities of any multitude of innocent persons. The officers did not provide any facts sufficient to distinguish Harris from innocent passengers in the depot. Cf. Johnson, 444 N.W.2d at 824 (holding that reasonable articulable suspicion was established when a motorist made evasive moves immediately after seeing a trooper’s vehicle).
The absence of any activity by Harris inconsistent with legal activity leads us to the conclusion that, when the police officers boarded the bus, they were acting on a mere hunch that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. A hunch, without additional objectively articulable facts, cannot provide the basis for an investigatory stop. See id. at 825. Accordingly, we conclude that when the officers boarded the bus, they did not have reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance.
B. Encounter ivith Harris at His Seat
Harris next argues, and the court of appeals held, that Harris was seized when the officers approached him at his seat at the back of the bus. In support of his argument that he was seized when the police officers approached him, Harris cites State v. Cripps, 533 N.W.2d 388 (Minn.1995), where we held that the police seized an underage bar patron.
In Cripps, two uniformed officers, who were visibly armed and displayed their badges, entered a bar where Cripps sat drinking a beer, approached Cripps at her table, and asked to see her identification. Id. at 389-90. The officers did not advise Cripps that she had the right to refuse to comply ■with the officers’ request. Cripps produced false identification that showed she was of legal drinking age. Id. at 390. Upon further investigation, the officers determined that the identification Cripps produced was not her owm and that she was, in fact, below the legal drinking age. Id. We held that, under the facts of that case, Cripps had been seized within the meaning of Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution after the officers first asked her to produce identification for the purpose of showing that she was of legal age to consume alcohol. Id. at 391. We concluded that, under these circumstances, “an objectively reasonable person would have believed that he or she was neither free to disregard the officer’s request nor free to terminate the encounter, knowing that he or she was being asked to prove his or her innocence of the crime of underage consumption of alcohol.” Id.
Harris’ case. can be distinguished from Cripps. Cripps was never informed by the armed, .uniformed officers who openly displayed their badges that she had the right to refuse to comply with their request to produce identification. Further, she was placed in a position where she was required .to prove her innocence. Once approached by the police officers, Cripps had three choices — show her false identification, show her true identification, or refuse to cooperate. But this was really.no choice given the circumstances— Cripps was underage and was sitting in a bar with a. half-empty bottle of beer in her hand. She was engaged in conduct that, by its very nature, required proof of identification and, specifically, proof that she was of legal drinking age. Put another way, Cripps was engaged in observable conduct that carries with it some legal limitation — that is, if she were not of legal,drinking age, her conduct would be illegal. In sum, Cripps had no way out of her situation in the bar.
Unlike the situation in Cripps, Harris was twice advised that his compliance with Bratseh’s requests to search was not required. Further, the conduct in which Harris was engaged — sitting in his seat on the bus — was not, by its very nature, illegal. Had Harris refused to comply with Bratsch’s requests, Bratsch would have been required to terminate the encounter because, at that point, as we noted earlier, Bratsch did not have reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris was transporting a controlled substance. The difference in the nature of the two encounters, coupled with the different factual scenarios, particularly the fact that Harris was twice informed that his compliance with Bratsch’s request was not required, leads us to conclude that Harris’ reliance on Cñpps is misplaced.
*102We further note that the examples of Circumstances that might indicate a seizure under the Mendenhallr-Royer totality of the circumstances standard weigh against concluding that a seizure .took place when the officers approached and questioned Harris at his seat on the bus. See E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 781-82 (citing Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 554-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870; Royer, 460 U.S. at 501, 103 S.Ct. 1319). Based on the record, it does not appear that the officers acted in a “threatening” manner toward Harris. Neither Bratsch nor Pyka displayed a weapon to Harris or to any of the passengers. The officers did not touch Harris in any way when they approached him at his seat. When Bratsch questioned Harris, he used a low key, easy-going tone of voice. Under the totality of the circumstances, these factors do not support Harris’ assertion that a seizure occurred when the officers approached and questioned him at his seat. We conclude that Harris was not seized when the officers approached and questioned him at his seat.
Finally, contrary to the dissent’s assertion, we do not “ignore the physical surroundings,” i.e., the bus setting. Rather, we reach our conclusion by taking into account the bus setting and all the other facts in the record. To reach its conclusion that. Harris was seized when the officers approached him at his seat, the dissent characterizes the encounter as one where the police “trapped” Harris at the back of the bus. We do not make such a characterization because we cannot, based on the record we have before us. Harris stipulated to Bratsch’s and Pyka’s version of the encounter and the officers’ version does not include facts by which we can conclude that Harris was trapped. Instead, the officers’ version of the encounter is that they did not trap anyone on the bus and that Harris voluntarily cooperated with Bratsch’s requests to search. Thus, without a more developed record, we are proscribed from creating our own characterizations of the facts of this encounter, no matter what we may personally believe those facts to be.
Accordingly, we hold that Harris was not seized when the officers approached and questioned him at his seat. Further, in reaching this holding, we expressly hold open the possibility that, given different circumstances, a seizure may take place in a bus setting.
C. First Search of Harris’ Person
After first asking Harris some general identification questions and whether he was transporting any narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of currency, Bratsch asked Harris’ permission to conduct a search of Harris’ person. Because the police lacked probable cause to search Harris, absent Harris’ consent, the- search would be illegal. The state claims Harris voluntarily gave consent to be searched, but Harris asserts that the consent he gave was not voluntary. If Harris did not give voluntary consent to the search, then the evidence gathered thereafter must be suppressed. Therefore, we must determine whether Harris’ consent was voluntarily given.
The police do not need probable cause or, in proper circumstances, reasonable articulable suspicion to search if a person voluntarily consents to an officer’s request to search his person and his belongings. See State v. George, 557 N.W.2d 575, 579 (Minn.1997). However, “an officer has a right to ask to search and an individual has the right' to say no.” State v. Dezso, 512 N.W.2d 877, 880 (Minn.1994).
[I]nvoluntariness of a consent to a police request is not to be inferred simply because the circumstances of the encounter are uncomfortable for the person being questioned. Rather, it is at the point when an encounter becomes coercive, when the right to say no to a search is compromised by a show of official authority, that the Fourth Amendment intervenes. Consent must be received, not extracted.
Id.; see also Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973). Whether consent was voluntary is determined by examining “the totality of the circumstances, including the nature of the encounter, the kind of person the defendant is, and what was said and how it was said'.” Dezso, 512 N.W.2d at 880. The state bears the burden of showing by a preponderance of. the evidence that consent was voluntarily obtained. See Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 392. *103The determination, involves balancing the government’s legitimate need to search against the requirement that consent not be coerced. Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 219, 93 S.Ct. 2041.
In support of his argument that he did not voluntarily consent to Bratsch’s request to search, Harris first cites State v. Dezso, 512 N.W.2d 877 (Minn.1994). In Dez-so, we held that the state did not meet its burden of showing that a police officer obtained voluntary consent when the officer searched a defendant’s wallet during a traffic stop on a highway at night. Id. at 881. While the officer used a conversational tone in his questioning, he leaned over to look into defendant’s wallet, did not inform the defendant that he had the right to refuse to consent, and persistently questioned the defendant about the contents of the wallet.; Id. In further support of his argument, Harris cites State v. George, 557 N.W.2d 575 (Minn.1997). In George, we held that the state produced insufficient evidence to show that the defendant voluntarily consented to a search of his motorcycle when the defendant was stopped for a minor traffic violation. Id. at 581. The defendant in George was subjected to persistent questioning -by two state troopers, was unaware that he had a right to refuse to consent, and answered the troopers’ questions with equivocal responses. Id.
In the present case, Harris was a passenger on an interstate bus that was making a regularly scheduled stopover in Saint Paul. The stopover occurred at approximately 10:30 in the morning. Bratsch and Pyka, both in plainclothes and neither visibly armed, boarded the bus, stood near where Harris was sitting, announced their intention to question all the passengers, stated that any questioning or searching would be voluntary, and approached Harris, who was seated at the back of the bus. Bratsch then advised Harris individually that “this was all consensual” and asked Harris one time whether he was carrying any weapons, narcotics, or large amounts of currency. Harris replied that he was not. Bratsch asked Harris, in a low key, easy-going tone of voice, for permission to search his person. Bratsch testified that Harris probably said, “yes, go ahead.” Harris then stood up and Bratsch searched him. Again, we note that Harris stipulated to Bratsch’s version of what transpired at the time Bratsch conducted this first search of his person.
The circumstances presented in Harris’ case are much different than the circumstances presented in either Dezso or George. In Dezso, the request for consent to search took place at night and the officer leaned over to look into Dezso’s wallet while he repeatedly asked Dezso’s permission to search the wallet. Here, it was mid-morning when Bratsch requested Harris’ consent to search. There is no evidence that Bratsch hovered over Harris or leaned over when he asked for Harris’ consent to search. In George, troopers persistently questioned the defendant in order to gain his consent and the defendant responded equivocally to the troopers’ requests for consent to search. Here, the record reveals that Harris promptly responded to Bratsch’s request to search and did so unequivocally. In both Dezso and George, the defendants were not advised of their right to refuse to comply with the officers’ requests that they consent to the searches. t Harris stipulated that he was informed on two separate occasions that his cooperation was voluntary, once when the officers boarded the bus and once when they approached him individually. Based on these facts, we conclude that Harris voluntarily consented to-the first search of his person.
D. Search of Harris’Bag
When the first search of Harris’ person produced no drugs, weapons, or large amounts of currency, Bratsch asked Harris if he had a bag. According to the police reports and testimony, Harris told the officers he had a bag in one. of the overhead compartments. Both officers stated that Harris gave Bratsch permission to search the bag. As with the first search of Harris’ person, there is nothing in the facts to support the position that the consent Harris gave to the search of his bag was anything other than voluntary.
Bratsch searched Harris’ bag and found miscellaneous clothing and papers. He also found two baggies, each containing 40-75 plastic bindles. Once Bratsch found *104the bindles in Harris’ bag, Harris’ situation fundamentally changed. When Bratsch pointedly confronted Harris, telling Harris that he knew that bindles are used to package drugs for sale and asking where the drugs were, Harris became fully aware that the officers knew that he might be transporting a controlled substance. Harris could not have, and a reasonable person would not have, felt free to terminate the encounter under these circumstances. Thus, it was at this point that Harris was seized.
E. Second Search of Harris’ Person
1. Consent
Harris contends that he did not voluntarily consent to the second search of his person, a search conducted after he was seized, and that, therefore, the evidence obtained as the result of this second search should have been suppressed. Consent is not involuntary merely because the person giving the consent has been seized. See State v. Alayon, 459 N.W.2d 325, 330 (Minn.1990) (holding that a defendant gave voluntary consent when, sometime after being ordered at gunpoint to lie on the floor, he was allowed to stand up, the police put away their guns, and the defendant then gave the police consent to search and assisted in the search). Rather, we look to the totality of the circumstances to determine whether consent was voluntarily given. See id. at 330. Here, the circumstances that led us to conclude that Hams was seized — Bratsch finding the plastic bindles in Harris’ bag, then pointedly telling Harris that he knew what bindles were used for and that Harris should give Bratsch the drugs — also lead us to conclude that the consent Harris gave to the search of his jacket sleeve was not voluntary. Accordingly, we hold that Harris did not voluntarily consent to the second search of his person.
2. Reasonable Articulable Suspicion
Generally, evidence gathered pursuant to consent that is determined to be involuntary must be suppressed. See, e.g., Dezso, 512 N.W.2d at 881. Because Harris did not voluntarily consent to the second search of his person, in order to justify Bratsch’s second search of Harris’ person, Bratsch must have had another basis to justify the search. Therefore, we turn our attention to whether at this point Bratsch had reasonable articula-ble suspicion that Harris was “armed and dangerous.”
When an officer has reasonable articulable suspicion that a person he has seized is armed and dangerous, the officer may conduct a protective pat-down search of the person’s outer clothing in order to ascertain whether the person is armed. Terry, 392 U.S. at 30, 88 S.Ct. 1868; see also State v. Ludtke, 306 N.W.2d 111, 113 (Minn.1981). If, during the course of this protective pat-down search, an officer locates what he immediately and without further manipulation has probable cause to believe is evidence of a crime, then the officer may legally seize that evidence. See Minnesota v. Dickerson, 508 U.S. 366, 375-76, 113 S.Ct. 2130, 124 L.Ed.2d 334 (1993); Ludtke, 306 N.W.2d at 113.
After Bratsch found the plastic bin-dles in Harris’ bag, he noted that Harris appeared extremely nervous and tried to hide his left arm. Bratsch testified that, at that point, he did not know whether Harris had a gun. When he ordered Harris to place his left arm on his lap, Bratsch noticed a large bulge in the sleeve of Harris’ jacket. Then, when Bratsch questioned Harris as to what was in the jacket sleeve, Harris responded that he did not know. Under these circumstances, Bratsch’s conclusion that Harris might be armed and dangerous was reasonable. Thus, at that point, Bratsch had reasonable articulable suspicion that Harris might be armed and dangerous, and a protective pat-down search of Harris’ outer clothing was justified.
But Bratsch did not pat down Harris’ outer clothing. Instead, he asked Harris for permission to search Harris’ jacket sleeve and, pursuant to Harris’ apparent consent, reached his hand into the jacket sleeve “through the arm” and pulled out a “large baggy” of marijuana. By searching Harris’ jacket sleeve from inside the jacket, Bratsch exceeded the scope of a proper protective pat-down search. See Terry, 392 U.S. at 30, 88 S.Ct. 1868. Normally, when police exceed the scope of a protective pat-down search, *105thereby performing an illegal warrantless search, any evidence gathered as a result of that search should be suppressed. See State v. Dickerson, 481 N.W.2d 840, 843 (Minn.1992); aff'd 508 U.S. at 378-79, 113 S.Ct. 2130. We recognize an exception to this general rule, however, when “the police would have obtained the evidence if no misconduct had taken place.” See In re J.W.K., 583 N.W.2d 752 (Minn.1998) (citing Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 444, 104 S.Ct. 2501, 81 L.Ed.2d 377 (1984)). This exception is commonly known as the “inevitable discovery” exception. See id. at 756. In the present case, the totality of the circumstances indicates that, had Bratseh performed a protective outer-clothing pat-down search of Harris’ jacket, he would have felt, then seized, what he had probable cause to believe was marijuana, which would have been admissible against Harris. See Ludtke, 306 N.W.2d at 113. See also Dickerson, 481 N.W.2d at 846. Bratseh, an experienced drug interdiction officer, had already found plastic bindles, commonly used in the packaging and sale of controlled substances. Immediately after Bratseh found the bindles, Harris began to act nervously and tried to hide his arm from Bratsch’s view. Then, when Bratseh next saw Harris’ arm, there was a noticeable bulge in the sleeve of Harris’ jacket.
Had Bratseh then proceeded to search Harris’ jacket via a permissible pat-down search, he would have felt a plastic bag containing a suspicious substance. Even if Bratseh may not have been able to positively identify the substance in the plastic bag as marijuana by his sense of touch alone, under the totality of the circumstances surrounding such a discovery, the presence of a plastic bag containing a substance consistent with marijuana hidden on Harris likely would have given Bratseh probable cause to believe that the bag contained a controlled substance. See Dickerson, 481 N.W.2d at 846; Ludtke, 306 N.W.2d at 113. With probable cause, Bratseh could have permissibly seized the plastic bag. See Dickerson, 481 N.W.2d at 843. The only reason that Bratseh patted down Harris’ jacket sleeve from the inside of the jacket as opposed to the outside of the jacket was that he believed he had obtained Harris’ voluntary consent to search the jacket sleeve from the inside. Therefore, we conclude that it was inevitable that Bratseh would have discovered and legally seized the marijuana during a protective pat-down search.
Because legal discovery of the marijuana was inevitable, the intervening illegality of performing a search of Harris’ jacket sleeve from the inside of his jacket sleeve pursuant to Harris’ apparent, but involuntary, consent cannot operate to invalidate the search. Accordingly, we hold that the second search of Harris’ person and the resulting seizure of the marijuana found in Harris’ jacket was justified and that the marijuana should not have been suppressed.
Affirmed.
LANCASTER, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
. The dissent asserts that our standard for reviewing whether a seizure takes place is "whether a reasonable person in the defendant's shoes would have concluded that he or she was not free to leave.” E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 780, 783. Viewed in the context of our analysis in E.D.J., however, the "in the defendant's shoes” language would have been more aptly phrased as "in the circumstances.” Our reading of the language in E.D.J. is supported by our decision in Cripps, where we held that Cripps was seized because, “[ujnder [the] circumstances, * * * an objectively reasonable person would have believed that he or she was neither free to disregard the officer’s request nor free to terminate the encounter * * Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391 (emphasis added). We cannot accept the dissent’s narrowing of the focus of the objectively reasonable person standard. Such a narrowing would render practical application of the standard unworkable.
. The United States Supreme Court held, in Michigan Dep't of State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444, 110 S.Ct. 2481, 110 L.Ed.2d 412 (1990), that sobriety checkpoints, where police use temporary roadblocks to stop cars and investigate a large number of drivers in order to discover drivers who are alcohol-impaired, are constitutional for purposes of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. This court, in Ascher, concluded that the Minnesota Constitution, in some circumstances, provides greater protection against unreasonable searches and *100seizures than does the federal constitution. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 187.

=== CASE 9741608 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:59:05.858954+00 ===

PAGE, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The court’s conclusion that Harris was not seized until the police officers found the plastic bindles in Harris’ bag is not supported by our prior decisions. We have said that “a person has been seized if in view of all the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he or she was neither free to disregard the police questions nor free to terminate the encounter.”1 While the “reasonable person standard is an objective standard which * * * does not vary with a particular person’s subjective state of mind,” 2 we have made it clear that we must determine “whether a reasonable person in the defendant’s shoes would have concluded that he or she was not free to leave.”3
*106The court’s analysis does not take into account whether an innocent young African-American male would feel free to refuse the police officer’s request to search his person, his luggage, or to leave the bus. The record in this case reveals that the police officers walked to the rear of the bus, stood in the middle of the aisle, and told the passengers that their purpose for boarding the bus was to look for narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of cash. Immediately after making these statements, the police officers approached Harris and asked him if he was transporting any narcotics, weapons, or large amounts of cash. The question that arises out of this encounter is whether an innocent young African-American male in Harris’ position would feel free to refuse to answer the police officer’s questions. In my experience it is not so clear that he would.4 Two police officers were standing in the middle of the bus aisle, blocking the only exit,5 with the intent to ask Harris whether he was transporting any weapons, narcotics, or large amounts of cash.6 The reality of the world is such that a person in Harris’ position would likely feel compelled to comply with the police officers’ requests.7 One need only recall the encounter between the police and Don Jackson, an African-American male and former police officer from southern California, who was pushed through a plate glass window by a police officer when he' dared to inquire why he had been stopped.8 Mr. Jackson has written that “the police have long been the greatest nemesis of blacks, irrespective of whether we are complying with the law or not.” 9 Mr. Jackson’s experience is but one of many publicized accounts of that type of encounter between African-Americans and the police.10
*107Once the police officers approached Harris for the express purpose of investigating him for specific criminal violations, I believe Harris was seized for the purposes of Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution.11 The court concedes that the police officers did not have a probable cause12 to search either Harris’ person or his bag before they boarded the bus and the record does not reveal any facts that would have given the officers a reason to target Harris, except for the results of their illegal search, once they boarded the bus. Therefore, the plastic bin-dles and the marijuana should have been suppressed.13
. State v. Cripps, 533 N.W.2d 388, 391 (Minn.1995) (citing Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 497-98, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 75 L.Ed.2d 229 (1983)).
. Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391.
.In re E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d 779, 780 (Minn.1993). See also Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 226, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973) (stating that age and educational background are legitimate factors to consider in determining whether a person's consent was voluntary).
. I speak from the perspective of an African-American male who was taught by his parents that, for personal safety, when in an unplanned encounter with law enforcement officers, it is best to comply carefully and without question to the officers’ request. It is a lesson that I have taught my children and, in fact, is one that I follow to this day.
. The court appears to ignore the physical surroundings during the police officers' encounter with Harris. The police officers did not merely approach Harris in the bus depot; they trapped him in the back of a bus with no reasonable means of egress. Although the United States Supreme Court has held that a seizure does not occur per se for purposes of the Fourth Amendment merely because the encounter between a citizen and the police takes place on a bus, the Court has not foreclosed consideration of the restrictive nature of a bus in determining whether a reasonable person would feel seized. See Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 111 S.Ct. 2382, 115 L.Ed.2d 389 (1991).
. See E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 781 (listing circumstances that might indicate that a seizure had taken place).
. The police officer’s statements that "this is all consensual" should not alter this result. The statement was confusing at best and misleading at worst. In fact, a reasonable person in Harris’ position might well view such a statement as a command requiring him to comply with the police officer's requests. See Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 226, 93 S.Ct. 2041.
. See Tracey Maclin, “Black and Blue Encounters" — Some Preliminary Thoughts about Fourth Amendment Seizures: Should Race Matter?, 26 Val. U.L.Rev. 243, 254 (1991) [hereinafter Should Race Matter? ].
. See id. (citing Don Jackson, Police Embody Racism To My People, N.Y. Times, January 23, 1989, at A25).
. In the book Race, Crime, and the Law, Harvard Law School Professor Randall Kennedy notes the problem by referencing a United States District Court judge who
carefully detailed numerous incidents which provide a virtual catalogue of the types of police mistreatment that have become deeply etched in the popular folklore of African-Americans: flagrant use by officers of the racial epithet "nigger"; resort to deadly force against suspects who could have been subdued by other means; harsher reactions to blacks than to whites engaged in the same conduct; needlessly destructive searches; unwarranted detentions; arrests for nothing more than what police perceived as insufficient deference; and purposeful infliction of public humiliation on political activists seeking to elevate the status of black Americans.
Randall Kennedy, Race, Crime, and the Law 122 (1997) (citing Council of Organization on Philadelphia Police Accountability and Responsibility v. Rizzo, 357 F.Supp. 1289 (E.D.Pa.1973)). While the Rizzo decision comes out of Philadelphia in 1973, it could just as well be documenting events from any city across the country today. See also Should Race Matter?, 26 Val.U.L.Rev. at 278 (stating that "it comes as no surprise that some black men go out of their way to be calm and extremely congenial when approached by a police officer. A black man’s *107silence in the face of police demands should not be interpreted as cooperation, however”); Andrew Hacker, Two Nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal 51 (1992) (describing typical encounters between the police and young African-American males).
.See Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391 (citing State v. Kearns, 75 Haw. 558, 867 P.2d 903, 907-08 (1994)) (holding that a reasonable person would believe that he or she has been seized when an officer approaches that person for the express purpose of investigating him or her for specific criminal violations and begins to ask for information).
. See Cripps, 533 N.W.2d at 391 (citing Berge v. Comm’r of Pub. Safety, 374 N.W.2d 730, 732 (Minn.1985)) (stating that an officer must have "a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the seized person of criminal activity”).
. See E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d at 783.

=== CASE 2228190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:53.580104+00 ===

904 N.E.2d 183 (2009)
David GRIMES and Wesley Grimes, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Gilbert SAIKLEY, Individually and as a Member of Saikley, Garrison, Colombo & Barney, LLC; and George Weller, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 4-08-0336.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
March 10, 2009.
*185 Justice MYERSCOUGH delivered the opinion of the court:
In March 2007, plaintiffs filed a two-count complaint against defendants, Gilbert Saikley, individually and as a member of Saikley, Garrison, Colombo & Barney, LLC; and George Weller, the public administrator of Vermilion County. The trial court granted defendants' motions to dismiss. In July 2007, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint. Again, defendants filed motions to dismiss and the trial court granted them; the court dismissed the claims against Weller with prejudice. In February 2008, plaintiffs filed a second-amended complaint. In April 2008, the trial court granted defendants' motions to dismiss. Plaintiffs appeal.
I. BACKGROUND
On March 18, 2005, plaintiffs and defendant George Weller entered into an agreement to close the estate of Clarence Grimes, plaintiffs' father. The agreement alleged the following facts.
On January 7, 2003, Clarence's widow, Virginia Grimes, hired attorney Gil Garman to open the estate and represent her as executrix. Later in January 2003, Garman filed a petition to open the estate and the trial court entered an order opening the estate.
On March 24, 2003, plaintiffs filed a petition to terminate the independent administration, and on May 22, 2003, the court entered an order, over Garman's objection, terminating independent administration. On May 7, 2003, plaintiffs filed a petition to remove the personal representative. On August 12, 2003, plaintiffs filed a motion to disqualify Garman from serving as legal counsel for the estate due to a variety of conflicts of interest. The court denied the motion in November 2003.
On August 27, 2003, plaintiffs filed their complaint to interpret the will, and on September 12, 2003, Garman filed the estate's answer. In April 2004, the trial court denied the motion to dismiss the complaint to interpret the will.
On May 19, 2004, plaintiffs filed a petition for emergency citation on the basis that Virginia had been diagnosed with terminal *186 cancer and was unable to serve as executrix of the estate.
The agreement stated that on unknown dates, Virginia, in her personal capacity, took possession of all estate vehicles and converted them to herself personally by changing vehicle titles to her name or allowing family members to use the vehicles without proper reimbursement to the estate. This was done without court authority and before the costs of administration were paid. On May 28, 2004, Virginia converted to herself over $20,000 from a First National Bank of Danville account ($2,097.2-9) and a First Midwest Bank certificate of deposit ($18,732.71). The agreement stated various members of Virginia's family assisted/conspired with her in transferring the vehicles and other assets from the estate to Virginia without court authority.
On July 20, 2004, following an evidentiary hearing on the emergency citation, the court removed Virginia as executrix of Clarence's estate after finding she mismanaged estate assets. The court appointed Weller as "executor to the will annexed."
Virginia died in August 2004, and in September 2004 her "family members removed and converted to their personal use, every item of personal property situated in the residence which was not attached to the building."
The agreement set forth how the remaining estate assets would be distributed. Plaintiffs and Weller signed the agreement.
On March 13, 2005, Weller submitted a final report that stated all assets had been distributed as set forth in the agreement to close the estate and asking that Weller be discharged and the estate be closed. Weller also assigned to plaintiffs "all of the [e]state's interest in any and all claims, demands, and/or causes of action * * * which the [e]state may have against any person or entitywith respect to any and all issues." The court entered an order approving the final report and the agreement to close the estate. Moreover, the court approved an interim accounting and amended final account, both of which were filed on February 28, 2005. The order further ordered Weller be discharged as public administrator serving as successor executor and the estate be closed.
On March 14, 2007, plaintiffs filed a two-count complaint against defendants Weller and Weller's attorney, Gilbert Saikley, both individually and as a member of Saikley, Garrison, Colombo & Barney, LLC. In April 2007, Weller filed a motion to dismiss, in which he claimed plaintiffs' claims against him were barred by both sovereign immunity and public-official's immunity. Saikley and his law firm also filed a motion to strike and dismiss. In June 2007, the trial court granted the motions to dismiss. In July 2007, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint and defendants again filed motions to dismiss. The trial court again granted the motions to dismiss. The court dismissed the claims against Weller with prejudice after concluding the claims against Weller, as public administrator of Vermilion County, must be brought in the Court of Claims as Weller was a state employee. The court also struck the claims against Saikley and the firm but allowed plaintiffs to amend those claims a second time.
On February 22, 2008, plaintiffs filed a two-count second-amended complaint against defendants. Count I of the second-amended complaint alleged negligence against Saikley, Saikley's firm, and Weller. Plaintiffs' attorney indicated Weller was named as a defendant in the complaint in order to preserve the claims against him. According to plaintiffs' brief, this count *187 was brought by plaintiffs in their capacity as assignees.
Count I asserted Saikley had at least three conferences with Gil Garman, who was Virginia's attorney when she was administratrix of the estate, regarding the estate. Weller had the duty to take such measures as he deemed proper to protect the estate from waste, loss, or embezzlement. Saikley "had to use the same degree of skill and care as an ordinarily careful attorney would exercise under similar circumstances." The complaint further asserted the primary purpose of the attorney-client relationship between Weller and Saikley was to carry out the instructions of Grimes's will and to provide legal advice as to the duties required for executors, including proper measures to be taken to protect and secure the estate from waste, loss, or embezzlement for the benefit of the plaintiffs as heirs and legatees of the will. Saikley was aware that Virginia's family was improperly in possession of real estate and estate personalty located on that real estate. Saikley was also aware that the matter was contentious, with plaintiffs on one side and Virginia's family on the other. Finally, Saikley was aware no estate inventory had been compiled or filed with the probate court. The complaint alleged Weller and Saikley violated their duty to the estate by one or more of the following negligent acts or omissions:
"a. Defendant Saikley failed to properly advise and instruct George Weller regarding protection and securing of estate property;
b. Defendant Saikley failed to take proper action through court filings to protect and secure estate property;
c. Allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to damage and allow damage to occur to the personalty, fixtures[,] and realty of the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
d. Allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to take various articles of personalty and fixtures which were the property of the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
e. Directed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to take personalty and fixtures belonging to the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
f. Allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to use personalty, fixtures[,] and realty of the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
g. Allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to occupy and live in realty owned by the estate after the death of Virginia Hawkes Grimes;
h. Failed to gather, inventory[,] and protect the assets of the estate;
i. Refused to file suit against William Townsley, Robert Banks, Gil Garman[,] and Sebat, Swanson, Banks[,] Garman & Townsley, a partnership for their negligence in representation of the administrat[rix] of the will of Clarence O. Grimes;
j. Failed to take any action to recover estate assets from Virginia Hawkes Grimes or her family;
k. Directed Vermilion County police officers to take no action to prevent the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes from looting the estate;
l. Entered their appearance and objected to the reopening of the estate and the appointment of one of the plaintiffs as administrator in a reopened estate for the sole purpose of preventing the estate from bringing suit against them for the negligence above described in paragraph *188 22, subparagraphs a [through] k above and their conduct in aiding and abetting the negligent and intentional conduct of Virginia Hawkes Grimes, her family as described in [c]ount II herein and William Townsley, Robert Banks, Gil Garman and Sebat, Swanson, Banks[,] Garman & Townsley, a partnership for their negligence and intentional conduct in their representation of the Administrat[rix] of the Estate of Clarence O. Grimes, Virginia Hawkes Grimes[,] and for their own self-serving actions in that estate."
Count II made the same assertions that Saikley was aware of the contentiousness of the matter, Virginia's family was improperly in possession of estate property, and no estate inventory had been compiled. Count II alleged Weller had the duty to protect the estate from waste, loss, or embezzlement. According to the complaint, during the attorney-client relationship between Weller and defendants, defendants knowingly conspired, aided, and abetted William Townsley, Robert Banks, Gil Garman, and Sebat, Swanson, Banks, Garman & Townsley, a partnership, Virginia Hawkes Grimes, and the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes in violation of their duty to the estate and to plaintiffs by the following:
"a. Knowingly allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to damage and allow damage to occur to the personalty, fixtures[,] and realty of the estate which was the legacy of plaintiffs from the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes [Grimes] had no right to do so;
b. Knowingly allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to take various articles of personalty and fixtures which were the property of the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
c. Knowingly directed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to take personalty and fixtures belonging to the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
d. Knowingly allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to use personalty, fixtures[,] and realty of the estate when the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes had no right to do so;
e. Knowingly allowed the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes to occupy and live in realty owned by the estate after the death of Virginia Hawkes Grimes;
* * *
k. Knowingly failed to gather, inventory[,] and protect the assets of the estate;
l. Explicitly refused to file suit against William Townsley, Robert Banks, Gil Garman and Sebat, Swanson, Banks[,] Garman & Townsley, a partnership[,] for their negligence in representation of the administrat[rix] of the will of Clarence O. Grimes;
m. Failed to take action to recover estate assets from Virginia Hawkes Grimes or her family;
n. Directed Vermilion County police officers to take no action to prevent the family of Virginia Hawkes Grimes from looting the estate;
o. Entered their appearance and objected to the reopening of the estate and the appointment of one of the plaintiffs as administrator in a reopened estate for the sole purpose of preventing the estate from bringing suit against them for the intentional conduct above described herein and the negligent conduct described in [c]ount I paragraph 22, subparagraphs a [through] k; aiding and abetting William Townsley, Robert Banks, Gil Garman and Sebat, Swanson, Banks[,] Garman & Townsley to avoid *189 suit by the estate for negligence, fraud[,] and aiding and abetting Virginia Hawkes Grimes and her family in their conversion and damage of estate property."
On March 18, 2008, Saikley, individually and as a member of his firm, filed a motion to strike and dismiss the second-amended complaint under sections 2-615 and 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/2-615, 2-619 (West 2006)). At an April 9, 2008, hearing, the trial court granted Saikley's motion to strike and dismiss the complaint. With respect to count I, the court stated (1) the claims against Saikley were for legal malpractice and legal-malpractice claims are not assignable in Illinois and (2) Saikley owed a duty to his client, Weller, not to plaintiffs. With respect to count II, the court stated the complaint did not establish the necessary elements. Specifically, the court stated (1) the claims fell short of showing Saikley "was regularly aware of his role as part of the overall or tortious activity at the time he provided assistance" and (2) plaintiffs did not plead Saikley knew "of and substantially assist[ed] the principal violation." The court asked plaintiffs' counsel whether she "wished to stand on [her] count II," or whether she "want[ed] leave to amend that yet again." Counsel replied, "I believe at this point, Your Honor, I would go ahead and stand on the [s]econd [a]mended [c]omplaint."
This appeal followed.
II. ANALYSIS
A. Standard of Review
In ruling on a motion to dismiss under either section 2-615 or section 2-619 of the Code, the trial court accepts all well-pleaded facts in the complaint as true and draws all reasonable inferences from those facts in favor of the nonmoving party. Lykowski v. Bergman, 299 Ill.App.3d 157, 162, 164-65, 233 Ill.Dec. 356, 700 N.E.2d 1064, 1069-70 (1998). We review dismissals under sections 2-615 and 2-619 de novo. Lykowski, 299 Ill.App.3d at 162, 164, 233 Ill.Dec. 356, 700 N.E.2d at 1069-70.
B. The Trial Court Properly Dismissed the Claims Against Weller
The trial court dismissed the claims against Weller after concluding Weller's alleged wrongful conduct stemmed solely "from his duties as a state employee[, as public administrator of Vermilion County,] to protect and secure an Illinois estate from waste, loss[,] or embezzlement," and therefore the suit was really "one against the State of Illinois." Therefore, according to the court, the claims against Weller must be brought in the Court of Claims, which has exclusive jurisdiction.
Pursuant to section 13-1 of the Probate Act of 1975 (Probate Act), the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoints a public administrator for each count for a term of four years, and "every [four] years thereafter or until his successor is appointed and qualified." 755 ILCS 5/13-1 (West 2006). The public administrator has the same powers and duties of other representatives of estates appointed under the Probate Act until he is either discharged or his authority is terminated by order of the court. 755 ILCS 5/13-4(a) (West 2006). A public administrator may take such measures as he deems appropriate to protect an estate from waste, loss, or embezzlement. 755 ILCS 5/13-4(a) (West 2006).
The public administrator must take and file "an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and will faithfully discharge the duties of his office and shall enter *190 into a bond payable to the people of the State of Illinois in a sum of not less than $5,000 with security as provided by this Act and approved by the court of the county in which he is appointed, conditioned that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office." 755 ILCS 5/13-2 (West 2006).
In counties having a population less than 1 million, compensation to the public administrator is by way of the fees received of his office and he/she also bears the expenses connected with the operation of the office. 755 ILCS 5/13-3(b) (West 2006). In counties with a population over 1 million, the public administrator pays all fees collected by the office into the county treasury, and each year the county board appropriates funds to pay the public administrator's salary (a minimum of $20,000) and the office expenses. 755 ILCS 5/13-3(a) (West 2006).
Plaintiffs assert that "there is a question as to whether Weller is a state employee." Plaintiffs note that Weller is not paid by the State for the services he performshis fee is provided from the assets of the estates he administers (755 ILCS 5/13-3(b) (West 2006))so "it is difficult to understand how he can be considered a [s]tate employee."
Weller argues that plaintiffs have forfeited the argument that Weller is not a state employee (1) by failing to cite any authority for their suggestion that only employees paid directly by the State constitute state employees and (2) because their argument is cursory and undeveloped. We agree.
Supreme Court Rule 341(h)(7) (210 Ill.2d R. 341(h)(7)) requires that argument in an appellant's brief include citation to the authorities relied upon and provides that points not argued are forfeited. See also Vernon Hills III Limited Partnership v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., 287 Ill.App.3d 303, 310-11, 222 Ill.Dec. 762, 678 N.E.2d 374, 379 (1997). Consequently, this argument is forfeited.
In Crews v. Lundquist, 361 Ill. 193, 201, 197 N.E. 768, 772 (1935), our supreme court stated "the services of a public administrator are rendered in the discharge of a function of [s]tate government." The court also recognized that as a "public officer [a public administrator] enjoys certain privileges not enjoyed by private administrators and is under certain duties not required of such other administrators." Crews, 361 Ill. at 199, 197 N.E. at 771. Moreover, in Ramsay v. VanMeter, 300 Ill. 193, 204, 133 N.E. 193, 196 (1921), the supreme court held a public administrator of an estate is "undoubtedly an officer" of the State. In People ex rel. Lowe v. Marquette National Fire Insurance Co., 351 Ill. 516, 526, 184 N.E. 800, 804 (1933), the court stated, the public administrator "is a [s]tate officer just as a [d]irector of [t]rade and [c]ommerce is a [s]tate officer."
In Kulas v. Vogler, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. 172, 172 (1997), the claimant brought a claim against respondent "as `an officer of the [S]tate' and name[d] him in his capacity as the [p]ublic [a]dministrator and [g]uardian of Lake County, in which capacity he [was] alleged to have acted in the" real-estate transaction that was the subject of the claim. The respondent allegedly executed a real-estate purchase/sale contract in his capacity as a state official. Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 172. The claimant sought damages for the respondent's alleged breach of the contract to convey real estate. Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 172. The Court of Claims noted the respondent had argued the claim was "actually against the estate, and against [the respondent] only in his capacity as executor and not in his capacity as public administrator (i.e., not as a [s]tate official or [s]tate employee)." (Emphasis *191 added.) Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 173. The court concluded claimant's contract was "with the probate estate and not with the State of Illinois." Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 173. The court further stated, "It is clear * * * that the operative capacity in which [the respondent] acted in this real[-]estate transaction was that of executor and not that of his public office. Moreover, no substantive or substantial nexus with his official capacity has been alleged." (Emphasis in original.) Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 174. The court then dismissed the claim for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. Kulas, 49 Ill. Ct. Cl. at 174.
As shown, both our supreme court and the Court of Claims have stated that public administrators are state officers. Accordingly, we conclude Weller, as public administrator of Vermilion County, was a state employee.
The United States Supreme Court has recognized that a sovereign entity cannot be sued without its consent. Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 745, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 2262, 144 L.Ed.2d 636, 672-73 (1999). "The purpose of sovereign immunity is to protect the [S]tate from interference with the performance of governmental functions and to preserve and to protect state funds." People ex rel. Manning v. Nickerson, 184 Ill.2d 245, 248, 234 Ill.Dec. 375, 702 N.E.2d 1278, 1280 (1998).
"The determination of whether an action is in fact a suit against the State turns upon an analysis of the issues involved and the relief sought, rather than the formal designation of the parties." Currie v. Lao, 148 Ill.2d 151, 158, 170 Ill.Dec. 297, 592 N.E.2d 977, 980 (1992). "[S]overeign immunity applies in an action naming a state employee as a defendant when the impact on the State makes the suit, for all practical purposes, one against the State." Evans v. Page, 341 Ill.App.3d 486, 490, 275 Ill.Dec. 330, 792 N.E.2d 805, 808 (2003). Illinois courts consider the following three criteria in determining whether an action is really against the State:
"(1) no allegations * * * [the] agent or employee of the State acted beyond the scope of his authority through wrongful acts; (2) the duty alleged to have been breached was not owed to the public generally independent of the fact of [s]tate employment; and (3) * * * the complained-of actions involve matters ordinarily within that employee's normal and official functions of the State." Robb v. Sutton, 147 Ill.App.3d 710, 716, 101 Ill.Dec. 85, 498 N.E.2d 267, 272 (1986).
If these three criteria are not met, the court must consider the relief sought, i.e., whether judgment for the plaintiff controls the State's actions or subjects it to liability. Jackson v. Alverez, 358 Ill.App.3d 555, 560, 294 Ill.Dec. 834, 831 N.E.2d 1159, 1164 (2005). "An action brought nominally against a [s]tate employee in his individual capacity will be found to be a claim against the State where a judgment for the plaintiff could operate to control the actions of the State or subject it to liability." Currie, 148 Ill.2d at 158, 170 Ill.Dec. 297, 592 N.E.2d at 980.
Plaintiffs do not argue Weller acted beyond the scope of his authority or that his actions were outside Weller's normal and official functions. Instead, plaintiffs argue Weller breached duties that any administrator would owe to the beneficiaries of an estate, independently of whether he was a public administrator. Weller responds that this argument is too simplistic and legally incorrect and cites Brandon v. Bonell, 368 Ill.App.3d 492, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d 465 (2006), as support for that argument.
*192 In Brandon, the plaintiffs, inmates at a correctional facility assigned to work in the kitchen, alleged the defendants, correctional-facility employees assigned to manage the kitchen, breached their duty to provide a reasonably safe workplace after plaintiffs were burned with hot grease. Brandon, 368 Ill.App.3d at 494, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 471. Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment on the basis that sovereign immunity applied to bar the claims against them. Brandon, 368 Ill. App.3d at 495, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 471. In Brandon, 368 Ill.App.3d at 505-07, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 480-81, the court discussed the "source of the duty" test, which is used to determine whether an employee breached a duty owed independently of his employment:
"According to the test, in order to determine if sovereign immunity protects an employee for his own act of negligence, one must look to the source of the duty the employee is charged with breaching in committing the negligent act. [Citation.] When the state employee allegedly breaches a duty that arises solely by virtue of his state employment, sovereign immunity will bar in circuit court an action that is founded on that breach. [Citation.] However, when an employee breaches a duty imposed independently of his state employment, he is entitled to no more immunity than is a private individual who breaches that same duty and the mere fact of his employment will not endow him with heightened protection. [Citation.] Thus, even if an employee is acting in the scope of his employment, he will not be protected by sovereign immunity for breaching a duty that arises separately from his state employment. [Citation.]
When applying the `source of duty' test, courts have found that an independent duty is a duty imposed by the employee's status as something other than an employee. [Citations.] For example, professionals employed by the State, such as public defenders and doctors at state hospitals, are not protected by sovereign immunity when they breach a professional duty owed by every member of that profession. [Citations.] Because a professional duty derives from the duty of care imposed by one's status as a professional, this is an independent duty that does not arise solely from one's employment and, thus, a breach is not protected by sovereign immunity. [Citation.]
In the same way, the duty to drive safely is a duty one owes to others regardless of one's employment, because it arises from one's status as a person operating a vehicle on a state roadway and not as a person employed as a driver. [Citation.] As a result, when a state employee breaches her duty to drive safely, even if she is driving within the scope of her state employment, she has breached a duty not imposed solely by her employment and is not protected by sovereign immunity. [Citation.]
However, the `source of duty' test is not without exceptions. [Citation.] When the conduct related to a state employee's independent duty is unique to his state employment such that a suit challenging this conduct could affect state policies or control its actions, then sovereign immunity will bar a suit against the state employee. [Citations.] For example, where a police officer was responding to an emergency call by driving south across westbound traffic, this manner of driving was considered unique to her state employment, and sovereign immunity applied despite her independent duty to drive with reasonable care. [Citation.]
Like duties as a professional and duties as a motor vehicle operator, *193 duties imposed by statute are normally considered independent duties because most statutes impose specific requirements on all people regardless of their employment. [Citation.] For example, when an employee in the course of his employment breaches a duty imposed by the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/1-1 [through 47-25] (West 2004)), he has breached an independent duty and is not protected by sovereign immunity. [Citation.] However, recently in Fritz [v. Johnston, 209 Ill.2d 302, 314, 282 Ill.Dec. 837, 807 N.E.2d 461, 468-69 (2004),] our supreme court clarified that where a statute imposes a duty only upon state employees, this statutory duty arises solely from their employment. [Citation.] As a result, an action resulting from a state employee's breach of a duty imposed solely by a statute pertaining only to state employees is protected by sovereign immunity. [Citation.] For example, where a professor sued the Board of Governors of State Colleges and Universities of Illinois, alleging that they had discharged her in violation of a section of the board of governors act, which applied only to the operation, management, and control of the State Colleges and Universities System, the court applied sovereign immunity despite the plaintiff's argument that the Board of Governors violated a statute. [Citation.]"
The court noted the parties distinguished public from private kitchens and focused their arguments on whether the defendants' duty to plaintiffs was unique to their state employment. Brandon, 368 Ill. App.3d at 507, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 481. The court affirmed on the basis that the statute relied on in the complaint imposed a duty on only the Department of Corrections. Brandon, 368 Ill.App.3d at 508, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 482. The Second District then stated as follows:
"Consequently, the statute imposes a duty solely on the Department of Corrections, and thus, any duty it imposes on Department of Corrections employees arises solely by virtue of their employment. Further, this court cannot find any common-law duty, akin to that of lawyers, doctors and other health professionals, and motor[-]vehicle operators, that kitchen supervisors have to keep kitchen staff members safe. [Citation.] Therefore, the trial court did not err in concluding that the duty defendants allegedly breached arose solely from their employment.
Because plaintiffs do not allege any facts showing that defendants breached a duty to plaintiffs that arose independently of defendants' state employment, the action is considered one against the State. [Citation.] In addition, because defendants' duty does not arise independently of their employment, we need not address if defendants' conduct was unique to their employment such that a lawsuit aimed at their conduct would operate to control state policies or actions, such that sovereign immunity applies." Brandon, 368 Ill.App.3d at 508, 306 Ill.Dec. 668, 858 N.E.2d at 482.
Had Weller not been appointed to be public administrator of Vermilion County, he would not have been involved in this case. His duties that arise under section 13-4 of the Probate Act (755 ILCS 5/13-4 (West 2006)) are imposed on him solely because he is the public administrator, a state employee or agent. Accordingly, the claims against Weller are barred by sovereign immunity and must be brought in the Court of Claims.
C. Trial Court Properly Dismissed Count I Because Legal Malpractice Claims Are Not Assignable
The trial court dismissed count I against Saikley because (1) plaintiffs' legal-negligence/malpractice *194 claim was not assignable to them and (2) Saikley owed no duty to plaintiffs. On appeal, plaintiffs acknowledge that Illinois courts that have considered the issue have held that legal-malpractice claims are not assignable. However, plaintiffs argue the circumstances of this case call for allowing the assignment of the legal-malpractice claim to them.
Illinois courts have consistently held a legal-malpractice claim is not assignable because of the personal nature of the attorney-client relationship and the potential for abuse. Brocato v. Prairie State Farmers Insurance Ass'n, 166 Ill.App.3d 986, 988-89, 117 Ill.Dec. 849, 520 N.E.2d 1200, 1201 (1988) (Fourth District); Brandon Apparel Group v. Kirkland & Ellis, 382 Ill.App.3d 273, 282, 320 Ill.Dec. 604, 887 N.E.2d 748, 755 (2008) (First District); Wilson v. Coronet Insurance Co., 293 Ill. App.3d 992, 994-95, 228 Ill.Dec. 736, 689 N.E.2d 1157, 1159 (1997) (First District); Clement v. Prestwich, 114 Ill.App.3d 479, 480, 70 Ill.Dec. 161, 448 N.E.2d 1039, 1041 (1983) (Second District); Christison v. Jones, 83 Ill.App.3d 334, 338-39, 39 Ill.Dec. 560, 405 N.E.2d 8, 11 (1980) (Third District). It has been stated "that `sound public policy prohibits the assignment of legal[-]malpractice claims since an assignee would be a stranger to the attorney-client relationship, who was owed no duty by the attorney and who suffered no injury from the attorney's actions.'" Brandon Apparel Group, 382 Ill.App.3d at 282, 320 Ill.Dec. 604, 887 N.E.2d at 755, quoting Clement, 114 Ill.App.3d at 480-81, 70 Ill. Dec. 161, 448 N.E.2d at 1041.
The public policy prohibiting such an assignment is served under these facts because Saikley, as attorney for the public administrator of the estate, owed no duty to plaintiffs, the intended beneficiaries. In Neal v. Baker, 194 Ill.App.3d 485, 486, 141 Ill.Dec. 517, 551 N.E.2d 704, 705 (1990), the sole income beneficiary filed a complaint against the attorney hired by the executor to serve as attorney in administrating the estate. The complaint alleged the attorney failed to make timely payments of inheritance taxes, failed to take advantage of certain tax benefits, and failed to diligently defend the will in a contest filed against the estate. Neal, 194 Ill.App.3d at 486, 141 Ill.Dec. 517, 551 N.E.2d at 705. The trial court dismissed the complaint. The issue on appeal was whether an attorney for the executor of the estate owed a duty to the beneficiaries of the estate, and if so, whether the plaintiff's complaint stated a cause of action on that duty. Neal, 194 Ill.App.3d at 487, 141 Ill.Dec. 517, 551 N.E.2d at 705. The Fifth District found that, under the facts of the case, no duty existed on behalf of the attorney for the estate as to the plaintiff and stated the following:
"It is well recognized that a fiduciary relationship exists between an attorney and a client, and the attorney owes the client the utmost fidelity, honesty[,] and good faith. [Citation.] An attorney owes a duty to a nonclient only in the most limited circumstances. [Citation.] In Pelham v. Griesheimer (1982), 92 Ill.2d 13, 64 Ill.Dec. 544, 440 N.E.2d 96, the supreme court established the standard for pleading the liability of attorneys to nonclients in legal[-]malpractice actions. The court extended the traditional concept of attorney liability to include third parties who were `intended beneficiaries of the relationship between the client and the attorney.' (Pelham, 92 Ill.2d at 20, 64 Ill.Dec. 544, 440 N.E.2d at 99.) A nonclient must prove that the primary purpose and intent of the attorney-client relationship is to benefit or influence the third party. (Pelham, 92 Ill.2d at 21, 64 Ill.Dec. 544, 440 N.E.2d at 100.) Finally, the court held *195 that where the attorney-client relationship is involved in an adversarial proceeding, there must be a `clear indication that the attorney's representation is intended to directly confer a benefit upon the third party.' Pelham, 92 Ill.2d at 23, 64 Ill.Dec. 544, 440 N.E.2d at 100." Neal, 194 Ill.App.3d at 487, 141 Ill.Dec. 517, 551 N.E.2d at 705.
Moreover, in In re Estate of Lis, 365 Ill.App.3d 1, 13, 301 Ill.Dec. 869, 847 N.E.2d 879, 889 (2006), petitioners argued attorneys for the estate owed a duty to all heirs since the attorneys were hired for the benefit of the estate. The First District rejected that argument and held the attorneys for the estate did not owe a duty to the petitioners (heirs of the estate). Estate of Lis, 365 Ill.App.3d at 18, 301 Ill.Dec. 869, 847 N.E.2d at 893. The court cited several cases as support for its holding, including the following:
"Schwartz v. Cortelloni, 177 Ill.2d 166, 175, [226 Ill.Dec. 416,] 685 N.E.2d 871[, 875-76] (1997) (`In determining whether a duty is owed to a third party, the key factor to be considered is whether the attorney acted at the direction of or on behalf of the client for the benefit of a third party'); Gagliardo v. Caffrey, 344 Ill.App.3d 219, 228, [279 Ill.Dec. 421,] 800 N.E.2d 489[, 496] (2003) (`the beneficiaries of an estate are intended to benefit from the estate and are owed a fiduciary duty by the executor to act with due care to protect their interests,' but `[t]hey are not, however, owed allegiance by the estate attorney, who does not have an attorney-client relationship with the beneficiaries and whose "first and only allegiance" is to the estate in such adversarial situations') (emphasis added); In re Estate of Vail, 309 Ill.App.3d 435, 441, [242 Ill.Dec. 759,] 722 N.E.2d 248[, 253] (1999) (`The attorney for the executor does not have an attorney-client relationship with the beneficiaries * * *. When an adversarial situation arises, the attorney for the executor owes allegiance only to the estate'); In re Estate of Kirk, 292 Ill.App.3d 914, 919, [227 Ill.Dec. 90,] 686 N.E.2d 1246[, 1250] (1997) (`"An attorney representing an estate must give his first and only allegiance to the estate when such an adversarial situation arises. [Citation.] Even though the beneficiaries of a decedent's estate are intended to benefit from the estate, an attorney cannot be held to have a duty to those beneficiaries, due to this potential adversarial relationship." [Citation.]'); Jewish Hospital of St. Louis, Missouri [v. Boatmen's National Bank of Belleville, 261 Ill.App.3d 750, 763[, 199 Ill.Dec. 276,] 633 N.E.2d 1267, 1277-78 (1994)] (`An attorney representing an estate must give his first and only allegiance to the estate, in the event that such an adversarial situation arises. Even though beneficiaries of a decedent's estate are intended to benefit from the estate, an attorney for an estate cannot be held to a duty to a beneficiary of an estate, due to the potentially adversarial relationship between the estate's interest in administering the estate and the interests of the beneficiaries of the estate'; finding no duty between the attorney and beneficiaries of estate); Rutkoski v. Hollis, 235 Ill.App.3d 744, 751, [175 Ill.Dec. 826,] 600 N.E.2d 1284[, 1289] (1992) (holding that the attorney for the executor of an estate, [where the executor] was also a beneficiary of that same estate, owed no duty based on the attorney-client relationship between the attorney and executor to him as a beneficiary: `Defendant's primary duty was to Charles as executor of the estate and not to the beneficiaries of the estate, including Charles'; *196 also noting that the plaintiff failed to cite any case in which an attorney who represented an estate was found to have an implied duty to the beneficiaries of that estate)." (Emphases in original.) Estate of Lis, 365 Ill.App.3d at 17[, 301 Ill.Dec. 869,] 847 N.E.2d at 892-93.
At the hearing on the motion to dismiss, plaintiffs' attorney stated "I don't think there's any question that the appellate courts in the State of Illinois that have considered the issue have stated that legal[-]malpractice claims are not assignable." Counsel then admitted she did not "think there's anything [she could] say that would put any kind of spin on those cases that would allow them to be read any differently." Instead, counsel asserted the better position would be to consider the circumstances of each case. We decline counsel's invitation to do so and conclude the trial court correctly dismissed count I against Saikley because (1) legal-malpractice claims cannot be assigned in Illinois and (2) Saikley owed no duty to plaintiffs as heirs.
D. The Trial Court Properly Dismissed Count II
The trial court dismissed count II because plaintiffs did not (1) sufficiently allege that Saikley "was regularly aware of his role as part of the overall or tortious activity at the time he provided assistance" and (2) plead Saikley knew "of and substantially assist[ed] the principal violation." We agree.
In Illinois, to properly plead the tort of aiding and abetting, one must allege the following elements: "`(1) the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act which causes an injury; (2) the defendant must be regularly aware of his role as part of the overall or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance; [and] (3) the defendant must knowingly and substantially assist the principal violation.'" Thornwood, Inc. v. Jenner & Block, 344 Ill.App.3d 15, 27-28, 278 Ill.Dec. 891, 799 N.E.2d 756, 767 (2003), quoting Wolf v. Liberis, 153 Ill. App.3d 488, 496, 106 Ill.Dec. 411, 505 N.E.2d 1202, 1208 (1987).
In count II of the second-amended complaint, plaintiffs alleged that defendants were aware of the contentiousness of the matter and that Virginia's family was improperly in possession of Clarence's estate's property. Paragraph 22 of count II of the amended complaint contains the allegations about how defendants allegedly aided and abetted William Townsley; Robert Banks; Gil Garman; and Sebat, Swanston, Banks, Garman & Townsley; and Virginia and her family in violation of their duty to both the estate and plaintiffs. Paragraph 22 of count II also alleged defendants (1) "knowingly allowed" Virginia's family to take, use, or damage property (subparagraphs a, b, d, and e); (2) "knowingly failed to gather, inventory[,], and protect the assets of the estate" (subparagraph k); (3) "explicitly refused to file suit" (subparagraph l), and (4) "failed to take any action to recover estate assets" (subparagraph m). While allegations of having knowledge and failing to take certain actions may be part of a cause of action for negligence in certain instances, those allegations do not allege that defendants (1) were regularly aware of their regular role in the tortious activity at the time of the assistance or (2) substantially assisted in the principal violation.
Plaintiffs also claimed defendants objected to the reopening of the estate and the appointment of one of the plaintiffs as administrator in a reopened estate for the sole purpose of preventing the estate from bringing suit against them (subparagraph o). This allegation does not allege that defendants (1) were regularly aware of *197 their regular role in the tortious activity at the time of the assistance or (2) substantially assisted in the principal violation.
Finally, plaintiffs alleged defendants "knowingly directed" Virginia's family to take personalty and fixtures belonging to Clarence's estate when her family had no right to do so (subparagraph c) and "directed Vermilion County police officers to take no action to prevent" Virginia's family from looting the estate (subparagraph n). Those allegations fail to state a claim for aiding and abetting. First, Saikley has no unilateral authority to direct police officers to do or abstain from doing anything. Second, even if true, the claims do not allege Saikley substantially assisted in the wrongful acts and was regularly aware of his role in the wrongful acts.
Accordingly, the trial court properly dismissed count II.
III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, we affirm the trial court's judgment.
Affirmed.
APPLETON and POPE, JJ., concur.