=== CASE 9741157 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:25.59746+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
I dissent in this case because I do not believe that there was evidence from which the trier of fact could reasonably infer beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant possessed and dispensed the narcotic in this case. Even assuming that the officer’s testimony concerning what he saw was not incredible as a matter of law, there is a complete lack of evidence as to who possessed or had the narcotic under *258control prior to the time that the appellant handed the envelope to the passenger. The officers testified that they saw the envelope pass from one hand to the other and nothing else. It is not an uncommon gesture for one remaining in a car to hand a passenger an article as he leaves, an article which has perhaps been inadvertently left on the seat. This gesture is surely not enough to support a conviction of sale or dispensing of narcotic drugs.
To illuminate this problem, suppose that an officer turns a corner and sees A handing an envelope to B a short distance away, and suppose that the envelope contains a narcotic. Suppose further that A is charged with the giving or selling of narcotics and the sole evidence at the trial is what the officer saw coupled with B’s testimony that he had just dropped the envelope and A had picked it up and was just handing it to him when the officer rounded the corner. Is this evidence sufficient to convict A of the crime charged? I think not. The presumption of innocence and the heavy burden of proof that the State is put to in a criminal case is, in my opinion, aimed at preventing such a result. We can guess and hypothesize about just what happened in the above scenario and speculate on whether or not we think B is telling the truth, but we cannot convict and sentence a man to up to twenty years in prison on the basis of what we think might really have happened. Just as a police officer needs articulable facts concerning his feelings that he has probable cause to arrest a suspect, Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, so do we demand objective evidence of the charged crime. In our hypothetical above, as in the actual cases before us, there are no such articulable facts to support the inferences needed to support the conviction.
We do not here question the good faith of the officer, or question his knowledge of the situation which might lead him to be certain what in fact was taking place. Informal hearsay and a well-developed “street sense” are important tools in law enforcement, but they cannot take the place of *259objective evidence at the time of trial. As we have often pointed out a verdict based “upon suspicion, opportunity, probability, conjecture, or unreasonable inferences of guilt gleaned from vague evidence” cannot stand. Durham v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 555, 238 N. E. 2d 9, 13; Manlove v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 70, 232 N. E. 2d 874.
If we make the assumption that evidence of the appellant’s flight is an indicia of guilt, the question in this case becomes, whose guilt? In Alberty v. U.S. (1895), 162 U.S. 499, 511, 16 S. Ct. 864, 868, 40 L. Ed. 1051, the Supreme Court stated that:
“it is a matter of common knowledge that men who are entirely innocent do sometimes fly from the scene of a crime through fear of being apprehended as the guilty parties, or from an unwillingness to appear as witnesses.” (Quoted with approval in Wong Sun v. U.S. (1963), 371 U.S. 471, 83 S. Ct. 407, 415, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441, fn. 10)
If the narcotics belonged to the passenger, the flight means nothing as to this appellant. In short, we can solve the mystery of whose narcotics were found, as well as the mystery of who felt guilty and why, only if we can ascertain who brought the narcotics into the car and who possessed them. Lacking that knowledge, or any evidence from which we could infer that knowledge, we cannot say, nor could a trier of fact say, that the appellant was guilty of possessing or dispensing narcotics beyond a reasonable doubt.
The sole evidence on this point is that the officers saw the envelope in the appellant’s hand for a split second as he handed the envelope to the passenger. In my opinion this is not sufficient to support the inference that the appellant was the one who had brought the narcotic into the car or who controlled its disposition.
Note.—Reported in 286 N. E. 2d 401.

=== CASE 2226376 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:07.571989+00 ===

286 N.E.2d 830 (1972)
Marvin Leo LAWRENCE, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 30737.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 11, 1972.
*831 Joseph B. Barker, Kagan & Barker, Martinsville, for appellant.
Theo. L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Robert F. Colker, Deputy Atty. Gen., for appellee.
PRENTICE, Justice.
Defendant (Appellant) was found guilty of Safe Burglary under Acts 1905, ch. 169, § 374a, as amended by Acts 1955, ch. 156, § 1, 1956 Repl. Burns Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-702a, IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X, and with being an Habitual Criminal under Acts 1907, ch. 82, § 1, 1956 Repl. Burns Ind. Stat. Ann. § 9-2207, IC 1971, 35-8-8-1. He was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for not less than five (5) years nor more than ten (10) years on the safe burglary count and to the Indiana State Prison for life on the habitual criminal count, said sentences to be served concurrently. The assignment of errors in essence presents two alleged errors here considered.
(1) Denial of a speedy trial as required by the statute then controlling. At the time of the defendant's arrest the *832 following relevant portion of Burns Ind. Stat. Ann. § 9-1402, 1956 Repl., Acts 1927, ch. 132, § 12, since replaced by Indiana Rules of Criminal Procedure CR 4, was in effect:
"* * * And no defendant shall be detained in jail, without a trial, on an indictment or affidavit, for a continuous period embracing more than two [2] terms after his arrest and commitment thereon; or if he was in jail at the time the indictment was found or affidavit filed, more than two [2] terms after the term at which the indictment was found or the affidavit first filed; except where a continuance was had on his motion, or the delay was caused by his act, or where there was not sufficient time to try him during such terms: Provided, however, That the prosecuting attorney shall make such statement for continuance at least five [5] days before the date set for trial, or shall sustain the burden of establishing to the satisfaction of the court that he is not at fault for failing to file such affidavit at an earlier date."
Appellant was in jail on another charge at the time charges were filed in the principal case. He contends that he was arrested on June 17, 1962 and that he was not brought to trial before the expiration of two terms after the term in which the affidavit was filed. Appellant's argument is grounded on the assumption that he was arrested on June 17, 1962, but the record does not support this contention. The record indicates and the defendant testified that charges were filed by affidavit on August 7, 1962. On December 16, 1963, during the second term after the term in which the charges were filed, the appellant made a motion for a change of venue, which he admits is a delay chargeable to him. He was brought to trial March 31, 1964. It follows that appellant was not denied a speedy trial under the provisions of the aforementioned statute.
(2) Errors in permitting certain voir dire statements, the introduction of certain evidence, and the giving of certain instructions including the reading of the charging affidavit, all over defendant's timely and proper objections and all of which disclosed to the jury the prior felony convictions of the defendant.
The affidavit was drawn in two counts, the first of which charged the burglary and the second of which charged the burglary and the requisites of the status of habitual criminal. On voir dire the prosectuor was permitted to read the habitual criminal statute to the jury. In the preliminary instructions given to the jury, both counts of the affidavit were included and the habitual criminal statute was re-read. The State produced its evidence of the defendant's guilt upon the primary charge of safe burglary and followed the evidence of the prior convictions, sentences and imprisonments. The defendant's motion for a directed verdict was overruled and he presented no evidence in rebuttal. By way of final instructions, the court re-read the habitual criminal statute and gave verdict forms calling for deliberations and verdicts upon both counts. Proper and timely objections were interposed to all of the foregoing. Thus the defendant has squarely challenged the procedure heretofore employed in habitual criminal cases as being fundamentally prejudicial, hence a denial of due process.
The admission or rejection of evidence is not a matter of judicial grace. It is a legal right. Thomas v. State (1958), 237 Ind. 537, 147 N.E.2d 577. To be admissible, evidence must logically tend to prove a material fact. Stallings v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 256, 235 N.E.2d 488. Accordingly, evidence of prior crimes is generally inadmissible in a criminal case, because it has no tendency to establish the guilt or innocence of the accused but, if effective at all, could serve only to prejudice or mislead or excite the minds and inflame the passions of the jury. Rowe v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 547, 237 N.E.2d 576. Evidence of prior crimes is admissible, however, if it is relevant to some issue in the *833 case, such as intent, motive, knowledge, plan, identity, or credibility. In trials for sex offenses, evidence of prior convictions for similar offenses has also been admitted as tending to show a depraved sexual instinct. Schnee v. State (1970), Ind., 262 N.E.2d 186; Burns v. State (1970), Ind., 260 N.E.2d 559; Meeks v. State (1950), 249 Ind. 659, 234 N.E.2d 629; Watts v. State (1950), 229 Ind. 80, 95 N.E.2d 570; Ashton v. Anderson (1972), Ind., 279 N.E.2d 210; Gilman v. State (1972), Ind., 282 N.E.2d 816; 2 Wigmore on Evidence, § 305. The admissibility of prior convictions in such cases is justified only by their relevance to the issues. The undesirable tendency to prejudice remains, but the overriding interests of the State in arriving at the truth prevails.
In the principal case no showing was made that evidence of the defendant's prior crimes was in any manner relevant to the safe burglary charge. Its sole relevance lay in its support of the habitual criminal charge. In Metzger v. State (1938), 214 Ind. 113, 13 N.E.2d 519, this Court held such a procedure to be proper so long as the jury considers the prior crimes for the single purpose of classifying the defendant as an habitual criminal. The court recognized the prejudicial effect that would follow from a failure to instruct the jury that such prior crimes may not be considered in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant on the principal charge.
"* * * A statute of this nature should be strictly construed. Its provisions should not be extended by construction, and, where, as in the case now under consideration, proof of former convictions had been made, that proof must be considered separate and apart from the proof upon the offense charged. * * *." 214 Ind. at 113, 13 N.E.2d at 521.
Inherent in this approach to the validity of the procedure is the belief that the jury can consider the prior convictions for the purpose of determining the status of habitual criminal, and at the same time make an independent determination of guilt on the crime charged solely on their evaluation of the evidence presented to support that charge. See also Smith v. State (1949), 227 Ind. 672, 87 N.E.2d 881. It is highly improbable that twelve jurors can be found with sufficient mental discipline to compartmentalize the evidence. The more realistic view was advanced by this Court in the case of Johnson v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 70, 245 N.E.2d 659, 662, wherein it was stated:
"The mental manipulation required by the present procedure would be difficult for one specially trained in the rules of evidence, and we would be less than realistic to expect evidence of prior convictions not to influence the jurors' determination of guilt or innocence on the principal offense."
The appellant's failure to properly present the issue to the Johnson court, however, precluded a determination regarding the procedure. But the court gave no tacit approval to the Metzger case and added:
"This should not be construed to mean that this court necessarily approves the procedures presently used under the habitual criminal statutes. Had the issue been properly presented, this court might well have questioned the fairness of a procedure which allows the jury to learn of a defendant's past convictions while deciding his guilt or innocence on the principal charge. * * * However, this question was never properly presented to the trial court and, therefore, cannot be considered by this court on this appeal." 245 N.E.2d at 662.
It is difficult to see how the appellant could have received a fair trial on the safe burglary charge once the jury became aware of his prior convictions. The unfairness inherent in this procedure becomes even more obvious when it is seen that a conviction on the principal charge, which may be influenced by evidence of prior convictions, *834 is necessary to obtain a conviction on the habitual criminal charge. Therefore, in a close case, a conviction on the principal charge might actually be obtained by the introduction of the evidence of prior convictions, which in turn would become the third felony needed to convict on the habitual criminal charge. In such an instance a conviction on either charge would be dependent on the other. The conviction on the principal charge would be dependent upon the evidence of prior convictions which could only be introduced to support the habitual criminal charge. On the other hand the habitual criminal charge would fail, absent a finding of guilty on the principal charge. Such a circuitous effect is patently unfair and circumvents the appellant's right to a fair trial.
"It is the duty of the courts to uphold the acts of the legislature if it can possibly be done, without doing violence to the Constitution; and in doing so, every reasonable presumption must be indulged in favor of the legality of the act." Morgan v. State (1912), 179 Ind. 300, 303, 101 N.E. 6, 8.
Book v. State Office Bldg. Comm. (1958), 238 Ind. 120, 149 N.E.2d 273; State ex rel. Mavity v. Tyndall (1947), 225 Ind. 360, 74 N.E.2d 914.
The statute seems to imply that there should be a joinder of the proceedings in that it provides for one affidavit or indictment and findings upon the issues of the primary crime and the prior convictions. If we were to determine that the statute mandates such procedure, however, we would be compelled to hold it unconstitutional, because of its inescapable tendency to prejudice and the absence of any overriding interest of the state. The convenience of such procedure can hardly warrant the injustice to the accused. In light of this and to assure constitutional validity to the statute we do not regard the provisions for one affidavit and one jury to mandate a full joinder as was done here and as has heretofore been the practice in this state. It is our opinion that the single affidavit and jury requirements were imposed to assure the accuseds their constitutional right to be advised of the charges against them and to have a speedy trial. This problem has been met in numerous other jurisdictions either by statutory proceedings or by judicially prescribed procedures.[1]
In State v. Ferrone (1921), 96 Conn. 160, 113 A. 452, the court dealt with the *835 same problem which now confronts this Court. The appellant there had been charged in the information with the principal offense. Included also was information regarding two previous crimes which the appellant had committed. The court clarified the need for this procedure:
"But in State v. Reilly, 94 Conn. 698, we further said, on page 705, 110 A. 550, on page 553, that in such an information `two separate issues are presented: First, was the defendant guilty of the crime charged? This relates to the crime only. Second, if guilty had the defendant twice before been convicted, sentenced, and imprisoned? This relates to the penalty only, and does not involve or state any other or different crime from that first stated. The jury must by their verdict answer each of these issues.'" 113 A. at 456-457.
The court proceeded to explain the need for a procedure that would prevent the jury from becoming unduly influenced by the introduction of evidence of prior crimes, as follows:
"It cannot be believed that an accused man would ever have a fair trial, resulting in a verdict not affected by prejudice or by considerations by which the jury should not be influenced, if during that trial allegations that he has twice before been convicted of state prison crimes have been read to the jury, and evidence of his former convictions has been placed before them. It is beyond question that knowledge of such facts must necessarily prejudice the minds of his triers against the accused, and cause him more serious injury than that which he would suffer from any improper remarks of the state's attorney." 113 A. at 457.
The court then adopted a procedure to accomplish that end:
"[10] In the absence of statutory regulation in this state, it is our opinion that a procedure similar to that prescribed by an English statute should be followed. 24 & 25 Vict. c. 99, s. 37; Reg. v. Martin, 1 L.R.C.C. 214. The information should be divided into two parts. In the first the particular offense with which the accused is charged should be set forth, and this should be upon the first page of the information and signed by the prosecuting officer. In the second part former convictions should be alleged, and this should be upon the second page of the information, separable from the first page and signed by the prosecuting officer. The entire information should be read to the accused and his plea taken in the absence of the jurors. When the jury has been impaneled and sworn, the clerk should read to them only that part of the information which sets forth the crime for which the accused is to be tried. The trial should then proceed in every respect as if there were no allegations of former convictions, of which no mention should be made in the evidence, or in the remarks of counsel, or in the charge of the court. When the jury retire to consider their verdict, only the first page of the information, on which the crime charged is set out, should be given to them. If they return a verdict of guilty, the second part of the information, in which former convictions are alleged, should be read to them without reswearing them, and they should be charged to inquire on that issue. Of course, the accused may plead guilty to this part of the information, and then no further proceedings before or by the jury would be necessary. No reason appears why the accused, if he should choose, might not submit this issue to the court without the jury." 113 A. at 457-458.
We hereby adopt the procedure prescribed in the Ferrone case, because in so doing we appear to be carrying out the intent of the legislature to impose greater penalties upon recidivists who have failed to respond to prior convictions, without subjecting those only thus far accused of *836 being members of such class to unnecessary prejudice, and by varying from the heretofore accepted procedure, we inflict but minimal inconvenience upon the courts.
The procedure employed in the trial of the defendant was a denial of due process. The defendant should have a new trial conducted in accordance with the provisions of this opinion, and the judgment of the trial court is accordingly reversed.
ARTERBURN, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and HUNTER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Alaska, Alaska Stat. § 12.55.060 (1962); Arkansas, Miller v. State, 239 Ark. 836, 394 S.W.2d 601 (1965); Colorado, Heinze v. People, 127 Colo. 54, 253 P.2d 596 (1953); Connecticut, State v. Ferrone, 96 Conn. 160, 113 A. 452 (1921); Delaware, Del. Code Ann. Tit. 11, § 3912 (b) (Supp. 1964); Florida, Fla. Stat. Ann. § 775.11 (1965), Shargaa v. State, 102 So. 2d 814 (1958); Idaho, State v. Johnson, 86 Idaho 51, 383 P.2d 326 (1963); Illinois, Ill. Rev. Stat. c. 38, §§ 603.1-603.9 (1963), Ill. Rev. Stat. c. 38, 22-43 (1965); Kansas, Kan.Gen.Stat. Ann. § 21-107a (1949); Louisiana, La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 15:529.1, subd. D (Supp. 1962); Maryland, Md.Rule of Proc. 713; Michigan, Mich. Stat. Ann. § 28.1085 (1954), M.C.L.A. § 769.13; Minnesota, Minn. Stat. Ann. § 609.16; Missouri, Mo. Ann. Stat. § 556.280 (1953); Nebraska, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-2221 (1964); New York, N.Y.Pen.Law, McKinney's Consol. Laws, c. 40, § 1943; New Mexico, Johnson v. Cox, 72 N.M. 55, 380 P.2d 199 (1963); North Dakota, N.D. Cent. Code § 12-06-23 (1960); Ohio, Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 2961.13 (1954); Oklahoma, Okla. Stat. Ann. Tit. 22, § 860 (Supp. 1964); Harris v. State, Okl.Cr., 369 P.2d 187 (1962); Oregon, Ore.Rev.Stat. § 168.065 (1961); Pennsylvania, Pa. Stat. Ann. Tit. 18, § 5108 (1963); South Dakota, S.D.Code § 13.0611(3) (1939); Tennessee, Tenn. Code Ann. § 40-2801 (1955); Harrison v. State, 217 Tenn. 31, 394 S.W.2d 713 (1965); Texas, Texas Code Crim.Proc. Art. 36.01 (1966); Utah, Utah Code Ann. § 76-1-19 (1953); State v. Stewart, 110 Utah 203, 171 P.2d 383 (1946); Virginia, Va. Code Ann. § 53-296 (1958); Washington, State v. Kirkpatrick, 181 Wash. 313, 43 P.2d 44 (1935); West Virginia, W. Va. Code Ann. § 6131 (1961).

=== CASE 9741158 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:29.278106+00 ===

Fahrnbruch, J.
Robert R. Emrich appeals his conviction for operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways within Red Willow County while he had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood.
Following a bench trial conviction in the Red Willow County Court, Emrich was placed on probation for 18 months. Among the provisions of his probation, Emrich was ordered to pay a $200 fine and ordered not to drive a motor vehicle for any purpose for 60 days.
Emrich appealed his conviction and sentence to the district court for Red Willow County, but failed to comply with Neb. Ct. R. of Cty. Cts. 52(I)(G) (rev. 1996), which reads as follows:
Within 10 days of the filing of the bill of exceptions in the district court, the appellant shall file with the district court a statement of errors, which shall consist of a separate, concise statement of each error a party contends was made by the trial court. . . . Consideration of the case will be limited to errors assigned and discussed.
The rule further provides that the district court may, at its option, notice a plain error not assigned.
The district court reviewed Emrich’s case for plain error and upheld the county court’s conviction and sentence of Emrich. Thereafter, Emrich filed an appeal in the Nebraska Court-of Appeals. This court authorized that this appeal be transferred to its docket.
We reverse the decision of the district court for Red Willow County and remand the cause to the district court with direction to remand the matter to the county court for a new trial.
*542ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR
In this court, Emrich submits only one assignment of error: The district court erred in affirming the county court’s decision finding that the administrative license revocation postarrest advisement (advisory form) read to Emrich was adequate.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Statutory interpretation is a matter of law in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the decision made by the court below. State v. Christner, post p. 549, 557 N.W.2d 707 (1997); State v. Johnson, 250 Neb. 933, 554 N.W.2d 126 (1996); Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995).
In a bench trial of a law action, including a criminal case tried without a jury, erroneous admission of evidence is not reversible error if other relevant evidence, admitted without objection or properly admitted over objection, sustains the trial court’s factual findings necessary for the judgment or decision reviewed; therefore, an appellant must show that the trial court actually made a factual determination, or otherwise resolved a factual issue or question, through use of erroneously admitted evidence in a case tried without a jury. State v. Christner, supra; State v. Lujano, ante p. 256, 557 N.W.2d 217 (1996); State v. Lomack, 239 Neb. 368, 476 N.W.2d 237 (1991). See, also, State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 66, 486 N.W.2d 481 (1992).
In determining whether evidence is sufficient to sustain a conviction in a bench trial, an appellate court does not resolve conflicts in evidence, pass on credibility of witnesses, evaluate explanations, or reweigh evidence presented, which are within a fact finder’s province for disposition. A conviction in a bench trial of a criminal case is sustained if the evidence, viewed and construed most favorably to the State, is sufficient to support that conviction. The trial court’s findings have the effect of a jury verdict and will not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. State v. Christner, supra; State v. Johnson, supra; State v. Hand, 244 Neb. 437, 507 N.W.2d 285 (1993).
On appeal, if it appears the evidence is sufficient to support a conviction, the cause may be remanded to the district court for further proceedings; if the evidence is not sufficient, the cause *543must be dismissed. State v. Christner, supra; State v. Lee, 227 Neb. 277, 417 N.W.2d 26 (1987). See State v. Palmer, 224 Neb. 282, 399 N.W.2d 706 (1986).
FACTS
At approximately 1:30 a.m. on April 8, 1995, McCook police officer Larry Kinne stopped a pickup truck containing three people for investigation of “suspicious behavior.” The truck was being driven by Emrich, and it contained two female passengers. The vehicle had been parked close to the front door of a closed, local law office when Kinne passed by it. At that time, Kinne observed a male in the driver’s seat of the truck and another person kneeling or squatting down by the front door of the law office. A female who was standing by a door of the truck was behaving nervously, according to Kinne.
Kinne circled the block in his police cruiser and had radio contact with his superior. Kinne testified that as he approached the site of the law office, the people he had previously observed near the law office got into the truck. The truck backed out from where it had been parked and then proceeded down the street. At that time, Kinne turned around in the law office parking lot, activated his cruiser’s emergency lights, and stopped the truck, which Emrich was driving.
When Kinne made personal contact with the occupants of the truck, he detected a fairly strong odor of alcohol coming from inside the truck. When he talked to the driver, who he later determined was Emrich, Kinne noticed that Emrich’s eyes were bloodshot and that his speech was slurred and “thick-tongued.”
While Kinne questioned the truck’s occupants about what they were doing at the law office site, Emrich admitted he had been drinking. In response to Kinne’s request, Emrich exited the truck he had been driving. Kinne noted that when Emrich got out of his truck he hung onto its door to support himself, he swayed from side to side in a somewhat circular motion, and he wavered to the side as he was walking. Kinne then asked Emrich to perform some field sobriety tests.
In all, Kinne had Emrich perform six sobriety tests. For the first test, Emrich was to recite the alphabet, which he did correctly, but his speech was slurred. On the second test, a finger *544dexterity test, Emrich did not touch the tip of his finger to the tip of his thumb as directed. The thumb touched more to the top of the knuckle as opposed to the tip of the fingeri During the third test, a orie-leg stand, Emrich swayed from side to side and bounced on one foot, contrary to the instructions given him. He also failed to follow other instructions on how to perform the test. While the fourth test was being explained to him, Emrich was “kind of swaying.” The test was to walk a straight line with heel to toe for nine steps, turn around, and return in the same manner. The record reflects he performed that test fairly well. The fifth test was a finger-to-nose test. In this test, the performer is instructed to stand with his heels together and his toes pointing out at a 45-degree angle. The performer’s head is tilted back slightly, his eyes are closed, and his arms are raised out to the side. He is then told to touch the tip of his nose with his finger. The evidence reflects that Emrich failed this test. The sixth test was a Romberg balance test, wherein the performer puts his heels together, points his toes out at a 45-degree angle, keeps his arms to his sides, tilts his head back, and closes his eyes. In such position, the performer, upon command, is to count 30 seconds and say stop. Emrich’s stopping time was 34 seconds. While performing the test, Emrich swayed “quite a bit from front to back and side to side.”
Kinne testified that during the tests he detected the odor of alcoholic beverage on Emrich’s breath. Based upon his observations and the results of the sobriety tests, Kinne testified that he was of the opinion that Emrich was intoxicated. The officer then administered a preliminary breath test to Emrich, arrested him, and transported him to the police station.
At the police station, Kinne read to Emrich an “Administrative License Revocation Advisement/Post Arrest” form. Subsequently, with Emrich’s consent, a sample of his blood was taken by a nurse. The McCook Community Hospital clinical laboratory tested Emrich’s blood.
Thereafter, Emrich was charged with operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways within Red Willow County while he (1) was under the influence of alcoholic liquor or (2) had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per *545100 milliliters of his blood, to wit: .20 of 1 gram by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood.
At trial, over the objection of Emrich, the trial court accepted into evidence exhibit 1, a report from the laboratory stating that Emrich had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood, to wit: .205.
The trial court made no finding in regard to whether Emrich was under the influence of alcohol while he was driving his truck prior to his arrest. Instead, the trial court specifically found Emrich guilty of operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways within Red Willow County while he had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood.
ANALYSIS
The determinative issue in this appeal is whether, over the objection of Emrich, the trial court erred in admitting into evidence the result of his blood alcohol test. We find that the trial court erred in admitting the test into evidence because Emrich was not adequately advised of the consequences of submitting to a blood test as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,197 (Reissue 1993) and this court’s decisions in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995), a civil case of administrative driver’s license revocation, and State v. Christner, post p. 549, 557 N.W.2d 707 (1997), a criminal case similar to the case at bar.
In Christner and in Smith, we addressed the issue of whether an arresting officer, by reading an advisory form identical to the one in this case, gave a driver-arrestee adequate notice, as required by § 60-6,197(10), of the consequences of failing a chemical test to detect alcohol concentration in the driverarrestee’s body. We held in both Christner and Smith that the advisory form used in those cases prior to the administration of a chemical test to detect alcohol concentration in a driverarrestee’s body failed to fully inform the driver-arrestee of the consequences of submitting to, or submitting to and failing, a chemical test as mandated by § 60-6,197(10). That statute, in relevant part, provides:
*546Any person who is required to submit ... to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests . . . shall be advised of (a) the consequences of refusing to submit to such test or tests and (b) the consequences if he or she submits to such test and the test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of subsection (1) of section 60-6,196.
(Emphasis supplied.)
(As an aside, we again note that the Nebraska Legislature amended the foregoing provision, with an operative date of February 27, 1996, to read: “Any person who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this section shall be advised that refusal to submit to such test or tests is a separate crime for which the person may be charged.” § 60-6,197(10) (Cum. Supp. 1996).)
We have held that the sensible reading of § 60-6,197(10) indicates that the Legislature intended drivers to be advised of the natural and direct legal consequences flowing from submitting to a chemical test and failing it. See, Christner, supra; Smith, supra. We have previously found that the advisory form used in this case fails to inform a driver-arrestee that the results of a valid chemical test could be competent evidence in any prosecution involving a driving under the influence offense. See, Christner, supra; Smith, supra. Citing our decision in State v. Deets, 234 Neb. 307, 450 N.W.2d 696 (1990), we concluded in Christner and in Smith that the purpose of requiring an officer to advise a driver-arrestee of the consequences of refusing to take a breath test was to ensure that the driver-arrestee was in a position to make a rational and voluntary decision as to whether to submit to a chemical test. As a result, we have held that an advisory form identical to the one used here is statutorily inadequate because it does not fully inform a driver-arrestee of the consequences of submitting to and failing a chemical test.
We held in Smith that the defendant’s motor vehicle operator’s license could not be revoked by the director of the Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles because the defendant was not fully informed of the consequences of submitting to a chemical test for alcohol concentration in his body. We reaffirmed our Smith decision in Perrine v. State, 249 Neb. 518, 544 *547N.W.2d 364 (1996), and in Biddlecome v. Conrad, 249 Neb. 282, 543 N.W.2d 170 (1996).
In Christner, a criminal case, we held that a defendant’s blood test should not be received in evidence when the defendant had not been fully advised of the consequences of taking the test, including the fact that the test result could be used against him in a criminal prosecution. At the time of the Christner appeal, this court had not ruled in a criminal case upon the admissibility of a chemical test for alcohol when the driverarrestee had not been fully advised of the consequences of taking or refusing the test. However, the Court of Appeals had held that when a driver-arrestee has not been fully informed of the consequences of taking a chemical test to determine the concentration of alcohol in his or her body, his or her refusal to take the test is not admissible in evidence to support a criminal charge of refusing to take such a test. State v. McGurk, 95 NCA No. 45, case No. A-95-162 (not designated for permanent publication). The Court of Appeals, in State v. HatcliFf, 95 NCA No. 45, case No. A-95-198 (not designated for permanent publication), held that the results of a blood test which were preceded by an inadequate advisement of the consequences of taking the test are inadmissible in a criminal case to prove the concentration of alcohol in a driver-arrestee’s body. The Court of Appeals reached the same conclusion in a criminal case, State v. Hingst, 4 Neb. App. 768, 550 N.W.2d 686 (1996). On petition for further review by this court, we affirmed the Court of Appeals’ judgment. See State v. Hingst, ante p. 535, 557 N.W.2d 681 (1997).
We again hold that a driver-arrestee in a criminal case who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test under § 60-6,197 should be advised of the natural and direct legal consequences of submitting to a chemical test. Such consequences include that any incriminating results from such a test may be used against the driver-arrestee in a criminal proceeding. We also hold that in a criminal case, if the defendant was read an inadequate advisory form before taking the test, it is error for a trial court, over the defendant’s objection, to admit into evidence the results of a chemical blood, breath, or urine *548test to prove the concentration of alcohol in the defendant’s body.
In Emrich’s case, the trial court could not have determined that Emrich was operating a motor vehicle with .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood without relying upon the results of Emrich’s blood test. The record clearly establishes that the county court in convicting Emrich relied solely upon the results of Emrich’s blood test.
In State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 66, 70, 486 N.W.2d 481, 484 (1992), we held that “the erroneous admission of evidence in a bench trial of a law action, including a criminal case tried without a jury, is not reversible error if other relevant evidence, admitted without objection or properly admitted over objection, sustains the trial court’s necessary factual findings.” A reversal is warranted in such a case “if the record shows that the trial court actually made a factual determination, or otherwise resolved a factual issue or question, through the use of erroneously admitted evidence.” Id. (citing State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 60, 486 N.W.2d 219 (1992)).
In Emrich’s case, there is no admissible evidence to support a finding that he had .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood, an essential element of the offense based on alcohol concentration. The trial court committed trial error when it relied explicitly and exclusively upon the inadmissible result of a blood test to find Emrich guilty of operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways while he had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood.
Although we are compelled to reverse Emrich’s conviction of the charge based on alcohol concentration, we must examine the sufficiency of all the evidence presented against him in order to resolve this matter completely. See State v. Lee, 227 Neb. 277, 417 N.W.2d 26 (1987). See, also, State v. Palmer, 224 Neb. 282, 399 N.W.2d 706 (1986).
In Lee, we stated that if it appears the evidence is sufficient to support a conviction, the cause may be remanded to the district court for further proceedings; if the evidence is not sufficient, the cause must be dismissed.
*549After a careful examination of the record, we find that there is sufficient admissible evidence upon which a fact finder could find Emrich guilty of operating or having physical control of a motor vehicle on a public road or highway while he was under the influence of alcohol.
CONCLUSION
Because Emrich’s blood test result should not have been received in evidence, we reverse Emrich’s conviction for operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle while he had a concentration of .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood.
Because there is sufficient evidence in the record from which a fact finder could find Emrich guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways while he was under the influence of alcohol, we reverse the decision of the district court for Red Willow County and remand the cause to the district court with direction to remand the matter to the county court for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded with direction.

=== CASE 9741160 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:29.761438+00 ===

OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.
Respondent Alan Krai commenced this declaratory action against appellant Ralph Boesch asserting (1) that he was entitled to a prescriptive easement to drain surface water through drainage tile on the neighboring Boesch property, (2) that Boesch was obliged to restore the tile line, (3) that he was entitled to enjoin Boesch from future interference with the tile system, and (4) that Boesch be held liable for tile line repair and Krai’s crop loss. Following a March 1, 1996 trial, the district court ordered judgment on findings of fact and conclusions of law denying Krai’s demand for a prescriptive easement, but, by application of the doctrine of reasonable use, granting Krai injunctive relief and damages for crop loss due to flooding caused by the obstructed tile line.
Boesch moved for amended findings of fact and conclusions of law. On May 15,1996, the district court denied the motion. Boesch appealed the judgment and Krai noticed review challenging the district court’s determination that he was not entitled to a prescriptive easement.
FACTS
Respondent Krai and appellant Boesch own neighboring tracts of Brown County farmland. During the spring of 1993, problems developed with drain tile located on the Krai property and connected to drain tile running across the Boesch property. The problems arose when LaRay Krai, respondent’s father, created a channel to drain surface water from the Krai property to a tile intake bordering the parties’ properties. The intake was a vertical span of tile standing about two feet above the ground. Krai apparently lowered this intake in order to allow the channel water to flow into it. Each party testified that he believed the intake was on his property; but neither party surveyed the property to determine the actual property line. When Boesch discovered the channel and modification of the intake, he raised the intake to keep water out. He also plugged the intake with cement, thereby completely blocking the flow of air and water through the tile system. Blocking the intake caused surface water to stand in three areas of the Krai property, which resulted in crop damage.
ISSUES
1. Did the district court err in determining that respondent was entitled to relief under the reasonable use doctrine?
2. Did the district court properly award damages to respondent?
3. Did the district court err in deciding that the law governing prescriptive easements is inapplicable to the determination of Krai’s right to drain surface water through Boesch’s tile system?
ANALYSIS
A district court’s findings of fact will not be reversed on appeal unless clearly erroneous. Minn. R. Civ. P. 52.01. “The [district court’s] findings on reasonable use will not be disturbed on appeal unless they are clearly erroneous.” Evers v. Willaby, 444 N.W.2d 856, 859 (Minn.App.1989) (citing Miles v. City of Oakdale, 323 N.W.2d 51, 54 (Minn.1982)). A clearly erroneous finding is one that is palpably and manifestly against the weight of the evidence. Enderson v. Kelehan, 226 Minn. 163, 169, 32 N.W.2d 286, 289-90 (1948) (involving surface drainage rights).
1. Application of Reasonable Use Doctrine; Injunction
Minnesota follows the “rule of reasonable use” with regard to diversion or obstruc*599tion of surface water. Evers, 444 N.W.2d at 859.
[T]he rule is that in effecting a reasonable use for a legitimate purpose a landowner, acting in good faith, may drain his land of surface waters and cast them as a burden upon the land of another, although such drainage carries with it some waters which would otherwise have never gone that way * * * jf
(a) [t]here is a reasonable necessity for such drainage;
(b) [r]easonable care be taken to avoid unnecessary injury to the land receiving the burden;
(c) [t]he utility or benefit accruing to the land drained reasonably outweighs the gravity of the harm resulting to the land receiving the burden;
(d) [w]here practicable, it is accomplished by reasonably improving and aiding the normal and natural system of drainage according to its reasonable carrying capac-
• ity, or if, in the absence of a practicable natural drain, a reasonable and feasible artificial drainage system is adopted.
Duevel v. Jennissen, 352 N.W.2d 93, 96 (Minn.App.1984) (quoting Enderson, 226 Minn, at 167-68, 32 N.W.2d at 289). In determining reasonableness, a court should consider the extent of harm caused, its foreseeability, and the landowner’s motive for the action taken. Miles, 323 N.W.2d at 55. No one factor or circumstance is controlling and what is a reasonable use is a fact question to be resolved depending on the facts of each case. Pell v. Nelson, 294 Minn. 363, 366, 201 N.W.2d 136, 138 (1972).
Boeseh does not challenge the district court’s factual findings concerning reasonable use, but rather, he argues that the reasonable use doctrine should not be applied because the district court did not make provisions for increased use of the tile system or allocate costs for maintaining the system.
The reasonable use doctrine has been applied to allow a landowner to drain his land by ditching or tiling as long as the interference with the surface water is reasonable. See id. at 367, 201 N.W.2d at 139 (owner may drain surface water from property by tiling).
We have also extended the reasonable use doctrine to drainage systems (such as the one at hand) and held that a property owner has the right to drain his land into an adjoining owner’s drainage system. Evers, 444 N.W.2d at 860.
In the instant case, the reasonable use doctrine answers each of Boesch’s challenges to its application. Boesch’s concern about Krai’s increased burden on the system is governed by the reasonable use doctrine. It entitles Krai to drain water into the tile system, provided the drainage remains reasonable; Boeseh has the burden of proving that Krai’s use of the system is unreasonable. See id. (rule of reasonable use permits other landowners to subsequently attach to existing drainage systems as long as the use is reasonable; use is reasonable absent evidence of damage to neighboring owner’s property). There was no evidence indicating that the additional water drained from the Krai property caused surface water problems on the Boeseh property. Furthermore, the legal remedy for a downstream owner who is burdened by unreasonable drainage of surface water is an action for damages. See Pell, 294 Minn, at 367 n. 2, 201 N.W.2d at 139 n. 2 (liability for drainage of surface water is incurred only for unreasonable interference); Sachs v. Chiat, 281 Minn. 540, 545, 162 N.W.2d 243, 246 (1968) (quoting Stanley v. Kinyon & Robert C. McClure, Interference With Surface Waters, 24 Minn L.Rev. 891, 904 (1940)) (“Each possessor [of land] is legally privileged to make a reasonable use of his land, even though the flow of surface waters is altered thereby and causes some harm to others. He incurs liability only when his harmful interference with the flow of surface water is unreasonable”). A downstream owner may not obstruct a neighboring owner’s access to a drainage system when the use of that drainage system is permissible under the reasonable use doctrine. Duevel, 352 N.W.2d at 97. Hence, the proper remedy for Boeseh, were an appropriate claim to arise, would be an action for damages rather than obstructing Krai’s use of the system. The district court recognized this by enjoining Boeseh from future interference with the tile system.
*600We conclude that the district court properly applied the reasonable use doctrine to determine Krai’s right to drain surface water into Boesch’s tile drainage system and the district court’s findings are supported by the evidence. We also conclude that the district court did not err by not allocating-costs for maintenance of the system. Boesch neither alleged nor proved harm or costs caused by Kral’s use of the tile line. In fact, the evidence indicates that Boesch had never repaired the tile line or had any problems with it until he obstructed it.
2. Damages for Crop Loss
Boesch claims that the district court erred in awarding damages for crop loss because it failed to determine the specific areas of Kral’s property that became unproductive due to the tile obstruction. The evidence indicates that the obstruction flooded three areas of Kral’s property, totalling 6.3 acres. Accordingly, the district court awarded crop damages for 6.3 acres of land. The district court’s findings of fact concerning crop damage are supported by the evidence and are riot clearly erroneous. See Minn. R. Civ. P. 52.01 (findings of fact not set aside unless clearly erroneous).
3. Prescriptive Easement
Krai’s primary claim was for a prescriptive easement arid other just and equitable relief. The district court determined that Krai was not entitled to a prescriptive easement because the basis for prescriptive easements does not apply to surface water. Krai filed a notice of review alleging that this determination was error. We disagree. The district court correctly found that Krai’s use of the drainage system could not be supported by his prescriptive easement claim. See Duenow v. Lindeman, 223 Minn. 505, 513-14, 27 N.W.2d 421, 427 (1947) (explaining that the. drainage of surface water from one owner’s upper land across a neighbor’s lower land is a natural right and lacks all elements of a prescriptive easement).
DECISION
The district court properly applied the reasonable use doctrine in permitting Krai’s use of Boeseh’s tile system and in enjoining Boesch and assessing damages against him for tile line obstruction. The district court also correctly rejected Krai’s prescriptive easement claim.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741161 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:29.765357+00 ===

CRIPPEN, Judge
(concurring specially).
I concur in the result. But the importance of this case may lie more in what it does not decide than in the decision itself.
Subject to often-stated limits, a landowner may cast surface water onto the property of a neighbor. Although the reasonable use doctrine is clear in most of its parts, there is remarkably little authority to guide us on the question of draining surface water by directly connecting a tile line into an existing line of a neighbor.
The controversy here involves a tile line, running on respondent Kral’s property and crossing onto appellant Boesch’s land, that has been in place for several decades. The trial court’s decision simply requires that the line be left as it has been. And appellant Boesch does not question Kral’s right to connect to his tile; rather, he asks for relief due to increased use of the drain by Krai and the expenses he anticipates when his own system has to be repaired.
In sum, the case does not require a decision on respondent’s right to connect his tile with the tile of his neighbor. Thus, for example, a decision in the case does not speak to the situation where a landowner is challenged immediately after connecting into the tile line of a neighbor. And it certainly does not deal with the more provocative suggestion that a landowner might have the freedom to cross a boundary line in order to tie into a tile line that the neighbor has constructed to a point near but short of the line.
In Evers v.Willaby, 444 N.W.2d 856 (Minn.App.1989), a landowner gained access to a neighbor’s tile line by paying an intervening neighbor for the right to connect to the tile system. Id. at 858. In other words, access to the neighbor’s line extended to a point beyond the neighbors’s boundary and where the respondent landowner clearly had a right to make a connection. Like the present case, *601Evers gives us no guidance on the right to make a boundary line connection to buried tile or to cross a boundary for such a connection.
One other point flows from the preceding description of the issues in the ease. Respondent Krai has asked for prescriptive rights only to have the tile line restored to its condition before appellant obstructed the line. And appellant has not disputed respondent’s rights to prior use of the existing tile line. Prescription law need not be determined to resolve the issues of the case, and an opinion on prescriptive rights is merely advisory. Moreover, Duenow v. Lindeman, 228 Minn. 505, 27 N.W.2d 421 (1947), discusses prescription law in the context of a claim for removal of a drainage obstruction; the case does not deal with the question of whether the right to preserve a tile line connection, at a boundary or even across it, might exist as a matter of prescriptive easement.

=== CASE 9741162 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:30.00974+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE JONES delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant appeals his conviction in a jury trial of the crime of murder. The facts show that on March 8, 1969, a group of people were assembled in the residence of Patricia Howze, who was defendant’s sister and also the girlfriend of the deceased, Carl Thomas. The group consumed a large quantity of liquor between the evening of March 7 and the afternoon of March 8. Those present at the party during the afternoon of March 8 included Dianne Weston, Norville Thomas (who is the brother of the deceased), Velma Becldey, Harry Fair, Láveme Taylor, Frank Cotton, and the deceased, Carl Thomas. Also present at the apartment dwelling during that afternoon were Julius Howze, who is the defendant’s younger brother, and Patricia’s two small children, Von Darvin and Tywanna. Tywanna, who was seated in the lap of Velma Beckley, took a piece of candy for herself. Láveme Taylor testified that this angered Velma, that Velma therefore spanked the child and that Julius Howze objected to Velma’s punishing his little niece, since Velma was not the child’s mother. Julius’ objection prompted Carl Thomas to tell him to leave the premises. When he refused, Thomas began hitting him. Thomas was restrained by Hairy Fair, whereupon Julius left the apartment dwelling. He ran down 19th Street, where he came upon his older brother, the defendant, at the intersection of 19th Street and Central. Upon learning what had just happened, defendant decided to go to Patricia’s house. Julius accompanied him. Defendant arrived and entered the front door of his sister’s apartment. He proceeded through the living room to the threshold of the kitchen where he met the deceased, who was standing in the kitchen on the other side of a stepdown entranceway. Láveme Taylor testified that defendant struck the first blow which caused the deceased to fall backward to the floor. Harry Fair, who was seated at the kitchen table during this incident, testified that after the deceased fell backwards to the floor, he observed a revolver in defendant’s hands and that he heard a shot ring out. Laverne Taylor testified that she was standing between the refrigerator and tlie back door in the kitchen during this incident, and that when the deceased tried to get up, she observed fire from a small gun in defendant’s hand and heard a shot. After the shot was fired, defendant ran out the back door. The deceased died from the gunshot wound two weeks later. The defendant testified that he had a fight with Thomas in the kitchen of his sister’s home on the day in question, but that he did not shoot the deceased as he had no gun with him at the time. Defendant’s first contention is that he was denied due process of law guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution when the prosecution failed to disclose to the defense the existence of a witness, Betty Burries, and the contents of her oral statement to the prosecution which allegedly contained evidence favorable to the defendant. The factual setting for this contention must be stated. The State presented its case in chief on July 16 and July 17 and rested. On July 17 defendant presented witnesses in his behalf and also testified in person, denying that he shot the deceased. On July 18 after court convened defendant rested and the State thereupon called as a rebuttal witness, Mary Burries, the girlfriend of the defendant. The defense objected to the witness on the ground that her name was not contained in the list of witnesses furnished the defendant by the State. Over the objection the witness was allowed to testify. She stated that defendant had been at her house about noon on the date of the shooting and that he returned later during that day and said that he was in trouble, that he had shot a man, something about “Ninety-nine,” (Julius, defendant’s brother). After the State concluded its questioning of Mary Burries defendant’s attorney requested and was given leave to question the witness in private. Upon the cross-examination which followed the witness then stated that the defendant returned to her home at a later time on the day in question and told her that some man had been shot, she didn’t know for sure if he told her that he had shot the man. She further stated that she was not sure that defendant shot the man, not sure it was about “Ninety-nine,” was not sure about anything and did not remember what defendant told her. Approximately three weeks after the trial was concluded defendants’ attorney took an unsworn question and answer statement from Betty Burries, the mother of Mary Burries. In the statement she related that Mr. Stacker, (an investigator for the St. Clair County State’s Attorney’s Office) came to her house the evening before Mary testified with a subpoena for Mary’s appearance and that he returned the next morning and took Mary to the courthouse. A short time later the same morning Mr. Stacker returned and asked her (Betty) to accompany him to the courthouse. She was taken to a room where a gentleman (an Assistant State’s Attorney) was talking to Mary. The statement then shows the following colloquy between Betty and the Assistant State’s Attorney as related by Betty: “A. And he asked me did James come back to my house. I told him, ‘No, sir, not as I knows; I ain’t seed him.’ I went over to the Alabama and got me a beer and come back and I was drinking my beer and I hadn’t saw him no more. Q. Did you tell him you didn’t see him the rest of that day? A. Yes, sir, I told him I didn’t see him at all. He didn’t come back to my house. Q. Did he tell you anything about Mary Elizabeth telling him that James had come back? A. No, sir, and so he told me that, ‘Mrs. Burries, that will be all, you won’t have to go up [to testify].’” In this same statement Betty Burries said that Mary told her that she had testified at the trial that James had returned to the house a second time on the day of the shooting but that was not true, it was a story, that she was scared and nervous and was trying to help James. It is defendant’s position that as a result of the incident which occurred in the room of the courthouse prior to the rebuttal testimony of Mary Burries, the State was possessed of information or knowledge that Betty Burries would contradict the testimony given by Mary by saying that, other than the time she went to the Alabama for a beer, she was home all day and that defendant never returned the remainder of that day, and accordingly could not have made the statement to Mary that he was in trouble because he had shot a man over “Ninety-nine.” This information was alleged to be favorable to defendant and he argues that he was denied due process of law when the prosecution failed to disclose it to him. We parenthetically note here that the defense made no request for favorable evidence or for statements of witnesses.  The subject of the extent of the obligation of the prosecution to disclose to the defense information or material which might be favorable to an accused in the preparation of his defense has received considerable attention and consideration in recent years. Now well established is the rule which requires the prosecution, upon request, to furnish statements in their possession or control to the defense during the trial for impeachment purposes. (People v. Wolff, 19 Ill.2d 318, 167 N.E.2d 197, and People v. Cole, 30 Ill.2d 375, 196 N.E.2d 691.) But there are other dimensions of the problem that are involved in the case under consideration, namely, whether the obligation to disclose pertains to favorable information or material other than statements useful for impeachment purposes, whether disclosure of favorable information or material must be made prior to trial and whether there must be a request by the defense for disclosure of favorable information or material. In Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 10 L.Ed.2d 215, 83 S.Ct. 1194, the Supreme Court held that “* * * the suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment ” * Although there are antecedent authorities the Brady case has generally served as the genesis for the development of the extension of the obligation of the prosecution to disclose evidence or information within their possession or control beyond the requirement to furnish statements for impeachment purposes. The reach of the obligation has been extended to require pre-trial disclosure of any material or information that might be favorable to the defendant in preparing a defense irrespective of whether there has been a demand or request therefor. (Cf. Barbee v. Warden, Maryland Penitentiary, 331 F.2d 842; Giles v. Maryland, 386 U.S. 66, (concurring opinion by Mr. Justice Fortas); State v. Fowler (1966), 101 Ariz. 561, 422 P.2d 125; McMullen v. Maxwell (1965), 3 Oh.St.2d 160, 209 N.E.2d 449; ex parte Cherry (Texas, 1970), 456 S.W.2d 949; State v. Thompson (Mo., 1965), 396 S.W.2d 697.) The American Bar Associations project on standards for criminal justice, in their Standards Relating to Discovery and Procedure Before Trial, section 2.1 (c) has recommended that * * the prosecuting attorney shaU disclose to defense counsel any material or information within his possession or control which tends to negate the guilt of the accused as to the offense charged or would tend to reduce his punishment therefor.” Section 2.2 of the same Standards makes it clear that the disclosure is to be made irrespective of any request or demand therefor and provides that the obligation appends at the pretrial stage of the proceeding. In a series of cases concerned with the question the Illinois Supreme Court has adopted and expanded the Brady rule, in one case apparently to the breadth of the American Bar Association recommended Standard. In People v. Hoffman, 32 Ill.2d 96, 203 N.E.2d 873, it was held error for the prosecution to refuse to produce upon request an item of clothing. The decision was based on Brady. In People v. Murdock, 39 Ill.2d 553, 237 N.E.2d 442, it was held to be a denial of due process when the prosecution failed to disclose evidence (a sworn statement and a police report) which contained information favorable to the defense in that it countered the prosecution’s theory of the case and supported defendant’s theory that a third party had committed the crime. Defendant did not learn of the existence of the evidence until subsequent to the trial so the duty of disclosure was found irrespective of a demand by the defense. The criteria applied in this case appear to equate with the American Bar Association recommended Standard, supra. In People v. Cagle, 41 Ill.2d 528, 244 N.E.2d 200, it was held that defendant had been denied due process when the prosecution suppressed favorable evidence (a confession of an alleged accomplice and a police report) requested by the defendant. The opinion recites defendant’s argument that the Illinois rule limiting the use of such favorable reports to impeachment purposes at the time of trial is too restrictive in that it hinders trial preparation and therefore violates the due process requirements for a fair trial. The court stated “In the view we take of this case it is not necessary to consider that issue, since the trial court here failed to follow the Illinois rule, and in effect precluded the use of the favorable police report, even for impeachment purposes.” The court held that the action by the prosecution was tantamount to a suppression of evidence and itself constituted a violation of the due process clause. In People v. Moore, 42 Ill.2d 73, 246 N.E.2d 299, the Supreme Court, citing only Brady v. Maryland, supra, and omitting any reference to the Murdock and Cagle cases, affirmed a conviction over defendant’s contention that there had been an unconstitutional concealment of evidence upon the. ground that defendant had failed to show by a preponderance of evidence that the prosecution had withheld favorable material evidence which had been requested by him. In a dissenting opinion Mr. Justice Schaefer argued with considerable force that a request from the defense should not be necessary to give rise to the duty of the prosecution to disclose favorable information. He stated: “Essential fairness, rather than the ability of counsel to ferret out concealed information, underlies the duty to disclose.” In People v. Sumner, 43 Ill.2d 228, 252 N.E.2d 534, it was disclosed that the prosecution at the time of trial had eight investigative reports which had not been made available to the defendant despite his request for copies of statements, although three other statements had been furnished. The State took the position that the withholding of the materials was not a suppression or concealment of evidence and that the failure to furnish them to the defense for use in impeachment, though concededly error, was harmless error. The court rejected the State’s argument and found it was error to withhold the statements. The court relied upon Brady v. Maryland, supra; People v. Cagle, supra, and section 2.1 (c) of the American Bar Association Standards Relating to Discovery and Procedure Before Trial.  Notwithstanding the favorable reference to the Standards of the American Bar Association contained in the Sumner case, and the adoption of a rule in the Murdock case that was apparently in direct alignment with those Standards, our Supreme Court nevertheless stopped short of obligating the prosecution to disclose information or material favorable to the defense in the absence of a request or demand therefor. Supreme Court Rule 412 (c) (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110A, sec. 412 (c) ) which became effective October 1, 1971, is patterned after section 2.1(c) of the American Bar Association Standards but the obligation to disclose is, by sub-section (d) of rule 412, expressly limited to instances where a request or demand is made by the defense. Whether the rule represents a regression from the case law or constitutes a reasonable compliance with the requirements of due process and fundamental fairness we cannot here decide. It must be sufficient for us to say that it is the rule in Illinois. Although the trial of defendant occurred prior to the adoption of Supreme Court Rule 412 we think it nontheless indicative of the law to be applied.  With this background we pass to a consideration of defendant’s position. His argument is founded solely upon the unsworn question and answer statement taken from Betty Burries following defendant’s conviction. The alleged knowledge of favorable information which was possessed and suppressed by the prosecution must have been gained by the prosecution during the interview the Assistant State’s Attorney had with Betty Burries in the presence of her daughter, Mary Burries, in the room at the courthouse prior to the testimony of Mary Burries as a rebuttal witness on the final day of the trial. The colloquy above set forth between the Assistant State’s Attorney and Betty Burries is what Betty Burries said she told the Assistant State’s Attorney. The prosecuion was not notified of the taking of the statement so the witness was not cross examined by the prosecution nor was anyone present in their behalf at the time this statement was taken. Neither was the witness offered for examination at the hearing on the motion for new trial nor was any excuse offered for her failure to appear in support of her statement. The statement shows that, according to Betty, she went to the Alabama (tavern) to get a beer, and from the time she returned and for the rest of the day the defendant did not come back to the house because she did not see him. Thus the possibility that the defendant did return to the house, as testified by Mary, is not excluded, for the defendant could have returned the second time while Betty was at the Alabama or he could have returned a second time without the knowledge of Betty. Even when Mary was cross examined she continued to say that defendant did return a second time but that he told her that a man had been shot, that she did not remember if he shot the man and, in fact, did not remember anything he said. The statement of Betty does not say how long she remained at the Alabama nor what time she returned. It is thus not shown to be impeaching of nor necessarily contradictory to testimony of Mary. The statement cannot be considered evidence that the defendant did not return to the Betty Burries house a second time on the day of the shooting. It establishes only that Betty Burries herself did not see defendant at her house a second time on that day. This falls short of establishing that the prosecution was in possession or control of information material to the guilt or punishment of defendant and failed to make disclosure thereof to the defense. Even if the information should be considered favorable, no request for its production was made. Since there was no other evidence or showing bearing upon the matter, defendant was not deprived of his rights to due process in that regard. The defendant’s point is that the trial court committed reversible error by allowing Mary Burries to testify as a rebuttal witness since her name was not upon the list of witnesses requested by the defendant and furnished by the State, and she was not a true rebuttal witness.  We think this point is not well taken since section 114 — 9 (c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat, ch. 38, sec. 114 — 9 (c)) expressly provides that the requirements of subsection (a) of section 114 — 9 (which requires the State to furnish a list of witnesses on motion of the defendant) does not apply to rebuttal witnesses. Furthermore, since the defendant took the stand and testified that he did not shoot the deceased, Mary Burries was properly permitted to state in rebuttal that the defendant admitted to her that he “had shot a man” even though her testimony might also have been used as part of the State’s case in chief. People v. Bell, 328 Ill. 446, 159 N.E. 807. Defendant next contends that the trial court committed reversible error by denying his motion for a new trial on the basis of newly discovered evidence. That evidence, defendant asserts, is revealed by question and answer statements of Betty Burries and Mary Sneed. Defendant argues that the statement of Betty Burries shows defendant did not return to her home a second time on the day of the shooting and therefore could not have made the admission to Mary Burries. That contention has been discussed earlier and further consideration of it in connection with the present argument is not warranted. A question and answer statement was also taken from one Mary Sneed following the trial. Its substance is that on the day of the incident in question she was passing by the backdoor of the Patricia Howze home and upon hearing a loud commotion, like a fight, she stepped into the backdoor hallway that leads into the kitchen. While standing there she saw the man who got shot getting up from the floor. James Howze (with whom she was personally acquainted) was standing nearby with both hands down beside his body when the deceased was shot. The shot came from behind James Howze but she could not tell who fired it. She stated that James Howze did not have a gun in his hand. When asked why she did not tell the police what she had seen she said she thought defendant would be found not guilty and that she had heard that some witnesses had been threatened.  Applications for a new trial on the ground of newly discovered evidence are not favored, and in order to prevent, so far as possible, fraud and imposition which defeated parties may be tempted to practice, such application should be subjected to closest scrutiny, the burden being on the applicant to rebut the presumption that the verdict is correct and to show there has been no lack of diligence, and the exercise of discretion in denying such application will not be disturbed except in case of manifest abuse. (People v. Holtzman, 1 Ill.2d 562, 116 N.E.2d 338.) To warrant a new trial for newly discovered evidence, the new evidence must be of such conclusive character that it will probably change the result on retrial, it must be material to the issue, it must have been discovered since the trial, and be of such character that it could not have been discovered prior to trial by the exercise of due diligence. People v. Baker, 16 Ill.2d 364, 158 N.E.2d 1.  We do not believe the statement of Mary Sneed is sufficient to comply with the standards required for the granting of a new trial. The most that could be said for it is that it is cumulative and corroborative of other testimony, i.e., that James Howze did not have a gun and that the shot that was fired came from behind him. We accordingly find that there was no abuse of discretion upon the part of the trial court in refusing to grant a new trial upon the basis of newly discovered evidence.  Defendant next argues that the court committed reversible error in permitting the prosecution to use a diagram of the Patricia Howze home and admitting it into evidence. The diagram in question was prepared by the prosecution with the assistance of Patricia Howze. It purported to show the floor plan of the Patricia Howze home and the location of furniture in various rooms. The diagram was admitted into evidence after foundation testimony given by Patricia Howze. Defendant objected to its admission and use upon the grounds that it was not drawn to scale and improperly showed the location of a partition wall in the kitchen that could obscure a view of portions of the kitchen by a person standing in the doorway leading from the living room to the kitchen. The jury was told that the diagram was not drawn to scale. The defense cross examined Patricia Howze thoroughly with regard to the location of the partition and the extent to which it blocked vision from the living room-kitchen door. Other witnesses who testified were also questioned regarding the location of the partition, where pertinent. Furthermore, there were seven photographs of the interior of the home that were admitted into evidence and examined by the jury. The composite of these photographs presented to the jury a comprehensive view of the interior of the home, including the location of the partition. The attorneys for both the prosecution and defense made extensive use of the diagram in their questioning of witnesses. Occurrence witnesses who were present in the kitchen at the time of the shooting indicated to the jury by use of the diagram their approximate location in the kitchen. Under these circumstances we are of the opinion that the jury could not have been misled by the diagram and the trial court committed no error in admitting it into evidence and permitting its use. People v. Frisco, 4 Ill.App.3d 1034, 283 N.E.2d 277. Cf. Brown v. Galesburg Pressed Brick and Tile Co., 132 Ill. 648, 24 N.E. 522.  Defendant finally contends that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. With this we cannot agree. The jury heard testimony from two eyewitnesses who were present at the shooting and testified that it was done by the defendant. The circumstances leading up to and surrounding this unfortunate incident served to corroborate the eyewitnesses testimony. The verdict is amply supported by the evidence and the guilt of the defendant is established beyond a reasonable doubt. No citation of authority is necessary for the proposition that a court of review will not reverse a jury verdict of guilty unless that verdict is manifestly against the weight of the evidence. We cannot make such finding here and we will not substitute our judgment for that of the jury. For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the trial court will be affirmed. Judgment affirmed. EBERSPACHER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741163 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:30.014542+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE GEORGE J. MORAN dissenting: The State had obtained a statement from Mary Burries who claimed to have been a girl friend of the deceased during the presentation of evidence for the defense. She testified that the defendant had been at her home located at 1414 South 19th Street sometime after noon of March 8, that he left with the intention of going to Patricia’s house, that she saw him leave and proceed down 19th Street toward Central, and that he was alone when she lost sight of him near 19th and Lawrence. Sometime thereafter, she testified, the defendant returned to her home and said he was in trouble. He said that he had shot a man and something about “Ninety-nine” (Julius). Betty Burries, the mother of Mary, gave the State’s Attorney’s office a statement which contradicted that of her daughter. She stated that after the defendant left her house she went out to get a beer and returned shortly thereafter. She stated further that she remained at home the rest of the afternoon and that to her knowledge, defendant did not return to her house during that time. The State’s Attorney’s office informed the elder Burries that her testimony would not be needed. However, they did not disclose her existence, or the nature of her statement to counsel for the defense. Defendant contends that the State denied defendant due process of law in withholding information from the defense regarding the existence of Betty Burries and the nature of her statements. A review of this contention must begin with Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215. That case held: “The suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution.” This rule, which has been followed in Illinois, is generally applied where defense counsel requests the production of, but is denied access to, certain favorable evidence in the possession or control of the prosecuting attorney. People v. Sumner, 43 Ill.2d 228, 252 N.E.2d 534; People v. Cagle, 41 Ill.2d 528, 244 N.E.2d 200; People v. Moses 11, Ill.2d 84, 142 N.E.2d 1; People v. Cole, 30 Ill.2d 375, 196 N.E.2d 691. The general rule set forth by the preceding cases applies to situations where the defense counsel did not learn of the favorable evidence of which the prosecutor had knowledge until the end of the trial. (People v. Murdock, 39 Ill.2d 553, 236 N.E.2d 442.) In Murdock the prosecution failed to disclose the police officers had interviewed a witness whose statement would have cast doubt on the prosecutions theory of the facts. This interview was reduced to a sworn statement, the existence of which was intentionally not revealed to defense counsel. Finding the statement to have been material to the defense, the court reversed the defendant’s conviction on the grounds that its suppression was a denial of due process. In the instant case, the State does not deny that an investigator in its office in fact took a statement of Betty Burries at the time in question, or that such statement was not at least partially a variance with that taken from Mary Burries. Nor does it deny withholding the statement from defense counsel. Rather, it denies that “the evidence of Betty Burries was material to the defense.” I cannot agree. Evidence which challenges the credibility of what undoubtedly was the most damaging of all testimony offered against the defendant must be viewed as material. The State’s Attorney’s belief to the contrary should not determine whether defendant is given the opportunity to present such evidence to the jury. (Brady v. Maryland, supra; People v. Sumner, supra.) Defendant should have been allowed a new trial by the trial court when it became evident to it that material evidence favorable to defendant’s case was withheld by the prosecutor. People v. Murdock, supra. The majority opinion states: “Even if the information should be considered favorable, no request for its production was made.” I am somewhat puzzled as to how the defendant is supposed to request a copy of a statement he knows nothing about. Here the State deliberately failed to disclose evidence in its possession favorable to the defense obtained during the trial. I believe it is unfortunate that this court now places its stamp of approval on such conduct.

=== CASE 9741164 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:30.409559+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE GUILD dehvered the opinion of the Court: This appeal arises from the same group of complaints and March 31, 1971, order of the Pollution Control Board of the State of Illinois (hereinafter referred to as “Board”) as was involved in our No. 71-113, North Shore Sanitary District v. Pollution Control Board (1972), 5 Ill.App.3d 1050. This case is distinctive in that petitioners, Lake County Contractors Association and Lake County Home BuHders Association (hereinafter referred to as “Associations”), were not parties to proceedings before the Board, and only Paragraph 7 of the Order is appealed from, namely: “The District shall not permit any additions to present sewer connections, or new sewer connections to its facilities until the District can demonstrate to the Board that it can adequately treat the wastes from those new sources so as not to violate the Environmental Protection Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.” The Board was created by the Environmental Control Act effective July 1, 1970, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 111½, par. 1001 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”), and under Section 1041 of that Act review is afforded directly to this Court from final orders of the Board, pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act. The League of Women Voters filed a complaint with the Board alleging that the North Shore Sanitary District (hereinafter referred to as “District”) was discharging effluent from its treatment plants and sewage systems degrading the waters of Lake Michigan in specified ways below stated permissible standards and asked for an order requiring the District to correct these particular violations and for “other appropriate relief." Facktor, et al., subsequently alleged the existence of odors and contaminants in the vicinity of their homes and sought an order of the Board directing the District to cease and desist operation of an existing sewerage treatment plant in a manner violative of the Act and prohibiting construction of an additional secondary treatment plant in Highland Park. The Board not only ruled against Facktor, et al., but ordered this group of complainants to cease and desist from all further actions against the District regarding expansion, bond issues, and particularly the siting of the Clavey Road Plant. The third complainant was the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter referred to as “Agency”). The Agency obtained leave to intervene before the Board and complained that the District discharged improperly treated effluent into Lake Michigan from certain of its plants and operated the Clavey Road waste treatment plant so as to emit obnoxious odors. All complaints were consolidated for hearing before the Board. While this review was pending in this court, the Agency moved to dismiss the Associations complaint filed in this court which seeks judicial review of the order of the Board on the ground that its order was not final to the Associations, or in the alternative, that the Associations had not exhausted their administrative remedies, as a variance procedure may be instituted for individual parcels of land. This motion was ordered taken with the case. The Agency argues additionally in its brief that the Associations do not have standing to raise constitutional objections of landowners to the sewer ban. Serious questions are raised in this appeal, such as alleged violation of the guarantees of equal protection and due process of law as well as claims the Board did not consider certain facts and circumstances which the General Assembly directed it to consider in making its orders and that certain statements contained in the Board’s order were without foundation in the evidence.  Administrative as well as judicial proceedings are governed by the fundamental principles and requirements of due process of law. (Brown v. Air Pollution Control Control Board (1967), 37 Ill.2d 450, 454, 227 N.E.2d 754.) The order is obviously broad and restrictive of the rights of many persons who did not participate in the hearings before the Board. The restrictions imposed by the order have no blanket immunity from challenge in the courts, but the narrow question here is whether the Associations can obtain judicial review pursuant to the Administrative Review Act. We are constrained to hold they cannot and accordingly dismiss their complaints. In so doing, we do not approve, but rather specifically reject, the rationale of the Agency.  The order of the Board recites that it is “final” and indeed it terminated proceedings on the three consolidated complaints before the Board. Judicial review of a final, comprehensive administrative order cannot and should not be avoided or defeated by imposing an additional requirement to seek and be denied individual variances. We cannot agree, moreover, that constitutional objections can be raised only by landowners.  The basis of our holding is that the Associations were not parties to the proceeding before the Board, they did not appear before the Board, and consequently their interest and aggrievement in the matter does not appear in the record of those proceedings. Although a voluminous transcript of proceedings has been filed, no abstract of the record has been made as the Associations state that non-evidence cannot be abstracted. The Supreme Court has held that the right to review a final administrative decision is limited to those parties of record in the proceeding before the administrative agency whose rights, privileges, or duties are affected by the decision. (222 E. Chestnut St. Corp. v. Board of Appeals (1956), 10 Ill.2d 132, 135, 139 N.E.2d 218; Winston v. Zoning Board of Appeals (1951), 407 Ill. 588, 95 N.E.2d 864 at 868.) In upholding the issuance of a writ of mandamus to persons who had been denied the right to participate in the administrative proceeding, the court said in Frank v. State Sanitary Water Board (1961), 33 Ill.App.2d 1 at 7, 178 N.E.2d 415: “It * * * appears that the right of administrative review is limited to the parties to the administrative proceeding.” The Administrative Review Act governs judicial review when its provisions, as here, are expressly adopted by the statute creating the agency, and only parties to the proceeding are barred from obtaining judicial review of an administrative decision if they do not pursue their remedy within the time and in the maimer provided. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 110, sec. 265.) As the Associations were not parties to the proceeding before the Board, it would therefore follow that the Associations are free to pursue any remedy they may desire other than judicial review pursuant to file Administrative Review Act.  The Associations’ interest sufficiently appears in its complaint filed in this Court, as it is alleged they are not-for-profit corporations engaged in the construction industry in Lake County; that review is sought on behalf of the Associations and in a representative capacity for members, their employees and others; that on March 31, 1971, members were engaged in construction of residential, commercial and public buddings involving millions of dollars for which building permits had been duly issued by lawful authorities and that work stoppage would result in unemployment and financial hardship. None of these factual allegations, however, are contained in any manner or form in the record of proceedings before the Board, and the Administrative Review Act in defining its scope of review explicitly states that no new or additional evidence in support of or in opposition to any order of the administrative agency shall be heard by the court. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 110, sec. 274.) Brown v. Air Pollution Control Board, supra, in 37 Ill.2d at 456 indicated that this provision is not to be given an unreasonably restrictive and unrealistic interpretation; however, the interest of, and adverse effect upon, the Associations is totally outside the record made before the Board and is therefore not before this court for review. The Environmental Protection Act defines “person” to include corporations and associations, but does not define “party.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 111½, sec. 1003 (i).) It also provides a right to obtain judicial review pursuant to the Administrative Review Act for “Any party to a Board hearing, any person who filed a complaint on which hearing was denied, any person who has been denied a variance or permit * * * and any party adversely affected by a final order of the Board.” (Emphasis supplied) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 111½, sec. 1041. The Environmental Protection Act apparently intended to extend the right of judicial review to an additional class of parties who are not parties to a Board hearing. “Party” is not defined in the Act, however, nor is any method provided for including in the record to be reviewed the interest of one not appearing at some stage in the proceedings before the Board. Such a broad interpretation of the phrase “any party adversely affected by a final order of the Board” must be declined because we believe it conflicts with existing provisions and interpretations of the Administrative Review Act.  Supreme Court Rule 335 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 110A, sec. 335) was adopted effective after the date of the order complained of but we look to it for guidance. It provides procedure for statutory review of orders of an administrative agency to the Appellate Court, and the Environmental Protection Act was the first legislative utilization of constitutional authority to provide such review. (See Committee Comments.) The conclusion we reach in this case is compatible with our reading of Rule 335, which provided at (a) that the petition for review shall specify the parties seeking review and shall designate the respondent and the order or part thereof to be reviewed. The form of the petition is set out in Rule 335; it does not suggest the supplying of factual allegations to establish the interest of petitioner. At (d), moreover, it is provided that the entire record before the agency shall be the record on review unless omissions from it are stipulated.  While judgments of courts have been held appealable by persons not parties to the litigation in the trial court, and a notice of appeal is part of the record in such cases (Nott v. Wolff (1960), 18 Ill.2d 362, 163 N.E.2d 809; Grennan v. Sheldon (1948), 401 Ill. 351, 356, 82 N.E.2d 162; and People v. Kennedy (1937), 367 Ill. 236, 238, 10 N.E.2d 806), judicial review pursuant to the Administrative Review Act must be distinguished. Supreme Court Rule 335 at (h) (1) specifically excepts the applicability of Rule 321 * to this procedure, and specifically applies Section 11 **, among others, of the Administrative Review Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110, par. 274.) Where judicial review is provided pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, it is not contemplated that issues of fact shall be framed by complaint and answer, the Civil Practice Act is not applicable, and the review is upon the record of the administrative agency. (Des Plaines Currency Exch., Inc. v. Knight (1963), 29 Ill.2d 244, 194 N.E.2d 89, cert. den., 376 U.S. 969; Jewell v. Carpentier (1966), 22 Ill.2d 445, 176 N.E.2d 767.) Consequently, the appeal of the Associations must be dismissed. The issues involved in this case are novel, urgent, and affect many citizens. It is therefore certified, pursuant to Constitution of Illinois, 1970, Article VI, sec. 4 (c), that this case involves a question of such importance that it should be further decided by the Supreme Court. Complaint for administrative review dismissed. ABRAHAMSON, J., concurs.   Rule 321 — Contents of Record on Appeal. The record on appeal shall consist of the judgment appealed from, the notice of appeal, and other parts of the trial court record designated in the praecipes.    Section 11 of The Administrative Review Act — Scope of Review. The hearing and determination shall extend to all questions of law and of fact presented by the entire record before the court. No new or additional evidence in support of or in opposition to any finding, order, determination or decision of the administrative agency shall be heard by the court.

=== CASE 9741165 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:30.414274+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE THOMAS J. MORAN dissenting: The legislature has given the right of review to four separate classes of persons: Any party to a Board hearing, any person whose complaint has been denied, any person who has been denied a permit or variance, and any party adversely affected by a final order or determination of the Board. I believe that petitioners herein qualify under the last category. Supreme Court Rule 335 governs the procedure to be followed in a review of the instant cases. The Rule expressly adopts Supreme Court Rule 301 (Supreme Court Rule 335 (h) (1) which supplanted former sections 74, 76 ( 2), and 80 of the Civil Practice Act. Rule 301 provides in part “* ” * All rights that could have been asserted by appeal or writ of error may be asserted by appeal * * The committee comments thereto state that the quoted portion “is intended to incorporate and restate the provisions of the last two sentences of Secion 74 (1).” The last two sentences of former Section 74 (1) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 110, sec. 74 (1) ) had provided “* * * The right heretofore possessed by any person not a party to the record to review a judgment or decree by writ of error is preserved by notice of appeal.” Cases interpreting the verbiage contained in Section 74 (1) have held that a person, not a party to the record, is entitled to appeal a judgment if he has been injured by such judgment or would be benefited by its reversal. In the prosecution of such appeal, his interest in the proceedings must appear in the record or be alleged in the points relied upon for reversal. A notice of appeal is a part of the record. People v. Kennedy (1937), 367 Ill. 236, 238. Also see, Grennan v. Sheldon (1948), 401 Ill. 351, 356, Nott v. Wolff (1960), 18 Ill.2d 362, 366 and Vece v. DeBiase (1964), 31 Ill.2d 542, 544-545. The petitions for review, which act as notice of appeals in the instant cases, allege that the petitioners were injured by the Board’s order and that they will be benefited by its reversal. Contrary to the majority view, I conclude that the phrase, “Any party adversely affected by a final order of the Board” includes the petitioners herein, that their petitions show sufficient interest as do their points relied upon for reversal. I would not dismiss the complaints, but dispose of them upon their merits. I, therefore, dissent. Subsequent to submission of the above dissent but prior to its filing, the majority opinion was revised by adding the four paragraphs preceding the last paragraph. The majority admits that the Act is “apparently intended to extend the right of judicial review to an additional class of parties who are not parties to the Board hearing” but reasons that the legislature did not mean what it said “because we believe it conflicts with existing provisions and interpretations of the Administrative Review Act.” Under this type of rationale we could also decide that a direct appeal to this Court, as provided by the Act, is not permissible “because # # it conflicts with existing provisions and interpretations of the Administrative Review Act.” See, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110, sec. 268 where it is provided that review of final administrative decisions is vested in the Circuit Courts. The Environmental Protection Act is a new approach toward solving one of society’s many problems. Some of the procedures are new, e.g., direct appeal to this Court from the Board’s action; however, protection of the basic rights of individuals has not changed. The legislature was cognizant of this fact when it added the last category to include the petitioners herein; otherwise there would be no necessity for its inclusion. I, therefore, adhere to my dissent.

=== CASE 9741166 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:31.079894+00 ===

MODIFIED OPINION UPON DENIAL OF PETITION FOR REHEARING Mr. JUSTICE SMITH delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal by the defendant from a sentence of seven to twenty years for manslaughter. This is the third appearance in this court of separate appeals by three of four defendants from a set of circumstances resulting in their indictment for murder arising out of an armed robbery of a victim resulting in his death. One defendant pleaded guilty to murder and was sentenced to a term of thirty to sixty years in the penitentiary. On appeal to this court the case was reversed and remanded on grounds not involved in this proceeding. (People v. Bradford, 1 Ill.App.3d 38, 272 N.E.2d 259.) Recently this court filed an opinion in the case of People v. Freddie Lee Bell (1972), 4 Ill.App.3d 397, 280 N.E.2d 487. The facts involved here and the incident of the arraignment and plea of guilty are accurately set forth in the majority opinion in Bell and need not be here repeated in detail. Bradford pleaded guilty to murder the week before the plea and sentence we now consider.  The defendant Love contends (1) that the nature of the charge to which he pleaded guilty was not adequately explained to him and (2) the record indicates that the defendant was innocent in that he did not participate in the crime. The first contention on the part of Love is adequately and fully considered and properly disposed of in the majority opinion in the Bell case and it needs no further elaboration or justification. On the issue of a proper admonition we follow the views expressed in that case. Likewise we continue to treat the plea and the arraignment of the defendant Love as a negotiated plea as it was understood and practiced prior to the adoption of Supreme Court Rule 402 as amended and effective on September 17, 1970. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110A, sec. 402.) The incidents which we discuss here occurred on January 20, 1970. Following what we have held as a full and complete advice to the defendant of his various rights, the court called upon the State’s Attorney for a recommendation as to sentence. He recommended a sentence of seven to twenty years. The court then inquired of defense counsel whether he would like to be heard as to why the court should not accept and adopt that recommendation. His answer was: “No, Your Honor, and if I may, I would like to make a brief statement as to the sentence recommended”. The court then stated: “You may because, as you know, I have said how can this be reconciled in view of the sentence imposed on a co-defendant. I am ready to listen to you”. This statement of the court referred to the thirty to sixty year sentence imposed upon Bradford the week before. Defense counsel then pointed out that it was Bradford who possessed the gun and carried out the robbery and resulting death of the victim, that the others tried to disassociate themselves from this activity and were without any weapons themselves, that they cooperated fully with the police and their conduct in jail was likewise considerably different than that of Bradford and that their area of responsibility was considerably different than his. He then stated: “It is for this reason that I feel the sentence should be accepted by the Court”. The court then imposed the sentence and inquired of each of the three defendants in this language: “In this sentence which has been imposed, is it any heavier, more severe, longer than what anybody, particularly your counsel or State’s Attorney may have indicated that you would receive on a plea of guilty? What I’m getting at, has anybody misled you, betrayed you, dumped you, done you dirty as far as this sentence misrepresented than what you were led to think you might get on a plea of guilty * * The Court: “And Mr. Love?” Defendant Love: “No, sir”. In this context, it would appear that there is no question but that this was a negotiated plea and that both sides fully and completely complied with the agreement made. The murder indictment was then dismissed.  The defendant argues and the dissent in Bell adopts the point of view that from the “total record” in this case there was no factual basis for the acceptance of this plea and that therefore this case should be reversed and remanded. This point of view makes a part of the record in the trial court and apparently before this court some statements made by all the defendants and attached to the State’s Attorney’s answer to a motion to produce the names of witnesses and documents. These statements were not referred to in open court by anybody, were never offered in evidence and as stated in Bell should not have been considered on review for the very simple reason that they have no bearing upon the issue of whether or not this negotiated plea should be implemented by an affirmance of the trial court’s decision. It should be here noted that they had been in the possession of defense attorney and the defendant several weeks before this negotiated plea was accepted. It should likewise be further noted that it was apparent early that there was a conflict of interest and apparently of testimony between Bradford and the three remaining defendants because a severance was granted to Bradford and a different attorney appointed. It seems abundantly clear therefore that defense counsel and the dissenting opinion have raised in this court an issue not properly before us and an issue not decided by the trial court. Thus on review to adopt the position of the defendant or of the dissent is to convert this court into a court of original jurisdiction rather than a reviewing court. This we ought not do in a case of this nature unless it is plain error appearing on the record. What is the record properly before us?  The defendant’s brief and the dissenting opinion display a disturbing departure from or an unwarranted extension of what constitutes record. A reading of Rule 321 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110A, sec. 321), states that the record on appeal shall consist of the judgment appealed from, the notice of appeal, and other parts of the trial court record designated in the praecipe. The trial court record includes any report of proceedings and every other document filed and judgment and order entered in the cause. The minutes of the trial court indicate “People’s answer to defendant’s motion for list of witnesses produced its confession, et cetera, on file with affidavit of mailing”. That answer states “That a copy of the written confession of the defendant, together with a list of witnesses to its making and acknowledgment has heretofore been furnished to the defendant”. This was filed on November 18, some two months before the acceptance of the plea and the sentence we here consider. There is nothing to indicate that the so-called “confessions” were ever actually considered by the trial court and so far as this record is concerned they are considered here only in the brief of the defendant and in the dissenting opinion. They were furnished in connection with a plea of not guilty to a murder charge. That plea of not guilty was withdrawn under the plea agreement, leave to file an information charging manslaughter was granted, the indictment for murder was subsequently dismissed and not a solitary mention of these so-called confessions appears in the consideration of the guilty plea or the imposition of sentence. Likewise both parties waived evidence in mitigation and aggravation, waived the filing of a petition for probation and the defendants counsel in their presence acquiesced in and requested the court to adopt the State’s Attorney’s recommendation. In determining whether to accept or not accept the plea of guilty to a specific charge which is a negotiated plea, the court is required to assure himself that there is a factual basis for the plea. The determination of whether or not there is a factual basis for a plea is poles apart from a determination of whether or not after a full-blown trial the evidence will sustain a conviction or establish a defense not made or asserted during the proceedings. It is only in defense counsel’s argument to the court as above recited where he states that the defendant’s position in the case is that they attempted to withdraw and he believed they did attempt to withdraw from the situation and to disassociate themselves from Mr. Bradford in the action that he took. These statements were made by defense counsel and properly so as a justification for his acquiescence in the recommended sentence of seven to twenty years. Perhaps it was a hard decision for counsel to make in this case. That is not infrequent in criminal cases. Whether a court or a jury would believe that Love and the other two defendants attempted to withdraw is a hard prediction for a counsel to make. Whether he properly exercised his judgment is really not before us for review because there is no charge of his incomptency nor does the record reflect incompetence. There can be no question but what that the exchange of a minimum of seven years for manslaughter in lieu of a minimum of fourteen years for murder and the dismissal of the murder indictment was considered by him and by the State’s Attorney and by his counsel as a good bargain. They made it openly and voluntarily. The defendant Love was specifically asked by the trial court after sentence whether or not the sentence given was in any sense different from the one that he expected and he answered a categorical “no”. It is likewise quite possible that the record would show that Love did withdraw from an actual murder of the old man, but still participated in an armed robbery as a matter of law or as a matter of fact. Be that as it may, we apprehend that no one would claim that these so-called confessions in the present state of the record could properly be treated by a trial court in support of a conviction or in support of a defense of withdrawal. We do not here consider a situation where either the trial court or this court weighs possible evidence or determines the innocence or guilt of the defendant. A plea of guilty voluntarily made precludes the necessity for proof. In the face of the unanimity of agreement between the State’s Attorney, the defense counsel and the defendant, we do not believe that any rule requires the trial court to go beyond this plea agreement honestly and fairly entered into. In our judgment, even though the rule as it then existed did not require the trial court to make a determination that there was a factual basis for the plea, his record shows that there was. And the information filed as well as the plea of guilty establishes just that fact. It appears to us that counsel and the dissenting opinion in Bell bring before us and consider matters not properly before this court on appeal and matters never presented or considered for any purpose by the trial court on any issue properly presented here for review. In our adversary system of formulating issues in both the trial and reviewing courts it is not an appropriate function of counsel or of this court to rummage through the waste paper basket or file of the circuit clerk to consider issues not presented or considered in the trial court nor necessary for a proper disposition of a negotiated plea. The judgment of the trial court is therefore affirmed. Judgment affirmed. TRAPP, P. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741175 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:36.993371+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE TRAPP specially concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur in the disposition reached for the reason that our Courts have consistently held that they will not entertain an action for declaratory judgment which has the effect of ousting the court which, in fact, had jurisdiction of the subject matter and parties. (Fairbanks, Morse & Co. v. Freeport, 5 Ill.2d 85, 125 N.E.2d 57; Trojan Fireworks Co. v. Acme Specialties Corp., 66 Ill.App.2d 108, 213 N.E.2d 44; Wolf v. Solem, 26 Ill.App.2d 262, 167 N.E.2d 820.) Within such context it is not necessary to consider the exercise of discretion by the trial court. I dissent from the language of the opinion which suggests that Supreme Court Rules 362 and 366 would permit the amendment of the record as sought here. Rule 362(b) provides that the application for amendment must show that the matters “[S] ought to be raised by the amendment are supported by the facts in the record on appeal.” Rule 366(a) (3) authorizes the reviewing Court to order or permit the record to be amended “[B]y correcting errors or by adding matters that should have been included.” Such Rules, in their plain language, seem explicit in limiting matters of amendment to those which were presented in the trial court but omitted from the record in that court.

=== CASE 9741176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:39.665915+00 ===

TERNUS, Justice.
Appellant, William S. Dible, filed a post-conviction relief action that was dismissed for failure to prosecute. He then brought this second posteonviction relief action which was filed more than three years from the date his underlying criminal convictions became final. To avoid the three-year statute of limitations of Iowa Code section 822.3, he alleged the ineffectiveness of his first posteonviction relief counsel was a “ground of fact or law that could not have been raised within the applicable time period.” See Iowa Code § 822.3 (1995). The district court rejected this argument and dismissed Dible’s second application for posteonviction relief. Dible appealed and the court of appeals reversed. On further review to this court, we vacate the decision of the court of appeals and affirm the judgment of the district court.
I. Background Facts and Proceedings.
In March 1989, Dible pleaded guilty to suborning perjury and third-degree criminal mischief. He was given a suspended five-year sentence. On July 5, 1990, Dible’s probation was revoked and he began to serve his sentence.
On December 5, 1990, Dible filed his first application for posteonviction relief. He alleged ineffective assistance of trial counsel and newly-discovered evidence as grounds for relief. Three attorneys were appointed at different times to represent him, but they withdrew or were dismissed. As of May 20, 1991, Dible was representing himself.
On July 30, 1992, twenty months after his first posteonviction relief action had been filed, the clerk of court sent a notice to Dible advising him that his pending application for posteonviction relief would be dismissed under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 215.1 if not tried prior to January 1,1993.1 Dible continued to represent himself and even filed several motions. In September 1992, however, attorney Robert L. Sikma was appointed to represent Dible.
Dible’s action was not tried before January 1, 1993, and the case was automatically dismissed on that date. Dible tried to contact Sikma to determine the status of his case but was unsuccessful in talking to him. Finally, *883almost two years after receiving the rule 215.1 notice, Dible contacted the clerk of court in May 1994, and learned for the first time his posteonviction action had been dismissed seventeen months earlier. Dible then filed a pro se motion to reinstate which was denied because it was filed more than six months after the dismissal. See Iowa R. Civ. P. 215.1 (requiring application to reinstate be filed within six months from the date of dismissal).
On November 18, 1994, Dible filed this second action for posteonviction relief. He repeated his allegations of ineffective assistance of trial counsel and newly-discovered evidence. In addition, he alleged Sikma, his first posteonviction relief counsel, was ineffective in allowing the first posteonviction action to be dismissed. The State filed a motion to dismiss claiming Dible’s action was barred by the three-year statute of limitations set forth in section 822.3. See Iowa Code § 822.3 (an application for postconvietion relief must be filed within three years of the date the challenged conviction became final). Dible argued the ineffectiveness of his first posteonviction counsel excused the untimeliness of his second posteonviction action.
The district court granted the State’s motion to dismiss. Relying on our decision in Wilkins v. State, 522 N.W.2d 822 (Iowa 1994), the court ruled ineffective assistance of posteonviction counsel will not toll the three-year statute of limitations contained in section 822.3. Dible appealed and the case was transferred to the court of appeals. The court of appeals reversed. It concluded Dible was aware of his posteonviction claims within the three-year period, but the ineffective assistance of his first posteonviction counsel deprived him of the opportunity to timely raise these claims. We granted the State’s application for further review.
II. Scope of Review.
We review to correct errors of law. McLaughlin v. State, 533 N.W.2d 546, 547 (Iowa 1995); Clark v. Miller, 503 N.W.2d 422, 424 (Iowa 1993). Because the dismissal was based on the State’s motion to dismiss, we take as true all well-pleaded facts. Harryman v. Hayles, 257 N.W.2d 631, 633 (Iowa 1977). Therefore, we accept for purposes of our decision that attorney Sikma provided ineffective assistance in Dible’s first posteon-viction relief action.
III. Is the Ineffective Assistance of Post-conviction Counsel an Exception to Section 822.S’s Statute of Limitations?
Iowa Code section 822.3 provides in relevant part:
All [posteonviction relief] applications must be filed within three years from the date the conviction or decision is final or, in the event of an appeal, from the date the writ of procedendo is issued. However, this limitation does not apply to a ground of fact or law that could not have been raised within the applicable time period.
The issue before us in this case is whether the ineffective assistance of posteonviction counsel can constitute a “ground of fact” within the meaning of the exception to the three-year statute of limitations. We hold it cannot based on the clear language of the statute and our prior case law interpreting it.
A. Prior case law. We considered the nature of a “ground of fact” in Hogan v. State, 454 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 1990). In Hogan, the petitioner sought posteonviction relief from a 1971 manslaughter conviction. Hogan, 454 N.W.2d at 360. His posteonviction action, however, was filed beyond the statutory deadline for such actions. See id. The “ground of fact” upon which he relied to avoid the limitations bar was his ignorance of the fact that his manslaughter conviction would enhance the penalty for any subsequent crime of which he was convicted. Id. at 361. (Hogan was convicted of the murder of another person in Nevada in 1985, and his prior manslaughter conviction was considered as a factor mitigating against leniency. Id. at 360.) We held his lack of knowledge
is not the sort of factual circumstance reasonably triggering the ground of fact exception of section [822.3]. The reason is that no nexus exists between the ground of fact Hogan asserts and the conviction he seeks to set aside. We are persuaded that a reasonable interpretation of the statute *884compels the conclusion that the exonerating ground of fact must, like newly discovered evidence, be “relevant and likely [to] change the result of the case.”
Id. at 361 (quoting State v. Edman, 444 N.W.2d 103, 106 (Iowa App.1989)) (emphasis added). The essence of our holding in Hogan is that a “ground of fact” within the meaning of the section 822.3 exception must have a nexus with the challenged conviction; a satisfactory nexus exists when the exonerating ground would likely have changed the result of the original criminal case.
We echoed this nexus requirement in Wilkins, a case factually similar to the one before us. In Wilkins, the defendant brought a second application for postconvietion relief, claiming he was denied the effective assistance of first postconvietion counsel. Wilkins, 522 N.W.2d at 823. His second post-conviction action was filed beyond the three-year limitations period. Id. Wilkins argued the exception to the limitations period applied because his claim of ineffectiveness of first postconvietion relief counsel could not have been raised within the three-year time limit of section 822.3. Id. We held “the exception applies to situations in which there ‘would be no opportunity to test the validity of the conviction in relation to [the ground of fact or law that allegedly could not have been raised within the time period].’ ” Id. at 824 (quoting Edman, 444 N.W.2d at 106) (emphasis added; brackets in original). In accordance with Hogan, we focused on Wilkins’ underlying claim challenging the validity of his conviction — trial counsel’s failure to have the victim’s shirt tested for powder burns. See id. We concluded Wilkins was aware of this shortcoming of his trial counsel within the three-year period and “had three opportunities to claim ineffective assistance of trial counsel before the time bar became enforceable against him.” /¿.(emphasis added). The ineffective assistance of Wilkins’ first postconvietion counsel did not alter these conclusions. Consequently, we reversed the district court’s denial of the State’s motion for summary dismissal of Wilkins’ second postconvietion action. Id.
It is important not to confuse the effect of ineffective assistance of trial counsel with the ineffective assistance of appellate or postcon-viction counsel. The errors of trial counsel have a direct impact on the validity of a criminal conviction. In contrast, the incompetency of appellate counsel or postconvietion counsel cannot have this type of impact because their involvement postdates the defendant’s conviction. The effect of the ineffective assistance of appellate or postconvietion counsel is to prevent the defendant from adequately presenting the errors that occurred in the trial court, including any errors by trial counsel, and thereby obtaining relief from the conviction or sentence. Because the “ground of fact” exception, as we interpreted it in Hogan, is limited to grounds that would likely have changed the' result of the criminal case, such grounds may include the ineffectiveness of trial counsel, but cannot include the ineffectiveness of appellate or postconvietion counsel.
Dible misses this distinction when he focuses on whether he could have known of the ineffective assistance of postconvietion counsel within the three-year period. The fact that Dible did not know of the ineffective assistance of his first postconvietion counsel is of no consequence under section 822.3 because there is no nexus between this alleged ground of fact and the conviction he seeks to set aside. See Hogan, 454 N.W.2d at 361 (must be nexus between ground of fact and conviction). In other words, even if Sikma had competently represented Dible in his first postconvietion action, the result of Dible’s criminal trial would not have been different. See id. (ground of fact must be likely to change the result of the case).
The proper focus should be on whether Dible knew, within the three-year period, of the underlying claims upon which he now challenges his conviction, i.e., those errors made during his criminal trial that allegedly changed the result of that trial. There can be no doubt that Dible did know of these claims inasmuch as the bases upon which he seeks to overturn his conviction in this action are the same bases urged in his first postcon-viction action, which was filed within the three-year period. Consequently, Dible has failed to establish a “ground of fact” that *885could not have been raised within the three-year period.
B. Statutory language. The correctness of our interpretation of section 822.3 in Hogan is evident when one compares the language of the section 822.3 exception with the error-preservation exception found in section 822.8. Section 822.8 requires that all grounds for relief “must be raised in the applicant’s original, supplemental or amended application” for posteonviction relief “unless the court finds a ground for relief asserted which for sufficient reason was not asseHed or was inadequately raised in the original, supplemental, or amended application” for postconviction relief. Iowa Code § 822.8 (emphasis added). In contrast, the exception to section 822.3’s statute of limitations encompasses only “a ground of fact or law that could not have been raised within the applicable time period.” Id. § 822.3 (emphasis added). Based on the differing language employed by the legislature in sections 822.3 and 822.8, our prior decisions have recognized the exceptions in these statutes are not coextensive.
For example, in Whitsel v. State, 525 N.W.2d 860 (Iowa 1994), we considered whether the applicant’s allegation that his first postconviction counsel was ineffective excused his failure to file his second postcon-viction action within the three-year limitations period. 525 N.W.2d at 864. In concluding it did not, we noted the distinction between section 822.8 and section 822.3:
Ineffective assistance of counsel may constitute “sufficient reason” for failure to raise an issue in an earlier trial or direct appeal. It does not, however, constitute a claim that “could not have been raised within the applicable time period” under section 822.3.
Id.
Section 822.8 contemplates that counsel in a prior postconviction proceeding might be ineffective as evidenced by the legislature’s statement in that section that the applicant’s failure to include all grounds for relief in the first postconviction action can be excused where such grounds were “inadequately raised.” The legislature did not make the same provision in section 822.3. To paraphrase an observation we have made on many occasions: If the legislature had intended that ineffective assistance of counsel serve as an exception to the statute of limitations, it would have said so. It certainly knew how to do so, as shown by the language it used in section 822.8.
For similar reasons, we reject Dible’s contention his right to the effective assistance of postconviction relief counsel requires us to adopt his suggested interpretation of section 822.3. See Iowa Code § 822.5 (providing for court-appointed counsel in postconviction relief proceedings); Patchette v. State, 374 N.W.2d 397, 398 (Iowa 1985) (recognizing statutory right to the effective assistance of postconviction relief counsel).-Dible claims he will be denied his right to the effective assistance of postconviction counsel if we affirm the dismissal of this untimely postconviction relief action. Because the legislature chose to bestow the right to postcon-viction counsel, however, see Dunbar v. State, 515 N.W.2d 12, 14 (Iowa 1994) (right to postconviction relief counsel is statutory, not constitutional), it is also free to determine the parameters of this right. If the legislature had intended the right to postcon-viction relief counsel to take precedence over the statute of limitations, it could easily have included in section 822.3 an exception to the limitations period based on a denial of that right, as it implicitly did in section 822.8. Because it chose not to do so, we are not at liberty to read such an exception into section 822.3.
C. Legislative intent. In our first opportunity to consider the legislative intent underlying the limitations period of section 822.3, we concluded the legislative purpose was “to reduce injustices occurring as a result of lost witnesses” necessary to resolve factual issues arising in postconviction proceedings and upon retrial of cases where convictions have been overturned. Brewer v. Iowa Dist. Ct., 395 N.W.2d 841, 843 (Iowa 1986). We subsequently observed the legislature also intended to conserve judicial resources and restore a sense of repose to our criminal justice system. Wilkins, 522 N.W.2d at 824. We noted in Wilkins that our decision not to recognize the ineffective *886assistance of postconviction counsel as a “ground of fact” that would trigger the exception to the statute of limitations “best promotes legislative intent.” Id. Our decision today again carries out that legislative intent by giving effect to the statute of limitations as it was drafted by the general assembly. Any other decision would result in an endless procession of postconviction actions, and the legislature’s hope to avoid stale claims and to achieve a sense of repose in the criminal justice system would not be realized.
IV. Summary.
In summary, we hold the ineffective assistance of postconviction relief counsel is not a “ground of fact” within the meaning of section 822.3. Consequently, it cannot serve as an exception to the three-year statute of limitations found in that statute. For these reasons, the trial court properly dismissed Dible’s second postconviction relief action.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED.
All justices concur except McGIVERIN, C.J., and CARTER, NEUMAN, and SNELL, JJ., who dissent.
. Rule 215.1 provides that any case filed prior to July 15 and not tried prior to January 1 of the next succeeding year is subject to dismissal "unless satisfactory reasons for want of prosecution or grounds for continuance” are shown by application.

=== CASE 9741177 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:39.671164+00 ===

McGIVERIN, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The majority opinion’s narrow interpretation of Iowa Code section 822.3 effectively denies petitioner Dible any opportunity to have his postconviction claims heard. I believe the provisions of that section can be given effect without producing such a harsh result.
I. The effect of Dible’s ineffective counsel.
As the majority correctly notes, the respondent State’s motion to dismiss Dible’s petition admits all well-pleaded facts in the petition, see Harryman v. Hayles, 257 N.W.2d 631, 633 (Iowa 1977), and we therefore must assume that attorney Sikma rendered ineffective assistance in Dible’s first postconviction action by allowing it to be dismissed under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 215.1. However, the majority fails to acknowledge the import of attorney Sikma’s substandard performance. Once counsel was appointed for Dible pursuant to Iowa Code section 822.5, Dible had a right to effective assistance of that counsel. See Dunbar v. State, 515 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1994); Schertz v. State, 380 N.W.2d 404, 412 (Iowa 1985) (stating that right to effective assistance of counsel applies to appeals and post-conviction actions as well as at trial).
Instead, Dible’s first postconviction action was dismissed due to his counsel’s failure to timely prosecute it or seek a continuance. Furthermore, because of counsel’s ineffectiveness and failure to communicate the dismissal of the petition to Dible, Dible was unable to timely avail himself of other means, such as an appeal from the dismissal of his first action (within thirty days of dismissal) or a motion for reinstatement under rule 215.1 (within six months of dismissal), to save his first posteonviction petition. Thus, despite his right to effective assistance of counsel, Dible was never given a hearing and had “no opportunity to test the validity of the conviction in relation to the ground of fact or law” alleged in his first postconviction action. See Wilkins v. State, 522 N.W.2d 822, 824 (Iowa 1994).
II. Time bar exception allowable under section 8%2.3.
Under section 822.3, Dible should not be barred from obtaining relief. Dible could not raise the claim of ineffective assistance, based on attorney Sikma’s inaction in the first postconviction case, within the required three-year period from the time Dible’s conviction became final in March 1989; the first postconviction action was not dismissed until January 1993, and Dible did not learn of the dismissal until the summer of 1994. Section 822.3 allows for exceptions to the three-year time limit in cases where there is “a ground of fact or law that could not have been raised within the applicable time period.” I believe the legislature clearly intended that postcon-vietion relief applicants should not be precluded from bringing their claims before a court unless any untimeliness was due to their own inaction. Cf. Schertz, 380 N.W.2d at 412 (noting that “[b]y a proper showing that all previous counsel were ineffective, a *887path may be forged to permit issues of error at trial to be raised before this court for the first time”).
III. Criminal case result could have been changed.
The majority emphasizes a distinction between the ineffective assistance of trial counsel and the ineffective assistance of appellate or postconviction counsel, asserting that “even if Sikma had competently represented Dible in his first postconviction action, the result of Dible’s criminal trial would not have been different.” That distinction is overstated. In this case, if attorney Sikma had competently represented Dible in his first postconviction action, Dible’s claims of newly-discovered evidence and ineffective assistance of trial counsel at least would have received a hearing and possibly could have changed the result of the underlying criminal case. However, the result of our decision today is that Dible is not afforded the effective assistance of postconviction counsel previously guaranteed by our cases and section 822.5.
IV. Conclusion.
In attempting to establish a bright-line rule, the majority’s decision leads to an unfair result in this case and deprives Dible of a hearing on his claims. I would affirm the decision of the court of appeals reinstating Dible’s second application for posteonviction relief and remand for further proceedings.
CARTER, NEUMAN, and SNELL, JJ., join this dissent.

=== CASE 2226418 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:08.664286+00 ===

348 Ill. App. 542 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 390
People of State of Illinois, Defendant in Error,
v.
Harvey M. Lackaye, Plaintiff in Error.
Gen. No. 45,869.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed December 10, 1952.
Released for publication December 31, 1952.
*543 BERYL A. BIRNDORF, of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
JOHN S. BOYLE, State's Attorney of Cook county, of Chicago, for defendant in error; JOHN T. GALLAGHER, RUDOLPH L. JANEGA, ARTHUR F. MANNING, WILLIAM J. McGAH, JR., and EUGENE WELKER, Assistant State's Attorneys, all of Chicago, of counsel.
MR. JUSTICE KILEY delivered the opinion of the court.
This is a writ of error to review the conviction of defendant of the charge of keeping "a house of ill fame or place for the practice of lewdness." Par. 162, chap. 38, Ill. Rev. Stat. [1951; Jones Ill. Stats. Ann. 37.128].
The question is whether the uncontroverted testimony of homosexual conduct between males performed in a bath house sustains the conviction of defendant, keeper of the house.
The pertinent part of par. 162 is: "Whoever keeps ... a house of ill fame or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness...." Defendant contends that that language defines but one crime, the keeping of a house of ill fame for the practice of prostitution; that to sustain a conviction for that crime proof of prostitution is essential; and that proof of homosexual conduct between males is not prostitution and is insufficient to sustain such a conviction.
*544 [1, 2] We think the proof sustains the conviction. The State, under the charge, had the burden of proving that defendant kept a place for the practice of lewdness. People v. Leoni, 198 Ill. App. 376; Parker v. People, 94 Ill. App. 648. It should be noted that the information does not contain the phrase "of prostitution" which is in the statute. It should be noted further that par. 162 appears in chap. 38 under the Disorderly Conduct Act, pars. 159-163, and not under An Act to Prevent the Prostitution of Females, pars. 165-173 [Jones Ill. Stats. Ann. 37.124-37.129, 37.439-37.426]. Cases cited by the defendant do hold that prostitution is lewdness, but none holds that lewdness is confined to prostitution. There is no merit in the contention that proof of lewdness necessarily required proof of sexual intercourse between male and female.
[3] The term "lewdness" must be given some meaning. People v. Goldman, 318 Ill. 77. It is more comprehensive than the word "prostitution." People v. Arcega, 49 Cal. App. 239, 193 P. 264. It includes immoral and degenerate conduct between persons of the same sex. Black's Law Dictionary (4th Ed.) page 1052. We think the legislature intended to include in par. 162 conduct of the same general class as prostitution. Caminetti v. United States, 242 U.S. 470; People v. Goldman, 318 Ill. 77. The illicit sexual acts between the men in the defendant's house are of the same general class as the illicit acts included in the term "prostitution." Commonwealth v. Porter, 237 Mass. 1, 129 N.E. 298. The acts proven are sexual, induced by a degrading passion within the meaning of "lust" in Webster's New Int. Dict. (2d Ed.), and therefore "lewd" within the definition of the same authority.
Affirmed.
LEWE, P.J. and FEINBERG, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741178 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:44.209643+00 ===

WEDEMEYER, P. J.
Black & Veatch, a Missouri general partnership, ("B&V") appeals from an order denying its motion to dismiss a complaint filed against it by CH2M Hill ("CH2M"). B&V claims that the trial court erred as a matter of law when it ruled that CH2M obtained personal jurisdiction over it pursuant to § 801.11(6), Stats. Because under the calls of the stat*373ute CH2M properly obtained personal jurisdiction over B&V, we affirm.
I. BACKGROUND
The facts central to a resolution of this appeal are not in dispute. CH2M, the prime design consultant to the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District's effort to effectuate a water pollution abatement program, sued B&V alleging various theories of negligence, breach of contract, warranty liability, and a claim for indemnification for additional costs incurred in the performance of its work on a portion of the total project. After years of unsuccessfully negotiating a settlement, this action was filed on February 2, 1995. At the time, CH2M, by its legal counsel, knew that B&V consisted of at least 130 general partners, but did not know the identities or .the locations of the individual partners. Thus, CH2M only named the partnership itself as defendant when the suit was filed, pursuant to § 807.12(3), Stats.1
Prior to filing suit, CH2M's counsel attempted to convince B&V's counsel to accept service on behalf of the partnership, but was told that authority was not given to legal counsel to do so. After the action was filed, CH2M's counsel made two further attempts between February 2, and February 20, to reach B&V's *374counsel to determine if he had obtained authority to accept service. The attempts, however, were unsuccessful because B&V's counsel was not in Wisconsin. On February 20, CH2M’s counsel communicated with B&V's in-house counsel again seeking consent to accept service. On February 28, the request was refused because of insurance indemnification reasons. Nevertheless, efforts by CH2M continued through March 15, to obtain consent to accept service.
In the meantime, on March 9, CH2M sent to B&V its first set of interrogatories requesting the names and addresses of B&V's general partners. Prior to B&V's response, CH2M advised B&V's in-house counsel that it had acquired a list of thirty-three of the partners and was arranging for immediate service of the summons and complaint on those partners. CH2M obtained service on twenty-eight of the thirty-three partners, prior to April 3, 1995, which was the sixty-day service expiration date. Section § 801.02(1), Stats.
On April 14, B&V responded to CH2M's interrogatory request for the names of all the partners. There were 160 partners. On May 3, 1995, after CH2M obtained all the names of the partners, it moved, pursuant to §807.12(3), Stats., for an order directing insertion of the names of the partners into the pleadings. The trial court granted the motion June 14,1995.
On July 15, 1995, B&V moved to dismiss CH2M's complaint. This motion was denied. This court, by order dated November 7,1995, granted B&V's petition for leave to appeal.
II. DISCUSSION
The basis for B&V's claim of trial court error involves the interpretation of a statute in the context of undisputed facts. Both parties ask us to construe and *375apply § 801.11(6), STATS., to reach a different result. Our review, therefore, is of an independent, nondefer-ential nature. See Bitters v. Milcut, Inc., 117 Wis. 2d 48, 49, 343 N.W.2d 418, 419 (Ct. App. 1983).
This appeal presents an issue of first impression in Wisconsin general partnership law: whether service on some of the partners in a general partnership composed of a large number of general partners is sufficient to properly commence a civil action against the partnership that will be binding on the partnership assets and the partners served.
The focus of our review involves the interpretation and construction of § 801.11(6), Stats., which provides:
(6) Partners and partnerships. A summons shall be served individually upon each general partner known to the plaintiff by service in any manner prescribed in sub. (1), (2) or (5) where the claim sued upon arises out of or relates to partnership activities within this state sufficient to subject a defendant to personal jurisdiction under s. 801.05 (2) to (10). A judgment rendered under such circumstances is a binding adjudication individually against each partner so served and is a binding adjudication against the partnership as to its assets anywhere.
B&V asserts that CH2M did not "serve those partners known to it, and in the exercise of due diligence, those partners who could have been known," within sixty days of filing its complaint as required by § 801.11(6), STATS. It argues thát by failing to effect proper service, CH2M did not properly commence this action under § 801.02(1), STATS.,2 thereby creating a jurisdictional defect which foreclosed personal jurisdic*376tion over B&V and all of its partners. Thus, B&V argues, the action must be dismissed. Stated otherwise, B&V contends that unless CH2M obtained service upon every known general partner, there is a fundamental defect in the commencement of the action preventing the court from having jurisdiction over any of the general partners — served or unserved.
B&V reaches its conclusion through the following thought process. First, § 801.11(6), Stats., ought to be construed in a manner to avoid inconsistency and conflict so as to give effect to every part, Associated Hospital Service Inc. v. City of Milwaukee, 13 Wis. 2d 447, 463, 109 N.W.2d 271, 279 (1961), and to prevent superfluity. State v. Wisconsin Tel. Co., 91 Wis. 2d 702, 714, 284 N.W.2d 41, 46 (1979). Next, B&V posits that the first sentence of the statute "[a] summons shall be served individually upon each general partner known to the plaintiff' is a condition precedent to triggering the second sentence: "A judgment rendered under such circumstances is a binding adjudication . . . against each partner so served." Thus, only when all general partners known to the plaintiff have been served will the second sentence take effect. Only this type of reading, proffers B&V, gives full effect to each part of the statute.
As additional support for its argument, B&V asserts that the presence of the verb "shall" renders the first sentence peremptory and mandatory, thereby making service on all of the known partners a necessity for personal jurisdiction. Finally, B&V claims that the *377placing of the past participle "known" in the first sentence "denotes an objective standard which mandates due diligence under the circumstances to discover the identities and locations of those who, with reasonable diligence could be discovered." Wold v. State, 57 Wis. 2d 344, 350, 204 N.W.2d 482, 487 (1973). In this respect, B&V points to four reasons why objectively CH2M did not exercise due diligence: (1) CH2M failed to request the identity of the B&V partners prior to filing its summons and complaint; (2) CH2M failed to schedule a pre-action deposition to discover the partners' identity; (3) CH2M failed to take immediate action to conduct discovery depositions upon filing of the action; and (4) CH2M failed to request the trial court to shorten its thirty day response time to the interrogatories CH2M did serve. We shall address each part of B&V's construct.
The trial court, in denying B&V's motion to dismiss, concluded that § 801.11(6), Stats., permitted personal jurisdiction over served partners when fewer than all known partners were served. To support its decision, the trial court also concluded that there was no statutory authority for B&V's claim that CH2M had to exercise due diligence in ascertaining the identity of the general partners. Alternatively, the trial court reasoned that even if such a requirement should be read into the statute, CH2M had complied.
A. General construction of§ 801.11(6), STATS.
The key element in B&V's claim of trial court error is its assertion that the presence of the verb "shall" renders the first sentence of § 801.11(6), STATS., mandatory. Whether a statute is mandatory or directory is a matter of statutory construction which is a *378question of law we decide independently. F.T. v. State, 150 Wis. 2d 216, 221, 441 N.W.2d 322, 324 (Ct. App. 1989). In addressing this issue, we begin with the rule of construction that "[s]tatutes relating to the same subject matter may be considered in construing a statutory provision." Chomicki v. Wittekind, 128 Wis. 2d 188, 193, 381 N.W.2d 561, 563 (Ct. App. 1985).
In Karow v. Milwaukee County Civil Service Commission, 82 Wis. 2d 565, 570, 263 N.W.2d 214, 217 (1978),3 our supreme court addressed the issue of whether a statute's use of the word "shall" should be given a mandatory versus a directory interpretation in cases where the statute contains a time limit (i.e. "time cases"). In Demmith v. Wisconsin Judicial Conference, *379166 Wis. 2d 649, 480 N.W.2d 502 (1992), however, our supreme court did not apply Karow's four-factor test to determine if the statute was mandatory or directory when the statute did not contain a time limit (i.e. "non-time" case). Instead, the supreme court declared:
"The general rule is that, when the word shall is used in a statute, it is presumed mandatory unless a different construction is necessary to carry out the clear intent of the legislature." ... "When the words 'shall' and 'may' are used in the same section of a statute, one can infer that the legislature was aware of the different denotations and intended the words to have their precise meanings."
Id., 166 Wis. 2d at 657 n.5, 480 N.W.2d at 506 n.5 (1992) (citations omitted).
An examination of § 801.11, STATS., and its seven subsections reveals that in subsections (4), (5) and (7), relating to the service of process on defendants other than natural persons, the word "may" is used as the operative verb. Thus, the argument naturally flows that the use of "shall" in subsection (6) relating to partners and partnerships is mandatory from which no deviation ought be countenanced. To impose such a requirement, however, would introduce an element of rigidity which is not warranted when the very purpose for which statutory interpretive rules exist is to glean legislative intent. To plumb the meaning of a statutory subsection our considerations ought not leave "context" and "common sense" on the courthouse steps. State v. Clausen, 105 Wis. 2d 231, 246, 313 N.W.2d 819, 826 (1982). Instead, we must not only examine the statute as a whole, but also in reference to other statutes dealing with the same general subject matter to discern the *380entire legislative scheme. See 2A NORMAN J. SINGER, Sutherland Statutory Construction § 46.05 (5th ed. 1992).
Undoubtedly, § 801.11, STATS., relates to the general subject matter of service of process on seven different types of defendants. We must, however, be mindful that the status of certain types of defendants are parts of discrete legislative schemes. Thus, we cannot ignore the provisions of the Uniform Partnership Act adopted by Wisconsin in Chapter 178, and the impact its provisions logically might have on personal jurisdiction questions.
B&V argues that to read the statute as interpreted by the trial court would implicate some due process concerns because the plain purpose of the subsection is to put proposed defendants on notice of a pending action and thus avoid prejudice. Laudatory as this concern may be, our legislature has already affected this aspect of partnership law in several significant respects: The Uniform Partnership Act declares that the partnership will be liable for any wrongful act or omission of any partner acting in the ordinary course of the partnership business. Section 178.10, STATS. It imposes joint and several liability on the general partners for everything chargeable to the partnership in the absence of contracts to the contrary. Section 178.12, Stats. In addition, § 178.09, Stats., "Notice to or knowledge of partner charges partnership" dictates:
Notice to any partner of any matter relating to partnership affairs, and the knowledge of the partner acting in the particular matter, acquired while a partner or then present to the partner's mind, and the knowledge of any other partner who reasonably could and should have communicated it to the act*381ing partner, operate as notice to or knowledge of the partnership, except in the case of a fraud on the partnership committed by or with the consent of that partner.
Thus, the need to directly notify all partners is not as paramount as it would be in the absence of this type of provision under the total legislative scheme. Even with this expansive legislative approach to notice obligations, B&V's concern about due process is sufficiently addressed in the second sentence by insulating non-served partners and their personal assets from direct action.
Our examination of this portion of B&V's argument would not be complete without some comment about common sense. It is a "fundamental axiom of judicial construction . . . that it avoid any result that would be absurd or unreasonable under the facts and circumstances of the case." J.A.L. v. State, 162 Wis. 2d 940, 963, 471 N.W.2d 493, 502 (1991). Section 801.01(2), Stats.,4 declares that statues regulating practice and procedure in our trial courts should be construed to "secure the just, speedy and inexpensive determination of every action. . . ." To accede to B&V's mandatory and peremptory approach of construing § 801.11(6), STATS., would make a mockery of the purpose for which the rules of construction exist. Under *382B&V's construction, the larger the aggregate of partners and far spread in location, the more insulated the partners and the partnership would be from answering injustice for acts of commission and omission. Rules of process are not designed to operate as instruments of obstruction, but are intended to provide the means to facilitate the just resolution of disputes.
To read the first sentence of the statute as a mandatory condition precedent to maintaining an action despite the protection provided individual unserved partners in the second sentence would render the legislature's scheme for partnership law meaningless. We thus conclude that contextual integrity, logic and common sense require that the first sentence of this statute be construed as directory only. Our conclusion is further supported by Wisconsin case law. See Stangarone v. Jacobs, 188 Wis. 20, 205 N.W. 318 (1925) (judgment allowed against served partner and partnership assets, but dismissed as to non-served partner).
B. Due Diligence.
B&V also asserts that CH2M was required to exercise due diligence to ascertain the names of the general partners and required to serve each one within sixty days after filing the summons and complaint. CH2M answers that the statute does not require that all known partners or those that could be known with reasonable diligence be served in order to acquire personal jurisdiction over the partners who actually are served and the partnership assets.
Section 801.11, STATS., delineates the manner of service of process that is required to exercise personal jurisdiction upon seven categories of defendants in civil actions. The statute relates to one subject but the *383methodology to obtain service is not uniform. Service of process for natural persons, § 801.11(l)(b); for natural persons with disabilities, § 801.11(2); and for corporations and limited liability companies, § 801.11(5)(b), all require some form of due diligence. Whereas service upon the state, § 801.11(3); on other political corporations, § 801.11(4); on partners and partnerships, § 801.11(6); and on other unincorporated associations, § 801.11(7), have no express requirement for due diligence.
B&V reasons that the use of the word "known" implies a reasonable objective due diligence requirement to ascertain whether the identities of the general partners are available to a plaintiff suing a partnership. Although this argument has merit, we accord more persuasive value to the well-recognized intrinsic rule of construction adopted by our supreme court: "[Wlhere a statute, with reference to a subject contains a given provision, the omission of such provision from a similar statute concerning a related subject is significant to show that a different intention existed." Green Bay Broadcast Ins. Co. v. Redevelopment Auth., 116 Wis. 2d 1, 19, 342 N.W.2d 27, 36 (1983), modified, 119 Wis. 2d 251, 349 N.W.2d 478 (1984); 2B SINGER, supra, at § 51.02. The only conclusion that can be rationally made is that the legislature intended a different procedure to be used in the manner in which personal jurisdiction can be exercised over partnerships and its partners. Thus, the trial court did not err.
Even if, arguendo, a reasonable diligence requirement can be read into the statute, the record — contrary to B&V's contention — demonstrates that the trial court did consider the question and reached a positive result.
*384"Reasonable diligence" or due diligence is treated as a finding of fact to be affirmed unless clearly erroneous. Welty v. Heggy, 124 Wis. 2d 318, 324, 369 N.W.2d 763, 767 (Ct. App.), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 947 (1985). Where the basic facts are undisputed, the trial court's determination is considered a conclusion of law to be addressed independently by this court. Cf. id.
Here the basic facts of how CH2M effectuated service on twenty-eight of the known thirty-three general partners are not in dispute; the dispute involves each parties' different interpretation of those undisputed facts. Earlier in this opinion we set forth the pertinent facts leading up to the actual service of the known partners and, without repeating them, we incorporate them in addressing this reasonable diligence issue. To put the matter in a few words, B&V argues that CH2M did too little too late to obtain all the names and addresses of the general partners. On the other hand, CH2M contends that its reasonable efforts to seek admission of service for the partners through their legal counsel having been rejected, it did everything reasonable to effect service on known parties within the sixty-day deadline. In this regard, the record is somewhat sketchy, but our review reveals that the trial court did address the issue.
In its prefatory remarks prior to issuing its bench decision, the trial court indicated it had spent considerable time reviewing the record. This is evident from the trial court's recitation of the sequence of procedural. events preceding CH2M's acts of service. From this review, the trial court concluded that CH2M "did not close their eyes to means of information reasonably *385accessible to it."5 From our earlier review of the same record, we reach the same conclusion.
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
Section 807.12, STATS., provides in pertinent part:
Suing by fictitious name or as unknown; partners' names unknown.
(3) In an action against a partnership, if the names of the partners are unknown to the plaintiff, all proceedings may be in the partnership name until the names of the partners are ascertained, whereupon the process, pleadings and all proceedings shall be amended by order directing the insertion of such names.
Section 801.02(1), Stats., provides in pertinent part:
*376Commencement of Action. (1) A civil action in which a personal judgment is sought is commenced as to any defendant when a summons and a complaint naming the person as defendant are filed with the court, provided service of an authenticated copy of the summons and of the complaint is made upon the defendant under this chapter within 60 days after filing.
In Karow v. Milwaukee County Civil Service Commission, 82 Wis. 2d 565, 263 N.W.2d 214 (1978), our supreme court set forth factors to be considered in "time cases." In determining whether legislation was intended to be mandatory or directory, it listed not only the omission of a prohibition or a penalty, but also "the consequences resulting from one construction or the other, the nature of the statute, 'the evil to be remedied, and the general object sought to be accomplished by the legislature.'" Id., 82 Wis. 2d at 572, 263 N.W.2d at 217 (citations omitted). It cited language of an earlier decision that "[W]here there is no substantial reason why the thing to be done might not as well be done after the time prescribed as before — no presumption that by allowing it to be so done, it may work an injury or wrong — nothing in the act itself, or in other acts relating to the same subject matter, indicating that the legislature did not intend that it should rather be done, after the time prescribed, than not to be at all; there the courts assume that the intent was, that if not done within the time prescribed, it might be. done afterwards." Id., 82 Wis. 2d at 572 n.7, 263 N.W.2d at 217 n.7 (citing State ex rel. Cothren v. Lean, 9 Wis. 254 [*279], 266 [*292] (1859)). Thus, even in "time cases" a procrustean standard was not always adhered to if context dictated otherwise.
Section 801.01(2), STATS., provides:
Kinds of proceedings; scope of chs. 801 to 847.
(2) SCOPE. Chapters 801 to 847 govern procedure and practice in circuit courts of this state in all civil actions and special proceedings whether cognizable as cases at law, in equity or of statutory origin.... Chapters 801 to 847 shall be construed to secure the just, speedy and inexpensive determination of every action and proceeding.
Accordingly, in substance, the trial court addressed and decided the issue even if it did not specifically state that it was doing so. See Connecticut Gen. Life Ins. Co. v. DILHR, 86 Wis. 2d 393, 404-05, 273 N.W.2d 206, 211 (1979) (substance controls over trial court's label).

=== CASE 2226423 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:08.757645+00 ===

348 Ill. App. 448 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 352
Margaret M. Cronin, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
William A. Brownlie, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 10,614.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed December 5, 1952.
Released for publication December 23, 1952.
*449 RATHJE & WOODWARD, of Wheaton, for appellant; JOHN S. WOODWARD, of Wheaton, of counsel.
THOMAS H. PRICE, of Elmhurst, for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE ANDERSON delivered the opinion of the court.
Margaret M. Cronin, plaintiff appellee, received personal injuries arising out of her slipping on an icy sidewalk on the premises of her landlord, William A. Brownlie, defendant appellant. She recovered a judgment in the circuit court of DuPage county based on a verdict of a jury in the sum of $2,500 against the defendant. Motions on behalf of the defendant for a directed verdict and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict were overruled by the trial court and this appeal follows.
*450 The defendant contended in the trial court and assigns as error here that as a matter of law the plaintiff failed to establish that she was free from contributory negligence and that the defendant was negligent.
The undisputed evidence discloses that the defendant owned a four-apartment building in Elmhurst, Illinois; that the plaintiff had lived in one of the apartments under a written lease for several years; that the defendant, who also lived in one of the apartments, had no janitor but performed the ordinary janitor services himself; that there was a cement sidewalk 160 feet long and 30 inches wide extending from the front entrance of the apartment to York Street; that the sidewalk was in a good state of repair and had no structural defects; that this sidewalk was used by all of the persons living in the building; that there was no provision in the lease that the landlord should keep the ice and snow off the sidewalks; that there was a small light burning at night outside the door at the entrance to the apartment; that a street light on York Street did not light up the entrance sidewalk; that on and prior to February 6, 1949, there was ice all over the city of Elmhurst and the plaintiff had used the sidewalk in question on several occasions prior to Saturday, February 5, 1949, at all of which times the sidewalk was in an icy condition due to natural accumulations of ice and snow.
Margaret M. Cronin testified in substance that when she left her apartment about 1:30 p.m. on February 5, 1949, the ice was frozen thick on the entrance sidewalk; that the ground was covered with snow in that area; that a Mr. Berry came up to the apartment entrance and together they walked down the sidewalk to an automobile; that he did not assist her; that she was wearing black suede dress shoes with heels about an inch and one-half high; that she had no galoshes or *451 rubbers on; that the occasion of her leaving the house was to attend a wedding reception; that at the reception she had not more than three cocktails containing whiskey; that she had the last drink several hours before she returned home; that some friends brought her to the York Street entrance of her apartment in an automobile about 1:30 Sunday morning, February 6; that the condition of the sidewalk was the same as when she walked on it in the afternoon; that the sidewalk from the apartment to the street was a glaze of ice; that there was snow some six to ten inches high adjacent to the sidewalk; that when she came within about fifteen feet of the apartment doorway, while walking on the sidewalk, she slipped and fell on the ice; that her leg was broken as a result of the fall. She further testified that the ice was rough but was in the same rough condition on all the sidewalk on the night she returned to her apartment; that no one escorted her from York Street to her apartment on her return; that she had been back and forth on the sidewalk to her home three times on Friday and the ice was the same as it was on Saturday and on Sunday morning; that she did not know whether or not anyone had shovelled the snow off the sidewalk from Friday to Sunday morning.
Clement Cuthbert testified that he was one of the tenants in the apartment building; that he observed the sidewalk from Friday, February 4, through Sunday, February 6; that Friday afternoon it had sleeted and then it froze Friday night and on Saturday it snowed and covered the ice with snow and on Saturday night he "noticed it was icy over the snow" and he "swept the sidewalk so that people using it would at least see the ice on it." He further testified that the sidewalk was in the same condition Saturday evening that it was on Friday evening  "nothing but ice."
*452 William A. Brownlie, the defendant, testified that on February 3, it snowed and he shovelled the snow off the walk; that after he had shovelled the walk on February 3, it was icy; that he also shovelled it on February 4; that he used no salt or ashes on the sidewalk; that he could not get the ice off the sidewalk; that on February 4 he left for Detroit and did not return until Sunday evening about 6:30; that when he left for Detroit his tenant, Mr. Cuthbert, said he would take charge of clearing the sidewalk during his absence; that he did not pay Cuthbert for his services.
The evidence further discloses that prior to the time of the injury the plaintiff was in good health and that on the day of the trial she had fully recovered from her broken leg. It is further disclosed by the record that during the period in question no one put any salt or sand on the sidewalk in question.
Charles L. Berry testified that he called for the plaintiff on Saturday, February 5, about 1:30 p.m.; that he met her at the front door of the apartment and they walked to York Street on the sidewalk; that "the sidewalk from the building to the street was a glaze of ice," and there were no ashes or salt on the sidewalk and the "sidewalk was just a sheet of glass."
[1] The first question presented here is whether or not the landlord defendant owes any duty to the plaintiff tenant to remove ice and snow accumulated from natural causes on the sidewalk used to enter the building. It follows, of course, that if no legal duty exists, there can be no negligence. We find no cases in Illinois exactly in point. The authorities throughout the country appear to be divided. The cases on the subject collected in ALR are: 25 A.L.R. 1273; 39 A.L.R. 294; 58 A.L.R. 1411; 75 A.L.R. 154; 97 A.L.R. 220.
[2] The law is settled in this State that a city is not liable for injuries resulting from the slipperiness *453 of its streets and sidewalks caused by the presence of ice and snow accumulated as a result of natural causes. (Strappelli v. City of Chicago, 371 Ill. 72.) The basis of this rule of law is that it is unreasonable and impractical to compel a city in our climate to perform the labor necessary to remove ice and snow from its streets and sidewalks to keep them safe for travel. If the accumulation is caused by some defect of the street or sidewalk and this creates the dangerous condition, then a city may be liable. (Graham v. City of Chicago, 346 Ill. 638.) The rule denying liability of cities on grounds of unreasonableness and impracticability while not decisive of the issues here is in some measure pertinent. The authorities in jurisdictions on the question of where there is a duty on the landlord who has rented the premises to several tenants to remove natural accumulations of ice and snow on steps or sidewalks, which have resulted in injuries to tenants by slipping are not in harmony. From an examination of cases cited in the above ALR notes and cases reviewed in this opinion, the weight of authority is that there is no such duty. The courts of Massachusetts, Ohio, New York, Maine, and Washington hold that there is no duty of a landlord in the absence of a special agreement to remove accumulations of ice and snow due to natural causes from the sidewalks, steps, or driveways which are used in common by several tenants of an apartment building. (Boulten v. Doorington, 302 Mass. 407, 19 N.E. (2d) 731; Gibson v. Prudential Ins. Co., 283 N.Y. 647, 28 N.E. (2d) 43; Turoff v. Richman, 76 Ohio App. 83 (1944), 61 N.E. (2d) 486; McNeill v. Home Savings Bank, 313 Mass. 664, 48 N.E. (2d) 695; Oerter v. Ziegler (1910), 59 Wash. 421, 109 P. 1058; Rosenberg v. Chapman Nat. Bank, 126 Me. 403, 139 A. 82, reported in 58 A.L.R. 1405; Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol. 52, p. 46, par. 417.)
*454 The minority rule holding that there may be liability is followed in New Hampshire and Connnecticut. (United Shoe Machine Corporation v. Walter L. Paine, 26 F.2d 594; Reardon v. Shimelmann, 102 Conn. 383, 128 A. 705, reported also in 39 A.L.R. 287.)
In the Turoff case the plaintiff tenant was injured by slipping on ice and snow on a driveway on the leased premises. This driveway had been covered for some time by ice and snow due to natural causes. The landlord had not cleared the driveway which had been used by the tenant plaintiff and other tenants in the leased apartments on several occasions prior to the time of her injury and she was well aware of its slippery condition. The court held that a different rule should not be applied to the landlord than the non-liability rule of a city and says:
"... In cases where there is no act on the part of the landlord creating a greater danger than was brought about by natural causes the dangers that are created by the elements such as forming of ice and the falling of snow, are universally known and unless the landlord has contracted to provide against these dangers all persons on his property must assume the burden of protecting themselves therefrom.
"This rule which is sustained by the greater weight of authority, is stated as follows in 25 A.L.R. 1301: `Ordinarily, the landlord of premises leased to different tenants who use in common the approaches thereto, and the halls and stairways, is not liable for accumulations of snow and ice due to natural causes and hence is not liable for injuries to persons using these portions of the premises, due to accumulations of this character.'
"Also, in the case of Oerter v. Ziegler, 1910, 59 Wash. 421, 109 P. 1058 on page 1059, the court said: `On the other hand the weight of authority holds that, *455 where different portions of a building are leased to different tenants, the landlord must use due diligence to keep the passageways, and such parts of the building as are used by the different tenants in common, in a reasonably safe condition, and is liable in damages for failure so to do. 18 Am. Enc. of Law (2d Ed.) P. 220. This obligation, however, only extends to general repairs and does not impose on the landlord a liability for injuries resulting from temporary obstructions arising from natural causes, such as the accumulation of ice or snow. Woods v. Naumkeag Steam Cotton Co., 134 Mass. 357, 45 Am. Rep. 344; Purcell v. English, 86 Ind. 34, 44 Am. Rep. 255; Sawyer v. McGillicuddy, 81 Me. 318, 17 A. 124, 3 L.R.A. 458, 10 Am. St. Rep. 260.'"
In the above case the court held the plaintiff could not recover and that the trial court erred in not directing a verdict for defendant.
In Boulton v. Doorington, 302 Mass. 407, 19 N.E. (2d) 731, the plaintiff tenant was injured in a fall from an icy porch on premises leased to him. The porch was also used by other tenants in the same building. The ice was caused by the general weather conditions of sleet and snow falling upon it. The court held that a verdict was properly directed for the defendant as injuries arose as a result of accumulations of ice and snow from natural causes and there was no duty on the landlord from the relation of landlord and tenant to remove the same.
In the McNeill case above cited the Supreme Court of Massachusetts held that there was no liability of the landlord living in an apartment on the premises to remove ice and snow causing slippery conditions from an alleyway commonly used by several tenants. Plaintiff was travelling on a path that had been cleared of snow by the janitor of the landlord but in a depression *456 some water had collected and had frozen forming ice on which the plaintiff slipped causing the injury. The court held the plaintiff could not recover and that the trial court should have directed a verdict for the defendant. The court in passing on the question urged by plaintiff that the janitor of the landlord by clearing the path of snow had created a duty to keep it clean and hence plaintiff had a right to rely on this said:
"... If the evidence was sufficient to warrant a finding that the defendant had undertaken the work of clearing a path from the store to the street, there is `nothing to that effect within the contract of hiring either as a part of its original terms or by modification thereof, and hence the obligation was gratuitous, and the defendant was not liable unless * * * its failure to remedy the dangerous condition was evidence of gross negligence.' Bell v. Siegel, 242 Mass. 380, 382, 136 N.E. 109, 110, 25 A.L.R. 1261."
[3-5] In our northern climate where ice and snow come frequently and are accepted by all, it appears to us that the rule adopted by the majority of the States finding no liability against the landlord is more reasonable and persuasive than the minority view. Applying the majority rule to the facts in the instant case, it appears to us to be unreasonable and somewhat impractical to require a landlord to remove ice and snow from sidewalks used jointly by his tenants where the ice and snow arise from natural causes. Appellee contends that at times the landlord had removed the snow from the sidewalks and that this fact in itself created a legal duty and hence his failure to remove the ice from the sidewalk was negligence. If the plaintiff had relied upon this, this contention might be persuasive. The evidence in the record discloses that at the time the appellee left the apartment and for several days prior thereto, there was ice on the sidewalk and no one *457 had made any effort to remove it. It appears that she did not rely on or expect the ice to be removed from the sidewalk and on the morning of her injury the ice was still there and in the same condition as when she left her apartment. As said in the McNeill case, what the defendant did in cleaning the snow off was a mere gratuity and did not create a legal duty. As there was no legal duty to remove the ice and snow such duty did not arise from the facts that he had heretofore cleared the snow from the sidewalk. We find that the defendant was not negligent as a matter of law.
Appellant urges that regardless of the question of the negligence of the defendant the plaintiff cannot recover because she was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. Counsel for both parties cite Blumberg v. Baird, 319 Ill. App. 642, 1st. Dist. (Abstract decision) as supporting them. In this case the plaintiff tenant of an apartment building suffered injuries by slipping on steps leading from her third-floor apartment to the ground. She brought suit against her landlord and obtained a verdict. The handrail and steps were covered with ice. The janitor of the building had cleared the steps three or four times prior to the accident. The plaintiff tenant had observed the condition of the handrail and steps but proceeded nevertheless and slipped on the first step and received injuries. The Appellate Court held that her use of the steps knowing of their dangerous condition was contributory negligence as a matter of law and that the trial court should have granted defendant's motions for a directed verdict or a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. On examination of this case we do not believe that the court held that defendant was or was not guilty of negligence. The judgment was reversed on the ground that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. The court said:
*458 "It must be conceded, of course, that the question of contributory negligence is ordinarily one of fact for the jury, but the law is equally well settled that where there is no conflict in the evidence and where the facts are not in dispute, the question becomes one of law for the court. Beidler v. Branshaw, 200 Ill. 425. As heretofore indicated, one who blames another for an injury must allege and affirmatively prove that he himself was in the exercise of due care and caution for his own safety, and we think plaintiff's conduct, whether it be characterized as the assumption of risk of the hazards and dangers of the condition of the back stairway, which were plain, open and obvious to her, as defendant argues, or contributory negligence, the fact remains that plaintiff was fully as cognizant of the slippery condition of the back stairway, and probably more so, than the defendant or anyone in his employ, and was therefore charged with a duty equally as great as that sought to be imposed upon defendant. As was stated in Sanders v. Smith, 25, N.Y. Supp. 125, `To require the defendant to pay her (plaintiff) for her injuries would be to require the defendant to take better care of the plaintiff than she should take of herself.'"
[6, 7] We are aware that the question of contributory negligence is one peculiarly for the jury to determine. The court is required to follow the verdict of the jury on this question and is not permitted to set aside the findings of the jury and enter a judgment notwithstanding the verdict unless it is established from a review of all the evidence considered in its aspects most favorable to the plaintiff that there is total failure of the plaintiff to prove that she was exercising due care and caution for her own safety. (Illinois Central R. Co. v. Oswald, 338 Ill. 270.)
[8] The facts in the instant case are quite parallel to the facts in the Blumberg case above mentioned *459 where the court held the contributory negligence of the plaintiff prevented her recovery. In the instant case the plaintiff, being fully aware of the icy condition of the sidewalk, attempted to walk on it at night. The evidence further discloses that she wore dress shoes with high heels and did not wear either rubbers or galoshes to make her footing more secure. As a result of this she sustained her injury. She exposed herself to a known danger knowing all the risks incident thereto. She assumed the risk of the action which caused her injury. As aptly stated in Sanders v. Smith, 5 Misc. 1, 25 N.Y. Supp. 125 and quoted in the Blumberg case above mentioned and quite parallel to the factual situation here: "To require the defendant to pay her (plaintiff) for her injuries would be to require the defendant to take better care of the plaintiff than she should take care of herself."
[9] Giving full credence to all the testimony in the record on behalf of the plaintiff, it appears to us that the plaintiff did not use that proper care, prudence, and foresight that was required of her and that the lack of the same was the proximate cause of her injury and hence she was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law and should not recover.
[10] For these reasons the trial court was in error in refusing to direct a verdict in favor of the defendant at the close of plaintiff's case and likewise erred in refusing to grant defendant's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict for the plaintiff.
Judgment reversed.

=== CASE 2226429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:08.859303+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 621 (1997)
FIRST BANK OF MINNESOTA, et al., Appellants,
v.
Kerry B. OLSON, et al., Respondents.
No. C1-96-1642.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
January 21, 1997.
Review Denied March 18, 1997.
*622 Thomas A. Foster, Jennifer Kjos Fackler, Foster, Waldeck & Lind, Ltd., Minneapolis, for appellants.
Kay Nord Hunt, Terrance W. Moore, Lommen, Nelson, Cole & Stageberg, P.A., Minneapolis, for respondents.
Considered and decided by DAVIES, P.J., and HUSPENI and SHORT, JJ.
OPINION
SHORT, Judge.
In this legal malpractice action, the trial court awarded summary judgment for attorney Olson, finding First Bank of Minnesota and First National Bank of Glencoe (banks) would have won the underlying dispute in spite of Olson's alleged negligence, and, therefore, any negligence by Olson did not proximately cause the banks' damages in settling the dispute. On appeal, the banks argue the trial court misapplied the law.
FACTS
The dispute underlying this malpractice claim involves residential real property in Edina, Minnesota. The million-dollar property was subject to six mortgages, of which First Bank of Minnesota and First National Bank of Glencoe each held one. After the primary mortgagor instituted a foreclosure proceeding and purchased the property, the property was subject to redemption by creditors filing notices of intent to redeem by September 10, 1992, six months after the date of sale. The banks acted together to purchase an assignment of the sheriff's certificate of sale and the second mortgage.
At 3:30 p.m. on September 10, 1992, the banks' attorney, Kerry B. Olson, telephoned the Hennepin County Recorder's Office and learned neither the banks nor any other creditors had filed notices of intent to redeem the property. Olson immediately telephoned the banks' common director and informed him that if no other creditor filed a notice by the end of the day, the banks' rights in the property would be unimpaired even if the bank did not file. No notices were filed, by the banks or others, as of 5 p.m. on September 10.
Earlier on September 10, a junior mortgagee had attempted to assign its mortgage to Collateral Recovery Corporation (CRC). CRC was unable to file a notice of intent to redeem before 5 p.m. that day. However, later the same evening, CRC obtained an ex-parte order from a Hennepin County District Court judge, directing the county recorder to accept CRC's late notice and date-stamp the notice as having been received on September 10. On September 11, CRC filed its notice of intent to redeem, together with the judge's order. The county recorder ignored the order and recorded September 11 as the filing date.
CRC attempted to redeem the property on September 16, 1992. Because Olson was leaving town, the banks retained the law firm of Oppenheimer, Wolff & Donnelly to file an action seeking declaratory relief against *623 CRC's purported interest in the property and to obtain a temporary restraining order preventing the sheriff from carrying out CRC's redemption. Before the trial court heard cross-motions for summary judgment, the parties reached a settlement, pursuant to which the banks paid CRC $83,000 for a release of any interest CRC had in the property. The banks eventually sold the property for an amount less than their total investment.
The banks filed this attorney malpractice action against Olson, alleging he was negligent by advising the banks it was not necessary for them to file notices of intent, and by failing to file such notices timely on their behalf. The banks claim damages, including the settlement amount in the CRC litigation, losses resulting from the delay in selling the property, and $25,000 in attorneys' fees paid to the Oppenheimer law firm.
In summary judgment proceedings, the trial court found Olson's alleged negligence did not damage the banks' position and was not a "but for" cause of the banks' settlement damages and granted summary judgment for Olson.
ISSUE
Did the trial court err in granting Olson summary judgment against the banks' attorney malpractice claim?
ANALYSIS
On appeal from a grant of summary judgment, this court determines whether the trial court erred in its application of the law and whether any genuine issues of material fact exist. State by Cooper v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2, 4 (Minn.1990); see Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.03 (setting forth trial court standard for summary judgment). To withstand summary judgment, the nonmoving party must present a genuine issue on each element essential to its case. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 2552, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). We do not defer to the trial court's analysis of purely legal issues. Frost-Benco Elec. Ass'n v. Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm'n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn. 1984).
To prevail on a legal malpractice claim, a plaintiff generally must show: (1) an attorney-client relationship existed; (2) the attorney acted negligently or in breach of contract; (3) such acts were the proximate cause of the plaintiff's damages; and (4) but for the attorney's conduct, the plaintiff would have been successful in the prosecution of his or her underlying claim. Togstad v. Vesely, Otto, Miller & Keefe, 291 N.W.2d 686, 692 (Minn.1980). However, when an attorney's negligence harms a plaintiff by some means other than destruction of or damage to a cause of action, the fourth Togstad element is inapplicable. Fiedler v. Adams, 466 N.W.2d 39, 42 (Minn.App.1991) (noting Togstad's "case-within-a-case" element essentially describes proximate cause for legal malpractice that damages claim), review denied (Minn. Apr. 29, 1991); see Gustafson v. Chestnut, 515 N.W.2d 114, 116 (Minn.App.1994) (recognizing Fiedler simply applied traditional rule of "but for" causation to different fact situation); see, e.g., Blue Water Corp. v. O'Toole, 336 N.W.2d 279, 282 (Minn.1983) (omitting analysis of "case-within-a-case" element). In such cases, the courts have omitted the fourth element of the test or refashioned it to describe a test of proximate cause suited to the specific facts of the case. See, e.g., Ross v. Briggs & Morgan, 540 N.W.2d 843, 847 (Minn.1995) (inquiring, in place of fourth element, whether plaintiff would have been successful in asserting claim of coverage against insurer if plaintiff's attorney had tendered defense of claim); Blue Water, 336 N.W.2d at 282 (rephrasing fourth inquiry to determine whether bank charter application would have been granted if attorney had timely filed); Fiedler, 466 N.W.2d at 42 (employing three-part test and examining whether attorney's negligent financial advice proximately caused plaintiffs' losses); TJD Dissolution v. Savoie Supply, 460 N.W.2d 59, 62 (Minn. App.1990) (analyzing three elements of legal malpractice claim where attorney's alleged negligence affected no underlying action); Veit v. Anderson, 428 N.W.2d 429, 431-32 (Minn.App.1988) (same). Both proximate cause and the amount of damage sustained are fact issues for the jury. Wartnick v. Moss & Barnett, 490 N.W.2d 108, 115 (Minn. 1992) (proximate cause); Admiral Merchants *624 Motor Freight v. O'Connor & Hannan, 494 N.W.2d 261, 267 (Minn.1992) (damages).
The banks do not claim Olson's failure to file notices of intent to redeem damaged an existing cause of action. Rather, they allege Olson's conduct directly caused them to lose their priority right to redeem the property, forcing them into litigation that would not have been necessary had Olson timely filed. Thus, to withstand summary judgment, the banks must offer evidence that Olson was negligent in failing to file or advise the banks to file, and that the negligence proximately caused the banks' settlement damages, attorney's fees, and losses arising from the delay in selling the property. The banks need not demonstrate as an element of their prima facie case that, but for Olson's conduct, they would have prevailed in the CRC litigation. Because Olson's negligence is not at issue on appeal, this case requires us to decide only whether the banks presented a genuine issue of the proximate cause element.
The sheriff's certificate and mortgage liens held by the bank were superior to the junior lien purchased by CRC. The banks argue that even if CRC's notice was valid, Olson's filing of a notice of intent on behalf of the banks would have allowed them to redeem the property themselves, taking it free and clear of any interest by CRC. The banks presented evidence to the trial court that, assuming this scenario, they would not have paid CRC $83,000 for a release of its interest, and their loss on the sale of the property would have been far less substantial than that actually suffered. Additionally, the banks argue they would not have incurred some or all of their extensive attorneys' fees in the CRC litigation but for Olson's failure to file a notice of intent to redeem. This evidence creates a genuine issue for trial on the element of proximate cause of the banks' damages. The extent of the loss, if any, directly resulting from Olson's alleged negligence, is a fact question for the jury.
The trial court granted summary judgment for Olson, finding that because the banks would have won the CRC litigation at trial, they need not have settled the dispute, and, therefore, the failure to file a notice of intent did not cause the banks' settlement damages. See Williams v. Preman, 911 S.W.2d 288, 296-98 (Mo.Ct.App.1995) (refusing to award damages to malpractice plaintiff for settlement paid in underlying claim, holding that, absent proof plaintiff would have lost claim, voluntary settlement created speculation as to extent of damages caused). However, Minnesota law does not recognize as an additional element of a legal malpractice cause of action a requirement that the plaintiff prove that settlement in an underlying dispute was necessary because he or she would have lost at trial. See, e.g., Ross, 540 N.W.2d at 845-47 (addressing malpractice claim where underlying dispute was settled and not distinguishing between settlement figure and other damages in proximate cause analysis).
Under the rule espoused by the trial court, a legal malpractice plaintiff who was certain to lose an underlying dispute because of an attorney's negligence would be secure in concluding a settlement and thereby mitigating damages. However, the typical plaintiff, for whom the outcome of trial is uncertain, would face two poor choices; the plaintiff could either settle the underlying dispute and risk not recovering the settlement, or take the dispute to trial and risk a more substantial loss on a jury verdict. The malpractice plaintiff's safest route would be to go to trial, hoping to pass the damage award on to the negligent attorney in case of an adverse verdict. Thus, the rule would discourage settlement, contravening this state's public policy favoring the settlement of disputes short of litigation. See Johnson v. St. Paul Ins., 305 N.W.2d 571, 573 (Minn.1981) (declaring public policy favoring settlement). Any motivation plaintiffs may have to settle underlying claims for an excessive figure is sufficiently tempered by the possibility they may not recover the settlement in a subsequent action for attorney malpractice. See Williams, 911 S.W.2d at 297 (fearing plaintiff may be tempted to settle underlying claim at any figure, believing responsibility for damage will be passed on to negligent attorney).
Moreover, the trial court's standard is not an accurate test of proximate cause. Under the proper test of causation, a jury could determine whether the banks' settlement damages were the natural and proximate result *625 of Olson's conduct, even if the banks' legal position in the CRC litigation was strong. See Schmanski v. Church of St. Casimir, 243 Minn. 289, 293, 67 N.W.2d 644, 647 (1954) (quoting Christianson v. Chicago, St. P., M. & O. Ry., 67 Minn. 94, 97, 69 N.W. 640, 641 (1896)) (stating negligent act is proximate cause of consequences that follow in unbroken sequence therefrom). Further, the banks would have incurred attorneys' fees in the CRC litigation and some loss due to the litigation-related delay in the sale of the property irrespective of whether the banks would ultimately have prevailed in the litigation. Therefore, we will not condition the banks' recovery of damages on proof they would have lost the CRC litigation in trial as a result of Olson's alleged negligence.
DECISION
The banks need only satisfy the traditional test of proximate cause to recover their damages for the settlement of the CRC litigation and other losses; they need not prove they would have lost the litigation, had it gone to trial. Given the disputed fact issues regarding the existence and extent of damages arising from Olson's alleged negligence, the trial court erred in granting summary judgment. We reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 2226431 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:08.891469+00 ===

329 Mass. 532 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 447
ASSESSORS OF WORCESTER
vs.
KNIGHTS OF COLUMBUS RELIGIOUS EDUCATIONAL CHARITABLE AND BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION OF WORCESTER.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
September 22, 1952.
December 3, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., RONAN, WILKINS, SPALDING, & WILLIAMS, JJ.
Henry P. Grady, Assistant City Solicitor, (Archibald M. Hillman, City Solicitor, with him,) for the assessors of Worcester.
Walter J. Griffin, (John M. Shea with him,) for the taxpayer.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is an appeal by the assessors of the city of Worcester from a decision of the Appellate Tax Board granting a partial abatement in the amount of $512.50 of a tax of $5,125 assessed on the real estate of the taxpayer in Worcester for the year 1949. The findings of fact by the board so far as material to the issues raised by the appeal are as follows. The taxpayer was incorporated in 1914 for the purposes "of teaching and fostering the Religion of Christ as may be had in devotional work, in special courses of instruction in divine things, and in encouragement and leadership in all that tends to make its members find motive for conduct in the thought of God; the promotion of its libraries, classes in the study of the humanities, the training of the mind and hand in science, mechanics, art and expression." The real estate in question consists of a four story building on Elm Street in Worcester. There are two stores on the first floor which, with the portion of the basement beneath them, are leased to others for commercial purposes. The rest of the basement is equipped as a gymnasium for the use of which members and nonmembers of the taxpayer are charged, but which may be used by school children without charge. On the first floor are a lounge, recreation room, billiard room, candy counter, reading room, and library. *534 There are also a "directors'" room and the office of the Grand Knight of Alhambra Council, Knights of Columbus, a voluntary association whose members are "ipso facto" members of the taxpayer corporation. On the second and third floors are located three large halls and a so called studio room. The fourth floor is an attic. Two of the halls are to a large extent rented to different outside organizations. The third hall, called Columbus Hall, is used "almost exclusively" by a boy scout troop without charge under the supervision of the officers of the Knights of Columbus. A schedule of the respective areas of the rooms in the building is included in the findings. "Ten per cent of the real estate in question is appropriated for the charitable purposes for which the ... [taxpayer] was incorporated."
By G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 59, § 5, Third, the real estate of literary, benevolent, charitable, and scientific institutions "owned and occupied by them or their officers for the purposes for which they are incorporated" is exempt from local taxation, except in cases where "any of the income or profits of the business of the institution or corporation is divided among the stockholders or members, or is used or appropriated for other than literary, educational, benevolent, charitable, scientific or religious purposes." No contention is made that the case comes within these exceptions.
The decision of the board is final as to its findings of fact, G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 58A, § 13, as appearing in St. 1933, c. 321, § 7, as amended, Commissioner of Corporations & Taxation v. Boston Edison Co. 310 Mass. 674, 676, Fisher School v. Assessors of Boston, 325 Mass. 529, 533; and the appeal reaches only questions of law raised before the board and set out separately and particularly in the claim of appeal. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 58A, § 13. Assessors of Lawrence v. Arlington Mills, 320 Mass. 272, 273.
The alleged errors assigned in the claim of appeal are as follows. "1. That the Appellate Tax Board is in error in its conclusion upon the facts as found that ten (10) per cent of the appellant's real estate was appropriated for the charitable purposes of the appellant. 2. The Appellate Tax *535 Board erred in failing to hold that the real estate of the Knights of Columbus Religious Educational Charitable and Benevolent Association of Worcester in its dominant use was for the purpose other than that for which it was incorporated. 3. That the Appellate Tax Board erred in failing to hold that the real estate of the Knights of Columbus Religious Educational Charitable and Benevolent Association of Worcester was owned, occupied and used by it for purposes other than that for which it was incorporated."
The only question of law raised by the first assignment is whether the board was warranted in concluding from the subsidiary facts which it had found that ten per cent of the building was appropriated for charitable purposes. As it could have found that the library, reading room, and Columbus Hall were so used, and that the floor space of these three rooms was more than ten per cent of the entire floor space of the building, there was no error in the conclusion of the board. The question which has been argued as to the authority of the board to grant a partial exemption is not presented by the assignment.
In the second and third assignments the errors set forth relate to the failure of the board to "hold" that the dominant use and occupancy of the building were for purposes other than that for which the taxpayer was incorporated. The nature of such use and occupancy was a fact to be found by the board and, as said in Assessors of Lawrence v. Arlington Mills, 320 Mass. 272, 274, its "failure to find a particular fact ... can hardly constitute an error of law." The board, however, has found that "ten per cent of the real estate in question is appropriated for the charitable purposes for which the ... [taxpayer] was incorporated." and we think this imports a conclusion that the remaining ninety per cent of the real estate is not so appropriated.
Abatement granted in the amount of $512.50.

=== CASE 2226432 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:08.900451+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 102 (1996)
Donald D. CONKLIN, Employee, by Charlene JOHNSON-CONKLIN, Spouse, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
MacMILLAN OIL COMPANY, Employer, U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., Insurance Carrier, Respondents-Appellees.
No. 95-1712.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
October 25, 1996.
*103 David S. Wiggins of Wiggins, Anderson & Conger, P.C., West Des Moines, for petitioner-appellant.
Stephanie L. Glenn of Grefe & Sidney, P.L.C., Des Moines, for respondents-appellees.
Heard by SACKETT, C.J., and HABHAB and VOGEL, JJ.
SACKETT, Chief Judge.
Petitioner-appellant Charlene Johnson-Conklin claimed to be the common-law wife *104 of Donald Conklin, who was killed while in the employ of respondent-appellee MacMillan Oil Company. Her petition seeking spousal death benefits was denied by the industrial commissioner, who found she failed to prove she was a common-law wife. On appeal, the district court affirmed the commissioner. This appeal follows. Charlene claims the industrial commissioner erred in failing to recognize a presumption of a common-law marriage on which she claims she can rely. We disagree and affirm the district court and the commissioner.
Donald Conklin and Charlene Johnson were married in 1974. They have three children. Their marriage was dissolved in 1985. At that time Charlene began using her maiden name of Johnson. She did not use the name "Johnson-Conklin" until Donald's death in March 1992.
In 1987, Charlene and Donald moved with their children to a rented home in Des Moines, Iowa. Except for three months in late 1989 and early 1990, they lived there together until Donald's death. They shared the same bedroom. They engaged in sexual relations. They shared household chores and the responsibility of raising their children. They were not remarried in a legal ceremony. There was evidence at times they indicated they were husband and wife. There also was evidence Donald made it clear to his co-employees, although he lived with Charlene and they had been married at one time, they no longer were married. Donald showed on an enrollment form for medical benefits Charlene was his spouse, but he showed his marital status as divorced.
After the dissolution, Charlene filed her income tax returns as a single person or as head of the household. When she leased the home where they lived at the time of Donald's death, she showed on the lease Donald was her former husband. In 1988, Charlene listed Donald the same way when she named him as one of the beneficiaries on her life insurance. In 1990, she applied for public assistance and showed Donald as absent from her children and listed herself as divorced.
Appellee-insurer United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company is paying workers' compensation death benefits to Donald's dependent children. Charlene filed a claim as a surviving spouse for death benefits with the industrial commissioner. She claimed a common-law marriage to Donald from 1987 to his death. A deputy commissioner entered an arbitration decision finding Charlene the common-law wife of Donald and due death benefits.
On the appeal by MacMillan Oil Company and United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company, the industrial commissioner filed a decision finding Charlene had not established she was Donald's common-law wife when he died. The commissioner found, although Charlene proved a continuous cohabitation, she failed to show declaration of the marriage and the present intent for such a marriage.
Charlene filed a petition for judicial review claiming the commissioner's ruling was not supported by substantial evidence and was affected by an error of law. The district court entered a decision affirming the commissioner's decision. The court determined there was substantial evidence supporting the commissioner's determination. This appeal follows.
Charlene raises one issue on appeal. She contends the commissioner misapplied the law in failing to hold a common-law marriage was presumed and she could rely upon that marriage. MacMillan Oil claims Charlene did not assert in proceedings before the commissioner her claim she was entitled to a presumption of a common-law marriage. MacMillan Oil claims this issue was not preserved for review. It further argues Charlene is not entitled to a presumption of a common-law marriage and the commissioner correctly found she had failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence she and Donald were married by common law.
We address Charlene's contention there is a presumption of common-law marriage under Iowa law and the commissioner did not properly consider it in weighing the evidence presented.
Iowa recognizes the validity of common-law marriages. In re Estate of Fisher, *105 176 N.W.2d 801, 805 (Iowa 1970). When one party is deceased, the party asserting the marriage must prove the elements of a common law marriage by a preponderance of clear, consistent, and convincing evidence. Id.; see also State v. Ware, 338 N.W.2d 707, 711 (Iowa 1983).
The three elements necessary to find a common-law marriage are: (1) present intent and agreement to be married; (2) continuous cohabitation; and (3) public declaration that the parties are husband and wife. In re Marriage of Winegard, 278 N.W.2d 505, 510 (Iowa 1979). The burden of proof is with the party asserting the existence of a common-law marriage. Id. A claim of common-law marriage is regarded with suspicion and is closely scrutinized. In re Marriage of Grother, 242 N.W.2d 1, 1 (Iowa 1976). No public policy favoring common-law marriages exists in Iowa. In re Marriage of Reed, 226 N.W.2d 795, 796 (Iowa 1975); Fisher, 176 N.W.2d at 804.
Proof of cohabitation, as well as evidence of conduct and general repute in the community where the parties reside, tends to strengthen the showing of present agreement to be husband and wife, as well as bearing upon the question of intent. Gammelgaard v. Gammelgaard, 247 Iowa 979, 980, 77 N.W.2d 479, 480 (1956); In re Marriage of Gebhardt, 426 N.W.2d 651, 652 (Iowa App. 1988). Circumstantial evidence may be relied upon to demonstrate a common-law marriage. Fisher, 176 N.W.2d at 806; State v. Lawson, 165 N.W.2d 838, 839 (Iowa 1969); In re Estate of Malli, 260 Iowa 252, 256, 149 N.W.2d 155, 158 (1967). A continuous cohabitation of the parties and the declaration or holding out to the public they were, in fact, husband and wife constitutes circumstantial evidence which tends to create a fair presumption that a common-law marital relationship existed. In re Marriage of Winegard, 257 N.W.2d 609, 617 (Iowa 1977).
A person may be entitled to marital rights if his or her intention is to be married, even though the other person's intention is not the same, provided they cohabit and provided the conduct of one person justifies the other to believe he or she intended to be married. Winegard, 257 N.W.2d at 616 (citing McFarland v. McFarland, 51 Iowa 565, 570, 2 N.W. 269, 273-74 (1879)). Contrary to Charlene's assertion, these holdings do not establish a presumption in favor of common-law marriage.
Charlene showed a nearly continuous cohabitation. This evidence was not disputed. Clearly cohabitation does not of itself constitute marriage. McFarland v. McFarland, 51 Iowa 565, 570, 2 N.W. 269, 273-74 (1879).[1] An element essential to the proof of such relationship is a general and substantial "holding-out" or open declaration to the public by both parties. In re Estate of Dallman, 228 N.W.2d 187, 190 (Iowa 1975). In fact, such "holding-out" or open declaration to the public has been said to be the acid test. Id. "In other words, there can be no secret common-law marriage." Id.
The commissioner found Charlene did not intend to be married by common law and the commissioner found Charlene failed to prove there was a public declaration of the marriage. There is substantial evidence in the record to support both conclusions. The commissioner and the district court must be affirmed. See Manpower Temporary Servs. v. Sioson, 529 N.W.2d 259, 262 (Iowa 1995).
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  This is no less true by current standards.

=== CASE 2226449 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:09.385809+00 ===

348 Ill. App. 225 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 244
Claude U. Stone, Trustee and Executor Under Will of Fannie G. Baldwin, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Sidney Baldwin et al., Defendants. Helen Baldwin Smith, Margaret Baldwin Holley et al., Petitioners-Objectors-Appellants,
v.
George Z. Barnes, Peoria Newspapers, Inc., and Peoria Star Company, and Claude Stone, Defendants.
Gen. No. 10,576.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed May 20, 1952.
Rehearing denied June 6, 1952.
Second petition for rehearing filed June 14, 1952.
Denied December 10, 1952.
Released for publication December 10, 1952.
*226 *227 *228 CASSIDY & SLOAN, of Peoria, for appellants.
REN THURMAN, and BLACK, BLACK & BORDEN, all of Peoria, for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE ANDERSON delivered the opinion of the court.
Claude U. Stone, appellee, executor and trustee under the will of Fannie G. Baldwin, deceased, filed his resignation and first and final report as trustee in the circuit court of Peoria county where the trust was pending. Helen Baldwin Smith and Margaret Baldwin Holley, appellants, made objections to the reports. After a lengthy hearing (the abstract of the record of the proceedings consisted of 441 pages), on July 31, 1951, the chancellor overruled all objections to the report. The court decreed that the fair value of Stone's services as a trustee from January 1, 1939 to January *229 1, 1944 should be $10,000 a year, but that he should be surcharged for the amount of compensation that he received as executor, for the money he received as president of the Star, and for the amount indicated in his report that he had advanced to himself as part payment on his fees, leaving a balance due him for fees of $10,923.75. Appellants have appealed from this decree.
The trust involved was created by the last will and testament of Fannie G. Baldwin. She died in 1938 at the age of 95. Shortly thereafter her will was admitted to probate in the probate court of Peoria county and Claude U. Stone, designated in her will as executor and trustee, was appointed executor in December 1938, and continued to act as executor until his discharge by the probate court in January 1946. His first and final account as executor was approved by the probate court who fixed his fee at $7,126.25. The probate court order directed that all assets in his hands be turned over to himself as trustee. At the time of his discharge the estate was $77,000 in debt and the probate court had entered an order authorizing the executor to pledge the Peoria Star stock with the bank to secure the above mentioned debt. The major part of the decedent's estate consisted of 798 shares of stock in the Peoria Star Company. The total shares in this company were 940. The value of this stock at the death of the decedent was approximately $600,000.
The Peoria Star for many years had published an afternoon newspaper in the City of Peoria. Fannie G. Baldwin had been active in publishing this paper and was for many years president of the corporation. For some years prior to her death, Claude U. Stone was her attorney and had charge, in a large measure, of her financial affairs. He was vice-president of the Star and as such officer had large control over its policies and of its business affairs.
*230 The will and codicil of Fannie G. Baldwin devised in trust practically all her property to Claude U. Stone as trustee and gave him broad powers as follows: It provided that he should manage and control the trust estate so as to produce the greatest amount of net income consistent with the reasonable security and safety of the trust estate; it gave him power to vote all shares of corporate stock and to convey or mortgage the property of the trust for the best interests of the estate; it provided that he might nominate his successor in trust. The will further provided:
"My object and purpose in continuing this trust for the period indicated is for the reason I most ardently desire the newspaper known as the Peoria Star, which constitutes the greater part of the property that will come to this trust estate, to be and remain strictly a Peoria institution, controlled at all times by Peorians for as long a period as it is possible for me to fix under the Will, provided, however, it is not my intention or purpose by the foregoing statement to limit the power of my said trustees to sell my stock in the Peoria Star Company at any time or to whomsoever they deem proper if my trustees in their judgment think it advisable and beneficial to said trust estate to do so."
The creator of the trust further provided that the trust was to continue for twenty years after the death of the last surviving granddaughter: that sixty per cent of the net income was to go to Sidney Baldwin, her unmarried daughter; and forty per cent to go equally to her granddaughters, Helen Smith and Margaret Holley. At the termination of the twenty-year period, the corpus of the trust was to go to the granddaughters if living, otherwise to their descendants. The will further provided that the trustee was to give bond to be approved by the circuit court and to file annual reports with the court.
*231 From the death of the testatrix until 1945 the estate was involved in a great deal of litigation. Stone, the executor and trustee, successfully defended this litigation, which cost the estate large sums of money, largely for attorneys' fees. Some of the litigation went to the Appellate and Supreme Courts. George Z. Barnes, now deceased, was attorney for Stone through all this litigation. This litigation was finally terminated and various settlements concerning the same are incorporated in the decree of the circuit court entered in September 1945, as hereafter mentioned.
After the death of Mrs. Baldwin, at the annual stockholders' meeting of the Peoria Star, Stone voted the stock of the Star to elect himself and Barnes as Directors. The Directors later elected Stone president and publisher and Barnes vice-president. This was in 1939. That year Stone received no salary as president of the Star, but from 1940 to 1943, the Board of Directors voted him a salary of $5,000 per year. The aggregate salary received by him from 1940 to 1943 was $20,500. He continued as president of the Star until 1950, but claimed no salary for the period from 1944 to 1950.
The fees claimed by Stone as trustee cover a period from January 1, 1939, to January 1, 1944. Stone was trustee until June 17, 1949, but makes no claim for trustee's fees from 1944 to 1949. During this latter period he was receiving a large salary and commissions as Chairman of the Board of Directors of Peoria Newspapers, Inc. From 1939 to 1943 the Baldwin estate and the Peoria Star went through a period of great financial distress. This was partly owing to the facts that the newspaper was losing money and that the estate had paid out or was obligated to pay large sums of money in defense of the litigation above mentioned. The Board of the Star held various meetings *232 with their creditors and discussed whether or not the Star should be sold to pay its debts. It appears from the evidence through this period that Stone was doing everything in his power to carry on the newspaper for the benefit of the trust.
In 1943 the Peoria Journal was likewise being published in Peoria. A plan was devised between the Boards of Directors of the two newspapers to merge. Much thought, investigation, and many conferences were held over this plan in all of which Stone, the trustee, took a principal part, and the merger was accomplished. Stone, as president of the Peoria Star, agreed to the merger, and it was subsequently unanimously approved by the Directors of the Star and its stockholders. The merger agreement provided that the Peoria Star Corporation and the Journal Corporation were to remain as corporate entities. The Peoria Star was to operate a morning paper and the Journal an evening paper, and the policies of the papers were still to be controlled by the Star and Journal companies. The assets were to be pooled, and the Peoria Newspapers, Inc. was to receive the profits and disburse them to the stockholders of the two other corporations, one-third to the Star and two-thirds to the Journal. The by-laws of Peoria Newspapers, Inc. provided: that the initial Board of Directors should consist of five persons, three to be elected by the stock held by the Journal and two by the Star stock; that the Board of Directors should consist of a president, two vice-presidents, and a chairman, among others; that the Journal Board of Directors should have exclusive power to elect the president, the vice-presidents, the secretary, and to fill vacancies in those offices; that the Peoria Star Directors should have exclusive power to elect the chairman of the board, the vice-chairman, the treasurer, the assistant treasurer, and to fill vacancies of said offices. Under these by-laws, *233 by virtue of his voting the stock of the Star, Claude U. Stone was elected chairman of the Board and continued to act in that capacity from the date of the merger to April 15, 1950. From about July 17, 1949 to April 15, 1950, Stone acted as chairman of the Board and drew compensation therefor. During this time he was no longer acting as trustee. George Z. Barnes was vice-president of the Peoria Star and later a paid officer of the merged corporation. Under the merger agreement (which was approved by the circuit court on petition of the trustee), the chairman of the Board was to receive a salary of $12,500 per year and three and one-third per cent of the amount accumulated for distribution as provided by the merger agreement. Stone, as chairman of the Board, from 1944 to 1950, received as salary and bonus payments $194,107.15. During that period the trust received from the operation of the newspaper $273,055.97. It is apparent that after the merger the Star came into a period of unprecedented prosperity, which has continued to this date.
The circuit court had approved the merger plan and directed the trustee to proceed to carry out the order as entered December 31, 1943. In September 1945, Stone, the trustee, asked the circuit court to take jurisdiction of the trust, and for other relief. Proper notice having been given to all parties interested, the court took jurisdiction of the trust, and in its decree dated September 19, 1945, the trustee was authorized to borrow money and pledge the stock. The settlement of the litigation above mentioned was approved. Attorneys for the appellants appeared at this hearing and approved the decree.
In April 1946, Stone closed his account as executor and entered a new account in the same bank as trustee. Stone as trustee never gave bond at any time, nor did he file annual reports, both being required under the *234 will. The beneficiaries under the trust had at no time theretofore questioned the right of Stone to act as trustee nor had they ever asked the court to require him to give bond or file annual reports.
In March 1949, Stone became ill, resigned as trustee, and filed his first and final report, the one here in question. The report shows receipts and disbursements from the creation of the trust to July 17, 1949. We cannot recite all the items of this report as it would unduly lengthen this opinion.
[1] Claude U. Stone was still ill at the time of the hearing on the report, and on the testimony of two doctors, who stated that his appearance at the hearing would endanger his health, the chancellor did not require him to appear and testify. His deposition was not taken. George Barnes and E.V. Champion, attorneys for Stone, and Clarence J. Zehr, assistant secretary-treasurer of the Peoria Star, all testified fully as to what Stone had done from the commencement of the trust until his resignation. The auditors also testified. There was very little dispute as to any of this testimony nor as to what the trustee had done as trustee and as executor. It is unfortunate that Stone could not testify. The chancellor did not abuse his discretion in that regard  not requiring him to appear and testify.
Appellants' position is disclosed by their objections to the report. They urge: (1) That the fact that the trustee did not file a bond or make annual reports prevented him from recovering any fees; that these provisions are conditions precedent, and his failure to comply with them forfeits his compensation; (2) that the evidence in the record concerning the report discloses that during the pendency of the trust, Stone had advanced himself illegally for fees as trustee the sum of $11,450, and by so doing he forfeits all compensation; (3) that the report of the trustee as disclosed by *235 his improperly kept books and accounts is so incomplete, erroneous, indefinite, and uncertain that it precludes recovery for fees; (4) that the trustee should not be permitted to receive any fee as trustee while he was acting as executor; (5) that the record discloses that the trustee, from the date of the probate of the will to the date of his resignation, was engaged in self-dealing for his own profit; that he was not performing his duties as a trustee with fidelity and all claims for compensation should be denied him; and that he should be surcharged with the amount he received as an officer and Director of the Peoria Star and as chairman of the Board of the Peoria Newspapers, Inc.
[2] Appellants, to sustain their position that Stone never was trustee because of his failure to file a bond, cite Bogert on Trusts, Vol. I-A, sec. 151, which states that there is considerable authority that a trustee is not a trustee until he files his bond. Appellee cites the paragraph following the above citation in the same textbook which states in substance that there are other decisions holding that he is in fact trustee although he filed no bond and that this condition is not a condition precedent to his being trustee. The textwriter further states that the latter view is a more sensible construction, and we agree with this. (See also Daley v. Daley, 300 Mass. 17, 14 N.E. (2d) 113; Trustees of the Little Redstone Presbyterian Church v. Stephens, 26 West. Co. L.J. 73. Stone was made trustee by the will and became trustee upon its admission to probate. On petition by appellants he would have been required to give bond or be removed. This was not done. In fact the appellants' counsel knew he was and had been acting as trustee and approved the decree whereby the circuit court took jurisdiction of the trust. He was a de jure trustee. Appellants cite Huston v. Weed, 242 Ill. App. 495. While this opinion does state that the filing of a bond is a condition precedent, an examination *236 discloses that what was said on this point was dictum as the case was reversed because of lack of jurisdiction as to the beneficiaries of the trust. It follows from our view of the law on this subject as above announced that the failure of the trustee to file bond or make annual reports does not deprive him of his fees. The important thing is, is the present report correct? (Wylie v. Bushnell, 277 Ill. 484.) Appellants' objections as to lack of a bond and reports are without merit.
[3] Appellants' objection that the fact that the trustee had advanced himself a portion of his compensation without order of the court would deprive him of fees, we also believe to be without merit. He had been surcharged with this amount and it would be indeed a harsh rule to hold that his collecting in advance a portion of his compensation that was justly due him, would deprive him of any compensation. This point was urged in the Wylie case above mentioned, and the court there held that this should not deprive the trustee of his compensation.
[4, 5] Appellants' third objection is that the report of the trustee does not disclose an accurate account of his trusteeship and for lack of this all compensation should be denied him. There is no question but that the law requires the trustee to keep accurate accounts and that in the absence of such he will be denied his fees. (Wylie v. Bushnell, 277 Ill. 484.) Where there has been a negligent failure to keep trust accounts all presumptions will be against the trustee. (In re Claim of Crimp v. First Union Trust & Savings Bank, 352 Ill. 93; Conant v. Lansden, 409 Ill. 149; Conant v. Lansden, 341 Ill. App. 488.) In the Wylie case the court found that the trustee's report was not kept by the best bookkeeping standards but that if the report was honest and true and there was no evidence to the contrary it would be considered to be prima facie *237 correct. The court held that the material, form, or construction of the account was not important so long as it fairly showed the true statement of the account and for these reasons held it was not proper to remove the trustee. In the Conant case in the Appellate Court, it says on page 500 of the opinion:
"(9) In our opinion the true rule is this: where the trustee keeps and presents a complete account of his acts, a party objecting to any item has the burden of going forward with evidence to substantiate the objection. If competent evidence is produced which establishes the inaccuracy or illegality of any items, or renders them doubtful and obscure, then the burden of proof is upon the trustee to establish their validity, and it becomes a question of fact whether he has sustained his claim by a preponderance of the evidence."
[6] The evidence disclosed by the record in the instant case shows that Stone as trustee submitted to the court a true and just account of his actions during his trusteeship. Two auditors for the appellee carefully checked over all details of receipts and disbursements and explained in detail the condition of the account. The auditors for the appellants also examined all records with reference to the account and we cannot find that they made any very serious objection to the accuracy of the substance of the accounts, although it was criticised as to form. We also do not commend the form of the report. The chancellor heard all this evidence and concluded that the account submitted was true and correct. No evidence was offered by appellants to contradict this. In view of the state of the record, as to this question, under the law, we believe the account was prima facie correct, and as no evidence was offered to controvert this, it was properly accepted as true and correct by the chancellor.
[7] Appellants urge that from the period 1939 to 1944 the trustee was acting as executor and performed *238 no duties as trustee; hence he was not entitled to any compensation. As above noted Stone did not testify what services he performed. What these services were was largely ascertained from the testimony of E.V. Champion, George Z. Barnes, Clarence Zehr, and of the auditors. From their testimony it appears that after the will was admitted to probate, Stone then in fact was the trustee and as both trustee and executor, he proceeded to have himself elected president of the Peoria Star. This position was not new to him as he had in fact been operating the Star for a number of years. The Star was in a bad financial condition but it was imperative that Stone continue to operate it for the best interests of the trust. In view of this financial condition the trustee might have been considered derelict in his duties had he not taken over its management. The testimony discloses without contradiction that during the five-year period ending in 1943, Stone devoted about two-thirds of his time to the affairs of the Star and to the trust. It is true that the duties of an executor and trustee are in general separate and distinct. (In re Estate of Mortenson, 248 Ill. 520.) The offices, however, are not inconsistent and the person acting as trustee and executor may often be performing duties of both offices at the same time, and that is what happened here. (Mannhardt v. Illinois Staats Zeitung Co., 90 Ill. App. 315.)
[8] In Sueske v. Schofield, 376 Ill. 431, the facts are somewhat parallel to the facts in the instant case. The question arose in that case whether the executor and testamentary trustee should account for a salary of $10,000 per year paid to him by a copper company. The stock in this company was a large part of the assets of the trust estate. Under the will the trustee was empowered to manage the copper company business according to his best discretion and to discontinue it, if he thought it best. The court found that the trustee *239 had conducted the business capably and paid a large amount of dividends to the stockholders; the business had increased greatly from year to year; Schofield, the trustee, had obtained the usual fees for those services from the assets of the trust. The court says: "It is evident from the will, that the testator contemplated Frank Schofield would be in complete charge of the company just as the testator had been in his lifetime." The court held that they saw no reason for ordering a trustee to account for any money he received as salary. In the instant case the trustee was surcharged with his salary for the five-year period. We see nothing wrong in his accepting the position as president of the Star, especially when he was surcharged.
[9] In the case of In re Peabody's Estate, 218 Wis. 541, 260 N.W. 444, it was held that the trustees of a testamentary trust which places upon them the duty of conducting a business of a mercantile corporation owned largely by the estate, required them to act as officers of the corporation. By so acting, they were accountable as trustees. This case appears in 99 A.L.R. 956, to which is appended a note entitled, "Compensation of Testamentary Trustee for conducting business or taking active part in management of corporation." The cases on this subject are reviewed and in general indicate that where the trustee is engaged in carrying on an incorporated business for the trust, according to the terms of the will, the trustee's compensation will be limited to the amounts he receives as trustee, and extra compensation for his corporate functions is denied. There are contrary cases but these are based on the particular facts existing in those cases. In re Berri, New York, 130 Misc. 527, 224 N.Y. Supp. 466, the decedent owned practically all the stock of a publishing company which was the chief asset of the trust created by his will. One of the trustees was elected president and treasurer of the corporation *240 and received a salary by virtue of such offices. As trustee, prior to the death of the testator, he had been acting as advertising agent for the corporation. He continued to so act after the death of the testator. The court held that receipt of the salary was proper, that while there was no direction in the will to continue the business, the trustees were given permission to hold the stock as an investment, and that the testator must have contemplated that the trustee would be employed as an officer of the corporation to safeguard the value of the stock.
In Turner v. Ryan, 223 Iowa 191, 272 N.W. 60, it was held that a trustee who acted diligently and in good faith should not be deprived of his compensation because of improper items of expenditure where his account had been surcharged with such items. Appended to this case, reported in 110 A.L.R. 554, is a note entitled: "Compensation of trustee as affected by neglect or violation of his duties." Many of the cases reviewed in this note turn on the question of the nature of the neglect or violation by the trustee. It is stated on page 566 of this note:
"It is said in American Law Institute, Restatement of the Law of Trusts, par. 243d: `If the trustee repudiates the trust or misappropriates the trust property, or if he intentionally or negligently mismanages the whole trust, he will ordinarily be allowed no compensation.'"
Cases illustrative of this rule denying compensation are Lehman v. Rothbarth, 159 Ill. 270; Sauvage v. Gallaway, 335 Ill. App. 35; Victor v. Hillebrecht, 339 Ill. App. 254. On the other hand by other cases reviewed in the note, if it appears that the trustee acted diligently and in good faith, that his dereliction was an error of judgment and there was no serious infraction of his duties, no loss to the trust, he will not be denied *241 his compensation. (See also the Conant cases above mentioned.)
O.P. Westervelt, attorney from Peoria, testified that he had large experience in the administration of testamentary trusts; that he had heard the testimony of Mr. Zehr and Mr. Barnes who testified as to what services Stone had performed and based on this testimony and his experience as to what are proper fees for the trustee, he formed an opinion as to the amount of the fees; that a reasonable fee for the services performed by Stone for the five-year period ending in 1943 was $10,000 per year. This opinion was also based on the fact that Stone had devoted two-thirds of his time to the business of the trust and executorship during that period. He further testified that the duties of the trust and the executorship were so intermingled and overlapped that he determined that the amount stated would be for all services rendered by Stone during this period; that Stone should be surcharged with the amount of his executor's fees and with his compensation received as president of the Star and also with the amount Stone had advanced himself for trustee's fees and that the net amount due Stone should be the same amount as fixed by the chancellor.
[10, 11] Sylvan Olson also testified on behalf of Stone and stated that he had been in charge of the Trust Department of the Commercial National Bank of Peoria since 1935; that he was acquainted with proper compensation for trustees. His testimony and his conclusions were largely the same as Westervelt's. No evidence was offered by appellants to controvert this testimony. Under the facts and circumstances surrounding this trust, the intermingling and overlapping of the duties as executor and trustee, we believe these witnesses' opinions as to the amount of the fees *242 and the manner in which they should be prorated and surcharged lawful and proper. We believe that the trustee should not be denied his compensation during the five-year period when he was also acting as executor. In view of the fact that the surcharges have been accepted by the trustee, he was in error as to some of them, under the law we do not believe his errors should deprive him of remuneration where the record discloses that at all times he was vigilantly and competently administering the affairs of the estate to the benefit of the beneficiaries. He carried the trust estate through a trying period without serious loss.
[12] For the above reasons we hold that the trustee should be permitted to receive compensation while he was acting as executor. Objection number four of appellants is not tenable. The amounts he received as executor were properly surcharged against him by the chancellor. Under the circumstances in this case the fact that Stone received a salary from the Peoria Star is not so unethical and improper as to prevent him receiving trustee's fees, especially when they are surcharged against him. While it is not decisive, it does bear comment here, that the record does not disclose at any time that the appellants made any objection to the actions of the trustee until his report was filed. It might be said that they are estopped by their actions.
[13-15] We now come to the fifth proposition urged by appellants. It is urged that Stone was guilty of self-dealing for his own profit, and therefore entitled to no compensation as trustee. As a general proposition, it is within the discretion of the chancellor whether the trustee who has committed a breach of trust shall receive full compensation, or whether his compensation shall be reduced or denied. The chancellor, in exercising his discretion, may consider whether or not the trustee acted in good faith, whether *243 the breach of trust was intentional, whether the breach of trust occasioned any loss, and whether or not the trustee's services were of value to the trust. (Restatement of the Law of Trusts, page 751.) The trial court found that the trustee was not guilty of any self-dealing, and when consideration is given to the evidence, we cannot reverse this finding by the trial court unless it be against the manifest weight of the evidence. Giving careful consideration to the record herein, we are of the opinion that the finding of the trial court that the trustee was not guilty of self-dealing is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
[16, 17] A more serious proposition is urged by appellants in the latter part of their objections. It is their position that because the trustee has been guilty of self-dealing, he should be surcharged with all moneys received by him in his capacity as chairman of the Board of Peoria Newspapers, Inc. The rule of law as announced by the weight of authority is that a testamentary trustee with express or implied authority to manage or participate in the management of a business or corporation if he deems it advisable while exercising good faith, sound judgment, and reasonable discretion, may manage the business or vote himself an officer of such corporation. If such position is obtained through his own act as trustee and he receives compensation therefor, he must account for same to the trust. His fiduciary duties come first for which he can rightfully be paid, but he cannot profit otherwise. (Conant v. Lansden, 341 Ill. App. 488; Merchants Loan & Trust Co. v. Northern Trust Co., 250 Ill. 86; In re Peabody's Estate, 218 Wis. 541, 260 N.W. 444, 99 A.L.R. 96.) Although as heretofore indicated, the trustee was not guilty of self-dealing, we cannot believe that under the facts of this case the compensation received by the trustee in his capacity as chairman of the Board can be considered on any different basis than the compensation *244 received by him as president of the Peoria Star. His activities as president of the Peoria Star, as trustee, as chairman of the Board of Peoria Newspapers, Inc., were all so closely interwoven as to constitute but one single transaction. While it is urged by appellee that his compensation as trustee is fixed by the merger agreement, no such specific order was entered by the trial court in approving the merger agreement. It is agreed by the parties that Claude U. Stone received, while chairman of the Board the total sum of $194,107.15. Of this amount two-thirds was paid by the Peoria Journal. The trustee cannot be surcharged for that part of his compensation. That portion of this amount received by Stone while acting as trustee must be surcharged to him as compensation advanced in the same manner that the moneys received by him as president of the Peoria Star, his executor's fees, and the moneys advanced to himself as trustee were surcharged against his compensation as trustee for the period from January 1, 1939 to January 1, 1944. Stone resigned as trustee on July 17, 1949, and his successor, Barnes, was appointed by Stone on that day under the terms of the will. Stone received compensation as chairman of the Board from the time of his resignation on July 17, 1949 to April 15, 1950. Inasmuch as his status as trustee was terminated at the time of his resignation, he should not be surcharged for moneys received in his capacity as chairman of the Board after the date of his resignation.
[18] There is no reason under the law to consider the acts, duties, and compensations of the trustee during the period that he acted in the capacity as trustee, from January 1, 1939 to the time of his resignation, on a piecemeal basis. His activities and account during the full period were before the chancellor, and were properly considered by him. Equally so, the compensation to which he was entitled, if any, was *245 also before the chancellor for the full period, and was considered by the chancellor in order to properly determine all of the issues.
We therefore affirm the decree of the chancellor that for the period from January 1, 1939 to January 1, 1944 there was due and owing from the trust estate to Claude U. Stone as trustee, the additional amount of $10,923.75 for fees for that period of time. The record shows that from January 1, 1944 to July 17, 1949, the trustee received approximately the sum of $165,404.80 from Peoria Newspapers, Inc. We hold that he should be surcharged as above indicated for one-third of the amount he received as compensation received by him as chairman of the Board of Peoria Newspapers, Inc., from January 1, 1944 to July 17, 1949, the date of his resignation.
[19] Insofar as the statement in the decree of the chancellor that repayment should be made to the Peoria Star of certain advances to Helen Baldwin Smith and Margaret Baldwin Holley, such statement does not constitute an order against these parties for such repayment, and is a matter between Helen Baldwin Smith, Margaret Baldwin Holley, and the Peoria Star, and is consequently not before this court.
The decree in this case approving the report of Claude U. Stone, trustee, is therefore reversed and this cause is remanded to the circuit court of Peoria county with directions to surcharge the trustee with one-third of the amount received by Stone from Peoria Newspapers, Inc., from January 1, 1944 to the date of his resignation, and to enter an order consistent with the views expressed in the opinion.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded with directions.
WOLFE and DOVE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741180 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:56.85538+00 ===

*536Per Curiam.
Ricky G. Hingst was convicted of driving under the influence of alcoholic liquor, second offense. The Nebraska Court of Appeals reversed the jury verdict and remanded the cause for a new trial, concluding that the district court committed plain error in failing to exclude the chemical test results because the postarrest advisement form failed to conform to this court’s decision in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995). We affirm.
BACKGROUND
On October 26, 1994, at approximately 3:30 a.m., Officer Matthew Roskens of the Pierce Police Department observed Hingst’s car cross both the center line and shoulder line of Highway 13 before coming to a stop. Upon approaching the vehicle, Roskens was informed by Hingst that his car accelerated unexpectedly due to a mechanical problem. At this point, Roskens smelled alcohol on Hingst’s breath and found a partial six-pack of beer in the vehicle, including two open bottles. Roskens radioed his dispatcher, requesting assistance.
Pierce County Deputy Sheriff Scott Blair arrived at the scene at approximately 4 a.m. Blair also smelled alcohol on Hingst’s breath and noted that his eyes were bloodshot. Blair then administered several field sobriety tests. Hingst failed twice to correctly recite the alphabet. In addition, when asked to count backward from 100 to 79, Hingst continued to count backward to 59. Hingst also failed a finger dexterity test in that he began the test before Blair instructed him to do so. At trial, Blair testified that Hingst’s speech appeared to be slurred while the field sobriety tests were being administered. Blair also testified that Hingst admitted to consuming 2‘A beers that evening.
Hingst was subsequently arrested for driving under the influence and transported to the Pierce County sheriff’s office, where he consented to a breath test after reading and signing the “Administrative License Revocation Advisement Post Arrest” form. The test indicated an alcohol concentration of .129 of a gram of alcohol per 210 liters of breath. Hingst was charged with driving under the influence, second offense.
*537At Hingst’s jury trial, Roskens and Blair testified that Hingst was, in their opinion, under the influence of alcohol on the evening in question. In addition to this testimony, the postarrest advisement form was admitted into evidence. The jury entered a verdict of guilty, and Hingst subsequently was sentenced to 30 days in jail and was ordered to pay a $500 fine; his license was revoked for 1 year. Hingst appealed to the Court of Appeals, contending that his criminal conviction, in lieu of the administrative revocation of his license, amounted to double jeopardy; that it was plain error for the district court not to have found that Hingst was not properly advised of the consequences of submitting to a breath test as required by Smith v. State, supra; and that the district court failed to find plain error in that the jury was selected 1 week before the trial began.
The Court of Appeals reversed the conviction, holding that it was plain error to admit the breath test results because the postarrest advisement form did not conform to the requirements set forth by this court in Smith v. State, supra. See State v. Hingst, 4 Neb. App. 768, 550 N.W.2d 686 (1996). We granted the State’s petition for further review.
ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR
In its petition for further review, the State contends that the Court of Appeals erred in finding plain error in the district court’s failure to find that the results of the chemical test should have been excluded.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Statutory interpretation is a matter of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the decision made by the court below. State v. Christner, post p. 549, 557 N.W.2d 707 (1997); State v. Emrich, post p. 540, 557 N.W.2d 674 (1997).
In a jury trial of a criminal case, an erroneous evidential ruling results in prejudice to a defendant unless the State demonstrates that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Lee, 247 Neb. 83, 525 N.W.2d 179 (1994); State v. Carter, 246 Neb. 953, 524 N.W.2d 763 (1994).
*538ANALYSIS
We begin our analysis noting that the postarrest advisement form read to Hingst prior to his submission to a chemical blood test is, in all respects, the same as those used in State v. Christner, supra, and in State v. Emrich, supra. In both those cases, we held that the form was inadequate because it failed to inform the driver of the “natural and direct legal consequences” of submitting to a chemical test as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,197 (Reissue 1993). State v. Christner, post at 554, 557 N.W.2d at 710; State v. Emrich, post at 546, 557 N.W.2d at 680. As such, we held in both cases that the district court erred in admitting chemical test results obtained after the driver was read the inadequate advisement form.
Obviously, the same holds true for Hingst. Because the postarrest advisement form read to him suffers from the same infirmities as those in Christner and in Emrich, we conclude that the Court of Appeals was correct in its determination that the district court erred in failing to exclude the results of Hingst’s chemical test results.
An important procedural distinction must be made, however, between the present case and Christner and Emrich. Unlike Christner and Emrich, Hingst’s case was tried before a jury. In a jury trial of a criminal case, an erroneous evidential ruling results in prejudice to a defendant unless the State demonstrates that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Lee, supra; State v. Carter, supra. An error is harmless when the improper admission of evidence did not materially influence the jury to reach a verdict adverse to the substantial rights of the defendant. State v. Carter, supra; State v. Hughes, 244 Neb. 810, 510 N.W.2d 33 (1993).
The record before us reveals that Hingst was charged with driving under the influence, in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,196 (Reissue 1993). We have repeatedly held that a violation of this statute can be proved in various ways. See State v. Dake, 247 Neb. 579, 529 N.W.2d 46 (1995). In addition to Hingst’s breath test results, there exists other evidence that Hingst may have been driving while under the influence on the night in question. In the instant case, we cannot determine which evidence the jury relied on in convicting Hingst. As such, *539we cannot say the State has proved that the erroneous admission of Hingst’s breath test results was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Consequently, we affirm the Court of Appeals’ reversal of Hingst’s conviction.
Although the admission of the breath test results requires us to reverse Hingst’s conviction, we must still examine the sufficiency of the evidence presented against him to resolve this matter completely. State v. Christner, supra; State v. Emrich, supra. If there is sufficient evidence to support Hingst’s conviction, the cause may be remanded to the district court for further proceedings; if not, the cause must be dismissed. See id. As previously noted, and as made evident from the facts set forth above, we conclude that there is sufficient evidence upon which a jury could, on remand, find Hingst guilty of driving under the influence.
CONCLUSION
In accordance with the foregoing analysis, we affirm the Court of Appeals’ decision in this matter reversing Hingst’s conviction and remanding the cause to the district court with directions to remand the matter to the county court for a new trial.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226576 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.50773+00 ===

746 N.E.2d 776 (2001)
321 Ill. App. 3d 41
254 Ill. Dec. 19
Emmanuel IKPOH, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Nikki ZOLLAR, Medical Disciplinary Board, Patricia Daniels and the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-00-0890.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
March 20, 2001.
*778 Alan Rhine, Chicago, for Appellant.
James E. Ryan, Attorney General, Joel D. Bertocchi, Solicitor General, Chicago (Jan E. Hughes, Assistant Attorney General, of counsel), for Appellees.
Justice GORDON delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff Emmanuel Ikpoh (Ikpoh) appeals from the judgement of the circuit court of Cook County upholding the administrative action in part and remanding certain dispositive issues back to the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation (the Department) for further proceedings. We dismiss this appeal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction since the order of the circuit court cannot be deemed final and appealable where dispositive matters were remanded for further hearing and consideration by the Department.
BACKGROUND
The following facts are not in dispute. On July 30, 1990, Ikpoh was found guilty in the circuit court of DuPage County of aggravated criminal sexual abuse and a judgement of conviction on that charge was entered on November 6, 1990. Ikpoh's medical license was suspended on August 2, 1990, and revoked in 1991. On February 15, 1996, Ikpoh filed a "Petition for Restoration" with the Department asking that his medical license be restored. In his petition, Ikpoh stated that he had not been arrested or convicted since his license was revoked. An administrative law judge with the Department held a hearing on the petition on October 16, 1996.
On August 26, 1997, after the hearing on his petition, Ikpoh was arrested in Bartlett, Illinois, for failing to register as a sex offender as required by law. He was indicted on this charge on September 12, 1997.
On September, 11, 1997, the Director of the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation (the Director) granted the petition for restoration, subject to several conditions. Then on September 19, 1997, the Chief of Prosecutions for the Department filed with the Department a "Motion to Supplement Record and Vacate Order" (motion to vacate). The motion to vacate set forth Ikpoh's arrest and indictment for failing to register as a sex offender and consequently asked that the order of September 11, 1997, be vacated. On that same day, the Director vacated the order of September 11, 1997, and remanded the matter to the administrative law judge to supplement the record with this additional evidence. The administrative law judge recommended that Ikpoh's petition for restoration be denied and on August 5, 1998, the petition was denied by the Director.
*779 On September 9, 1998, Ikpoh filed a "Complaint for Administrative Review" with the circuit court of Cook County. Ikpoh asked that the orders of September 19, 1997, and August 5, 1998, be vacated and that the court find the order of September 11, 1997, to be valid.
On February 15, 2000, the circuit court issued an order. The court found that the September 11, 1997, order was not a final administrative order, and that even if it were final, the Department was authorized to vacate it under the Department's rules. The court said that it could not, however, determine if the August 5, 1998, order was entered against the manifest weight of the evidence. The court thus remanded to the administrative agency to determine how the Department's knowledge of Ikpoh's arrest was acquired; whether the arrest was the result of any activity attributable to the Department; whether there was collusion surrounding the arrest and why Ikpoh was initially arrested. The court also remanded to determine if several technical errors were prejudicial to Ikpoh. These included that an affidavit was not attached to the Department's motion to vacate and insufficient notice to Ikpoh of the "Motion to Supplement the Record and Vacate Order." In its order the circuit court made a Rule 304(a) finding that there was no just cause to delay enforcement or appeal from the order. On appeal, the appellant contends that the September 11, 1997, order was a final administrative order; that the Department was not authorized to vacate that order; that the motion to vacate was predicated on matters which arose after the petition was filed and therefore should have been brought as part of a new proceeding against Ikpoh; and that the September 19, 1997, order was improperly granted because the motion to vacate did not have an affidavit attached and because it was granted in a manner which violated both due process and the Administrative Procedure Act.
ANALYSIS
The Department first argues that this court lacks jurisdiction of the subject matter over this cause by reason of the fact that the February 15, 2000, order from which Ikpoh appeals did not have the requisite finality. The Department contends that the order of February 15, 2000, is not final because in that order the circuit court remanded this cause to the Department for an evidentiary hearing. Ikpoh argues that the order is final because the circuit court made a finding pursuant to Rule 304(a) (155 Ill.2d R. 304(a)) that it was a final and appealable order and because there were three distinct claims before the circuit court, two of which were resolved by the February 15, 2000, order and are thus appealable under Rule 304(a). We agree with the Department.
"The law is well established that unless specifically authorized by the rules of [the supreme] court, the appellate court has no jurisdiction to review judgments, orders or decrees which are not final." Department of Central Management Services v. American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, 182 Ill. 2d 234, 238, 230 Ill. Dec. 954, 695 N.E.2d 444, 446 (1998). Supreme Court Rule 304(a) provides in part that:
"If multiple parties or multiple claims for relief are involved in an action, an appeal may be taken from a final judgement as to one or more but fewer than all of the parties or claims only if the trial court has made an express written finding that there is no just reason for delaying either enforcement or appeal or both." 155 Ill.2d R. 304(a).
"An order is final and appealable if it terminates the litigation between the parties on the merits or disposes of the rights *780 of the parties, either on the entire controversy or a separate part thereof." R.W. Dunteman Company v. C/G Enterprises, Inc., 181 Ill. 2d 153, 159, 229 Ill. Dec. 533, 692 N.E.2d 306, 310 (1998). "The ultimate question to be decided in each case is whether the judgement fully and finally disposes of the rights of the parties to the cause so that no material controverted issue remains to be determined." Wilkey v. Illinois Racing Board, 96 Ill. 2d 245, 249, 70 Ill. Dec. 496, 449 N.E.2d 843, 844 (1983).
Our supreme court applies the standard for finality of decisions of the appellate court to a circuit court's review of administrative decisions. Wilkey, 96 Ill.2d at 250, 70 Ill. Dec. 496, 449 N.E.2d at 845. "[W]here a cause is remanded for a new trial or other further proceedings involving disputed questions of law or fact, the judgment of the Appellate Court is not of a final character." Wilkey, 96 Ill.2d at 249-51, 70 Ill. Dec. 496, 449 N.E.2d at 844-45. "If, upon remandment, the trial court has only to enter a judgment or decree in accordance with the directions of the reviewing court, or to conduct further proceedings on uncontroverted incidental matters, then, irrespective of the remanding clause in the judgment order, the judgment of the Appellate Court is final and reviewable." Wilkey, 96 Ill.2d at 249, 70 Ill. Dec. 496, 449 N.E.2d at 844.
The appellate court has thus stated that if "the court remands the cause [to the administrative agency] for a new hearing, the rights of the parties have not yet been fully and finally adjudicated." Lippert v. State Property Tax Appeal Board, 273 Ill.App.3d 150, 153, 209 Ill. Dec. 921, 652 N.E.2d 461, 463 (1995); accord Page v. City of Chicago, 299 Ill.App.3d 450, 457, 233 Ill. Dec. 575, 701 N.E.2d 218, 223 (1998). As this court has noted,
"Where the circuit court has the power to remand an agency decision for further hearings or proceedings, we feel that jurisdiction must necessarily remain with the circuit court until after disposition of these further matters. Only after the circuit court has examined the results of these additional proceedings will we recognize its subsequent order as being final and appealable." Mitrenga v. Martin, 110 Ill.App.3d 1006, 1008, 66 Ill. Dec. 585, 443 N.E.2d 268, 270 (1982).
Accord Lippert, 273 Ill.App.3d at 154, 209 Ill. Dec. 921, 652 N.E.2d at 464.
This reasoning is supported by an analysis of Supreme Court Rule 306. 166 Ill.2d R. 306. Rule 306(a)(6) provides that a party may petition for leave to appeal to the appellate court "from an order of the circuit court which remands the proceedings for a hearing de novo before an administrative agency." 166 Ill.2d R. 306(a). Under Rule 306(b) any such petition must be accompanied by a supporting record and the opponent has the right to file a timely answer and a supplemental supporting record. 166 Ill.2d R. 306(b). Thus under Rule 306(a)(6), an appeal from an order which remands a matter back to the administrative agency is not appealable as a matter of right from a final order, but is interlocutory and requiring a petition for leave to appeal which this court may grant or deny at its discretion. Cf. In re Marriage of Leopando, 96 Ill. 2d 114, 118, 70 Ill. Dec. 263, 449 N.E.2d 137, 139 (1983) (custody orders not final and appealable under Rule 304(a) where Rule 306(a), provided that such orders were interlocutory and for such orders to be appealed upon allowance of a petition for leave to appeal).
In the case at bar, the circuit court remanded the cause for further review by the Department, an administrative agency. The court ordered that on remand the Department conduct a hearing to determine *781 the circumstances surrounding Ikpoh's arrest and that the result of that hearing would be dispositive as to the restoration of Ikpoh's license. Since the cause was remanded for a hearing, the order was not final. Lippert, 273 Ill. App.3d at 153, 209 Ill. Dec. 921, 652 N.E.2d at 463; Page, 299 Ill.App.3d at 457, 233 Ill. Dec. 575, 701 N.E.2d at 223. If Ikpoh wished to appeal from this non-final order, his recourse was to petition this court for leave to appeal under Rule 306(a)(6) and to comply with all of the procedural requirements under Rule 306(b), none of which he did. 166 Ill.2d R. 306(a)(6), 306(b).
Ikpoh contends that the February 15, 2000, order is final and appealable because the circuit court made a written finding that it was appealable pursuant to Rule 304(a). Ikpoh clearly misunderstands Illinois law on this point. The presence of a written finding of appealability pursuant to Rule 304(a) does not in itself make an order appealable and this court is not bound by the circuit court's finding of appealability. Metzger v. Fitzsimmons, 175 Ill.App.3d 674, 675, 125 Ill. Dec. 103, 529 N.E.2d 1179, 1180 (1988) ("The fact that an order contains * * * language [stating that there is no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal] does not make an otherwise non-final order appealable").
Ikpoh next contends that this appeal is cognizable under Rule 304(a) because there were multiple claims before the circuit court. These include:
"[1] Whether the Department's order of September 11, 1997, was a final administrative decision, thereby terminating the Department's jurisdiction over the case or in the alternative whether the Department could vacate a final administrative decision.
[2] Whether the Department's order of September 19, 1997, was improperly entered as the result of an ex parte proceeding.
[3] Whether the denial of Dr. Ikpoh's petition for Restoration by the Department's order of August 5, 1998, was against the manifest weight of the evidence."
Ikpoh argues that each of the forgoing constitutes a distinct claim and that the circuit court found against him on the first two of these three putative claims. Ikpoh thus seeks to render the findings on these two putative claims appealable under Rule 304(a) notwithstanding the provision under Rule 306(a)(6). We disagree.
"An order is considered final if it disposes of the rights of the parties either with respect to the entire controversy or some definite and separate portion thereof." Arachnid, Inc. v. Beall, 210 Ill. App. 3d 1096, 1103, 155 Ill. Dec. 662, 569 N.E.2d 1273, 1277 (1991). "It is well established that the statement of a single claim in several ways, even by multiple counts, does not warrant a separate appeal." Arachnid, 210 Ill.App.3d at 1103, 155 Ill. Dec. 662, 569 N.E.2d at 1277 (complaint containing two counts for breach of contract and one for torturous interference with contractual rights contained only one claim); accord Rice v. Burnley, 230 Ill. App. 3d 987, 991, 172 Ill. Dec. 826, 596 N.E.2d 105, 107 (1992); Hull v. City of Chicago, 165 Ill.App.3d 732, 733, 117 Ill. Dec. 369, 520 N.E.2d 720, 721 (where complaint alleged several different negligent acts and omissions but advanced only one theory of recovery, namely negligence, the action only involved a single claim); see also Leopando, 96 Ill.2d at 119, 70 Ill. Dec. 263, 449 N.E.2d at 140 (determination of child custody is not a separate claim in an action for dissolution of marriage). "[W]here the bases for recovery under the counts that are dismissed are different *782 than those under the counts left standing, the dismissal is appealable because it disposes of a distinct cause of action." Heinrich v. Peabody International Corporation, 99 Ill. 2d 344, 348, 76 Ill. Dec. 800, 459 N.E.2d 935, 938 (1984).
The three issues identified by Ikpoh do not constitute separate claims. Ikpoh's petition for restoration at the administrative level only makes one claim, namely that Ikpoh's right to practice medicine should be restored. The three issues which Ikpoh contends are separate claims are not claims at all but merely arguments on appeal to the circuit court to support reversal of the Department's single order disposing of his single claim for restoration of his license. On review at the circuit court level, the court is without power to hear new evidence or provide relief other than that appropriate to a reviewing court. In this respect, the relationship between the circuit court sitting in administrative review and the administrative agency is analogous to the relationship between a trial court in a non-administrative review proceeding and an appellate court. Schweig v. Schacht, 276 Ill.App.3d 311, 315, 212 Ill. Dec. 807, 657 N.E.2d 1152, 1155 (1995) (duty of appellate court in "administrative review case is the same as that of the circuit court"); Biscan v. Village of Melrose Park Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, 277 Ill.App.3d 844, 847, 214 Ill. Dec. 570, 661 N.E.2d 424, 427 (1996) (sole duty of circuit court "in an administrative review action is to review administrative record to determine whether agency's decision is against the manifest weight of the evidence"). Thus it would be inappropriate to attempt to characterize arguments made on appellate review as constituting separate claims for relief other than the claim initially raised before the administrative agency from which the appeal was taken. Western Casualty & Surety Company v. Brochu, 105 Ill. 2d 486, 500, 86 Ill. Dec. 493, 475 N.E.2d 872, 879 (1985) (issues not raised in the trial court are waived and may not be raised for the first time on appeal).
Ikpoh's reliance on Krivitskie v. Cramlett, 301 Ill.App.3d 705, 235 Ill. Dec. 384, 704 N.E.2d 957 (1998), is misplaced. In Krivitskie the court held that a count for willful and wanton misconduct was sufficiently distinct from a count for negligence in the same lawsuit to permit an appeal from the dismissal of the willful and wanton count under Rule 304(a) where the negligence count was not dismissed. The court reasoned that while the two counts were not separate causes of action, they required different elements to establish a proper claim and therefore were sufficiently distinct to allow a Rule 304(a) appeal from the dismissal of one count.
Krivitskie is distinguishable, in that unlike the case at bar, it considers a situation where two different counts at the trial level, proposing different theories are brought. In the case at bar, Ikpoh simply brought before an administrative agency a petition for restoration of his license which only contained one claim. He only raised multiple issues on appeal to the circuit court as reasons for reversal on appeal. As already discussed, these reasons on appeal do not lend themselves to be characterized as separate claims under Rule 304(a), so as to pass on a piecemeal basis for further review by a higher court of review.
Likewise, Ikpoh's reliance on Heller Financial, Inc. v. Johns-Byrne Company, 246 Ill.App.3d 754, 186 Ill. Dec. 762, 617 N.E.2d 1 (1992), is similarly misplaced. In Heller Financial the court found that where the trial court entered an order specifying the minimum amount plaintiff was owed by defendant, that order was final and appealable under Rule 304(a). In *783 the facts of Heller Financial the plaintiff sued the defendant to collect on an equipment lease. The trial court entered partial summary judgement for the minimum amount which the plaintiff owed the defendant and left the issue of the total recovery for the trier of fact. On appeal, the court reasoned that while 304(a) only applied to cases with multiple claims, the case contained multiple claims which it defined as "any right, liability or matter" raised in an action. The court reasoned that "a plaintiff could move for summary judgement on `any part of the relief sought,' and that thus, the grant of partial summary judgement was a final order for purposes of appeal." Heller Financial, 246 Ill.App.3d at 758, 186 Ill. Dec. 762, 617 N.E.2d at 4. The court then held that the order was final "since it clearly disposes of the rights of the parties in regard to some definite part of the controversy."
We have some question as to the correctness of the analysis in Heller Financial in determining what constitutes a separate claim. See Leopando, 96 Ill.2d at 119, 70 Ill. Dec. 263, 449 N.E.2d at 140 (determination of child custody is not a separate claim in an action for dissolution of marriage). However, even if we were to agree with the analysis in Heller Financial, it would not be applicable to these facts, or to this case, since here there was no partial adjudication of plaintiff's claim which was initiated at the administrative level. Rather, the entire claim for the restoration of Ikpoh's license was denied at the administrative level and came up on appeal to the circuit court for administrative review. On review, the circuit court disposed of the reasons given in support of reversal by rejecting some and questioning and remanding on others. There is no basis upon which to conclude that Rule 304(a) would permit fragmentation on further appeal of the reasons urged for review in the initial appeal, which in this case commenced in the circuit court.
For the forgoing reasons, the instant appeal is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
Appeal dismissed.
COUSINS and McBRIDE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741204 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:35.725564+00 ===

JUSTICE ZWICK delivered the opinion of the court: In this appeal, we must decide whether the administrative agency erred in determining that Carpetland U.S.A., Inc. (Carpetland), owed unemployment contributions under the Unemployment Insurance Act (the Act) (820 ILCS 405/100 et seq. (West 1998)) for its installation contractors and measure services. Carpetland sought administrative review of a decision by Lynn Quigley Doherty, Director of the Illinois Department of Employment Security (Director), which adopted and affirmed an Illinois Department of Employment Security (Department) representative’s determination. The Department found that work performed by installation contractors and measurers for Carpetland’s customers was “employment” under the Unemployment Insurance Act (820 ILCS 405/100 et seq. (West 1998)) and, therefore, not exempt under section 212 of the Act. 820 ILCS 405/212 (West 1998). The Director further determined that Carpetland owes $38,977.17 plus interest and $200 in penalties in unpaid unemployment contributions on behalf of 259 installation contractors and 12 measure services. On administrative review, the circuit court affirmed the Director’s decision and entered judgment in favor of the Department. Carpetland now appeals from that judgment. On appeal, Carpetland contends (1) that the Director’s decision that the services performed by installation contractors and measurers constituted employment within the meaning of section 206 of the Act (820 ILCS 405/206 (West 1998)) is against the manifest weight of the evidence, (2) the circuit court erred as a matter of law in deciding that Carpetland waived its constitutional claims by not raising them at the administrative level, and (3) Carpetland was denied due process by the procedure leading to the Director’s decision. Because we agree with Carpetland’s first contention, we need not address its second and third claims. BACKGROUND The following evidence was introduced at the administrative hearing before the Director’s representative. Carpetland U.S.A. is a retailer of floor coverings, primarily carpet. During 1991, Carpetland operated 17 retail stores in Illinois. Each customer who requested installation agreed to the following terms, which were included in the customer’s contract with Carpetland: “INSTALLATION BY SUBCONTRACTOR It is understood that Carpetland will not install said materials but that by the acceptance of this proposal you authorize Carpet-land to contract with a subcontractor on [your] behalf to make the installation. You authorize Carpetland to issue to said subcontractor on [your] behalf an installation work order with these specifications. You agree to pay to Carpetland the amount specified herein which shall include the price of all materials and the installation charges which are payable to the subcontractor on your behalf.” Next, Carpetland arranged for and contracted with an installer to complete the installation. In 75% of Carpetland’s floor covering sales, installation was included in the sale and the price. In these sales, the customer paid Carpetland directly for the installation. Three installers and one measurer testified at the hearing before the representative describing their relationships with Carpetland as well as the nature of their businesses. Installers and measurers could hire helpers or employees to work for them. Joseph Smith, an installer, testified during the hearing that he was president of a company called The Tile Works, Inc., which was an installation service that performed floor covering installations for Carpetland and other carpet companies. Smith later changed the name of the business to J. Smith Floors, and Carpetland made payments to this entity. Smith testified that he engaged helpers, both as employees and subcontractors. The representative found that, while there was no record for The Tile Works, Inc., in the Department’s files, there was a record for J. Smith Flooring, Inc., in May 1994. The representative concluded that Smith may have created a corporate entity, but he did not truly work for that entity since Smith did not adhere to corporate structure formalities. Kenneth W. Weiss, a measurer, also testified at the hearing. He stated that for the first part of 1991 he worked for his father’s company, G.W. Carpet Service, and through that business entity he performed carpet measuring for Carpetland as well as for others. There is no information in the record to show that G.W Carpet Service paid any unemployment contributions on Weiss’ behalf. For the second half of the year, Weiss testified that he created his own company called Ken Weiss Measure Service, which had no employees and dealt directly with Carpetland. Weiss stated that he filed an income tax return as a subcontractor of Gary Weiss for the first half of 1991 and of Carpetland for the second half. James Lawson testified at the hearing that in 1991 he installed carpets, vinyl and some hardwood floors for carpet stores, including Carpetland, under the name Lawson’s Carpet Service. Lawson stated that he advertised for a full- or part-time helper and hired a few, but had to fire them because they were not sufficiently qualified. Department records showed that Lawson’s Carpet Service had a Department account number and reported having one employee during the first six months of 1991. Craig Panozzo testified that during 1991 he worked for Craig’s Custom Tile, where he acted as the sole proprietor, president, worker, and owner. Panozzo performed work for Carpetland installing ceramic and marble flooring in new construction. He stated that he has no employer account number with the Department, he used his own social security number, and that he did not file a corporate federal income tax return in 1991. Payments by Carpetland in 1991 were made to Craig Panozzo. The representative therefore concluded that Panozzo did not truly work for the corporate entity Craig’s Custom Tile because he did not adhere to corporate structure formalities. ANALYSIS  In reviewing a final decision under the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3 — 101 et seq. (West 1998)), we review the agency’s decision and not the circuit court’s determination. XL Disposal Corp. v. Zehnder, 304 Ill. App. 3d 202, 207, 709 N.E.2d 293, 297 (1999). Judicial review of the Department’s decision extends to all questions of law and fact presented by the record. Cohen Furniture Co. v. Department of Employment Security, 307 Ill. App. 3d 978, 981, 718 N.E.2d 1058, 1061 (1999). The Department’s factual findings are held to be prima facie true and a reviewing court may only set aside such decisions if they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 981. However, the Department’s conclusions of law are not entitled to such deference and are subject to de novo review. AFM Messenger Service, Inc. v. Department of Employment Security, 315 Ill. App. 3d 308, 312, 733 N.E.2d 749 (2000).  The facts in this case are not in dispute. As in City of Belvidere v. Illinois State Labor Relations Board, 181 Ill. 2d 191, 205, 692 N.E.2d 295 (1998), “this case involves an examination of the legal effect of a given set of facts, [and therefore] it involves a mixed question of fact and law.” As such, the Illinois Supreme Court held that a clearly erroneous standard of review applied. The clearly erroneous standard is “between a manifest weight of the evidence standard and a de novo standard so as to provide some deference to the [agency’s] experience and expertise.” City of Belvidere, 181 Ill. 2d at 205. We must accept the administrative agency’s findings under this standard unless we are “ ‘left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed.’ ” AFM Messenger Service, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 312-13, quoting United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 395, 92 L. Ed. 746, 766, 68 S. Ct. 525, 541-42 (1948).  In this case, Carpetland argues that the circuit court and the Director erred in finding that the services provided by the installation contractors and measure services constituted employment by Carpet-land within the meaning of section 206 of the Act and that these individuals were not independent contractors under the exception in section 212. Employment is defined under the Act as “any service *** performed by an individual for an employing unit.” 820 ILCS 405/206 (West 1998). An exception to this broad definition is contained in section 212, exempting independent contractors from “employment” and providing: “Service performed by an individual for an employing unit, whether or not such individual employs others in connection with the performance of such services, shall be deemed to be employment unless and until it is proven in any proceeding where such issue is involved that— A. Such individual has been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of such services, both under his contract of service and in fact; and B. Such service is either outside the usual course of the business for which such service is performed or that such service is performed outside of all the places of business of the enterprise for which such service is performed; and C. Such individual is engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, profession, or business.” 820 ILCS 405/212 (West 1998). The employer has a strict burden of proof and must prove all three requirements of section 212 before an exemption will be granted. O’Hare-Midway Limousine Service, Inc. v. Baker, 232 Ill. App. 3d 108, 112, 596 N.E.2d 795 (1992); Jack Bradley, Inc. v. Department of Employment Security, 146 Ill. 2d 61, 75, 585 N.E.2d 123, 129 (1991). When construing section 212(A), courts do not strictly follow common law principles relating to independent contractor status. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 982. Instead, courts use the term “independent contractor” in a much broader sense. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 982.  First, we analyze section 212(A) to determine if the installers and measurers were free from control and direction over the performance of their services by Carpetland. “Direction or control” means that an employer has the right to control and direct the worker, not only as to the work to be done but also as to how it should be done, whether or not that control is exercised. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g) (1990). This determination must be made on the particular facts in each case, but section 2732.200(g) lists 25 factors indicative of those used by the Department in making its decision. 56 Ill. Adm. Code §§ 2732.200(g)(1) through (g)(25) (1990); Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 982, 718 N.E.2d at 1062. Carpetland argues that the representative, Director and the trial court ignored these 25 factors when determining the existence of control. The Director noted in her decision that her representative considered similar factors to the ones listed in the Code, all of which were relevant. The section of the Code that creates these 25 factors states they are not mandatory: “The following are illustrative of the types of questions the Department will examine to determine whether ‘direction or control’ exists. The type of business subject to review and the relationship being examined will determine which questions are asked *** under this Section.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g) (1990). The Code further states: “No one question or answer or combination of questions and answers will determine whether direction or control exists but rather the business reality or totality of circumstances will determine if direction or control exists.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g) (1990). Nonetheless, we agree with Carpetland that the factors set out by the regulations are factors which are generally applicable to the carpet sales and installation businesses, that they are relevant, and that the Director should have considered the factors set out by the Code in considering whether Carpetland exercised control over the individual installers and measurers. Accordingly, we consider the 25 factors. First, the record shows that Carpetland did not “issue assignments” or “schedule work” for the installers and measurers, nor did it set “quotas” or “make time requirements.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(1) (1990). Rather, Carpetland called installers and offered them assignments on a per-job basis. Installers and measurers were free to refuse work when called, and the evidence presented showed that they regularly did so when their schedules conflicted with the needs of Carpetland’s customers. Carpetland’s agreement with the installers did not provide that it could dictate or alter the methods used by the installers or measurers in performing their services. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(2) (1990). Measurers and installers completed their work as they determined was best for the job at hand. Nor were workers required to follow a specific routine or schedule in completing their work. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(3) (1990). As long as the job was done to the satisfaction of Carpetland’s customer, Carpetland remained uninvolved in the installation. Neither were Carpetland’s subcontractors required to report to any specific location or at regular intervals. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(4) (1990). Testimony suggested that at least one Carpet-land store set up “mailboxes” for the installers to collect their work orders, but there was no requirement that installers personally pick up the orders, as one might expect an employee to be required to do. Carpetland established at the hearing that it did not require the installers or measurers to provide records of the time spent on a given job. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(5) (1990). Nor did Carpetland require the installers or measurers to work a specific minimum number of hours per day or per week. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(6) (1990). Workers were not treated as if employed on a “permanent basis,” as is made clear by the fact that Carpetland sales people were required to contact each installer or measurer each time a new job was available. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(7) (1990). Workers were not reimbursed in any way for the costs associated with their jobs. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(8) (1990). None of the measurers or installers, or any of their employees, were included in Carpetland-sponsored pensions, bonuses, paid vacations, sick pay or any other benefit program that other Carpetland employees enjoyed. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(9) (1990). Carpet-land did not carry workers’ compensation insurance on the installers and measurers (56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(10) (1990)), nor did it deduct social security taxes (56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(ll) (1990)), as was done for its other employees. Nor did Carpetland report workers’ incomes to the federal government on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2. 56 IllAdm. Code § 2732.200(g)(12) (1990). Carpetland did not bond the installers or measurers (56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(13) (1990)). Although it is true that installers were required to enter into a hold-back arrangement whereby $1,000 was held by Carpetland to insure the quality of each installer’s work should there be a customer complaint, it is significant that installers were also required to guarantee to Carpetland’s customers the quality of their work for a period of one year after the installation. This fact militates in favor of Carpetland’s position that the installers were not employees because employees do not generally guarantee the work of their employers. Instead, it is typically the employer that guarantees the work of the employee. Garpetland did not “furnish the worker with materials and supplies.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g) (14) (1990). The carpeting and padding were not materials furnished to the installers by Garpetland because the carpeting and padding were cut for and owned by the customer at the time they were picked up by the installers. Although this court in Cohen determined that carpeting and padding were “primary materials” provided to installers for their use at a job (Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 983), we do not agree with the court’s analysis of this particular factor. Once the carpeting had been sold to the customer, the delivery of that carpeting to the installer (the customer’s agent) cannot be fairly equated with providing “the worker” with his “materials.” Furthermore, all materials used by the installers in performing their jobs, such as tacks, glue, tape and razors, were provided by the installers themselves. In addition, it is clear that the installers and measurers were not provided either tools or equipment by Garpetland (as we discuss in more detail below), factors which favor finding that Garpetland is not an employer under the Act. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(14) (1990). Garpetland did not furnish any of the measurers or installation contractors with transportation, drawing accounts, expense accounts, business cards or “order blanks.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(15) (1990). This is yet another factor which favors Carpetland’s position that the installers and measurers were independent contractors. The record also clearly demonstrates that Garpetland never attempted to limit the types of other employment its measurers and installers could pursue. In fact, many Garpetland installers provided services on a regular basis to Carpetland’s competitors. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(16) (1990). This is something an employer would want to prevent its employees from doing, yet Garpetland never attempted to exercise control over its subcontractors’ other work. Administrative Code sections 2732.200(g)(17) through (g)(20) refer to restricting an employee’s ability to sell to particular customers, fixing the terms of sale (including the credit terms), reserving the right to approve contracts or restricting the territory in which a putative employee performs his work. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(17) through (g)(20) (1990). Garpetland did not determine which customers each installer would service in that each installer remained free to accept or refuse any particular job, without apparent repercussion to the relationship. Installers and measurers were free, for example, to turn down jobs because the customer was in a geographic area that was difficult to service or because they simply had too much other work to do. Contrary to the arguments of the Director on appeal, Carpetland did not have the right to discharge a measurer or installer once he had been hired to perform a given job. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(21) (1990). Once an installer had accepted a given job with a Carpetland customer, the terms of the contract between the installer and the customer were fixed, and this fact prevented Carpetland from terminating the installer. The same would not be true with a traditional at-will or contractual employee, whom Carpetland could terminate mid-job without further obligation. Sections 2732.200(g)(22) through (g)(24) refer to whether Carpet-land ever required installers or measurers to attend meetings or training courses, whether Carpetland ever retained the right to appoint supervisors over the work and whether Carpetland reserved for itself the right to set rules and regulations over the work. Once again, these factors all favor Carpetland’s position that the installers and measurers were independent contractors. Finally, as previously discussed, Carpetland did “purport to guarantee the *** services performed” (56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(25) (1990)), but the facts show that this was not done in any meaningful way. The Director found that each installer under its agreement with Carpetland was required to issue a one-year guarantee of its work directly to the customer and this guarantee was backed with a $1,000 hold-back by Carpetland on the contractor’s work. This factor favors finding that Carpetland was not, in reality, the guarantor of the work performed by the installers because the economic reality of the situation was that the installers were fully underwriting the guarantees made to the customer. At best, Carpetland acted as a “secondary guarantor” for the guarantee offered by the installer. The primary risk that a customer might be unhappy with the installation was therefore borne by the installer, not Carpetland. In considering the 25 very specific factors set out by section 2732.200(g), it is clear that Carpetland established that it did not exercise the type of “control” over the installers and measurers which would prevent it from making out a section 212(A) claim. By our count, no less than 24 of the 25 factors set out by the Department in its regulations suggest that Carpetland does not “control” the installers and measurers. The only factor that favors the Director’s decision is the fact that it was Carpetland that set and collected the installation charge from the customer. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g)(17) (1990). While this is certainly significant, it does not, by itself, outweigh the terms of the contract and the way in which Carpetland and the installers and measurers conducted business. It is therefore necessary, briefly, to address sections 212(B) and 212(C) of the Act. Section 212(B) is met by Carpetland by showing that the installers and measurers performed services “outside of all the places of business of the enterprise for which such service is performed.” 820 ILCS 405/212(B) (West 1998). The Director suggests that the “place of business” of Carpetland is the place where its customers want carpeting installed, in that the installers and measurers represent Carpetland’s interests when they perform their work. However, Carpetland customers are given veiy clear notice in both the contract terms and in the way in which the installers and measurers actually operate that the installers and measurers are not representing Carpetland. The record shows that installers used their own business cards and that the vehicles they used were not labeled with Carpetland’s insignias. The installers and measurers took responsibility for the quality of their work. This is very different than the situation in O’Hare-Midway Limousine Service, where the passengers were unaware that they were dealing with drivers who the company claimed were not its employees. See O’Hare-Midway Limousine Service, 232 Ill. App. 3d at 113; see also United Delivery Service, Ltd. v. Didrickson, 276 Ill. App. 3d 584, 589, 659 N.E.2d 82 (1995). Finally, Carpetland met the requirements of section 212(C) by establishing that the installers and measurers were engaged in “independently established businesses.” 820 ILCS 405/212(C) (West 1998). Our supreme court has explained that this test requires looking to whether the purported employee runs an enterprise that is capable of operation independent of the purported employer. Jack Bradley, Inc. v. Department of Employment Security, 146 Ill. 2d 61, 78, 585 N.E.2d 123 (1991). Here, in almost every case, the work received through Carpetland was shown to be less than one-third of the contractor’s total business volume. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(1) (1990). The installers showed that they had made substantial investments of capital in their businesses and all owned one or more business vehicles. Each installer testified that his enterprise had acquired considerable quantities of tools, representing investments of between $5,000 and $18,000. Some had sizeable investments in offices and warehouse equipment as well. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(2) (1990). It was the installers and the measurers, and not Carpetland, that bore the losses and gained the profits of these operations. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(3) (1990). Virtually every installer or measurer who testified stated that he advertised his services, either through the phone book or by passing out business ' cards or through word of mouth. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code §§ 2732.200(e)(4), (e)(12) (1990). The installers and measurers handled their own tax reporting, used their own business names and maintained their own shops or offices. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code §§ 2732.200(e)(5), (e)(6), (e)(7) (1990). Carpetland expressly informed its customers that it did not handle the installation of floor coverings. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(8) (1990). Each company involved in installation hired its own helpers and employees without Carpet-land’s approval. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(9) (1990). The agreement between Carpetland and each installer provided that the installer would make reports to the Illinois Department of Employment Security. See 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(e)(10) (1990). The fact that these installers and measurers failed to keep accurate records and diligently report to the Department is manifestly insufficient to make them employees of Carpetland. Poor record keeping and negligent reporting, in and of themselves, are inadequate to transform employment status from that of an independent contractor to an employee.  In short, the overwhelming evidence presented at the hearing showed that the installers and measurers who performed work after the sale of Carpetland’s products were not employees of Carpetland. Justice Slater recognized in his dissent in Cohen that many of the factors set out in the regulations have been mistakenly applied so that coverage under the Act is required “almost anytime a business compensates another party for providing service to its customers,” even when the service “is only ancillary to its business.” Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 985 (Slater, J., dissenting). We agree with this assessment of the developing law. Although there are many cases that properly give the Act a “liberal construction” (see, e.g., Jack Bradley, Inc., 146 Ill. 2d at 73), this should only be done after taking into consideration the realities of the relationship and the factors the agency has promulgated for assessing when a party is an independent contractor. One of the great advantages of our economic system is that individuals and businesses are allowed to determine which areas of economic endeavor they are best suited to pursue, and which are too risky or complicated to be handled profitably or effectively. The record shows that Carpetland determined that its business would be selling floor coverings to consumers, but that installing the floor coverings it sold would be left to professional installers. Carpetland has followed this business model openly and has not attempted to interfere in the businesses of the installers and measurers who have also built independent businesses. Our General Assembly certainly did not intend in passing the Act to restrict the ability of organizations such as Carpetland and those run by the installers and measurers to establish separate businesses. Business organizations in our state such as those involved in the current case must be given guidance as to what conduct will cause them to run afoul of “independent contractor” provisions of the Act. The failure of the Department to do so in the current case has resulted in a Department decision that is unsupportable under the facts presented. Accordingly, the decision of the Director must be reversed. For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Director is reversed. Reversed. QUINN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741205 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:35.730532+00 ===

JUSTICE THEIS, dissenting: The majority appears to find the Department and the trial court made their determinations based on political motivation, rather than a disciplined analysis of the statutory factors. Because I do not believe the Director’s decision was clearly erroneous, I would affirm the judgment of the circuit court. I do agree with the majority that there is a need for consistency and uniformity in order to give businesses guidance in this area. Significantly, the issues in this case have already been resolved in Cohen Furniture Co. v. Department of Employment Security, 307 Ill. App. 3d 978, 718 N.E.2d 1058 (1999), on strikingly similar facts. In Cohen, Cohen Furniture sold home furnishings, including carpeting, with the cost of installation sometimes included in the price. Cohen Furniture was always willing to arrange installation and chose the installer from a list it maintains. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 980, 718 N.E.2d at 1060. Installers provided their own tools and minor materials, but Cohen furnished the primary materials, carpet and padding. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 983, 718 N.E.2d at 1062. The court looked to the totality of the circumstances and found that Cohen Furniture controlled the carpet installers through the contract, the routine it established for installation, the quality controls it created by requiring installers to provide a one-year guarantee and handling customer complaints, and by setting the prices and rates. Cohen, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 981-84, 718 N.E.2d at 1061-63. The facts here are nearly identical and warrant the same conclusion that Carpetland controlled its installers and measurers. Carpetland established a routine for its installers, similar to the routine found in Cohen, by contracting with the customer and setting the date and approximate time for installation. Carpetland required the installers to furnish their own minor materials, such as glue, nails, etc., while providing the installers with the primary materials, carpet and padding. Installers picked up these materials, along with the contract and measuring diagrams, at Carpetland’s store and then delivered these materials to the designated jobsite. Most importantly, the customer’s contract price reflected both carpeting as well as the installation costs, from which Carpetland made a profit. Carpetland also controlled the quality of the work, as in Cohen. Carpetland required all installers to perform the job “in a neat, workmanlike manner in accordance with the job specifications” and to guarantee the installation to Carpetland for one year. Carpetland handled all customer complaints regarding installation and then assigned the original installer to resolve the problem. If the installer no longer worked for Carpetland, Carpetland paid for the repairs or replacements, partly funded by the required “retainage agreements.” These facts all suggest the same result as in Cohen: that the installers and measurers were employees and not independent contractors. In its discussion of section 212(A) (820 ILCS 405/212(A) (West 1998)), the majority criticizes the Director because she should have considered the 25 factors delineated in the Code. 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 2732.200(g) (1990). However, there is nothing in the record to show the Director ignored the Code. To the contrary, the Director’s decision specifically references the relevant factors found in section 2732.200(g). As the majority itself notes, those factors are not mandatory, and the Code does not require an analysis of each illustration. I believe the Director adequately examined the business reality and totality of circumstances in her determination. Lastly, there are a few facts stated by the majority which I do not believe are completely accurate. In the representative’s factual findings, Carpetland did have the right to inspect the quality of the installer’s work and exercised this right by sending a representative with the installer for the first four or five assignments, contrary to the majority’s opposite assertion. Additionally, contrary to the majority’s statement that Carpetland was not the guarantor of the installer’s work, Carpetland handled all customer complaints regarding installation and then referred them to the installers. If the original installers no longer worked for Carpetland, Carpetland bore the ultimate responsibility for the repairs. Further, the majority contends that the installers testified that their enterprises “had acquired considerable quantities of tools, representing investments of between $5,000 and $18,000.” 319 Ill. App. 3d at 1078. I find no mention of any fact supporting this assertion in the representative’s findings of fact. For these reasons, I dissent.

=== CASE 9741206 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:36.89192+00 ===

CARTER, Justice.
The appellants, Subhash Sahai, a physician, and Webster City Medical Clinic, Inc., a professional corporation for the practice of medicine, challenge the district court’s order upholding a finding by the Iowa Civil Rights Commission that they were guilty of sexual discrimination in employment when, following a physical examination of a job applicant for a prospective employer, they recommended that a pregnant female applicant not be hired. Based on this finding, a monetary sanction of $11,000 plus interest was levied against appellants by the commission, and appellants were ordered to develop written policies concerning future recommendations to employers with respect to pregnant female applicants examined at the clinic at the employer’s request.
This judicial proceeding is for review of agency action as provided in Iowa Code section 17A.19 (1995). The respondents in the district court and appellees in this court are the Iowa Civil Rights Commission and the complainant, Stacey D. Davies. After reviewing the record and considering the arguments presented, we reverse the judgment of the district court and the decision of the Iowa Civil Rights Commission.
The complainant, Stacey D. Davies, applied for work at the Nissen Company in Webster City in the summer of 1989. Nissen is a meat packing facility that does not have a kill floor. Work at that plant primarily involves packing smaller processed meats such as wieners or franks. Davies was interviewed for a position on the assembly line at Nissen on September 8,1989.
The vice president of production determined that she was qualified for the job and advised her that she would be hired if she could pass a physical examination and drug test. The Nissen representative arranged for Davies to obtain a physical examination and drug test at the Webster City Medical Clinic. Pursuant to a contract with Nissen, the clinic regularly conducted physical examinations on prospective employees and provided Nissen with the results and recommendations concerning physical abilities to do the job. Davies was originally scheduled to see a Dr. Schoultz for her physical examination. *900When she informed Dr. Schoultz that she was fourteen weeks into a pregnancy and that Dr. Sahai of the same clinic had delivered her first child, Dr. Schoultz thought it preferable to have Dr. Sahai perform the examination.
Dr. Sahai is a graduate of the University of Iowa Medical School and a board-certified family practice specialist. He performed a complete physical examination on Davies, including obtaining a current patient history concerning alcohol usage, allergies, potential pulmonary problems, fractures, mental disease, diabetes, kidney trouble, hearing difficulties, coronary condition, tumors, prior back pain, prior surgeries, and medications that Davies was then taking. Davies’ blood pressure was taken and recorded, and a physical examination was completed as to height, weight, vision, hearing, cardiovascular sufficiency, and respiratory sufficiency. An abdominal examination was performed as well as genito-urinary, gastrointestinal, nervous system and joint examinations.
Upon completing the examination, Dr. Sa-hai completed a medical form evidencing the results and, in a space on that form that indicated whether Davies was approved for the prospective work, checked a box indicating “No.” That recommendation was communicated to Nissen officials by telephone the same day. In this conversation, Dr. Sahai informed Nissen personnel employees that his decision was made with respect to assembly line work and indicated that Davies was physically able to perform less-demanding work if available. Dr. Sahai testified at the administrative hearing that a written report followed approximately two days later.
Acting on Dr. Sahai’s oral report, Nissen Company personnel managers declined to hire Davies for the available assembly line position. No less physically demanding position was available at that time. Approximately three months after the birth of her child, Davies reapplied for work with Nissen and was hired as a packager of hot dogs. She worked in that position for approximately four months.
Davies filed a complaint against Nissen, the clinic, and Dr. Sahai, contending that her failure to obtain the assembly line position as a result of her pregnancy was an unlawful discrimination in employment based on sex. The issues involving Nissen are not involved on this appeal. With respect to the claims against the clinic and Dr. Sahai, an administrative law judge took evidence and filed a proposed decision finding that (1) not only employers but all entities that play a role in hiring decisions are subject to the statutory prohibitions against employment discrimination, (2) any classification based on pregnancy is a distinction based on sex, and (3) the only defense available to the clinic and Dr. Sahai was to show that absence of pregnancy was a bona fide occupational qualification for an assembly line position at Nissen.
With respect to the third point listed above, the hearing officer concluded that the clinic and Dr. Sahai failed to establish a job-related physical disqualification based on pregnancy because them concerns were not with plaintiffs ability to perform the work but rather with the incremental increase in the health risk to her from assembly line work as her stages of pregnancy progressed. This proposed decision was adopted as the final agency action in the case. After being reviewed by the district court pursuant to section 17A.19, the final agency order, including imposition of sanctions, was affirmed.
In challenging the orders of the Civil Rights Commission, the clinic and Dr. Sahai urge that their only role in the hiring process was to conduct a physical examination of a job applicant and report the results to the prospective employer together with an opinion concerning the applicant’s physical ability to perform the particular job.1 The employer, appellants argue, was free to treat that opinion as it wished for purposes of the hiring decision. They maintain that in such instances the responsibility to evaluate the impact of the civil rights laws on the ultimate hiring decision is the employer’s responsibili*901ty and should play no role in a physician’s formulation of a medical judgment.
In seeking to counter these arguments, the commission and Davies argue that the clinic’s arrangement with Nissen placed it in a position to control the latter’s hiring decisions. As a result, she urges, the clinic and its member doctors should be subject to sanction under the employment discrimination statutes (Iowa Code § 216.6(l)(a)) for recommendations that cause the employer to render discriminatory hiring decisions. We disagree with this contention.
The arguments that the commission and Davies set forth take note of the fact that the controlling statute, § 216.6(l)(a), prohibits “any person” from discriminating in employment based on sex rather than “any employer.” Although we agree that this language extends the prohibition of the act to some situations in which a person guilty of discriminatory conduct is not the actual employer of the person discriminated against, it does not, in our view, embrace the actions of the clinic and Dr. Sahai in the present case. That is due to the fact that within the context of the Nissen hiring decision the clinic’s role was advisory. The advice being sought was an independent medical judgment. Recommendations made in this context that are directly responsive to a prospective employer’s request are not in our view discriminatory actions.
We reach the conclusion stated above as a matter of statutory interpretation in our review of agency action under Iowa Code section 17A.19(8)(a) (when the agency has violated a statute). Consequently, our task is to determine whether the district court’s view as to the meaning of the statute accords with our own interpretation. Davenport Bank & Trust Co. v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 457 N.W.2d 610, 612 (Iowa 1990); Iowa Auto Dealers Ass’n v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 301 N.W.2d 760, 762 (Iowa 1981). Whether a particular state of facts fall under the statute as interpreted by this court is an adjunct issue of statutory construction when that decision may be made by viewing the facts most favorably toward the opposing point of view.
The operative facts in the present dispute are such that it poses both sexual discrimination issues and physical disability issues. For this reason, we find that the conclusion of the commission that the case presents a straight bona fide occupational qualification issue is not well taken. As developed in our prior cases, the doctrine of bona fide occupational qualification has reference to general personnel policies applied to specific categories of employees. See Quaker Oats Co. v. Cedar Rapids Human Rights Comm’n, 268 N.W.2d 862, 867 (Iowa 1978); Cedar Rapids Community Sch. Dist. v. Parr, 227 N.W.2d 486, 496 (Iowa 1975). The present case, on the other hand, relates to an ad hoc evaluation of a single job applicant with respect to physical qualifications for job performance. Although we have recognized that “any classification which relies on pregnancy as a determinative criteria is a distinction based on sex,” Quaker Oats Co., 268 N.W.2d at 867, we have never indicated that physical disabilities caused by pregnancy, if shown to exist, may not be a factor in a hiring decision if the disability affects performance of the job. In order to determine whether this is the case with respect to a particular employee or prospective employee, an employer should be free to seek out expert medical opinion and those professionals asked to give such opinions should be free to make independent medical judgments.2
The commission believed that Dr. Sahai’s recommendation was not an independent medical judgment concerning Davies because he candidly admitted during cross-examination that he would make the same recommendation against assembly line work for any prospective female employee in Davies’ stage of pregnancy. We are convinced, however, that physicians regularly issue medical opin*902ions based on typical prognoses for similarly situated clinical settings. This does not mean that such evaluations are not individualized when rendered with respect to a particular individual in connection with a physical examination of that person.
The commission also rejected Dr. Sa-hai’s claim that he was only giving advice concerning Davies’ ability to do the job because his recommendation that Nissen not hire her was based on his concern for the potential adverse physical consequences to Davies rather than her physical ability to perform the requirements of the job while pregnant. In this regard, the commission relied on the following observation in a federal court decision involving pregnancy discrimination:
[The employer’s] contention that an element of business necessity is its consideration for the safety of the pregnant [employee] and her unborn child is not persuasive. If this personal compassion can be attributed to corporate policy, it is commendable, but in the area of civil rights, personal risk decisions not affecting business operations are best left to individuals who are the targets of discrimination.
Burwell v. Eastern Air Lines, Inc., 633 F.2d 361, 371 (4th Cir.1980).
The evidence does reveal that Davies’ physical well-being was of paramount consideration in Dr. Sahai’s recommendation and probably influenced him more than her potential ability to perform the physical tasks of assembly line work. This circumstance, however, only establishes that Dr. Sahai’s opinion did not contain all of the information that Nissen would need in order to evaluate the potential employment discrimination aspects of its hiring decision. It does not mean that the potential health consequences to Davies were a matter of no concern to Nissen. This was information that Nissen could use in shaping Davies’ job responsibilities if it did hire her. We believe it was the type of information that Dr. Sahai should have been free to include in his opinion.
It is perhaps unfortunate that the form of Dr. Sahai’s written opinion was a conclusory recommendation as to whether Davies’ should be hired. The record indicates, however, that immediately following her physical examination, Dr. Sahai phoned a Nissen personnel representative and informed him that he did not believe a young woman who was fourteen weeks pregnant should be doing assembly line work. He emphasized that this was particularly true for a newly hired employee that had never done that type of work before. At this point, Nissen representatives were free to ask follow-up questions concerning whether Dr. Sahai’s recommendation was based on his beliefs concerning Davies’ ability to perform assembly line work or upon potential physical harm to her from doing that work. The fact that Nissen did not ask these follow-up questions and, as a result, might have violated employment discrimination laws, does not make Dr. Sahai’s recommendation, based on health considerations, a sexually discriminatory act.
In reaching these conclusions, we have considered the line of cases decided under federal sex discrimination statutes that are commonly referred to as the “gatekeeper” cases. These cases are Zaklama v. Mt. Sinai Medical Center, 842 F.2d 291 (11th Cir.1988); Pardazi v. Cullman Medical Center, 838 F.2d 1155 (11th Cir.1988); Doe v. St. Joseph’s Hospital, 788 F.2d 411 (7th Cir.1986); and Gomez v. Alexian Bros. Hospital, 698 F.2d 1019, 1021 (9th Cir.1983). These cases involved alleged discriminatory practices in the denial of hospital staff privileges or residency status to physicians and thus foreclosing their employment by third persons. It was determined that the hospitals involved had by their actions violated federal employment discrimination laws even though they were not the actual employers of the complaining parties. In each of these cases, the alleged discriminatory acts were with respect to the national origin of the physician. The exercise of independent professional judgment by the hospitals alleged to have discriminated was not at issue. We find that these authorities offer no support for the commission’s position in the present case.
As a final matter, we wish to note that our decision does not suggest that the clinic or Dr. Sahai are totally without responsibility for the recommendations that they make un*903der their agreement with Nissen. Their liability to Nissen, as the party that hired them, is established by the terms of the contract of hire. In addition, some authorities recognize that physicians employed by a prospective employer to examine a job applicant may be liable to that applicant if an inaccurate report injures the examinee’s employment chances. See 61 Am.Jur.2d Physicians, Surgeons, and Other Healers § 297, at 446 (1981). We express no view concerning this type of liability in the present case because it exists, if at all, outside the ambit of the employment discrimination laws set forth in section 216.6. Because we find that the acts of the clinic and Dr. Sahai of which Davies complained provide no claim under that statute, we reverse the judgment of the district court and the decision of the Iowa Civil Rights Commission.
REVERSED.
All justices concur except HARRIS, J., who concurs in the result, and LAVORATO, NEUMAN, ANDREASEN, and TERNUS, JJ., who dissent.
. For this purpose Dr. Sahai and other doctors at the clinic had visited the Nissen plant and familiarized themselves with the nature of the work for assembly line positions, as well as other positions.
. The commission believed that Dr. Sahai should not be able to use his right to make an independent medical judgment as a defense in this matter because there was no physician and patient relationship between him and Davies. Accepting the commission's conclusion that Davies was not Dr. Sahai's patient, we nevertheless believe that Nissen, as the party that had contracted for Dr. Sahai's services, was entitled to his independent medical judgment, and he was entitled to give it that judgment.

=== CASE 9741207 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:36.897909+00 ===

LAVORATO, Justice
(dissenting).
I. The majority concedes, as it must, that persons other than employers may be held hable under Iowa Code section 216.6(l)(a). The statute is abundantly clear on this point:
1. It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any:
a. Person to refuse to ... classify, or refer for employment ... any applicant for employment ... because of the ... sex ... of such applicant....
Iowa Code § 216.6(l)(a). A “person” includes, among others, “one or more individuals ... [and] corporations.” Iowa Code § 216.2(11). Sahai and the clinic are “persons” within the meaning of this definition.
For the purposes of this statute “any classification which relies on pregnancy as the determinative criteria is a distinction based on sex.” Quaker Oats Co. v. Cedar Rapids Human Rights Comm’n, 268 N.W.2d 862, 867 (Iowa 1978) (quoting Massachusetts Elec. Co. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 375 Mass. 160, 166-168, 375 N.E.2d 1192, 1198-99 (1978)). Simply put, pregnancy discrimination is equivalent to sex discrimination. Id.; Cedar Rapids Community Sch. Dist. v. Parr, 227 N.W.2d 486, 493 (Iowa 1975).
Davies applied for a job with Nissen. Nis-sen hired Davies on condition that she pass the physical examination and drug test. Clearly, Davies was an applicant for employment and Nissen was a prospective employer.
The commission found that Sahai refused to classify or refer Davies for employment because of her pregnancy, a discriminatory criterion. There is substantial record evidence to support this finding through Sahai’s own testimony:
Q. In fact, you do have a blanket policy for permitting pregnant women to work on the assembly line, do you not? A. Well, you’re correct. For the assembly line, yes, there is. If you want to call that a blanket policy, yes, I’ll give in to that.
Q. It’s your policy not to permit pregnant women to work on the assembly line for Nissen Company. That is your policy, isn’t that correct? A. That’s not correct. The policy is not to newly hire women who are pregnant for assembly line work.
Q. So, in essence, though when you are approving people for their pre-employment physical, that would be a newly hired person? A. That’s correct.
Q. You would not approve someone for hire on the assembly line who is pregnant? A. That’s correct.
Q. And the sole reason for that is the pregnancy, isn’t that right, Doctor? A. And assembly line work.
Sahai based his policy on medical knowledge that anyone working on an assembly line had a higher likelihood of developing carpal tunnel syndrome and that pregnancy exacerbates this malady. The policy was also based on his knowledge that assembly-line work exacerbates back pain and joint pain associated with pregnancy.
As the majority points out, Sahai did a thorough physical examination. Following that examination, Sahai concluded Davies was a “healthy pregnant woman” who had *904none of the maladies to which Sahai felt she might be prone in assembly-line work.
Nevertheless, Sahai told Davies he was going to recommend that Nissen not hire her. True to his word, Sahai telephoned Hakes, the individual who had interviewed Davies, and recommended against hiring Davies for assembly-line work because she was pregnant. Sahai also sent Nissen a physical exam record he had filled out on the day of the examination. To the question, “Approved for work?” on the form, Sahai responded, “No.”
This evidence supports the commission’s finding that Sahai refused to refer Davies for employment because she was pregnant and not because she was unable to do assembly-line work.
The majority puts a different spin on this evidence, stating Sahai’s refusal to approve Davies for work was not discriminatory because his role was merely “advisory.” But the commission found to the contrary and, as already illustrated, there is substantial evidence in the record to support this finding. The majority must engage in a de novo review to justify its conclusion that Sahai’s recommendation was mere advice, a standard of review that ⅛ clearly inappropriate in this agency appeal. See Norland v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 412 N.W.2d 904, 908 (Iowa 1987) (holding that agency findings are binding on appeal unless a contrary result is demanded as a matter of law).
The crux of the majority opinion, however, is based on a mixed motivation theory. The majority states that Sahai’s recommendation was based on two factors: Davies’ physical well-being (a discriminatory criterion because based solely on Davies’ pregnancy) and her ability to do the work (a nondiscriminatory criterion). The majority attempts to save Sahai from liability by putting the blame on Nissen for not asking the right questions: whether the recommendation was based on Sahai’s beliefs concerning Davies’ ability to perform assembly-line work or upon potential physical harm to her from doing that work because she was pregnant.
I think this reasoning is flawed for several reasons. First, what motivated Sahai’s recommendation is a fact question. The commission found that the recommendation was based on a stereotypic and discriminatory belief that pregnant women should not do assembly-line work. The record contains substantial evidence to support this finding, a finding that is binding on us on appeal.
Second, the reasoning runs counter to the mixed motivation rule fashioned in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 109 S.Ct. 1775, 104 L.Ed.2d 268 (1989). Under this rule, the employee must first establish by a preponderance of the evidence that a discriminatory reason played a part in the employment decision. Price Waterhouse, 490 U.S. at 244, 109 S.Ct. at 1787,104 L.Ed.2d at 285. The defendant’s burden at this point “is most appropriately deemed an affirmative defense” rather than a shift in the burden of proof. Id. at 252, 109 S.Ct. at 1792, 104 L.Ed.2d at 289. If the defendant wishes to prevail, it must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that “its legitimate reason, standing alone, would have induced it to make the same decision.” Id.
Stated in another way,
[w]hen a plaintiff ... proves that [a discriminatory reason] played a motivating part in an employment decision, the defendant may avoid a finding of liability only by proving by a preponderance of the evidence that it would have made the same decision even if it had not taken the [discriminatory reason] into account.
Id. at 258, 109 S.Ct. at 1795, 104 L.Ed.2d at 293. This approach is justified in mixed motivation cases because the defendant “has created uncertainty as to causation by knowingly giving substantial weight to an impermissible criterion.” Id. at 261, 109 S.Ct. at 1796, 104 L.Ed.2d at 295 (O’Connor, Justice, concurring).
Assuming for purposes of argument that Sahai had a mixed motivation, as the majority suggests, he still loses because he made no showing before the commission that he would have made the same recommendation even if he had not taken the discriminatory reason into account. The majority turns the mixed motivation rule on its head because it shifts the burden to Davies to prove what substantially motivated Sahai’s recommendation.
*905Even if the mixed motivation rule is not applicable, I think the result should be the same. The critical question is whether the discriminatory reason played a substantial part in Sahai’s recommendation. Again, this is a fact question and inheres in the commission’s finding that Sahai refused to classify or refer Davies for employment because of her pregnancy, a discriminatory criterion.
II. I think the commission’s decision is also supported by a second theory the commission relied on: the “control over employment opportunities” theory of liability. The commission borrowed this theory from federal cases interpreting Title VII.
This theory is based on the rule that parties other than a plaintiffs actual potential employer can be liable under Title VII if such parties control the plaintiffs access to employment opportunities and interfere with that access for discriminatory reasons. The seminal case is Sibley Memorial Hospital v. Wilson, 488 F.2d 1338 (D.C.Cir.1973).
The rule is based on a broad interpretation of Title VII. Pelech v. Klaff-Joss, LP, 815 F.Supp. 260, 262 (N.D.Ill.1993). Title VII— the counterpart to our own employment discrimination statute — provides:
(a) It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer—
(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(l).
The interpretation that Title VII encompasses more than the traditional employer-employee relationship derives from the statute’s use of the term “any individual,” instead of employee. Pelech, 815 F.Supp. at 262-63. This interpretation is consistent with the purpose of Title VII:
[T]he Congressional objective in Title VII is “plain from the language of the statute,” and that is “to achieve equality of employment opportunities. ...” In prohibiting discrimination in employment on the basis of sex, “one of Congress’ main goals was to provide equal access to the job market for both men and women.” Control over access to the job market may reside, depending upon the circumstances of the case in a labor organization, an employment agency, or an employer as defined in Title VII; and it would appear that Congress has determined to prohibit each of these from exerting any power it may have to foreclose, on [invidious] grounds, access by any individual to employment opportunities otherwise available to him. To permit a covered employer to exploit circumstances peculiarly affording it the capability of dis-criminatorily interfering with an individual’s employment opportunities with another employer, while it could not do so with respect to employment in its own service would be to condone continued use of the very criteria for employment that Congress has prohibited.
A fair reading of the Act in the light of its stated purposes precludes such re-sult_
The Act defines “employee” as “an individual employed by an employer,” but nowhere are there words of limitation that restrict references in the Act to “any individual” as comprehending only an employee of an employer. Nor is there any good reason to confine the meaning of “any individual” to include only former employees and applicants for employment, in addition to present employees. Those words should, therefore, be given their ordinary meaning so long as that meaning does not conflict with the manifest policy of the Act.
Sibley, 488 F.2d at 1340-41.
Liability under the rule turns on whether the defendant had control over the plaintiffs access to employment opportunities. On the control issue, the proper focus is on whether the defendant had the power to affect the plaintiffs access to employment opportunities and interfered with that access for discriminatory reasons. Mitchell v. Tenney, 650 F.Supp. 703, 706 (N.D.Ill.1986) (holding that analysis should focus on whether defendant had the power to affect plaintiffs access to employment opportunities in a discriminatory manner).
*906The commission borrowed this “control over employment opportunities” theory of liability in interpreting our own employment discrimination statute, and I think properly so. Tailored to Iowa Code section 216.6(l)(a) and the facts of this case, the claim for discrimination would be phrased this way:
A person who controls an applicant’s access to employment opportunities with a third party and who refuses to classify or refer the applicant for employment with the third party because of sex is liable to the applicant.
Under the “control over employment opportunities” theory, our focus should be on whether Sahai had the power to affect, that is, influence Nissen’s decision to hire Davies. The factual scenario in Association of Mexican-American Educators v. California, 836 F.Supp. 1534 (N.D.Cal.1993), illustrates this point. In this case three associations and fifteen individuals brought a class action against the State of California and the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (teaching commission). The lawsuit, premised in part on a violation of Title VII, challenged the use of the State’s basic educational skills test (test) as a requirement for certification to teach in California public schools. The plaintiffs challenged the test requirement on the grounds it had a disparate impact on racial minorities.
Among other grounds for their summary judgment motion, the State and the teaching commission urged Title VII did not apply because local school districts, rather than the State and the teaching commission, directly employed the plaintiffs. The pivotal question was whether the State and the teaching commission, the entities responsible for the test requirement, could nevertheless be held liable under Title VII “because of the obstacle they placed in plaintiffs’ path to employment” with the school districts. Id. at 1550-51. Relying on Sibley, the court held against the State and the teaching commission, stating significantly:
There is no question but that under Sibley, defendants cannot escape Title VII liability solely because they are not plaintiffs’ employers. While defendants are correct that passage of the [test] does not guarantee a job (a successful applicant must be hired by the local school district), passing the test is the sine qua non of employment in California’s public schools.
Id. at 1551.
The school districts had the ultimate say on whether the plaintiffs would be hired. Passing the test still did not guarantee a job. Nevertheless, the nonemployers (the State and the teaching commission) could incur Title VII liability because they required the plaintiffs (the applicants) to pass a discriminatory test before the school districts (the potential employers) could even consider the plaintiffs for employment. In short, the State and the teaching commission had the power to affect the plaintiffs’ access to employment opportunities with the districts because passing the test was a necessary condition of employment with the districts.
Here, Davies was in a stronger position than the plaintiffs were in Association of Mexican-Ameñcan Educators. Davies had the job, but there was one catch: She had to pass Sahai’s physical examination and receive a favorable recommendation from him. Sa-hai had the power to affect Davies’ conditional employment because passing the physical and receiving a favorable recommendation were the necessary conditions of Davies’ employment with Nissen.
There is substantial record evidence to support the commission’s findings that Sahai (1) had the power to affect Davies’ access to employment opportunities with Nissen, and (2) interfered with that access for discriminatory reasons.
Hakes told Davies in her initial interview that she was qualified and offered her the job conditioned on her passing the physical. Sahai recommended that Nissen not hire her because she was pregnant. Based on Sahai’s recommendation, Nissen did not hire Davies. On this last point, a commission investigator testified about her conversations with Hakes regarding Sahai’s recommendations in general and his recommendation as to Davies in particular. Hakes unequivocally attributed Nissen’s refusal to hire Davies directly to Sahai’s recommendation:
*907Q. In your questioning of Mr. Hakes, did you inquire of him as to why he did not hire or Nissen Company did not hire Ms. Davies? A. Yes.
Q. What was his response to you? A. He said that Dr. Sahai’s decision could not be overruled. It was Dr. Sahai that recommended Ms. Davies not be hired because of her pregnancy. As far as he was concerned, she was qualified.
Q. Did you ask Mr. Hakes what role he played in the decision concerning Ms. Davies versus the role of Dr. Sahai in the decision? A. Mr. Hakes hires for the production line. He interviews persons sent from Job Service. Initially he would determine if they are qualified, then he sends the person to get a physical, but Dr. Sahai determines whether or not they will be hired based on the physical, and Mr. Hakes said he could not overrule the doctor’s decision.
Q. Did Mr. Hakes indicate whether he followed the doctor’s recommendation in Ms. Davies’ case? A. Yes, he did.
The majority notes “[i]t is perhaps unfortunate that the form of Dr. Sahai’s written opinion was a conelusory recommendation as to whether Davies should be hired.” The majority, of course, is again resorting to a de novo review and insisting that Sahai in truth did not recommend against hiring Davies but was only giving advice. The testimony elicited from the commission investigator substantiates the commission’s finding that Sahai did in fact recommend and determine whether an applicant should be hired. Nissen blindly accepted Sahai’s recommendation, and it made no difference to the company what motivated that recommendation.
The primary reason, however, for the majority’s rejection of the “control over employment opportunities” cases appears to be that these cases did not involve “the exercise of independent professional judgment.” By relying on this distinction, the majority has created an exception to our civil rights law for professionals giving opinions within them area of expertise. The majority justifies its position by noting “an employer should be free to seek out expert medical opinion.” While this may be true, it is no justification for concluding the expert is free to discriminate simply because he or she does so under the guise of “professional judgment.” The immunity created by the majority has no support in the broad language of section 216.6(l)(a) or the purposes underlying discrimination laws.
III. Sahai suggests that if a physician can be held liable under the circumstances of this case, the physician will be placed in a dilemma. The dilemma, he claims, is having to choose between (1) violating a physician’s Hippocratic oath not to knowingly harm a patient or (2) facing discrimination allegations. By the tone of its opinion, the majority implicitly agrees.
I see no such dilemma. Nissen employed Sahai to give a medical opinion on Davies’ fitness to work. Davies was clearly able to perform assembly-line work when Sahai examined her, and Sahai should have approved her for this work. Such an opinion would not have prevented Sahai from honoring his Hippocratic oath. All Sahai had to do to comply with both his oath and the law was to (1) warn Davies of the increased risks associated with a pregnant woman doing assembly-line work, (2) advise her against taking the job because of these risks, and (3) leave the final decision to her. Instead, he made the decision for her.
In essence, Sahai was like a gatekeeper to job opportunities at Nissen. A successful physical and favorable recommendation constituted the entry way to those opportunities. In Davies’ case, passage was conditioned on a discriminatory criterion, nonpregnancy.
In my opinion, Sahai’s decision not to classify Davies as fit for employment solely because she was pregnant violated the Iowa Civil Rights Act. The commission correctly decided this ease, and I would affirm.
NEUMAN, ANDREASEN, and TERNUS, JJ., join this dissent.

=== CASE 9741181 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:56.859407+00 ===

Cassel, D.J.,
concurring.
The decision in this case is controlled by the decision in State v. Christner, post p. 549, 557 N.W.2d 707 (1997), which follows from the decision in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995).
The principle of stare decisis requires adherence to past decisions. As Justice Brandéis stated:
Stare decisis is usually the wise policy, because in most matters it is more important that the applicable rule of law be settled than that it be settled right. . . . This is commonly true even where the error is a matter of serious concern, provided correction can be had by legislation.
Burnet v. Coronado Oil & Gas Co., 285 U.S. 393, 406, 52 S. Ct. 443, 76 L. Ed. 815 (1932) (Brandeis, J., dissenting).
I am constrained to follow the principles previously established by the majority in Christner and in Smith. Although I *540might have decided those cases differently, the rule of law demands adherence to settled principles. This is particularly true where the Legislature can, and indeed has chosen to, provide for a different result in future cases. Accordingly, I concur in the judgment of the court.

=== CASE 2226467 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:09.837127+00 ===

348 Ill. App. 510 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 402
Dorothy Fenberg, Appellant,
v.
Alan Rosenthal, Appellee.
Gen. No. 45,762.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed December 9, 1952.
Rehearing denied December 23, 1952.
Released for publication December 23, 1952.
*511 *512 JOSEPH D. RYAN, of Chicago, for appellant.
WYATT JACOBS, of Chicago, for appellee; CHARLES E. HECKLER, and JOSEPH B. LEDERLEITNER, both of Chicago, of counsel.
MR. JUSTICE TUOHY delivered the opinion of the court.
Plaintiff sued defendant charging willful and wanton misconduct in the operation of his car as a result of which she, while a passenger in the car, was injured. From a judgment entered on a verdict finding defendant not guilty plaintiff appeals.
Plaintiff contends that the verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence.
The accident happened between 1:30 and 2:30 a.m. June 29, 1947. Plaintiff, a 24-year-old unmarried woman, had come with her sister to Chicago from Memphis, Tennessee, on the evening preceding the accident, and prior to her coming it had been arranged for her to be introduced to defendant, a 26-year-old unmarried man. Plaintiff and defendant were returning from a date, which had included stops at an inn northwest of Chicago and at a side road parking place afterward. They were homeward bound in a southerly direction on Skokie highway, a 4-lane concrete roadway, when it commenced to rain very hard, causing poor visibility. Defendant was driving a new Chevrolet club coupe. The mechanical condition of the car was good, and the lights and windshield wipers were in working order. The major conflict of fact involves the speed of and manner in which defendant operated *513 his car. Plaintiff testified that she looked at the speedometer once and "it was 40 or more"; that she asked defendant to slow down and "he would slow down" when she asked him; that he went off the pavement onto the shoulder twice before the accident; and that she was cautioning him again to slow down when he headed into the oncoming northbound car. Defendant testified that the rain affected visibility to the extent that he could see only from 30 to 40 feet in front of his car; that he was compelled to guide himself by watching the righthand side of the road; that his car went off the pavement, and in attempting to bring it back onto the slab "the car seemed to slide in an easterly direction" and careened across from the southbound into the northbound lane; that at the time he was driving approximately 12 to 15 miles an hour. He stated that he had been driving in the rain 20 minutes or half an hour before the accident and denied that he had been off the road any time other than the one time just before the collision.
[1, 2] Plaintiff insists that the willful and wanton character of the accident is emphasized by an alleged occurrence at the roadside parking place before they started back to Chicago. According to plaintiff, defendant had attempted to take unwarranted liberties, which she repulsed. The argument is made that he was resentful at having been rebuffed and that this occasioned reckless driving. Defendant denies that he made any improper overtures or that any incident causing anger or resentment occurred. He insists that his difficulty in driving was occasioned solely by the abnormal weather conditions. We think, after a review of all the facts and circumstances of the case, that the question of whether or not defendant was guilty of willful and wanton conduct in the operation of his automobile at the time and place of the accident was a matter for the jury, and we are unable to say that *514 the jury's finding in this respect is against the manifest weight of the evidence.
Plaintiff complains there was error in the refusal of the court to admit competent and material testimony.
[3, 4] The automobile with which defendant's car collided was driven by Mrs. Margaret Sliker. She testified by way of deposition on behalf of defendant, fixing the speed of defendant's automobile immediately before the accident at about 20 miles an hour, stating that prior to the accident she had not observed any southbound automobiles weaving in and out of traffic. Over objection, it was developed on cross-examination that she had been paid $700 by the defendant or his representative for medical expenses necessitated by injuries received in the accident. Upon the trial the court, out of the presence of the jury, sustained objections to questions in the deposition seeking to establish the payment of this money. Plaintiff claims that the exclusion of this testimony was error. She maintains that it was for the jury to determine whether or not this payment affected the credibility of the witness. Defendant, on the other hand, insists that the payment, being in the nature of settlement of a controversy, was inadmissible for any purpose. We are thus faced with an apparent conflict between two well established legal principles, the one that it is always permissible to prove payments of money to a witness for the purpose of showing interest or bias, thus reflecting upon credibility (West Skokie Drainage Dist. v. Dawson, 243 Ill. 175, 182; Schuman v. Bader & Co., 227 Ill. App. 28, 31); the other that offers of compromise or settlement are never admissible in evidence (Edwin S. Hartwell Lumber Co. v. Bork, 138 Ill. App. 506; Graff v. Fox, 204 Ill. App. 598).
The case of Jacobson v. Chicago Motor Coach Co., 328 Ill. App. 131, is the only case in this State where *515 we find the question here presented to have been passed on. The court in that case held it error to have permitted the previous settlement with a witness injured in the same accident to be shown on cross-examination, citing 31 C.J.S. sec. 292, p. 1055, where the general rule is stated as follows:
"A settlement between a party and a third person cannot be shown, even though it relates to the matters involved in the action and the person with whom the compromise was made was in the same position as the party seeking to show such settlement. The rule above stated may be subject to exceptions under unusual circumstances."
This rule finds strong support in the following cases: Georgia Ry. & Elec. Co. v. Wallace & Co., 122 Ga. 547, 50 S.E. 478; Powers v. Wiley, 241 Ky. 645, 44 S.W.2d 591; Hawthorne v. Eckerson Co., 77 F.2d 844; Ashley v. Safeway Stores, 100 Mont. 312, 47 P.2d 53.
In Georgia Ry. & Elec. Co. v. Wallace & Co., supra, plaintiff sought to show on cross-examination that defendant's witness had received a money payment in settlement of damages suffered in the same accident. The court, holding this evidence inadmissible, said:
"It costs time, trouble, and money to defend even an unfounded claim. Parties have a right to purchase their peace. The fact that they have entered into negotiations to secure that end, and admissions or propositions made with the view to a compromise, are not admissible in evidence for or against either litigant, in the event there is a failure to adjust and suit follows. For a much stronger reason, evidence of a settlement with a third person injured in the same casualty ought to be excluded. * * * The rule against allowing evidence of compromises is founded upon recognition of the fact that such testimony is inherently harmful, for the jury will draw conclusions therefrom *516 in spite of anything said by the parties at the time of discussing the compromise, and in spite of anything which may be said by the judge in instructing them as to the weight to be given such evidence."
In Powers v. Wiley, supra, a witness called on behalf of defendant had been a passenger in the car with which defendant's car collided and plaintiff sought to cross-examine him as to a settlement with defendant prior to trial in which he had received $1,500. The court there commented:
"The rule is well settled that, if in the same accident two or more persons are injured, a compromise with one cannot be shown in an action by the other. * * * The reason for the rule is that the law favors the settlement of controversies out of court, and, if a man could not settle one claim out of court without fear that this would be used in another suit as an admission against him, many settlements would not be made. For this reason, offers of compromise are always held inadmissible, and for the same reason a man's buying his peace from one party can no more be used against him in the suit of another party than the defendant could use the settlement against the plaintiff in the action to reduce his recovery if for only a nominal amount."
The court refused to admit such testimony, saying:
"It is insisted, however, that the evidence should be admitted to show Hall's bias. But that was not the real object in getting the matter before the jury. The real effect of the evidence, if admitted, would have been to advise the jury that Wiley had admitted liability to Beutel and Hall. The fact that Hall had received a part of the money that Wiley had paid in this settlement did not really go to his credibility. The fact that he had been settled with simply showed that he had no further interest in the matter."
In Hawthorne v. Eckerson Co., supra, plaintiff's car collided with defendant's car. Plaintiff and her passenger, *517 Miss Kellogg, were both injured. Defendant's car was driven by one A.J. Gassett, its employee. One of the questions involved Gassett's authority to drive defendant's car at the time and place of the accident. Plaintiff was permitted over objection to prove that defendant had made a settlement with plaintiff's passenger, Miss Kellogg, both in order to show that Gassett was defendant's agent and also to show liability. JUSTICE AUGUSTUS HAND, speaking for the court, said:
"The defendant complains because the court permitted the plaintiff to prove the settlement with Miss Kellogg, both in order to show that Gassett was its agent and also to show liability. We think the rulings in this respect were erroneous. Compromises are not in themselves evidence as admissions of liability, and the same rule applies when they are offered as proof of agency."
The court there cited with approval the rulings in Georgia Ry. & Elec. Co. v. Wallace & Co. and Powers v. Wiley, supra.
[5-8] In the case of Hill v. Hiles, 309 Ill. App. 321, it was held error to have permitted defendant to prove that the plaintiff paid the cost of repairing damages to the parked car with which plaintiff's car collided, the court stating at page 331:
"The Illinois courts have consistently refused to permit evidence of mere offers and negotiations for settlement to reach the jury on the ground that public policy favors the settlement of claims outside of court. * * * We think that this same public policy applies when an actual settlement is made with a third party."
While no question of interest or bias of a witness was involved in the last-cited case, the reasoning is nevertheless indicative of the fact that our courts are firmly committed to the principle that offers of compromise or settlements with third persons are not admissible. *518 Plaintiff cites authority to the contrary, most of which stems from Gurley v. St. Louis Transit Co. (Mo. App.), 259 S.W. 895, and Etheredge v. Gordon Const. Co., 62 Wash. 256, 113 P. 639, 640. We have examined the cases cited. All are cases where verdicts were affirmed notwithstanding the admission of such testimony; none where the exclusion of such testimony was held error. In each of these cases the courts have been careful to point out that the jury was instructed that evidence of the offer of compromise was admitted solely upon the question of the credibility of the witness and not on the question of liability. We think, however, that such reasoning is not realistic, for, as pointed out in the cases committed to contrary doctrine, it is a practical impossibility to eradicate from the jury's minds the consideration that where there has been a payment there must have been liability. We see no reason to depart from our former ruling in the Jacobson case. We are of the opinion that the more substantial authority supports the conclusion that the rule permitting payments to a witness to be shown for the purpose of determining whether such payments affect credibility must yield to the public policy inherent in the other rule that offers of compromise and settlement with third persons may not be shown except under unusual circumstances. Such unusual circumstances exist where some species of fraud or other questionable practice is indulged in to procure or influence such testimony. If such claim is made the trial court should hear testimony of the alleged misconduct out of the presence of the jury and rule on a motion to strike, preliminary to the testimony being offered in evidence. However, no such unusual circumstances are found or claimed to be present in the instant case.
[9] Plaintiff complains that certain instructions are erroneous. In the instant case 38 instructions were tendered to the trial court. Of these plaintiff offered *519 21. Of the 38 instructions tendered 27 were given to the jury, 13 on behalf of plaintiff and 14 for the defendant. We have frequently criticized the practice of submitting an excessive number of instructions to the trial court, and such practice may be indulged in only at the risk of some intruding inaccuracies. We have carefully examined the instructions in the instant case and we are of the opinion there was no reversible error in the giving or refusing of the same. In this case the weight of the evidence supports the verdict of the jury. As the court said in the case of Farmer v. Davis, 289 Ill. 392:
"One or two of the five instructions complained of may be subject to criticism, but where the evidence warrants the verdict a decree will not be reversed for inaccuracies in instructions. There is no reason to believe a different verdict and decree might have resulted if none of the instructions complained of had been given. Courts of review reverse for only such errors as may have been prejudicial to the party complaining."
The judgment of the superior court of Cook county is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
ROBSON, P.J. and SCHWARTZ, J., concur.

=== CASE 2226477 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:10.064785+00 ===

329 Mass. 508 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 166
THE CENTURY INDEMNITY COMPANY
vs.
HENRY B. BLOOM & others.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
October 8, 1952.
December 1, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., RONAN, WILKINS, SPALDING, & COUNIHAN, JJ.
Julius H. Soble, for the defendant David Bloom.
David Gorfinkle, for the plaintiff.
WILKINS, J.
Following the earlier decision in this case, 325 Mass. 52, the declaration was amended, and there was another trial limited to the liability of the defendant David Bloom (hereinafter called the defendant). The judge found for the plaintiff on the amended first count. The defendant's exceptions are to the denial of certain requests for rulings.
The amended first count alleges that on November 13, 1939, the defendants Henry B. Bloom, David Bloom, the late Louis Bloom, and the now defunct Leighton & La Pierre Co., a corporation (hereinafter called the corporation), executed with the plaintiff a general contract of indemnity, a copy of which is annexed; that after the corporation ceased to do business, the defendants Henry B. Bloom, Muriel Cohen, and Sylvia Bloom formed a partnership, and carried on business under the name of Leighton & La Pierre, Dunhill Co., Leighton & La Pierre Co., and Leighton-La Pierre; that the partnership as principal and the plaintiff as surety issued two indemnity bonds upon which the plaintiff has been obliged to make payments for which recovery is sought; that the first bond, executed on or about May 14, 1946, to New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company for freight charges, resulted in a payment to the *510 obligee by the plaintiff of $700; and that the second bond, executed on or about October 31, 1946, to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for the payment of beverage excise taxes resulted in a payment to the obligee by the plaintiff of $1,677.07.
At the trial the proof was much the same as at the earlier one. There was evidence of the execution of the general contract of indemnity, the corporation ceasing to do business, the formation of the partnership, the execution by the plaintiff as surety of the two bonds, and the payments of losses, as alleged. With respect to the first bond, there was evidence that "Leighton-La Pierre appeared as principal." As to the second bond there was evidence that "the defendants Henry B. Bloom and Sylvia Bloom, together with Muriel Cohen, doing business as Leighton and La Pierre, doing business as Dunhill Co., and doing business as Leighton & La Pierre Co., executed" as principals. The only material new evidence was that Henry B. Bloom and Sylvia Bloom were husband and wife; and that the plaintiff's representative who executed the bonds was unaware of that fact.
1. The defendant's third request was: "The execution of the bond of May 14, 1946, wherein Leighton-La Pierre appeared as principal, the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad as obligee and the plaintiff as surety was not such a bond the loss against which the defendant David Bloom agreed to indemnify the plaintiff under the general contract of indemnity of May [sic] 13, 1939." The request is obscure. Literally, the "execution of the bond" could not be "a bond." The defendant now briefly argues that there was no evidence as to who signed the bond on behalf of Leighton-La Pierre, and no evidence that any member of the partnership executed it. When the case was here before, it was held that the defendant Henry B. Bloom was liable upon both bonds, and that both bonds fell within the general contract of indemnity (page 56). This request was rightly denied. Boyd v. Taylor, 207 Mass. 335. John Hetherington & Sons, Ltd. v. William Firth Co. 212 Mass. *511 257, 260. Parker v. American Woolen Co. 215 Mass. 176, 181. Taylor v. Pierce Brothers, Ltd. 220 Mass. 254, 255. Spilios v. Papps, 292 Mass. 145, 146. Cann v. Barry, 298 Mass. 186, 187.
2. The defendant argues that there could be no valid principal on the two bonds because Henry B. Bloom and Sylvia Bloom were husband and wife and could not be partners. The judge ruled that "an ostensible partnership existed as to third persons and that the defendant David Bloom is estopped to deny" liability. This ruling was correct. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 108A, § 16. Standard Oil Co. of New York v. Henderson, 265 Mass. 322. Requests numbered 39 and 41[1] were rightly denied. Requests numbered 36 and 37, which were to the effect that the plaintiff was bound by the allegations in its declaration that the principal on the two bonds was the partnership, were abstractly correct. Bancroft v. Cook, 264 Mass. 343, 348. Markus v. Boston Edison Co. 317 Mass. 1, 7. These requested rulings, however, were not material to the decisive issue, and the defendant suffered no harm in their denial. John Hetherington & Sons, Ltd. v. William Firth Co. 210 Mass. 8, 18.
3. The thirty-fourth request was: "Notice of acceptance of the contract of indemnity by the plaintiff was never communicated to the defendant David Bloom and he therefore cannot be held liable thereunder."
The general contract of indemnity, which was filled in on a printed form of the plaintiff, designated Leighton & La Pierre Co., Louis Bloom, Henry B. Bloom, and David Bloom as indemnitors, and was signed by them under seal. The plaintiff, which was designated as surety, did not sign, and the form furnished no place for anyone to sign on its behalf. The contract provided, "Whereas, certain bonds, *512 undertakings and other writings obligatory in the nature of a bond, have heretofore been, and may hereafter be, required by, for, or on behalf of the indemnitor(s), or any one or more of the parties included in the designation indemnitor(s), in connection with either their joint, several or individual business, and application has been made and may hereafter be made to the surety to execute such instruments as surety. Now therefore, in consideration of the premises and of the sum of One Dollar, duly paid by the surety to each of the indemnitors, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, and in further consideration of the execution by the surety of obligations of the nature aforesaid to be given by, for, or on behalf of the indemnitor(s), or any one or more of the parties included in such designation and for other good and valuable considerations, the undersigned indemnitor(s)" agree to indemnify the surety by reason of becoming surety on any bonds, and to pay an annual premium on each bond. "Any of the indemnitor(s) may by written notice to the home office of the surety at Hartford, Connecticut, terminate their liability as to bonds, undertakings and other obligations in the nature of a bond executed by the surety subsequent to ten days after the receipt of such notice by the surety. It being understood and agreed that such notice of termination shall in no way modify, bar or discharge any obligations of the indemnitor(s) to be performed under this agreement in connection with bonds executed by the surety prior to the effective date of the said notice of termination.... We acknowledge that the execution, from time to time, of bonds or undertakings under this general contract of indemnity is the compensation for this general contract of indemnity.... We further agree that our liability shall be construed as the liability of a compensated surety, as broadly as the liability of the surety is construed towards its obligee.... The undersigned indemnitor(s) fully appreciate that this agreement is intended to cover whatever bonds ... may be executed by the surety on behalf of the undersigned indemnitors, or any one of them, from time to time, and over an indefinite period of *513 years, until this agreement shall be cancelled in accordance with the terms hereof."
The defendant's contention is that the general contract of indemnity was unilateral in character, and amounted to no more than a promise to guarantee or indemnify, which the plaintiff might or might not accept; and that the plaintiff should have given notice of acceptance to the defendant within a reasonable time. This theory overlooks the fundamental distinction between an absolute guaranty and an offer of one. See Paige v. Parker, 8 Gray, 211, 213-214. The general contract of indemnity under seal executed by the defendant was at once binding on him. Chem-Lac Products, Inc. v. Gerome, 327 Mass. 394, 395. It contained other recitals of consideration to the defendant. See Davis v. Wells, 104 U.S. 159, 167-168. Still other provisions as to termination are inconsistent with the implication of any duty upon the plaintiff to give notice of the execution of any bond. Where there is an absolute guaranty, no obligation exists to give notice of the doing of any specified act. Mayo v. Bloomberg, 290 Mass. 168, 170-171, and cases cited. See Gloucester Mutual Fishing Ins. Co. v. Boyer, 294 Mass. 35, 41. The cases relied upon by the defendant concern contingent offers of guaranty. See Cumberland Glass Manuf. Co. v. Wheaton, 208 Mass. 425, 431-432. The distinction from an absolute guaranty is clearly pointed out in Black, Starr & Frost v. Grabow, 216 Mass. 516, 518, and Lane Brothers Co. v. Sheinwald, 275 Mass. 96, 98.
On the issue of notice, the judge found that the defendant "accepted the benefits of the contract and was aware of its acceptance by the surety prior to the losses sustained by it." As the finding was immaterial, there is no occasion to consider the defendant's complaint that it was unwarranted by the evidence.
Exceptions overruled.
NOTES
[1]  "39. If there was no partnership between Henry B. Bloom, Sylvia W. Bloom and Muriel Cohen, there was no principal in either of the two bonds in question, and the defendant David Bloom is not liable under either bond." "41. The defendant David Bloom is not liable on either of the two bonds because there was no principal on either bond." The judge gave the thirty-eight request, which was: "If Sylvia W. Bloom was the wife of Henry B. Bloom there could be no partnership between them."

=== CASE 9741183 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:03.877176+00 ===

Per Curiam.
On February 2, 1984, plaintiff-appellant, Dennis Snipes, suffered an eye injury in the course of his employment by defendant-appellee, Sperry Vickers. Sperry Vickers paid all medical expenses and all temporary and permanent disability benefits. As a result of his eye injury, Snipes was required to wear glasses. When Snipes so requested, he was examined by an ophthalmologist, who would change his prescription if appropriate. Sperry Vickers paid for all examinations and glasses through August 14, 1992.
On March 9, 1995, Snipes was examined by his. ophthalmologist, who changed Snipes’ prescription for glasses. It is stipulated that the cost of the examination and the new glasses is a result of the injury at work on February 2,1984, and that Snipes had no claim against Sperry Vickers between August 14, 1992, and March 9, 1995.
Sperry Vickers refused to pay the cost of the eye examination and the resultant cost of new glasses. It urges that the claim was filed more than 2 years áfter the last payment and thát Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-137 (Reissue 1993) establishes a 2-year limitation period. Snipes filed an amended petition against Sperry Vickers in the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court on April 12, 1995. Snipes claims that Sperry Vickers is liable for his medical expenses as and when needed. Snipes further alleges that the statute of limitations could not run until such time as he had a claim, which he did not have until March 9, 1995.
*417A majority of the review panel confirmed the trial court’s finding that the statute of limitations took precedence over the requirement to pay medical expenses. One judge dissented.
Snipes appealed to the Nebraska Court of Appeals, arguing that the statute of limitations had not run because the claim was filed as soon as it occurred. We removed the case to our docket pursuant to our power to regulate the docket of the Court of Appeals. We affirm.
BACKGROUND
The parties stipulated to the following facts:
On February 2, 1984, [Snipes] was employed by [Sperry Vickers] when he suffered an injury to his right eye arising out of and in the course of his employment
As a result of the injury, [Snipes’] vision in his right eye was reduced to less than 20/20.
William R. Schlichtemeier, M.D., d/b/a Cornea Associates, P.C., performed surgery in 1984 on [Snipes’] right eye. With the use of glasses, [Snipes] has some, but not all the vision in his right eye.
Since 1984, [Snipes] has been examined by John Fitzpatrick, M.D., W.R. Schlichtemeier, M.D., and Stanley M. Truhlsen, M.D. and glasses were purchased.
[Sperry Vickers] paid all medical expenses, expenses for glasses, temporary disability and permanent disability benefits through August 14, 1992. [Sperry Vickers] made no payments to or on behalf of [Snipes] after August 14, 1992.
After August 14, 1992 and before March 9, 1995, [Snipes] incurred no medical expenses for which [Sperry Vickers] would be liable and [Snipes] had no claim against [Sperry Vickers] for which workman’s compensation benefits would be due or owing.
On March 9,1995, [Snipes’] right eye was examined by W.R. Schlichtemeier, M.D. Dr. Schlichtemeier changed the prescription for [Snipes’] glasses and [Snipes] needs a replacement set of glasses.
*418The examination and treatment by W.R. Schlichtemeier, M.D. on March 9, 1995 and the cost of a replacement set of glasses is directly and proximately caused by and arose out of [Snipes’] injury while in the course of his employment by [Sperry Vickers] on February 2, 1984.
The fair and reasonable charge for the examination by W.R. Schlichtemeier, M.D. on March 9, 1995 is $60.00.
The fair and reasonable charge for the glasses ordered by W.R. Schlichtemeier, M.D. is $440.00.
Dr. Schlichtemeier’s statement in the amount of $60.00 and the statement of Malbar Vision Center in the amount of $440.00 [were] submitted to [Sperry Vickers].
[Sperry Vickers] refused to pay the statements of Dr. Schlichtemeier and Malbar Vision Center on the grounds that more than two years has passed since August 14, 1992, the date of it’s [sic] last compensation payment and as a result, [Snipes’] claim is barred by the statute of limitations, §48-137 R.R.S. 1993.
Snipes alleges that the medical expense is payable as a reasonable and necessary medical expense as provided for in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-120 (Reissue 1993) and is not barred by the statute of limitations, since it did not commence because Snipes had no compensable claim to make between August 14, 1992, and March 9, 1995.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Snipes assigns as error the following: (1) Errors of law were committed by the trial court; (2) the court’s decision was contrary to law; (3) the court’s decision was contrary to the facts; (4) the court failed to order Sperry Vickers to pay Snipes’ medical bill incurred “as and when needed” as required by § 48-120(1); (5) the court found Snipes’ claim for medical expenses which are stipulated to have arisen out of his employment by Sperry Vickers and on which suit was filed within 2 months of the date of medical care was barred by the statute of limitations, § 48-137; (6) the court found the statute of limitations, § 48-137, begins to run before a right to file a claim for medical expenses has arisen; and, finally, (7) the court failed to award Snipes an attorney fee.
*419STANDARD OF REVIEW
A judgment, order, or award of the Workers’ Compensation Court may be modified, reversed, or set aside only upon the grounds that (1) the compensation court acted without or in excess of its powers; (2) the judgment, order, or award was procured by fraud; (3) there is not sufficient competent evidence in the record to warrant the making of the order, judgment, or award; or (4) the findings of fact by the compensation court do not support the order or award. Berggren v. Grand Island Accessories, 249 Neb. 789, 545 N.W.2d 727 (1996); Pettit v. State, 249 Neb. 666, 544 N.W.2d 855 (1996); Scott v. Pepsi Cola Co., 249 Neb. 60, 541 N.W.2d 49 (1995); Toombs v. Driver Mgmt., Inc., 248 Neb. 1016, 540 N.W.2d 592 (1995).
An appellate court is obligated in workers’ compensation cases to make its own determinations as to questions of law. Berggren, supra; Hull v. Aetna Ins. Co., 249 Neb. 125, 541 N.W.2d 631 (1996); Scott, supra.
ANALYSIS
The parties stipulate that the issue for this court to decide is whether or not a claim for medical expenses incurred more than 2 years after the last payment of compensation is barred by the statute of limitations when the employee had no compensable claims to file between August 14, 1992, the date of the last payment of compensation, and March 9, 1995, the date of the examination by Dr. William R. Schlichtemeier. We hold that the claim in this case is barred by the statute of limitations.
The answer to the issue presented by stipulation requires statutory interpretation of various sections of the Workers’ Compensation Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-101 et seq. (Reissue 1993 & Cum. Supp. 1994). Statutory interpretation is a matter of law in connection with which we have an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the determination made by the court below. In re Interest of Brandy M. et al., 250 Neb. 510, 550 N.W.2d 17 (1996); County Cork v. Nebraska Liquor Control Comm., 250 Neb. 456, 550 N.W.2d 913 (1996); Goolsby v. Anderson, 250 Neb. 306, 549 N.W.2d 153 (1996). Further, in determining the meaning of a statute, we may conjunctively consider and construe a collection of statutes *420which pertain to a certain subject matter to determine the intent of the Legislature so that different provisions of the act are consistent, harmonious, and sensible. McCook Nat. Bank v. Bennett, 248 Neb. 567, 537 N.W.2d 353 (1995); Anderson v. Nashua Corp., 246 Neb. 420, 519 N.W.2d 275 (1994).
Sperry Vickers correctly states that a claimant has 2 years from the date of the last payment of compensation within which to bring an action under the Worker’s Compensation Act, citing § 48-137.
Snipes argues that an employer is liable for all reasonable medical services, including appliances, supplies, prosthetic devices, and medicines as and when needed which are required by the nature of the injury and which will relieve pain or promote and hasten the employee’s restoration to health and employment, citing § 48-120. He further argues that additional compensation may be awarded when there is an increase in disability. See, § 48-141; White v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 230 Neb. 369, 431 N.W.2d 641 (1988).
When payments of compensation have been made, as in the instant case, the statute of limitations will not take effect until the expiration of 2 years from the time of the making of the last payment, § 48-137. Snipes’ initial argument, relying on § 48-120, is misplaced. We have never held § 48-120 to be an exception to the 2-year limitation in § 48-137, and we refrain from doing so now.
However, there are at least two exceptions that apply to § 48-137. The first, not argued by Snipes, is the situation where the injury is “latent and progressive” and is not discovered within 2 years of the accident which caused the injury. See, Borowski v. Armco Steel Corp., 188 Neb. 654, 198 N.W.2d 460 (1972); Williams v. Dobberstein, 182 Neb. 862, 157 N.W.2d 776 (1968). See, also, Maxey v. Fremont Department of Utilities, 220 Neb. 627, 371 N.W.2d 294 (1985); Novak v. Triangle Steel Co., 197 Neb. 783, 251 N.W.2d 158 (1977) (stating that knowledge of compensable disability, and not awareness of full extent thereof, is factor which controls in determining when statute of limitations begins to run).
The second exception to the statute of limitations, argued by Snipes, is articulated in the case of White, supra.
*421In White, this court confronted similar facts. The employee, Barbara A. White, injured her back on November 16, 1983, as a result of an accident that occurred during the course of her employment. As a result of her injury, White underwent surgery and did not return to work until August 1984. During the time White was off work, her employer paid compensation to her, the last payment having been made in September 1984.
On February 20, 1987, White filed a petition in the Workers’ Compensation Court, alleging that since the spring of 1986, she had suffered a material change in her condition which necessitated additional medical care and for which she had suffered increased disability. Specifically, she had an increase from “ ‘some residual minor back discomfort’ ” to “between a 5-per-cent and 12-percent permanent disability to the body as a whole.” Id. at 371, 431 N.W.2d at 643. Her employer relied on the statute of limitations. Both the single judge and the rehearing panel accepted the employer’s argument.
The instant case has facts similar to those in White. Snipes’ employer, Sperry Vickers, paid all medical expenses, expenses for glasses, and temporary disability and permanent disability benefits through August 14, 1992. Sperry Vickers made no payments to or on behalf of Snipes after that date. After August 14, 1992, and before March 9, 1995, Snipes incurred no medical expenses for which Sperry Vickers would be liable, and Snipes had no claim against Sperry Vickers for which workers’ compensation benefits would be due or owing.
On April 12, 1995, Snipes filed an amended petition against Sperry Vickers in the Workers’ Compensation Court, claiming in essence, that a material increase in disability occurred to his eye. This increase, resulting from the initial injury, necessitated additional medical care, i.e., examination on March 9, 1995, by Dr. Schlichtemeier, who changed the prescription for Snipes’ glasses. Sperry Vickers relied on the statute of limitations. Both the trial judge and the review panel accepted the employer’s argument.
In discussing the statute of limitations issue in White v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 230 Neb. 369, 371-72, 431 N.W.2d 641, 643 (1988), we stated:
*422There is no doubt as to the right of an injured worker to receive compensation for an increase in disability that occurs following a compensable injury. Where there has been a proceeding before the compensation court and there has been an award, the procedure is set out in § 48-141. Where there is no dispute about the compensable nature of the injury which the worker sustained, and the employer has voluntarily paid compensation to the injured worker, the right to receive additional compensation in the event of a material increase in disability resulting from the injury is still available.
(Emphasis supplied.)
Further:
“The entire question is the simple one of whether the claimant has any reasonable occasion to file a claim sooner than he did. If voluntary compensation was paid, this cancels out the initial disability as a reason for filing a claim, and the case becomes identical to any other latent-injury situation.”
White, 230 Neb. at 372, 431 N.W.2d at 643 (quoting 3 Arthur Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation § 78.44 at 15-296 (1988)).
Sperry Vickers paid compensation, thus canceling out the initial disability as a reason for filing a claim. Snipes had no reasonable occasion to file a claim sooner than he did. When the parties are unable to agree on the compensation owed, the worker’s remedy is to file a petition in the compensation court. See White, supra. Such a petition must be filed within 2 years from the time the employee knows or is chargeable with knowledge that the employee’s condition has materially changed and that there has been such a substantial increase in disability as to entitle the employee to additional compensation. § 48-137; White, supra. See Peek v. Ayers Auto Supply, 157 Neb. 363, 59 N.W.2d 564 (1953).
We note that this case does not present a situation where the glasses were damaged and replacement of the glasses is sought. This is a case where the eye of the employee was damaged. However, this case is distinguished from White in one important *423area. There is no evidence in the stipulated facts that there has been a material increase in Snipes’ disability.
In White, the evidence showed a 5- to 12-percent increase in permanent disability to the body as a whole. That was determined to be a “material increase” in the claimant’s disability. There is no such evidence in this case.
When payments of compensation have been made, as in the instant case, the statute of limitations will not take effect until the expiration of 2 years from the time of the making of the last payment. § 48-137. The last payment in this case was made on August 14, 1992. Lacking evidence of an exception, the March 9, 1995, claim is barred by the statute of limitations.
Based on the evidence it had before it, the compensation court was correct in its finding that the 2-year statute of limitations contained in § 48-137 had run. We therefore affirm.
Snipes has pointed out that his only other alternative is to incur “phony and/or frivolous” medical expenses and ask the court to order the employer to pay for such medical care in order to repeatedly extend the start date of the statute of limitations. Snipes argues that this would encourage frivolous medical care and litigation over frivolous medical care and would penalize an honest employee who has not abused the system.
Regarding this argument, the compensation court stated, “[Snipes] may very well be correct, but this problem was undoubtedly foreseen by the [Legislature which chose to make no exceptions.” The compensation court was not in error.
CONCLUSION
The petition was filed after the 2-year time period set forth in the applicable statute of limitations. The possible exceptions to the statute of limitations do not apply. The judgment of the compensation court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741185 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:04.468749+00 ===

Murphy, P.J.
Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Company of Michigan appeals by leave granted from a March 8, 1994, order of the Isabella Circuit Court denying its motion to intervene. Farm Bureau claims that it is entitled to intervene for the purpose of enforcing a mediation sanctions order entered against plaintiff in this negligence action against her husband, Farm Bureau’s insured. We agree and reverse and remand the case to the trial court.
Plaintiff sued her husband, Charles Neal, for negligence arising out of a one-car accident. The case went to mediation. Farm Bureau, on behalf of Mr. Neal, accepted the award of $35,000 in favor of plaintiff, but she rejected the award. At trial, Farm Bureau provided a defense to Mr. Neal. After the jury returned a verdict of no cause of action, defense counsel moved for an order taxing costs and media*492tion sanctions. Plaintiff was ordered to pay costs and mediation sanctions in the amount of $4,752.34.
When defense counsel wrote to plaintiffs counsel seeking payment, plaintiffs counsel responded that plaintiff had informed him that her husband wished to waive the imposition of any costs or sanctions. Recognizing a conflict of interest for defense counsel it hired to represent Mr. Neal, Farm Bureau hired separate counsel to pursue the matter. That attorney sent a letter to Mr. Neal asking whether he intended to interfere with Farm Bureau’s right to collect the costs and mediation sanctions and noting the subrogation provision of his insurance policy with Farm Bureau. The letter asked Mr. Neal to disavow any intent to interfere with the collection of costs and mediation sanctions. Mr. Neal responded, stating that he had not intended to violate the policy, he did not wish to pursue any claim for costs against his wife, and he would prefer that Farm Bureau not attempt to collect costs. He also stated that he did not understand the policy language quoted in counsel's letter because no payment was made to his wife.
Farm Bureau then filed a motion for intervention and substitution, claiming that it fulfilled its contractual obligation to Mr. Neal by defending him in the action and that it was the real party in interest with regard to the recovery of mediation sanctions. The trial court denied the motion, finding that it was not timely filed.
The decision whether to grant a motion to intervene is within the trial court’s discretion. The rule for intervention should be liberally construed to allow intervention where the applicant's interests may be inadequately represented. Black v Dep’t of Social Ser*493vices, 212 Mich App 203, 204; 537 NW2d 456 (1995). However, “intervention may not be proper where it will have the effect of delaying the action or producing a multifariousness of parties and causes of action.” Precision Pipe & Supply, Inc v Meram Construction, Inc, 195 Mich App 153, 157; 489 NW2d 166 (1992).
We believe the trial court abused its discretion in denying Farm Bureau’s motion to intervene. Farm Bureau argues that the purpose of the mediation sanctions rule requires that it be allowed to intervene in this case. A party who rejects a mediation evaluation is subject to sanctions if the party fails to improve its position at trial. MCR 2.403(0). The purpose of the mediation rule is to expedite and simplify final settlement of cases. The sanction provision of the rule places the burden of litigation costs on the party who insists on trial by rejecting a proposed mediation award, the reasonableness of which is measured by the outcome of the trial. See Meagher v McNeely & Lincoln, Inc, 212 Mich App 154, 157; 536 NW2d 851 (1995); Smith v Elenges, 156 Mich App 260, 263; 401 NW2d 342 (1986).
Farm Bureau relies on Pinto v Buckeye Union Ins Co, 193 Mich App 304; 484 NW2d 9 (1992), for the proposition that it is appropriate to look past nominal parties when considering mediation sanctions. In Pinto, this Court found that the insurer rather than the insured would be responsible for mediation sanctions if the insurer controlled the litigation and rejected the mediation award. Id. at 310-311. Farm Bureau argues that implicit in this holding is a determination that the purpose of mediation sanctions would be thwarted if a party could evade paying *494mediation sanctions by the technicality that the insurer is not a named party. We agree.
Farm Bureau contends that it has a right to collect mediation sanctions by contract. Farm Bureau was obligated by its insurance policy to defend Mr. Neal in the negligence action brought by plaintiff. The subrogation provision of the policy, relating to liability and physical damage, provides in part:
In the event of any payment under this policy, the company shall be subrogated to all the insured’s rights of recovery therefor, against any person or organization and the insured shall execute and deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such rights.
Farm Bureau claims that the mediation sanctions represent a partial reimbursement for its payment of defense costs in connection with defending Mr. Neal. Plaintiff argues that the subrogation provision applies to the payment of a claim under the policy and has nothing to do with the costs of defense.
We find Farm Bureau’s argument persuasive. In Michigan Educational Employees Mutual Ins Co v Transamerica Ins Corp of America, 204 Mich App 440; 516 NW2d 93 (1994), rev’d on other grounds 450 Mich 429; 537 NW2d 879 (1995), the primary insurance policy provided that the insurer assumed all of the insured’s rights to recover from any other person in the event of any payment under the policy, and the primary insurer assumed the insured’s defense and sought to pay the limits of its policy and be excused from the defense. Because the insured would have a right to bring an action against the excess insurer for failing to defend him or share in the defense costs, this Court found that the primary insurer had a right *495to sue the excess insurer for reimbursement of defense costs. Id. at 443. Similarly, the insurance policy in this case provides that Farm Bureau shall be subrogated to the insured’s rights of recovery in the event of any payment under the policy, and Farm Bureau paid for Mr. Neal’s defense. Mr. Neal has a right to collect costs and mediation sanctions because plaintiff rejected the mediation award and failed to prevail at trial. As in Michigan Educational Employees Mutual, the defense costs incurred by Farm Bureau may be considered as payments under its policy. Therefore, Farm Bureau should be entitled to recover such costs in the form of mediation sanctions under a contract subrogation theory.1
Farm Bureau also argues that it has a right to collect mediation sanctions by equitable subrogation. Because a contract cannot be implied in law while an express contract covering the same subject matter is in force between the parties, Scholz v Montgomery Ward & Co, Inc, 437 Mich 83, 93; 468 NW2d 845 (1991); Wallace v Recorder’s Court, 207 Mich App 443, 447; 525 NW2d 481 (1994); Cascade Electric Co v Rice, 70 Mich App 420, 426; 245 NW2d 774 (1976), we consider this issue in the alternative and conclude that Farm Bureau would be entitled to collect the costs and mediation sanctions under the doctrine of equitable subrogation.
Equitable subrogation is a legal fiction through which a person who pays a debt for which another is *496primarily responsible is substituted or subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the other. Commercial Union Ins Co v Medical Protective Co, 426 Mich 109, 117; 393 NW2d 479 (1986). It is a “flexible and elastic equitable doctrine, and hence ‘the mere fact that the doctrine of subrogation has not been previously invoked in a particular situation is not a prima facie bar to its applicability.’ ” Atlanta Int’l Ins Co v Bell, 438 Mich 512, 521; 475 NW2d 294 (1991), quoting 73 Am Jur 2d, Subrogation, § 1, p 602. However, subrogation is not available to a “mere volunteer.” Auto Club Ins Ass’n v New York Life Ins Co, 440 Mich 126, 132; 485 NW2d 695 (1992).
In Atlanta Int’l Ins Co, supra, the Supreme Court considered whether defense counsel retained by an insurer to defend its insured can be held answerable to the insurer for professional malpractice. In determine g that the doctrine of equitable subrogation permits the insurer to sue counsel for malpractice, the Court made findings that may be analogized to the present case. Noting that counsel’s immunity from suit by the insurer would place the loss for the attorney’s misconduct on the insurer and “[t]he only winner . . . would be the malpracticing attorney,” the Court found that “[e]quity cries out for application [of the doctrine of equitable subrogation] under such circumstances.” 438 Mich 522. In this case, plaintiff’s immunity from collection of mediation sanctions by Farm Bureau would place the loss for defense costs on the insurer and plaintiff would be “the winner” even though she rejected the mediation award and failed to prevail at trial. As a result, plaintiff would suffer no real risk in rejecting the mediation award. We believe that equity should be applied under these *497circumstances because Farm Bureau would have been responsible for mediation sanctions had it rejected the mediation award and lost at trial. See Pinto, supra at 310-311.
In Atlanta Int’l Ins Co, supra, the Supreme Court also found that the insured has no real incentive to pursue a malpractice action against the defense attorney because the insurer, rather than the insured, is required to satisfy a judgment arising from the attorney’s malpractice. Similarly, in the present case, the insured has no incentive to pursue collection of costs and mediation sanctions because he will not receive the money. In fact, where the insured is married to the opposing party who rejected the mediation award, there may be an incentive not to collect the costs because they may come out of the marital estate.
Finally, the Supreme Court noted that allowing the insurer to stand in the shoes of the insured under the doctrine of equitable subrogation best serves the public policy underlying the attorney-client relationship and properly imposes the social costs of malpractice where they belong. 438 Mich 521. Likewise, allowing the insurer to stand in the shoes of the insured to collect mediation sanctions to cover defense costs best serves the public policy underlying the sanctions rule to expedite and simplify final settlement of cases by placing the burden of litigation costs on the party who insists on trial by rejecting the mediation evaluation.
With regard to the trial court’s finding that the motion to intervene was untimely, Farm Bureau filed the motion less than one month after it was advised of Mr. Neal’s position. Farm Bureau sought intervention for the limited puxpose of enforcing the trial *498court’s order regarding costs and mediation sanctions to cover defense costs incurred in successfully defending Mr. Neal, and it did not attempt to address the merits of the case after judgment had been entered as in the cases relied on by the trial court. See Ferndale School Dist v Royal Oak Twp School Dist No 8, 293 Mich 1; 291 NW 199 (1940); Hettche v Oakland Circuit Judge, 290 Mich 453; 287 NW 877 (1939). Considering that the sanctions order remained unsatisfied at the time the motion to intervene was filed, the fact that it was not filed until ten months after the judgment of no cause of action was entered and nine months after the sanctions order was entered is not determinative.
Reversed and remanded to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
M. J. Matuzak, J., concurred.
In reversing this Court’s decision in Michigan Educational Employees Mutual, the Supreme Court held that the primary insurer should have defended the insured and paid the defense costs up to its policy limit and the excess insurer was liable for the defense costs incurred only after the primary insurer was excused under the terms of its policy. 450 Mich 439. This holding does not affect our analysis.

=== CASE 9741187 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:06.108058+00 ===

Draper, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment in favor of the defendants, who are the appellees in this appeal, in a suit brought by the plaintiffs, the appellants here, as taxpayers, to set aside a lease entered into between the defendant Jefferson-Craig Consolidated School Corporation, of Switzerland County, Indiana, as lessee, and the defendant Jefferson-Craig School Building Corporation, as lessor, under the authority of ch. 273 of the Acts of 1947 as amended. Burns’ Stat., §28-3220 et seq.1 The corporations will be hereafter *530referred to as the “building corporation” and the “school corporation.”
The facts were stipulated. Except as they may be amplified as we proceed, they are condensed as follows:
The building corporation was formed under the laws of the State of Indiana for the purpose of acquiring land, erecting thereon a school building, and leasing the same to the school corporation. On, April 9, 1951, the corporations entered into a lease contract whereby the property is leased to the school corporation for a period of thirty years beginning at the time the building is ready for occupancy.
The lease requires the school corporation to provide all repairs, replacements and maintenance and to provide insurance against loss by fire, tornado and other casualties and to provide rent or rental value insurance for the benefit of the building corporation or such parties as the latter may designate. The annual rental is $16,000.00, payable $8,000.00 on June 30 and December 30 of each year. The school corporation may renew the lease for a further, like or lesser term, upon the same or like conditions.
The lease grants the school corporation an option to purchase the property on any rental payment date at a price equal to the amount required to enable the building corporation to liquidate by payment of all indebtedness, with accrued and unpaid interest, and to redeem and retire any stock at par value plus accumulated dividends, the expenses and charges of liquidation, and the cost of transferring the property.
The lease further provides that “Nothing herein contained shall be construed to provide that Lessee shall be under any obligation to purchase the demised premises, or under any obligation in respect to any creditors, shareholders or other security holders of Lessor.”
*531The building corporation has no assets except such amounts as are necessary, under the law, to perfect its organization and qualify it to begin business. It intends to issue first mortgage bonds in the amount of $200,000.00 and second mortgage bonds in the amount of $80,000.00 to acquire the land and erect the building. The securities so issued will be secured by a lien on the property and in default of payment of principal or interest the land and improvements will be liable to sale for the payment thereof.
The land and building will cost $280,000.00. The proposed building is of such construction that its useful life will exceed forty years. The value of the taxable property within the school corporation as ascertained by the last assessment for state and county taxes is $1,815,366.00.
The appellants are taxpayers of the school corporation, and the building corporation is threatening and, unless enjoined from so doing, will proceed with the sale of securities and the purchase of said land and erection of said school building, and the school corporation will, unless enjoined, go into occupancy of said property under and pursuant to the provisions of said lease.
The school corporation perfected this appeal after its motion for new trial, which asserts that the decision is contrary to law, was overruled.
The right of the school corporation to rent a school house is not questioned. The problem presented is whether the lease contract is void because it creates a present indebtedness of the school corporation in the sum of $280,000.00 at a time when the limit of indebtedness the school corporation may constitutionally incur *532is only $36,307.32. The constitutional provision, being Art. 13, §1, is set out in full in the margin.2
It was held in The City of Valparaiso et al. v. Gardner (1884), 97 Ind. 1, that a municipal corporation may lawfully contract for necessary services over a period of years and agree to pay therefor in periodic installments as the services are furnished. In such cases the aggregate of the amounts to be paid as the services are rendered under such contracts are not considered as .an indebtedness of such corporation, and such contracts are not rendered invalid by the fact that the aggregate of the installments exceeds the debt limitation. That decision has been followed by later cases in this jurisdiction,3 and the rule prevails in a majority of the. other jurisdictions. Anno. 103 A. L. R. 1160.
The question as it involves leases is not new. Similar problems have been before this court on at least three *533occasions. In City of South Bend v. Reynolds (1900), 155 Ind. 70, 57 N. E. 706, 49 L. R. A. 795, the city entered into an agreement with one James Oliver whereby Oliver agreed to build a city hall on land owned by the city, and to rent the same to the city for twelve years at a rental of $7,200 per year to be paid annually as the same accrued from year to year. The city reserved an option to purchase the building at the termination of the lease, or at any time during the term, at a price equal to the original contract cost with interest, less the total of rentals already paid, and if the city failed to exercise its option to purchase, Oliver could either remove the building or purchase the ground. The city was to pay taxes and insurance, but in case of fire the insurance was to be invested in repair of the old building or the erection of a new one.
In that case it was noted that the rental was a fair one. In the course of the opinion this court said:
“It is settled in this State that if a city contracts for water, light or other things which pertain to its ordinary and necessary expenses, and agrees to pay for the same annually or monthly as furnished, such contract does not create an indebtedness for the aggregate sum of all the annual or monthly payments, because the debt for each year or month does not come into existence until it is earned. But if the indebtedness of the city already equals or exceeds the constitutional limit, and the current revenues are not sufficient to pay such indebtedness when it comes into existence, including other expenses for which the city is liable, an indebtedness is thereby created and the Constitution is violated.”
In Hively v. School City of Nappanee (1930), 202 Ind. 28, 169 N. E. 51, 171 N. E. 381, 71 A. L. R. 1311, a lease contract was made between the school city and *534the Nappanee Building Company under the provisions of Acts of 1927, ch. 223. The school city owned real estate which it leased to the building company for twenty-five years at a rental of $1.00 per year. The building company proposed to erect a school house on said property and to lease the property to the school city for a like' term of years at a stipulated rental payable semi-annually. The school city further agreed to pay as rental all taxes, special assessments and levies of every kind, including water rentals, and to keep the improvements insured in an amount equal to the par value of all outstanding bonds that might be issued by the building company. The lease gave the school city an option to renew the lease and to purchase the property at a price equal to the amount necessary to enable the building company to pay its debts and redeem its outstanding securities, said purchase price not to exceed the amount actually invested in the property by the building company. If the buildings were destroyed by fire that fact would in no wise affect the rental to be paid by the school city.
Citing for its authority City of South Bend v. Reynolds, supra, this court there said
“. . . where an ordinary lease is entered into, at a reasonable rental, for a term of more than one year, a present indebtedness is not created in the aggregate sum of all the annual payments of rent to become due under the lease, and such a leáse contract, even though it includes an option to purchase the property, does not violate Art. 13 of the Constitution, if the annual rental installments, as they become due, do not bring the indebtedness to a point beyond the constitutional limit.”
But it was alleged in that case that the rentals provided for in the lease were in excess of a fair and reasonable rental, and said payments so reserved were, *535in truth and in fact, payment of a part of the purchase price for said school building. It was further alleged that said lease was entered into for the purpose of evading the constitution and thereby causing the school city to become indebted in an amount in excess of its constitutional limit.
The court below sustained a demurrer to the complaint. In holding the demurrer should have been overruled, this court observed that in that case (unlike this one) the failure of the school corporation to pay the indebtedness would result in the loss to the school corporation of its own property, and indicated that in the court’s opinion the allegations of the complaint, taken together with the terms of the lease contract, disclosed an arrangement for the purchase of property which was pledged for the payment of an indebtedness, and that the contract was entered into for the purpose of accomplishing an evasion of the Constitution by indirection.
Jefferson School Twp. v. Jefferson Twp. S. Bldg. Co. (1937), 212 Ind. 542, 10 N. E. 2d 608, is the last case on the subject. There the building company was also organized pursuant to Acts 1927, ch. 223, for the purpose of erecting a school building to be used by the township under a lease-contract arrangement. The object of the arrangement was not only to furnish an adequate school building for the school township, but also to enable the township eventually to become the owner of the building. The demised term was for twenty-six years at an annual rental payable semiannually. The lessee agreed to pay taxes, keep the buiding insured, pay for repairs and replacements and pay for alterations and improvements. In the event rental payments at any time exceeded the amount necessary to meet incidental corporate expenses and *536pay dividends and interest on lessor’s outstanding indebtedness, the excess was to be used and applied in the redemption of its outstanding securities at their par value, and in event the total excess of rental payments was sufficient to redeem all outstanding securities of the lessor with interest or dividends, the lessor was to convey the premises to the lessee. The lessee also had an option to purchase the property at- any time prior to the expiration of the lease term at a price not to exceed the amount actually invested by the lessor corporation.
It was there held that the only relationship existing between the contracting parties was that of lessor and lessee, and the transaction did not impose upon the lessee a present indebtedness in excess of its constitutional debt capacity. The court observed that compliance by the lessee with the terms of the lease would enable the school corporation eventually to become the owner of the school building, but said that this did not change the nature of the obligation incurred under the lease contract insofar as the nature of the obligation related to the question of the amount of the indebtedness, and further said:
“The fact that the building company was willing to give the school building to the Jefferson School Township when the building company had been paid an amount equal to its investment and a reasonable return thereon does not change the lease-contract into a contract to purchase. It is true that the Jefferson School Township, through the device of a long term lease providing for annual rental payments, may become the owner of a school building which, in view of Article 13 of the State Constitution, it could not have acquired in 1928 by issuing bonds. But it does not follow that either the arrangement or the result constitutes an evasion of the limitations of Article 13 of the State Constitution. The lease-contract is not in contra*537vention of Article 13 unless it necessarily created a legally enforceable debt obligation for an amount in excess of the amount permitted by Article 13.”
Hively v. School City of Nappanee, supra, was distinguished in the Jefferson School Township case. It was not overruled. It was pointed out that by the demurrer filed in the Hively case it was admitted that the annual rentals provided for in the lease were in excess of a fair and reasonable rental; the payments so reserved were in truth and in fact payments of the part of the purchase price for said school building; the lease was entered into for the purpose of evading the Constitution and thereby causing the school city to become indebted in an amount in excess of its constitutional limit; and by the execution of the lease the city would become indebted to the building company in the total sum of $180,300, which exceeded the two percent limit of indebtedness.
We are unable to distinguish the Jefferson Township case from the case at bar. The appellants make no effort to do so. They rely on the Hively case, and seek to dispose of the Jefferson Township case by saying it is subject to criticism in that the court should not have taken as true allegations of conclusions in the complaint in the Hively case which were in conflict with the provisions of the lease in that case, which lease was attached to the complaint as an exhibit.
We think we need not discuss the validity of the criticism. Rightly or wrongly the court did assume in the Hively case that the above mentioned allegations of the complaint must be taken as true. So far as the case before us is concerned, the important consideration is that the Hively case was decided on the basis of the facts so assumed to be true. On that basis the decision was clearly right, and it and the decision in *538the Jefferson Township case can stand together. In the case before us no such admissions have been made and no such facts can be assumed.
As noted in the Jefferson Township case, considerable emphasis was placed in the Hively case upon the allegations of the complaint in that case that the annual rental payments were in excess of a fair rental. Such is not the case here. The complaint here does allege that to be a fact, but there is no evidence whatever to support that allegation. It is stipulated that notice of the execution of the lease was given by publication and remonstrances were filed thereto, and thereafter the State Board of Tax Commissioners found that a necessity existed for the execution of said lease, and that the rental therein was fair and reasonable and said remonstrances were denied. Thus the only evidence before the court was to the effect that there was a necessity for the execution of the lease, and that the rental was fair and reasonable. If that be true, it follows as a matter of course that no part of such rental payments could be payments of purchase price in disguise. The case is apparently one where the lessor voluntarily relinquishes to the lessee the profits which usually flow from the ownership of leased real estate.
We are reminded that the building corporation is limited in its purposes to acquiring a site, erecting a suitable school building, leasing it to the school corporation and collecting the rentals and applying them as provided by statute; that the school corporation pays any taxes or assessments levied against the property, pays for insurance, and is responsible for maintenance, repairs, alterations and improvements; that the building corporation cannot make a profit; but in effect it merely collects money from the lessee with one hand *539and pays it to the security holders with the other. From these facts it is argued that the building corporation is merely a “dummy” corporation, and we are asked to look to the substance of the transaction and find that we are dealing with nothing more than an arrangement for the purchase of a school building on the installment plan.
Actually we are required only to examine the transaction for the purpose of determining whether the school corporation becomes indebted by the lease-contract in excess of constitutional authority, but should it appear that such is in reality the case, it would be our duty to so find, regardless of any subterfuge or attempt at concealment no matter how plausible.4 But the particular question before us is not an open one in Indiana. On the authority of the Jefferson Township case we feel constrained to hold otherwise. It was said in that case that the fact the school corporation could, by paying a reasonable rental over a period of years, become the owner of the building, did not change the lease-contract into a contract to purchase a building, nor create a present indebtedness where none actually existed. We may add that, in our opinion, the limitation of the activities in which the parties may be required or permitted to engage during the life of the lease are equally impotent to effect such a change.
If the school corporation is unable to build a school house it must lease one. If, as it appears here without contradiction, the school corporation can lease a new *540building at a fair and reasonable rental, this court would not be unwarranted in striking the arrangement down merely because the school corporation can, at its option, but without compulsion so to do, acquire ownership of the property on favorable terms.
Much stress has been laid upon the fact that a tax must be levied each year to pay the lease rentals. Burns’ Stat. §28-3230. But such is also the case where necessary services are contracted to be furnished each year over a period of years. If the school corporation executed a lease without option to purchase it would still be required to pay rent. It does not seem to us that the contract can be rendered invalid because provision has been made for compliance with its terms. In any event we think the inclusion of that provision in the statute would not change the nature of the transaction, and consequently could not affect the validity of the lease.
We have examined cases cited from other jurisdictions by the parties to sustain their respective positions. We think it would be fruitless to analyze them here for we consider the Jefferson Township case as controlling. We may say, however, that from our examination of those cases we believe that the following editorial statement found on page 1362 of 145 A. L. R. is supported by the authorities. It is as follows:
“The recent cases on the point tend to confirm the general principle stated in the original annotation, that the leasing of property by a city, county, or other political subdivision, with an option to purchase the same, does not give rise to an indebtedness or liability of the public body for the stipulated optional purchase price or for the aggregate of all the rentals for the entire term, provided the instrument is in fact a lease, and not a contract of purchase on the instalment plan.”
*541No other question was presented.
The judgment is affirmed.
Gilkison, J., dissents with opinion.
The lease between the building corporation and the school corporation purports to have been made on April 9, 1951, under the authority of Acts 1947, ch. 273, as amended by Acts 1949, ch. 177. Further amendments were made by Acts 1951, ch. 273, which took effect March 7, 1951. The lease is at variance with the 1951 amendment in only one material respect. It is conceded that this variance has no effect upon the real issue in this case, so it will not be further noticed.
“Limitation on indebtedness—Excess Void.—No political or municipal corporation in this State shall ever become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount in the aggregate exceeding two per centum on the value of the taxable property within such corporation, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and County taxes, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness; and all bonds or obligations, in excess of such amount, given by such corporations, shall be void: Provided, that in time of war, foreign invasion, or other great public calamity, on petition of a majority of the property owners, in number and value, within the limits of such corporation, the public authorities, in their discretion, may incur obligations necessary for the public protection and defense, to such an amount as may be requested in such petition.”
Crowder v. Sullivan (1891), 128 Ind. 486, 28 N. E. 94, 13 L. R. A. 647; Foland v. Frankton (1895), 142 Ind. 546, 41 N. E. 1031; Seward v. Liberty (1895), 142 Ind. 551, 42 N. E. 39; LaPorte v. Gamewell (1897), 146 Ind. 466, 45 N. E. 588, 58 A. S. 359, 35 L. R. A. 686; Board of Commissioners v. Gardner (1901), 155 Ind. 165, 57 N. E. 908; Town of Gosport v. Pritchard (1901), 156 Ind. 400, 59 N. E. 1058.
Cerajewski v. McVey (1947), 225 Ind. 67, 72 N. E. 2d 650, 171 A. L. R. 723; Rappaport v. Dept. of Public Health (1949), 227 Ind. 508, 87 N. E. 2d 77, 88 N. E. 2d 150; and see interesting discussion in 25 Ind. Law Journal, p. 325.

=== CASE 9741188 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:06.114154+00 ===

DISSENTING OPINION
Gilkison, J.
I am unable to agree with the majority opinion for the reasons hereinafter stated.
We are all agreed that the constitution of the state of Indiana forbids any political or municipal corporation of the state to “become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount in the aggregate exceeding two per centum of the value of the taxable property within such corporation, to be ascertained by the last assessment for state and county taxes previous to the incurring of such indebtedness; and all bonds or obligations, in excess of such amount, given by such corporations, shall be void:” Article 13, Indiana Constitution (adopted March 14, 1881).
The opinion correctly states that “the value of the taxable property within the school corporations as ascertained by the last assessment for state and county taxes is $1,815,366.00” and that the school building contemplated and the land upon which it is to be located will cost $280,000.00. Of course, this will constitute an indebtedness of 15.4+ per centum of the value of the taxable property within the two township corporations involved. The opinion correctly states that “the limit of indebtedness the school corporation may constitutionally incur is only $36,307.32.”
But it was asserted in argument that the state legislature by Chapter 273, Acts 1947, pp. 1087 to 1096 inclusive, as amended by Chapter 177, Acts 1949, pp. 590 to 594, and by a process of procedure contained in *542those statutes has found a way to create an indebtedness of the two corporations more than seven times greater than that permitted by the Constitution. This requires that we examine the two acts carefully agreeable with the usual rules long adopted by this court for the consideration of such statutes to ascertain if a method has been found whereby the constitutional prohibition noted may be circumvented and political corporations may become indebted without limitation. For if that end may be accomplished in this instance by the method attempted the way is wide open for its accomplishment in all instances, even to the point of complete insolvency of political and municipal corporations of the state.
Article 8, Section 1 of the Indiana Constitution makes it a duty of the General Assembly to provide by law for a general and uniform system of common schools wherein tuition shall be without charge and equally open to all. The education of our children thus becomes and is a governmental duty of the state. However, it seems that it is imperative upon the General Assembly to perform this duty within the confines of the Constitution. In a recent case presenting a very similar situation this court, by Young, J., said:
“In appraising the validity of the statute before us and the proposal to proceed thereunder by appellees, we must consider the purpose of the debt limitation section of the Constitution and must look through the form of the statute to the substance of what it does and we should not countenance subterfuge to evade the intent of our fundamental law. Voss v. Waterloo Water Co. (1904), 163 Ind. 69, 89, 90, 71 N. E. 208. State ex rel. Matthews, Governor v. Forsythe (1896), 147 Ind. 466, 472, 473, 44 N. E. 593.” Cerajewski v. McVey (1947), 225 Ind. 67, 71, 72 N. E. 2d 650.
*543At page 72 of that case we further said:
“It seems to us that the clear purpose of §1, Art. 13, of the Constitution, was to prevent the creation of an excessive debt by a real limitation upon the power of the legislature to authorize indebtedness. If it may be circumvented by the simple device of creating new and additional political or municipal corporations in the same territory, each with separate and independent borrowing power, for the purpose of evading the constitutional prohibition, no real limitation upon the power of the legislature to authorize indebtedness is provided and the object of the constitutional provision is defeated . . .”
In Rappaport v. Dept. of Public Health (1949), 227 Ind. 508, 517, 87 N. E. (2d) 77, we said:
“No hard and fast rules to test the question of evasion in cases of this kind can be laid down. Each case must stand on its own bottom. In each case, we must look to the true inwardness of the situation, in the light of the purpose of the constitutional provision. If, on the whole, the real effect seems to be to increase borrowing power in the exercise of substantially the same governmental function, in substantially the same area, rather than better to accomplish a public service, then there has been an evasion and Article 13 has been violated.
“. . . Whether incurred in one name or another ultimately it (the debt incurred) would have to be paid by the same taxpayers of the same areas. . . . To shift a governmental function from an old governmental unit to a new one in the same area in effect would, to the extent of the indebtedness incurred by the new unit, in connection with the exercise of such function, enlarge the debt limit within which the exercise of the function had been financed. This has been done by the statute under consideration. With this in mind, and with the further fact in mind, that substantial control remains in the city, with only a little change in mechanics, we are almost compelled to think that *544the change was made for the purpose of circumventing the constitutional debt limitation, and, even though made with the best of motives, it transgresses our fundamental law. If within our constitution, as it is, we cannot finance necessary-hospital additions and improvements, then we should amend the constitution, not flout it.
. . The new setup may have been innocently conceived with the best motives in the world, but in testing the constitutionality of legislation, courts do not look to motives or the wisdom or desirability of the end sought to be attained. We may look only to the effect and result, and, if the new legislation, however desirable, appears to be a device which in fact serves to circumvent the constitutional debt limitation provision, we have no choice but to condemn it. . . . ‘but we can not escape the force of the strong and plain provisions of our organic law.’ ”
In Hively v. School City of Nappanee (1929), 202 Ind. 28, 169 N. E. 51, a case involving an older statute, Acts 1927, Ch. 223, and being in all essential features similar to the statute before us in the instant case, in effect and general results, cited in the majority opinion on another subject, speaking through Martin, J., this court, among other things, said on page 34:
“The contract here, read as a whole, and considered together with the Acts 1927, Ch. 223 leaves no doubt in the mind of the court that it was entered into for the purpose of evading the mandate of the Constitution, and, of doing indirectly, through the plan and through the corporation provided for by the act, that which could not be done directly. The law will look to the substance of the transaction regardless of its form or color. State ex rel. v. Forsythe (1896), 147 Ind. 466, 473, 44 N. E. 593, 33 L. R. A. 221.”
The title of Chapter 273, Acts 1947, p. 1087, is as follows:
*545“AN ACT concerning the acquisition of sites, construction, equipment and financing of buildings for school purposes by private corporations and the leasing and acquisition thereof by school corporations, and declaring an emergency.”
Section 1 of that Act, among other things, provides as follows:
“Provided, however, That no such contract of lease shall be entered into for a period of more than thirty years, nor unless . . . the board of school trustees, advisory board or the body or bodies vested with such control shall have, after investigation, determined that a need exists for such school building and that such school corporation cannot provide the necessary funds to pay the cost or its proportionate share of the cost of the school building or buildings required to meet the present needs; . . (My italics.)
The meaning of the italicized words above, contained in the statute, is that the law can apply only to such townships, towns and cities, whose total taxable property as disclosed by the last assessment is so low that they cannot raise funds sufficient to provide the buildings and grounds needed, within the constitutional limitations provided by Article 13 of the state constitution. This statement in the law itself, is notice given by the legislature that the sole purpose of the law is to evade the constitution of the state, by permitting the extremely poor political and municipal corporations to ignore it, and to engage in unrestricted spending. Apparently, other political and municipal corporations of the state are still left under the control of Article 13 of the Constitution, when exercising the same acts or sovereignty and performing the same public services. This is a violation of Art. 4, §22, clauses 10 and 13, and §23 of the Indiana Constitution. It is an illegal clas*546sification since it seeks to “regulate township business” in poor townships that cannot provide the necessary funds to pay their proportionate share of the cost of the school building required to meet the present needs, but does not apply to wealthier townships that can provide such funds. Heffelfinger v. City of Ft. Wayne (1925), 196 Ind. 689, 695, 149 N. E. 555. School City of Rushville v. Hayes (1904), 162 Ind. 193, 196, 70 N. E. 134. Bullock V. Robison (1911), 176 Ind. 198, 201, 93 N. E. 998. Donaldson v. State ex rel. (1913), 182 Ind. 615, 633, 101 N. E. 485. Keane v. Remy (1929), 201 Ind. 286, 294, 168 N. E. 10.
No legal reason can be given why the poor townships and municipalities of the state should be penalized by the law in question, by removing them from the protection of Article 13 of the state Constitution, but leaving the wealthier townships and municipalities fully protected thereby. This court cannot be blinded by the attempted legerdemain contained in the involved statute as noted herein, we cannot allow ourselves' to become entangled in a confused web of a dummy private corporation leasing property in which it has no semblance of interest, and from that, arbitrarily say that only a lease contract is involved.
Section 2, Ch. 273, Acts 1947, authorizes the creation of a corporation organized under the laws of the state solely for the purpose of acquiring a site, erecting a building, leasing the same to the school corporation, collecting rentals and applying the proceeds in the manner provided in the law. We are not advised whether this is to be organized as a corporation for profit under Sec. 25-201 et seq. Burns’ 1948 Replacement, but this could not be since the statute further provides that the corporation shall act, “entirely without profit to the corporation, its officers, directors and *547stockholders . . .” Apparently the corporation is a special one, created to exercise acts of sovereignty and to accomplish a public purpose in lieu and instead of or at least coordinate with the public officials whose duties under the constitution and laws of the state are to exercise the same acts of sovereignty and to accomplish the same purpose and achieve the same ends. The authority for the creation of this corporation is the special act, Ch. 273, Acts 1947, supra. This part of the statute seems to be in direct conflict with Article 11, Sec. 13 of the Indiana constitution providing:
“Corporations, other than banking, shall not be created by special Act, but may be formed under general laws.”
In re Application of the Bank of Commerce for Change of Name (1899), 153 Ind. 460, 462 et seq.
It has been held that Special Acts are not unconstitutional under Art. 11, §13 unless on a subject enumerated in Art. 4, §22. Town of Longview v. City of Crawfordsville (1905), 164 Ind. 117, 73 N. E. 78. However, Article 4, §22, Cl. (10) provides that the General Assembly shall not pass local or special laws “Regulating county and township business”; and clause 12 of the same section provides that no such laws shall be passed “For the assessment and collection of taxes for State, county, township or road purposes.” The law involved in the instant case provides for the assessment and collection of taxes in poor townships, for township purposes. It is in direct conflict with clauses (10) and (12), Sec. 22, Art. 4 of the Indiana Constitution.
It is provided by the state Constitution that:
“All county, township and town officers, shall reside within their respective counties, townships, and towns; and shall keep their respective offices *548at such places therein, and perform such duties, as may be directed by law.” Art. 6, §6. (My italics.)
The building of school buildings in townships of this state has been a specific duty of township trustees and township advisory boards since 1899. Sections 65-313 to 65-321 inclusive, Burns’ 1951 Replacement and prior to that time under other statutes then in force. The section last noted specifically provides: “All contracts made in violation of this section shall be null and void.”
Since the constitution noted provides for the creation of township officers and charges them with performing such duties as may be directed by law, the question is posed in the instant case: May the legislature authorize the creation of a private corporation and endow it with coordinate power to perform the acts of sovereignty, and the governmental duties allotted by the constitution and laws to the trustees and advisory boards of townships, in the matter of erecting school buildings?
It seems to be the general rule, to which there are no exceptions, that the duties which the laws require to be performed by county and township officers may not be contracted to be done by third persons without official standing, as a matter of public policy, and any such contract or authorization is ultra vires and void. State ex rel. Workman v. Goldthait (1909), 172 Ind. 210, 223, 87 N. E. 133. City of Richmond v. Dickinson (1900), 155 Ind. 345, 346, 58 N. E. 260. The City of Ft. Wayne v. Lehr (1882), 88 Ind. 62, 64.
“Briefly, the term ‘public office’ embraces the idea of tenure, duration, fees, emoluments, powers and duties. . . . All of them taken together constitute a public office.
“Public offices are created for the purpose of effecting the end for which government has been instituted, which is the common good, ... In the
*549last analysis, a public office is a privilege in the gift of the state. It must have some permanency and continuity and possess a delegation of a portion of the sovereign power of government to be exercised for the benefit of the public.” 42 Am. Jur. Public Officer, Sec. 3 p. 881. 67 C. J. S. Officers §2-a p. 97.
Our court, quoting from decisions of the United States Supreme Court, has given similar definitions. Foltz v. Kerlin (1886), 105 Ind. 221, 223, 4 N. E. 439. Wells v. State ex rel. Peden (1911), 175 Ind. 380, 384, 94 N. E. 321.
I think it is clear that the legislature is without power to authorize the creation of a private corporation for the sole purpose of exercising the sovereign power of government coordinate with or supplemental to the duties of public officials of township, municipal, county or state government. So far as I can find this question has not been before our courts but it seems axiomatic, that one who exercises sovereignty must hold a public office and be under the usual oath, and if required, bond as such. See: Adams v. Tonella, 70 Miss. 701, 14 So. 17, 22 L. R. A. 346. If this can be done in this instance, there is no reason why all our local governments may not be taken over by similar private corporations, and thereby government by the people may perish.
In the argument before us counsel for appellees and amicus curiae stressed the great need of the appellee townships for better school buildings. That there is such need is undoubtedly true. No doubt the same argument of “need” was presented to the legislature. This argument poses a simple question. That question is, shall our state constitution be supported and sustained, or shall we have the school buildings? Certainly we cannot immediately have both. The legisla*550ture in substance voted to abandon the constitutional prohibition and to have the schools. Thus the respected state officials noted have paid the heavy penalty demanded by the peculiar principle called “Expediency.” The question posed for us by this appeal if we consider the statute is: Shall we likewise be governed in our decision by the same principle? The construction of school buildings by townships has been provided for by appropriate statutes since Indiana has been a state. Some of the effective statutes on this subject at the present time are Sections 28-3101 to 28-3110 Burns’ 1948 Replacement, and Sections 65-313 to 65-321 Burns’ 1951 Replacement. Chapter 273, Acts 1947, pp. 1087 to 1096 as amended by Chapter 177, Acts 1949, pp. 590 to 594 inclusive, among other things, provides for the organization of a corporation under the laws of the state, the duties of the corporation, among other things, are: To acquire a site; erect thereon a suitable school building or buildings; lease the same to the school corporation or corporations; collect the rentals therefor and apply the proceeds thereof in the manner provided; to act without profit; to apply lease rental received by such corporation over and above the amount needed to meet incidental corporate expenses, to the redemption of its outstanding securities.
Section 3 of the Act provides:
(1) All lease contracts shall provide that the lessee shall have an option to renew the lease; or to purchase the leased property. If the option to purchase is exercised the purchase price shall equal the amount required for lessor to pay all indebtedness, including interest, par value of stock sold, and expenses.
(2) “No such contract of lease shall provide, nor be construed to provide, that any such school corporation shall be under any obligation to pur*551chase such leased school building or buildings, or under any obligation in respect to any creditors, shareholders or other security holders of the lessor corporation.”
In the Hively v. Nappanee case, cited with approval in the majority opinion, concerning a similar provision in the 1927 Act, Ch. 223, our court, noted that the school city must carry out its contract during the entire rental period or exercise its option to purchase in order to keep possession of the school property. It further noted that the school corporation was required to levy a tax annually to pay the amounts necessary to carry out the contract. Section 11 of Chapter 273, Acts 1947, p. 1095, as amended by Chapter 177, Acts 1949, p. 593, provides:
“Sec. 11. Any school corporation which shall execute a lease contract under the provisions of this act shall annually levy a tax sufficient to produce each year the necessary funds with which to pay the lease rental stipulated to be paid by such school corporation in such lease contract. . . . The first tax levy shall be made at the first annual tax levy period, following the date of the execution of the aforesaid lease contract and said first annual levy shall be sufficient to pay the estimated amount of the first annual lease rental payment to be made under said lease. Thereafter the annual levies herein provided for shall be made.”
It must be noted that the statute, just noted, is quite explicit in providing that the involved school corporations shall annually levy a tax sufficient to raise the funds to meet the so-called “rentals” payable to the lessor corporation, but in fact for the benefit of the bondholders. This makes the officers of the involved townships merely ministerial, or servants of the private corporation without a right to exercise discretion. In the Hively case our court, at page 35, said:
*552“. . . for all practical purposes, it is clear that the entire liability for the whole bond issue of the building company must and does rest on the school city, . .
With respect to a clause in the rental contract, and to the third grammatical paragraph of Sec. 2, Ch. 223, Acts 1927,1 almost exactly similar to the last sentence of Sec. 3, Chapter 273, Acts 1947 and which I have heretofore quoted in full under my own number (2), (of a similar provision contained in the lease contract in the instant case) we said in the Hivély case:
“The contract actually accomplishes exactly what it disclaims in the paragraph just quoted. We, therefore, conclude that the contract set up in the complaint constituted a present indebtedness on behalf of the school city for the total amount to be paid out thereunder, and it follows that the complaint states a cause of action and is good as against a demurrer.”
In the instant case it seems to me that the statute upon which appellees have acted and the contract executed thereunder, are subject to the precise infirmity as the contract and statute considered in the Hively case and therein declared unconstitutional as being in conflict with Article 13 of the state Constitution.
Section 9 as amended by the Acts of 1949, Ch. 177, Section 2, authorizes the lessor corporation provided for by the act to issue stock, bonds and other securities and sell them. Mortgage bonds issued are made a first *553lien on the leased property. Section 11, as amended by Sec. 3, Ch. 177, Acts 1949, p. 593, compels the involved townships to levy a tax each year sufficient to produce funds to pay the yearly indebtedness. The incorporators and other persons who may have advanced funds, shall be reimbursed from the funds received from the sale of securities. In fact it is undoubtedly true that all the costs in the erection of the $280,000.00 school building must be borne by taxpayers of the two townships involved, and no one else.
It is quite apparent that the lessor corporation provided for by the law, is created for the sole purpose of raising the funds for the erection of the school buildings, and that, of course, is the duty alone of the trustees and advisory boards of the two townships under other existing laws, and is an exercise of sovereign power by the private corporation. There is no pretense that these legal officers of the townships are unauthorized by law to erect school buildings under existing law. The sole purpose of creating the lessor corporation then, is to elude officers, official action, official duty and responsibility, and to exercise sovereignty by the private corporation, the object being to evade Article 13 aforesaid. The sole purpose in having the securities sold by this lessor instead of the legal officers of the involved townships, and of having this so-called “lessor corporation” enter into a lease contract with the two townships involved is because there is believed to be some authority, that if the contract to pay is called a rental contract, it may not offend this constitutional prohibition. All this, to me is clearly a crafty subterfuge designed by cunning persons for the sole purpose of evading the constitutional prohibition.
*554The opinion rests heavily upon Jefferson School Twp. v. Jefferson Ttvp. S. Bldg. Co. (1937), 212 Ind. 542, 10 N. E. (2d) 608. In that case the proceedings were based wholly upon Acts 1927, Ch. 223, p. 645, as is stated in the opinion by Treanor, J. As herein shown that law very substantially had been held unconstitutional by this court in 1929 in Hively v. School City of Nappanee et al. (1929), 202 Ind. 28, supra, 71 A. L. R. 1311. The statute, Acts 1927, Ch. 223, as amended, was specifically repealed by the legislature at its Special Session, 1932 (Aug. 15, 1932). See Acts 1932 S. S., Ch. 36, p. 155. From the opinion in that case it appears that the lease of the school premises became effective June 1, 1928. The action was brought to cancel the lease contract. Apparently it had been in effect for nine years or more at the time the case was decided. We do not know how much influence the practical construction of the lease-contract by the parties themselves during the nine year period, or the long delay in bringing the action, may have had upon the decision of the court, but it must have been quite potent.
The action before us is to set aside the lease-contract entered into April 9, 1951, and to enjoin defendants (appellees) from taking further action under the lease, for costs and all proper relief. So far no site has been secured, no building has been started, and nothing has been done to suggest a practical construction of the law attacked, and the action has been timely instituted. To apply the constitutional prohibition against contracting an excessive debt by a political corporation at this time cannot injure appellees or anyone else but must be beneficial to all.
In the Jefferson School Township case, supra, our court, apparently refused to permit itself to see the *555entire situation including the lease-contract, the statute under which it had been entered into—which at the time of the opinion had been repealed for more than five years, and which at that time had been substantially declared unconstitutional more than seven years before. Our court held strictly to a construction of the so-called lease-contract and refused to consider the matter as a whole and thereby to uncover the evasion of Article 18 of the state Constitution. Since in that case the school township had had possession and use of the premises for nine years and had paid seventeen of the forty-nine payments it was required to pay under the contract, the practical construction placed upon the contract by the parties themselves would seem to be a matter of important consideration. It might have caused the court to make the highly questionable, refuge statement, thus:
“A careful examination of the allegations of the first paragraph of complaint forces the conclusion that the facts alleged fail to show that the Jefferson School Township, by becoming a party to the lease-contract involved in this suit, did incur a present indebtedness in excess of its constitutional debt capacity.”
The majority opinion fails to pass upon the question of the constitutionality of the law upon which the proceeding involved is founded in the instant case. As in the Jefferson School Township case, it confines itself solely to a consideration only of the validity of the so-called lease. It is the position of appellees that the constitutionality of the law upon which they have proceeded is not involved in this case. The majority opinion sustains the position of appellees. Thus we are left without a judicial determination of the constitutionality of Acts 1947, Ch. 223, as amended by Acts 1949, *556Ch. 177. I have given my thought on this proposition, because I think the public welfare requires it.
I think the judgment of the trial court should be reversed.
Note.—Reported in 109 N. E. 2d 889.
This paragraph in the 1927 Act reads thus: “Such lease contracts shall not provide, nor shall they ever be construed to provide, for any obligation on the part of such corporation to purchase such school building or any obligation of such school corporation in respect to any creditor, stockholder or other security holder of the corporation contracting to build such school building.”

=== CASE 9741189 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:06.581108+00 ===

OPINION
KEITH, Chief Justice.
Appellant Dennis Darol Linehan was civilly committed under the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act on July 27, 1995 at the age of 54 after spending most of his life in the criminal justice system for sex-related crimes. See Act of August 31, 1994, ch. 1, art. 1, 1995 Minn. Laws 5, 5-9 (1994 first special session), codified in relevant part at Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.02, subd. 18b, 253B.185 (1994) (SDP Act). The district court concluded that the application of the Act to Linehan was constitutional and found that: (1) Linehan had engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct; (2) Linehan suffers from an antisocial personality disorder (APD); and, as a result, (3) it is “highly probable” that Linehan will engage in harmful sexual conduct in the future. The court of appeals affirmed Line-han’s initial commitment. In re Linehan, 544 N.W.2d 308, 319 (Minn.App.1996) (Linehan II).
Linehan contends that the commitment violates his constitutional rights to substantive due process and equal protection under the Minnesota and United States Constitutions, and his rights against ex post facto laws and double jeopardy under the United States *175Constitution. Linehan also argues that if the commitment is constitutional, then the district court clearly erred in finding that it is highly probable that he will engage in harmful sexual conduct in the future and that this probability is a result of his past conduct and his APD. Linehan does not dispute that he has APD or that he once engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct. Rather, he challenges the district court’s method of prediction and the specificity of the court’s findings.
We conclude that Linehan’s initial commitment did not violate his constitutional rights, nor did the district court clearly err in evaluating the evidence; therefore, we affirm.
I.
Facts and Procedural History
Linehan was sexually and physically abused as a child and he began a record of sexual misconduct in his teens. In 1956, at age 15, Linehan pulled down the shorts of a 4-year-old girl and was sent to reform school. In 1960, at age 19, he had intercourse with a 13-year-old girl. In 1963, Linehan engaged in window peeping. Later that year, he and a friend raped L.H. On June 10, 1965, after window peeping, Line-han killed B.I. while attempting to sexually assault her. Before being arrested for B.I.’s death, Linehan committed two additional sexual assaults — including rape — in July of 1965. Linehan pleaded guilty to kidnapping B.I. and the murder charges against him were dropped. He was sentenced to a maximum term of 40 years and began serving time at the Minnesota Correctional Facility in Still-water. Linehan’s sentence expires on August 21,1997.
Linehan escaped from Stillwater’s minimum security facility on June 20, 1975, and 11 days later he assaulted 12-year-old T.L. in a ditch off the side of a Michigan road. He was convicted of assault with intent to commit criminal sexual conduct and imprisoned in Michigan. Linehan was returned to Stillwater prison 5 years later. He remained at Stillwater for most of the next 12 years.
On December 30, 1992, Linehan was committed to the Minnesota Security Hospital (MSH) under the Psychopathic Personality Commitment Act (PP Act). See Minn.Stat. §§ 526.09-.10 (1992) (current version at Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a (1994)). However, Linehan’s PP Act commitment was vacated by this court on June 30,1994. In re Linehan, 518 N.W.2d 609, 614 (Minn.1994) (.Linehan I). We held that Ramsey County failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that Linehan was utterly unable to control his sexual impulses. Id. The “utter inability” element of proof under the PP Act was established when the statute was narrowed in State ex rel. Pearson v. Probate Court of Ramsey County, 205 Minn. 545, 555, 287 N.W. 297, 302 (1939) (upholding the statute against, inter alia, a vagueness challenge), aff'd, 309 U.S. 270, 277, 60 S.Ct. 523, 527, 84 L.Ed. 744 (1940).
On August 18, 1994, after the reversal of his PP Act commitment and his discharge from MSH, Linehan was paroled to Residence 4 on the grounds of the Stillwater correctional facility. Residence 4 was converted to a halfway house for Linehan because no other facility would accept him. At the halfway house, Linehan was under “intensive supervised release.” Residence 4 was equipped with phone taps (of which Li-nehan was notified) and hidden video surveillance cameras. Linehan was also subject to drug testing. Linehan continued his treatment as a sex offender at Residence 4. He began participating in the Atlantis outpatient sex offender program after completing the inpatient Transitional Sex Offender Program (TSOP). Atlantis conducted group therapy sessions at Residence 4 for Linehan and other sex offenders.
On August 31, the Minnesota Legislature met in special session and amended the civil commitment statute to include “sexually dangerous persons.” Act of August 31, 1994, ch. 1, art. 1,1995 Minn. Laws at 5-9. A “sexually dangerous person” has engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct; suffers from a sexual, personality, or other mental disorder or dysfunction; and, as a result, is likely to engage in serious and harmful sexual conduct in the future. Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subds. 7a, 18b(a) (1994). Commitment under the SDP Act does not require proof that the proposed patient is unable to *176control his or her sexual impulses. Id. ■ § 253B.02, subd. 18b(b). On September .2, respondent Ramsey County petitioned for Linehan’s commitment under the SDP Act.
The district court denied Linehan’s motion to dismiss the petition based on as-applied constitutional challenges, and the court of appeals later affirmed. Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d at 317-19. Both courts concluded that APD is a mental disorder that the state may use to trigger civil commitment of dangerous persons; that the legislature had adequate reasons for applying civil commitment to sexually dangerous persons with APD but not to those without a mental disorder or dysfunction; and that the purpose and effect of the SDP Act is treatment, not punishment. The court of appeals correctly placed the burden of persuasion on the state regarding the substantive due process and equal protection challenges. See In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910, 914, 916-17 (Minn.1994); Skeen v. State, 505 N.W.2d 299, 312 (Minn.1993).
In its opinion, the district court interpreted the SDP Act to require proof that it is “highly probable” that the proposed patient will sexually harm others in the future, even though the statute refers to “likely” future harm. Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a)(3). The court relied on the clear and convincing evidence standard for such commitments, due process concerns, and the seriousness of the proceedings. The court of appeals agreed with the district court’s interpretation, and described the standard for prediction as “highly likely.” Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d. at 313-14.
Much of the initial commitment hearing was devoted to expert testimony.1 After hearing from Stillwater personnel and three of Linehan’s victims, the county’s case focused on two expert witnesses. Dr. Michael Millard testified that Linehan suffers from alcohol dependence (in remission), impulse control disorder, and APD. He also concluded that Linehan is very likely to reoffend, based on Department of Justice (DOJ) base rate statistics and five multi-factor violence prediction checklists derived from various studies.
Dr. Douglas Fox also testified in favor of commitment. Although he did not examine Linehan, Dr. Fox concluded from written records that Linehan meets the criteria for APD, paraphilia (not otherwise specified), alcohol dependence (by history), and voyeurism (by history) according to the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed. 1994) (DSM-IV). Dr. Fox acknowledged, however, that Linehan is not “mentally ill,” as he understood the term. Dr. Fox relied primarily on DOJ base rates for rearrests and the factors in Linehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 614, to conclude that Linehan is dangerous.
Linehan’s experts disagreed with these conclusions. Dr. John Austin interviewed Li-nehan for the hearing and concluded that APD is not an appropriate diagnosis, although in 1992 he had concluded otherwise. Based partly on Linehan’s age and the results of a “psychopathy checklist” also used by Dr. Millard, Dr. Austin concluded that the likelihood of reoffense is low.
Dr. Darel Hulsing, Linehan’s treating psychiatrist during his PP Act commitment, concluded in 1992 that Linehan was not mentally ill, mentally disordered, or incompetent, and did not suffer from impulse control disorder. Hulsing diagnosed Linehan with APD in 1992, but at the SDP commitment hearing Hulsing testified that he had intended a “softer” conclusion than the label implied. Dr. Hulsing acknowledged that an APD diagnosis may partly rest on thought-based criteria, such as a lack of empathy, and is not restricted to evidence of outward physical behavior.
Linehan also called Professor Herb Hutch-ins, a DSM expert and critic, to discredit DSM’s method of defining supposed mental disorders in terms of characteristics that are largely behavioral. DSM offers diagnostic checklists, but it does not explain the under*177lying cause of the purported disorders and dysfunctions. Dr. Kutchins also testified that predictions of individual behavior cannot be made from DSM-based diagnoses.
Linehan then attacked the accuracy of the prediction evidence used by the county’s experts. Dr. R. Owen Nelson, a clinical psychologist, testified that multi-factor “clinical” predictions based on an examiner’s experience and judgment are generally less accurate than “actuarial” predictions founded on well-tailored base rate statistics. Dr. Nelson used a base rate of 8% to illustrate that even an actuarial prediction of future dangerousness will often produce a “false positive.”2
After 20 days of testimony, the district court issued an initial commitment order. Linehan was committed to MSH, or to a treatment facility designated by the Commissioner of Human Services, for a 60-day treatment evaluation. See Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.18, subds. 1, 2, 253B.185, subd. 1. The court found clear and convincing evidence that Li-nehan (1) engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct, and (2) manifests an Axis II diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder.3 As a result of both (1) and (2), the court concluded that it is highly probable that Li-nehan would engage in harmful sexual conduct in the future.
DSM-IV describes the “essential feature” of antisocial personality disorder as “a pervasive pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others that begins in childhood or early adolescence and continues into adulthood.” DSM-IV at 645. This pattern must be indicated by satisfaction of at least three of seven diagnostic criteria.4 Id. at 649-50. The district court agreed with the county’s experts and concluded that Linehan has APD based on five of the seven criteria:
(1) Failure to conform to social norms of lawful behavior, demonstrated by his past course of harmful sexual conduct;
(2) Deceitfulness, shown by Linehan’s various versions of B.I.’s death; his testimony regarding the seriousness of his attack on T.L., which conflicted with the victim’s testimony; Linehan’s statement to Dr. Millard that he no longer masturbated when the evidence showed otherwise; and Line-han’s violation of North Dakota prison rules by selling merchandise to other inmates and charging interest (“conning others for personal profit,” Id. at 650);
(3) Irritability and aggressiveness, expressed in his attacks on women when he was out of custody, and in shouting at and other irritability toward staff at MSH and Residence 4;
(4) Consistent reckless disregard for the safety of self or others, also demonstrated by his past course of harmful sexual conduct; and
(5) Lack of remorse, based on Linehan’s unconvincing display of regret at the hearing; Linehan’s August 1994 telephone conversation with his wife during which Line-han said that T.L. “deserved what she got” for putting herself in such a position; and *178Linehan’s failure to recognize that he has caused more than 12 hours of misery to others, as he claimed during an interview with Dr. Millard.
The court did not rest its conclusion on the remaining criteria: impulsivity or failure to plan, and consistent irresponsibility.
In finding that Linehan would very likely repeat a course of harmful sexual conduct, the district court used a multi-factor analysis. First, the court considered all six factors for predicting dangerousness outlined in Line-han I, 518 N.W.2d at 614 (listing demographics; history of violent behavior; base rate statistics; sources of stress; similarity of present and future contexts to the past; and record of sex therapy). Linehan turned 54 years old on April 15, 1995, which the court believed weighed in his favor. See, e.g., DSM-IV at 648; DOJ Recidivism Report at 5 (table 7). However, Linehan attacked T.L. while he was in his mid-thirties, and Dr. Fox testified that child molesters are less prone to moderate their behavior with age than are other criminals. Linehan’s history of violent conduct weighed against him, and the court discounted the length of time since his last criminal act by his lack of opportunity to reoffend while in custody. Stress upon release seemed potentially problematic to the court, although the court noted evidence of Linehan’s ability to cope and of a helpful support structure. Linehan completed an Atlantis chemical dependency program in 1988, but the court stated that a noncustodial environment would offer many opportunities to attack young women. Linehan also completed TSOP, but he does not participate in Alcoholics Anonymous and he refused to enter an offender treatment program at MSH during his PP Act commitment. Possible future alcohol use was troubling to the court in light of Linehan’s pattern of alcohol-related crimes.
The district court also considered base rate statistics introduced at the hearing, but con-eluded that the statistical evidence was not dispositive. The court noted several reasons for believing the 7.7% rearrest rate for rapists in the DOJ survey was not a sound base rate in Linehan’s case. First, rapes committed 4 or more years after release were not included in the survey. See DOJ Recidivism Report, at 1, 6 (table 9). Second, not all rapes are reported and not all rapists are arrested. See, e.g., Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1992, at 7 (1994) (table 5). Third, the 7.7% figure included only rearrest for rape, and therefore did not include rearrest for other crimes that are included in the definition of “harmful sexual conduct.” Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 7a; see DOJ Recidivism Report, at 1, 6 (table 9). Finally, the court conceded that Linehan’s age group was less likely to be rearrested, but emphasized that rearrest was more likely for those with longer records and for those first arrested at a younger age. See DOJ Recidivism Report, at 1, 7-10 (tables 11, 14, 15,16,18).
In addition, the district court weighed other factors it believed were sound indicators of future conduct. The court concluded that Linehan was still attracted to young girls,5 and recently displayed impulsiveness,6 deceitfulness, lack of remorse, and aggressiveness. Finally, the court considered Linehan’s APD, a disorder that is characterized by an enduring pattern of behavior.
On balance, Linehan’s past record, current behavior, and APD sufficiently outweighed the evidence against commitment as a sexually dangerous person. The court of appeals affirmed. Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d at 313-16. On February 22, 1996, after a 60-day treatment evaluation and a review hearing required by the Act, the district court issued a final commitment order. Pursuant to that order, Linehan was indeterminately committed to MSH and to the Psychopathic Personality Treatment Center in Moose Lake. *179Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.18, subds. 2, 3, 253B.185, subd. 1.
II.
The Sexually Dangerous Persons Act
The Sexually Dangerous Persons Act created a new class of individuals eligible for civil commitment for treatment.7 The Act defines a sexually dangerous person as one who:
(1) has engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct * * *;
(2) has manifested a sexual, personality, or other mental disorder or dysfunction; and
(3) as a result, is likely to engage in acts of harmful sexual conduct * * *.
Id. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a).
The SDP Act is a departure from the Psychopathic Personality Act upheld in Blod-gett, 510 N.W.2d at 918. First, commitment under the SDP Act does not require proof that the proposed patient has an inability to control his or her sexual impulses. Minn. Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(b). Second, the SDP Act describes the conduct in which the patient must have engaged before the commitment, and in which the patient is likely to engage in the future. “Harmful sexual conduct” is sexual conduct that “creates a substantial likelihood of serious physical or emotional harm to another.” Id. § 253B.02, subd. 7a(a). Such harm is rebuttably presumed for conduct described by certain criminal offenses. Id. § 253B.02, subd. 7a(b) (applying the presumption to criminal sexual conduct in the first through fourth degrees, and to crimes such as murder, manslaughter, and kidnapping, if such crimes were motivated by sexual impulses or were part of a pattern of behavior that included criminal sexual conduct as a goal).
Otherwise, the operation of the SDP Act is substantially the same as the PP Act. Both contain three substantive elements. See Li-nehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 613. Moreover, the civil commitment procedures are similar under the SDP Act and the PP Act. The hearing procedure is the same for both Acts, and generally follows the procedure for committing the mentally ill and dangerous. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.185, subd. 1. But see id. (requiring county attorneys to screen and file petitions for the commitment of sexually dangerous persons or persons with a sexual psychopathic personality8). Grounds for commitment must be demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence for all three categories of patients. See id. §§ 253B.18, subd. 1, 253B.185, subd. 1. If the patient is committed pursuant to any of the three categories, the treatment facility must submit a treatment report within 60 days of the commitment, and the committing court must then hold a review hearing. See id. §§ 253B.18, subd. 2, 253B.185, subd. 1. Finally, the same procedures for conditional and full discharge apply to all three categories of patients. See id. §§ 253B.18, subds. 7,15, 253B.185, subd. 1.
III.
The Likelihood of Harmful Sexual Conduct
The SDP Act requires a finding that the proposed patient is “likely” to engage in harmful sexual conduct in the future. Id. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a)(3). The evidence must be clear and convincing. Id. §§ 253B.18, subd. 1, 253B.185, subd. 1; see also Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 425-33, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 1809-13, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979) (holding that due process requires clear and convincing evidence for civil commitment of the mentally ill and dangerous).
*180The state believes that the ordinary meaning of “likely” is more likely than not. Even if the petitioner must satisfy the clear and convincing evidence standard, the state contends that the underlying fact to be determined (a probability) is not necessarily related to the burden of proof (the degree of certainty).
We agree with the lower courts’ conclusions for two reasons. First, the best reading of the statute and its concern for accurate factual findings precludes the state’s construction. The SDP Act’s demand for “likely” harm implies that committing courts cannot combine a factual element that requires only 50.1% probability with an eviden-tiary standard of less-than-certainty. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a)(3). We do not believe that the legislature intended to iveaken the standard of likelihood in the SDP Act by combination with a relatively high burden of persuasion — the clear and convincing evidence standard. The district court applied this heightened burden of persuasion to each element of proof necessary under the Act, but by demanding highly likely future harm, the lower courts established a degree of overall certainty consistent with the statute.
Second, and in the alternative, due process concerns under the state and federal constitutions constrain legislative discretion to set standards of likelihood when liberty is at stake. U.S. Const, amend. XIV; Minn. Const, art. I, § 7. “The individual should not be asked to share equally with society the risk of error when the possible injury to the individual is significantly greater than any possible harm to the state.” Addington, 441 U.S. at 427, 99 S.Ct. at 1810. No less is required by the guarantee of due process in our state constitution. See Minn. Const, art. I, § 7; Skeen, 505 N.W.2d at 313; State v. Fuller, 374 N.W.2d 722, 726-27 (Minn.1985). Cf. Schulte v. Transportation Unlimited, Inc., 354 N.W.2d 830, 833-35 (Minn.1984) (applying notice standards under the due process clauses of the Minnesota and United States Constitutions as a procedural safeguard for unemployment compensation recipients). If the state were to require only a 10% probability of dangerousness (the fact to be demonstrated) and a clear and convincing evidence standard (say, a 75% degree of certainty), then the demand of due process that the citizen not share equally the risk of error would be undermined. Addington ⅛ holding was partly motivated by substantive concerns about the preservation of individual liberty. See Addington, 441 U.S. at 427, 433, 99,S.Ct. at 1810, 1813. Hence, the error that due process seeks to avoid is a false prediction of future harmful conduct, and not only a prediction that is less accurate than the statutory standard prescribed by the legislature. The due process clauses of both the federal and state constitutions require that future harmful sexual conduct must be highly likely in order to commit a proposed patient under the SDP Act.
IV.
Substantive Due Process
Linehan argues that, as applied to his case, civil commitment under the SDP Act violates substantive due process rights arising from the Minnesota and United States Constitutions. Linehan’s primary contention is that his SDP Act commitment is not narrowly drawn to serve the state’s interests because criminal sanctions are available to deter him from and, if necessary, to punish him for any future harmful sexual conduct. He asserts that he is presently competent to stand trial, able to control his sexual impulses, not mentally ill, and that he has not been acquitted of a crime on the basis of insanity. Linehan further contends that an antisocial personality disorder is' an insufficient basis for the commitment of dangerous persons, and that an utter inability to control sexual impulses is required in order to satisfy the narrow tailoring demand of strict scrutiny.
Despite these arguments, Linehan’s commitment under the SDP Act is constitutional. As applied to Linehan, the SDP Act is a narrowly tailored departure from the PP Act, which itself is a limited but valid policy of confinement and treatment for highly dangerous sexual predators. We acknowledge the constraint of substantive due process in this area of legislative action, but we conclude that there is no principled and constitu*181tionally significant distinction between Line-han’s commitment under the SDP Act and the commitments of other sexual predators upheld under the PP Act. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914-16. Linehan raises important issues and valid concerns in a difficult field of constitutional law. Substantive due process forecloses the substitution of preventive detention schemes for the criminal justice system, and the judiciary has a constitutional duty to intervene before civil commitment becomes the norm and criminal prosecution the exception. See Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U.S. 71, 82-83, 112 S.Ct. 1780, 1786-87, 118 L.Ed.2d 437 (1992). But that is not this ease.
A.
Both the Minnesota and United States Constitutions protect individuals from deprivations of liberty without due process of law. U.S. Const, amends. V, XIV; Minn. Const, art. I, § 7. Both guarantees include substantive components prohibiting “certain arbitrary, wrongful government actions, ‘regardless of the fairness of the procedures used to implement them.’ ” Zinermon v. Burch, 494 U.S. 113, 125, 110 S.Ct. 975, 983, 108 L.Ed.2d 100 (1990) (citation omitted); see State v. Guminga, 395 N.W.2d 344, 346-47, 349 (Minn.1986). Freedom from physical restraint is at the core of the right to liberty protected by due process. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 80, 112 S.Ct. at 1785-86; Youngberg v. Romeo, 457 U.S. 307, 316, 102 S.Ct. 2452, 2458, 73 L.Ed.2d 28 (1982).
Because the fundamental right to liberty is at stake, the SDP Act is subject to strict scrutiny and the burden of persuasion rests with the government. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914; id. at 922 (Wahl, J., dissenting). Under strict scrutiny, challenged legislation must be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest. Young v. Weston, 898 F.Supp. 744, 748 (W.D.Wash.1995) (invalidating a civil commitment statute for antisocial and dangerous persons); State v. Post, 197 Wis.2d 279, 302, 541 N.W.2d 115, 122 (1995) (upholding a civil commitment statute for mentally disordered and dangerous persons). In certain circumstances, we have also recognized that substantive due process allows a comparison of the magnitude of the liberty deprivation and of the state’s interests as a guide to determining the extent of the constitutional guarantee. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914, 918 (upholding the PP Act against federal and state constitutional challenges); Guminga, 395 N.W.2d at 348-49 (balancing public and liberty interests, in light of policy alternatives, under the state constitution).
Under its police powers, the state has a compelling interest in protecting the public from sexual assault. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914, 916. There is also a compelling interest in the care and treatment of the mentally disordered. Cf. Addington, 441 U.S. at 426, 99 S.Ct. at 1809-10 (noting such an interest as sufficient to justify civil commitment). Clearly, these two interests are intertwined. Treating sexual predators for the disorders that explain their dangerousness serves and falls within the state’s interest in protecting the public from sexual assault. Cf. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 916 (“[E]ven when treatment is problematic, and it often is, the state’s interest in the safety of others is no less legitimate and compelling. So long as civil commitment is programmed to provide treatment and periodic review, due process is provided.”).
B.
We therefore consider whether the SDP Act is sufficiently narrow, as applied to a person suffering from APD, to satisfy strict scrutiny. The leading United States Supreme Court case on the subject of civil commitment for dangerous persons is Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U.S. 71, 112 S.Ct. 1780, 118 L.Ed.2d 437 (1992), in which the Court invoked substantive due process to invalidate the commitment of a presently sane insanity acquittee who suffered from APD. The Louisiana statute at issue required mandatory and indefinite commitment for insanity ac-quittees, and allowed release only if the ac-quittee could prove that he or she was no longer dangerous; the current sanity of the acquittee was irrelevant. Id. at 73, 112 S.Ct. at 1781-82. Foucha’s continued commitment was based solely on his inability to demonstrate that he posed no danger to himself or to others. Id. at 83, 112 S.Ct. at 1787; id. at *18286-87, 112 S.Ct. at 1788-89 (O’Connor, J., concurring). Foucha was diagnosed with APD, but the state conceded that he was no longer “mentally ill” and did not contradict the assertion that APD could not be treated. Id. at 75, 80, 82, 112 S.Ct. at 1782, 1785-86, 1786-87. The Court held that insanity ac-quittees may be committed only so long as the patient is both mentally ill and dangerous. Id. at 77-78, 112 S.Ct. at 1784; see also Jones v. United States, 463 U.S. 354, 370, 103 S.Ct. 3043, 3052-53, 77 L.Ed.2d 694 (1983); O’Connor v. Donaldson, 422 U.S. 563, 574-75, 95 S.Ct. 2486, 2493-94, 45 L.Ed.2d 396 (1975).
After Foucha, this court upheld the PP Act commitment of a convicted sex offender diagnosed with APD in In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1994). Blodgett interpreted Foucha to permit at least three categories of confinement pursuant to a state’s police powers: (1) convicted criminals may be imprisoned for purposes of deterrence and retribution; (2) the mentally ill and dangerous may be civilly committed; and (3) persons who pose a danger to others may be subject to limited confinement in certain narrow circumstances, such as pretrial detention of dangerous criminals. The PP Act was upheld either as a subset of mentally ill and dangerous commitment statutes, or as an additional category not mentioned in Foucha. See id. at 914.
Although the SDP Act is a departure from the PP Act, Blodgett is not distinguishable. Like Linehan, Blodgett was dangerous and suffered from APD; the court concluded that there was a valid mental health basis for commitment. The Blodgett court did note that psychopathic personality is a severe form of APD that involves a “volitional dysfunction which grossly impairs judgment and behavior with respect to the sex drive.” Id. at 915. However, the court did not assert that an utter inability to control sexual impulses was the only constitutional basis for committing sexual predators; Blodgett did not indicate that substantive due process precluded milder forms of APD as the mental health basis for civil commitment. See id. at 916 (emphasizing that substantive due process requires a connection between the medical rationale for commitment and the patient’s continued loss of liberty, but not offering limits to the medical basis for commitment).
Other decisions make clear that civil commitment for sexual predators is allowed if treatment is necessary to abate the mental disorders that make such persons so dangerous to others. See Call v. Gomez, 535 N.W.2d 312, 319 (Minn.1995) (holding that PP Act patients may be confined so long as they are dangerous and need treatment, despite no longer meeting the inability-to-control requirement for initial commitment); State v. Randall, 192 Wis.2d 800, 806-07, 532 N.W.2d 94, 96 (1995) (holding that dangerous but sane insanity acquittees may be confined in a mental health facility so long as there is a medical justification for doing so). Blodgett was concerned with the reality of an identifiable mental disorder that caused a person to be sexually dangerous. See Blod-gett, 510 N.W.2d at 914-15. The SDP Act’s application to a dangerous person suffering from an antisocial personality disorder does not alter the substantive due process analysis.
We conclude that, under Blodgett, the SDP Act is sufficiently narrow to satisfy strict scrutiny as applied to Linehan. The SDP Act serves the same state purposes and interests as the PP Act. In fact, the SDP Act is an attempt to protect the public by treating sexual predators even more dangerous than those reached by the PP Act — the mentally disordered who retain enough control to “plan, wait, and delay the indulgence of their maladies until presented with a higher probability of success.” Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d at 318. And as the court of appeals recognized, the mental disorder requirement in the SDP Act serves the state’s interest in public safety by aiding the prediction of dangerousness. Id. Both the SDP Act and the PP Act apply only if a person has already engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct, will probably do so again, and suffers from a mental disorder that explains and helps predict that person’s dangerousness.
Linehan attempts to distinguish Blodgett by posing an underlying theory of substantive due process as applied to civil commit*183ment. Linehan argues that Foucha requires the state to explain why criminal law is insufficient to address dangerousness. Charge, conviction, and heightened penalties for recidivists are “the normal means of dealing with persistent criminal conduct.” Foucha, 504 U.S. at 82, 112 S.Ct. at 1786-87. From this proposition, Linehan asserts that the state cannot satisfy the narrow-tailoring element of strict scrutiny unless the proposed patient is “unreachable” by the criminal law.
There is some force to Linehan’s argument. Foucha ⅛ application of strict scrutiny to the continued commitment of a sane insanity acquittee did demand sound reasons for departing from the criminal justice system in the name of public protection. Moreover, Linehan’s substantive due process theory might avoid difficult constitutional issues. If every basis for civil commitment implied a defense to criminal charges, and if every criminal conviction precluded civil commitment, the judiciary might not have to inquire whether a particular mental disorder, dysfunction, or illness is acceptable under substantive due process; only the division between the two systems would be relevant. The legislature could create a mental health basis for commitment, but then a defense to criminal charges would follow. Likewise, a mental health defense to criminal charges would imply a valid basis for commitment.
Nevertheless, we believe that some overlap between the two systems is justified to adequately serve the interests of public protection and treatment.9 And whatever its merits, Linehan’s theory is foreclosed by our case law. See Pearson, 205 Minn, at 556, 287 N.W. at 303 (stating that an uncontrollable impulse is not a defense to a crime if the defendant was aware of the nature and quality of the act, and that a committable mental malady does not necessarily create an excuse for criminal conduct). The utter inability to control one’s mental or sexual impulses is not, per se, a defense to criminal punishment under Minnesota law. Rather, the defendant must prove that, at the time of the act,-he or she could not understand the nature of the act or that the act was wrong. See Minn. Stat. § 611.026; State v. Jolley, 508 N.W.2d 770, 772 (Minn.1993); State v. Rawland, 294 Minn. 17, 46, 199 N.W.2d 774, 790 (1972). Nor is Linehan’s proposed hermetic seal between the civil commitment and criminal justice systems mandated by state or federal due process protections. Under our ease law, a person who is utterly unable to control impulses to sexually assault others does not, by that fact, have a defense to criminal charges, and yet that person may still be subject to civil commitment under the PP Act. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a(b); Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914-16.
We cannot accept Linehan’s theory without disrupting the result in Blodgett. Blodgett upheld the commitment of a dangerous person who suffered from APD and who lacked volitional control, but who was serving a prison sentence at the time, of his commitment. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914-16; see also Bailey v. Gardebring, 940 F.2d 1150, 1153 (8th Cir.1991) (upholding dual commitment and prison confinement), The relevant feature distinguishing Linehan’s case from Blod-gett’s is the nature of their mental disorders, not that one was “reachable” by the criminal law and the other was not. And, as we discuss below, evidence of Linehan’s APD and dangerousness supplied a constitutionally adequate basis for civil commitment.
It may be true, in a certain philosophical sense, that Blodgett was less blameworthy than is Linehan because Blodgett could not control his sexual impulses. And Blodgett may have been less deterred by impending criminal sanctions. But Blodgett, like Line-han, was neither incompetent nor mentally ill, and Blodgett’s inability to control his impulses was not a defense to criminal liability. The 1994 amendments to the civil commitment statute reaffirm this conclusion. Minn. *184Stat. § 253B.185, subd. 3 (declaring that satisfaction of the definition of sexual psychopathic personality or sexually dangerous person does not constitute a criminal defense). We reaffirm Blodgett today, and therefore Linehan’s substantive due process theory is unpersuasive.
C.
Linehan also contends that APD is, per se, an invalid basis for commitment because the diagnosis is little more than a definition of criminal behavior. We recognize that there are constitutional limits to state-created definitions of mental illness in the civil commitment context. The Supreme Court implied such limits in Foucha.
[T]he State asserts that because Foucha once committed a criminal act and now has an antisocial personality that sometimes leads to aggressive conduct, a disorder for which there is no effective treatment, he may be held indefinitely. This rationale would permit the State to hold indefinitely any other insanity acquittee not mentally ill who could be shown to have a personality disorder that may lead to criminal conduct. The same would be true of any convicted criminal, even though he has completed his prison term. It would also be only a step away from substituting confinements for dangerousness for our present system which, with only narrow exceptions and aside from permissible confinements for mental illness, incarcerates only those who are proved beyond reasonable doubt to have violated a criminal law.
Foucha, 504 U.S. at 82-83, 112 S.Ct. at 1787 (emphasis added); see also id. at 88, 112 S.Ct. at 1789-90 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (“I think it clear that acquittees could not be confined as mental patients absent some medical justification for doing so; in such a case the necessary connection between the nature and purposes of confinement would be absent.”). Mere social maladjustments might not satisfy state or federal due process concerns, see Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914, and certainly other constitutional provisions limit the government’s ability to civilly commit those whom it fears. See, e.g., U.S. Const, amends. I, XIV (guaranteeing freedom of speech, religion, and equal protection of the laws); Minn.Const. art. I, §§ 2, 3, 16 (same).10
However, substantive due process allows the legislature some flexibility to define the medical grounds for civil commitment. See Foucha, 504 U.S. at 80, 112 S.Ct. at 1785-86; id. at 87-89, 112 S.Ct. at 1789-90 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (discussing the importance and vitality of judicial deference to state legislatures); Jones, 463 U.S. at 364 n. 13, 370, 103 S.Ct. at 3050 n. 13, 3053 (assuring judicial deference to legislatures designing-insanity defenses, an area of legislation “fraught with medical and scientific uncertainties” (citation omitted)). Cf. Addington, 441 U.S. at 431, 99 S.Ct. at 1812 (noting the importance federalism places on diversity in the substance and procedure of civil commitment laws). Thus, we are hesitant to restrain legislative judgment in areas of medical uncertainty. We are bound to enforce the requirements of due process, but we give the legislature due regard in identifying medically recognized mental disorders, such as APD, that explain a person’s dangerousness and that are appropriate bases for civil commitment and treatment. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.03, subd. 7 (requiring proper care and treatment, best adapted to eliminate the need for continued confinement and care); Call, 535 N.W.2d at 319-20 (rejecting a dou*185ble jeopardy challenge to the PP Act because of its treatment purposes and requirements).
Linehan relies on Young v. Weston for the proposition that APD is a constitutionally deficient basis for his commitment. In Young, a federal district court held that the State of Washington’s definitions of mental “abnormalities” were unconstitutionally circular. Washington allowed civil commitment of persons convicted of or charged with a crime of sexual violence, who suffer from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that makes such persons likely to commit violent sexual offenses. Wash.Rev.Code Ann. § 71.09.020(1), (4) (West Supp.1997). The court thought that the statutory bases for civil commitment were essentially descriptions of dangerous behavior, and not medically recognizable mental illnesses. See Young, 898 F.Supp. at 749-50 & nn. 2-3. The statute targeted “antisocial personality features which are unamenable to existing mental illness treatment modalities.” Wash. Rev.Code Ann. § 71.09.010 (providing legislative findings).
The reasoning in Young cannot be used to invalidate Linehan’s commitment. First, adopting Young ⅛ belief that substantive due process precludes “circular” definitions of mental illness seems inconsistent with this court’s opinion in Blodgett. The “utter inability to control” test for psychopathic personalities also might be “circular” in the sense that it describes dangerous behavior as well as a mental disorder. Again, Linehan does not explain how his reasoning can be applied without disturbing the result in Blod-gett. Second, even if the circularity argument is valid after Blodgett, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder applied to Li-nehan by the district court was not solely based on his criminal behavior. The court also relied on evidence of Linehan’s mental processes in finding that he has APD, emphasizing Linehan’s lack of empathy and remorse.
Moreover, the SDP Act was written with the advice of psychiatrists and psychologists who believe that DSM-IV offers a helpful categorization of mental disorders — “clinically significant behavioral or psychological syndrome[s] of pattern[s] * * * currently * * * considered a manifestation of a behavioral, psychological, or biological dysfunction in the individual.” DSM-IV at xxi-xxii. Granted, a diagnosis of APD is based in part on evidence of behavior. However, the purpose and effect of the diagnostic criteria in DSM-IV is to identify an underlying mental disorder that accounts for the behavior. Linehan does not now challenge the district court’s conclusion that he has such a disorder. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we accept the legislature’s and the American Psychiatric Association’s determination that APD is an identifiable mental disorder that helps explain behavior.11
*186For these reasons, we conclude that the SDP Act, as applied to Linehan, satisfies the demands of substantive due process.
V.
Equal Protection
Linehan’s second constitutional argument is that the SDP Act violates his right to equal protection of the laws. U.S. Const, amend. XIV; Minn. Const, art. I, § 2. Ami-cus curiae MCLU contends that the SDP Act impermissibly distinguishes between two classes of sexually dangerous persons: (1) those who suffer from a sexual, personality, or other mental disorder or dysfunction, Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a)(2), and (2) those who do not. Only the first class is subject to civil commitment under the SDP Act. MCLU argues that the Act fails to satisfy strict scrutiny because the classifications are underinclusive: it may be that many sex offenders who are as likely to reoffend as Linehan do not suffer from mental, sexual, or personality disorders.12
Again, Blodgett controls our analysis. There, we recognized that civil commitment for sexual predators threatens liberty, and therefore such schemes must satisfy heightened scrutiny under state and federal equal protection principles. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 917 (departing from the rational basis standard in Pearson, 309 U.S. at 274-75, 60 S.Ct. at 525-26). Blodgett concluded that the PP Act, as interpreted by Pearson, permissibly drew genuine and substantial distinctions that define a class of dangerous and mentally disordered persons who victimize others in a particular manner. The PP Act addressed the threat of sexual predators who pose a unique danger. Id. Therefore, heightened scrutiny, not strict scrutiny, is applicable to the SDP Act. The “genuine and substantial” standard used in Blodgett is a form of intermediate scrutiny under the Minnesota Constitution. See State v. Russell, 477 N.W.2d 886, 889 (Minn.1991), cited in Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 917. Deference to the legislature is due, and the statute’s genuine and substantial distinctions must be reasonably connected to achieving the state’s legitimate purposes. See Russell, 477 N.W.2d at 888-89.13
The legislature had sufficient basis to conclude that interests in public protection and treatment would be reasonably served by a distinction between sexually dangerous persons with and without mental disorders. First, the legislature has concluded that applying civil commitment to those with mental disorders helps isolate sexually dangerous persons most likely to harm others in the future. Although the SDP Act already requires that future harmful sexual conduct must be highly likely, the existence of a mental disorder such as APD identifies a *187cause of enduring harmful behavior. The legislature’s judgment regarding the relationship between mental disorders and dangerousness is sufficient under heightened scrutiny. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 917; see also Foucha, 504 U.S. at 87, 112 S.Ct. at 1789 (O’Connor, J., concurring).
Second, the state’s interest in treating sexual predators is served by confining the scope of the SDP Act to those with mental disorders. The state appears to assert this interest by emphasizing the substantial commitment the legislature has made to creating adequate facilities and treatment programs for those committed under the PP and SDP Acts. The state has an obvious interest in treating sexual predators for their mental disorders before they harm others again. See Addington, 441 U.S. at 426, 99 S.Ct. at 1809-10 (discussing parens patriae powers); In re Young, 122 Wash.2d at 26, 857 P.2d at 1000 (“[I]t is irrefutable that the State has a compelling interest both in treating sex predators and protecting society from their actions.”). Rather than rely exclusively on enhancing sentences for sex-related crimes, the legislature has also opted to provide comprehensive care and treatment for committed sex offenders at MSH and at a new treatment center in Moose Lake. See Call, 535 N.W.2d at 318-19 & n. 5; Minnesota Security Hospital, Sex Offender Treatment Program: Plan, Content and Sequence 1-2, 6.
The state adds that substantive due process requires the classifications challenged by Linehan: civil commitment is not available as a tool for protecting the public unless the proposed patient is both dangerous and suffering from a mental disorder. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 77-78, 112 S.Ct. at 1784. In essence, the state contends that Linehan’s substantive due process rights preclude equal protection analysis. We have difficulty accepting this conclusion. It is far from clear that a constitutionally imposed limitation on legislative classifications creates a compelling state interest to justify those classifications. Constitutional rights and state interests are distinct concepts.
Nevertheless, the SDP Act’s classification is sufficiently justified by Blodgett and the reasonable connection between a proposed patient’s mental disorder and the state’s interests in public protection and treatment. Therefore, the Act does not violate Linehan’s rights to equal protection.
VI.
Ex Post Facto and Double Jeopardy
MCLU also asserts that the SDP Act and its application to Linehan constitutes enhanced or additional criminal punishment under the Ex Post Facto and Double Jeopardy Clauses of the United States Constitution. U.S. Const, art. I, § 10; id. amends. V, XIV. Both clauses apply only to criminal and predominantly punitive civil laws. Because the SDP Act was an amendment to a civil statute (chapter 253B) and thus facially civil, Line-han must offer the “clearest proof’ that the Act is sufficiently punitive in purpose or effect to negate its civil label. United States v. Ward, 448 U.S. 242, 248-51, 100 S.Ct. 2636, 2641-43, 65 L.Ed.2d 742 (1980) (citation omitted).
A. '
Article I, Section 10 of the federal constitution prohibits ex post facto laws, which include laws that increase the punishment for crimes committed before enactment. Collins v. Youngblood, 497 U.S. 37, 42, 110 S.Ct. 2715, 2719, 111 L.Ed.2d 30 (1990). The protection ensures fair warning of criminal sanctions, and restrains “arbitrary and potentially vindictive legislation.” Weaver v. Graham, 450 U.S. 24, 29, 101 S.Ct. 960, 964, 67 L.Ed.2d 17 (1981) (explaining that ex post facto laws must be criminal, apply to past conduct, and disadvantage the offender). The initial question is whether the SDP Act is sufficiently punitive in purpose or effect.
MCLU does not address Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 916, which emphasized that treatment after commitment is required, or Call, 535 N.W.2d at 319-20, which upheld a PP Act commitment against a double jeopardy challenge. Call concluded that the purpose of the PP Act is treatment, not preventive detention. See id. (assuming that the argument could be raised). Call also described *188the state’s substantial efforts to treat and rehabilitate sex offenders. Id. at 318-19 & n. 5. Under the civil commitment statute, all patients have the right to receive “proper care and treatment, best adapted, according to contemporary professional standards, to rendering further custody, institutionalization, or other services unnecessary.” Minn. Stat. § 253B.08, subd. 7. Patients are also entitled to a written program plan articulating treatment goals, duration, and measures to be employed, and a quarterly progress review. Id. The SDP Act ensures treatment to the same extent as the PP Act. See id. §§ 253B.18, 253B.185, subd. 1.
Moreover, after 2 years of work, the staff of the Minnesota Security Hospital developed a four-phase treatment program for sex offenders committed to MSH, and a similar program is being developed at the Minnesota Psychopathic Personality Treatment Center (MPPTC) in Moose Lake. Sex Offender Treatment Program, supra, at 1, 26, 29. According to evidence introduced at Linehan’s initial commitment hearing, each' of the four phases will last approximately 8'months for model patients — those who complete the program’s therapy and education requirements, satisfy the program’s goals, and behave consistent with program standards. Id. at 6. In fact, treatment and rehabilitation are essential to MSH’s mission. Id. at 2, 8 (“Residents have a right to treatment.”). The purpose and effect of the SDP Act is therefore predominantly remedial, not punitive.
This conclusion is in accord with Allen v. Illinois, 478 U.S. 364, 106 S.Ct. 2988, 92 L.Ed.2d 296 (1986). In Allen, the Court held that confinement and treatment of sexually dangerous persons under the Illinois sexual predator statute was civil in nature. Id. at 369-75, 106 S.Ct. at 2992-95. The Illinois statute provided for mandatory treatment at a psychiatric care facility and for full discharge when the patient demonstrated that he or she was no longer dangerous. See id. at 369-70,106 S.Ct. at 2992-93.
MCLU notes'that the SDP Act requires that a prison sentence be completed at a facility designated by the Commissioner of Corrections if the patient was committed to the commissioner before the SDP Act petition. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.185, subd. 2(b). However, the SDP Act does not, by its terms, require that any outstanding criminal sentence be served at a correctional facility. Moreover, the lower courts in this case did not invoke the provision cited by MCLU. Linehan was ultimately committed to the MSH and to the MPPTC. Both institutions are managed by the Commissioner of Human Services, and both must provide care and treatment. Id. §§ 246B.02-.04, 253.20-202; Call, 535 N.W.2d at 318-19 & n. 5; Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 916 (holding that due process is satisfied by a commitment system “programmed to provide treatment and periodic review”); Sex Offender Treatment Program, supra, at 2, 8.
B.
The protection against double jeopardy in the Fifth Amendment to the federal constitution applies to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. See Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784, 794-96, 89 S.Ct. 2056, 2062-64, 23 L.Ed.2d 707 (1969). MCLU asserts that Linehan’s commitment constitutes a second punishment for past convictions. To prevail, Linehan must show that the civil “penalty” was (1) punishment, (2) imposed in a separate proceeding, and (3) based on the same offense for which the proposed patient was already placed in jeopardy. United States v. Halper, 490 U.S. 435, 438, 440-41, 448-51, 109 S.Ct. 1892, 1896, 1897-98, 1901-03, 104 L.Ed.2d 487 (1989).
As above, Linehan fails to demonstrate that his commitment under the SDP Act is “punishment.” See id. at 448-49, 109 S.Ct. at 1901-02 (explaining that a civil sanction violates double jeopardy only if it “may not fairly be characterized as remedial, but only as a deterrent or retribution”). Call concluded that the PP Act did not violate double jeopardy because the commitment was for the purpose of treatment. Our decision was not affected by Call’s incarceration at the time of commitment. See Call, 535 N.W.2d at 319-20. As we noted above, the procedures and treatment after commitment under the SDP Act are identical to those of the PP Act. See Young, 898 F.Supp. at 753-54 (using the same analysis of punitiveness for *189both ex post facto and double jeopardy purposes).
Linehan has not offered evidence that the treatment regime at MSH or MPPTC is a sham, or even that such treatment is ineffective. On the record before us and in light of our conclusion in Call, we conclude that the SDP Act is facially civil and is not so punitive in purpose or effect to trigger the federal constitutional prohibitions against ex post facto laws and double jeopardy.
VII.
Sufficiency of the Evidence
Linehan also argues that certain findings of fact were clearly erroneous. On appeal, we will not weigh the evidence. We will determine if the evidence as a whole presents substantial support for the district court’s conclusions. Johnson v. Noot, 323 N.W.2d 724, 728 (Minn.1982).
A.
First, Linehan asserts that the county failed to prove highly likely future harm by “state of the art” evidence or the “best available scientific knowledge and methodology.” Linehan argues that “actuarial” methods of prediction founded on base rate recidivism statistics are more accurate than “clinical” predictions, and therefore dangerousness predictions must rely on the former.14 The only base rate statistic noted in the district court opinion was the 7.7% 3-year rapist rearrest rate. The court discounted the weight of that statistic for several convincing reasons, which we have already detailed. Nevertheless, Linehan argues that a base rate is required for dangerousness prediction, and that the county had the burden of establishing another statistic if it believed 7.7% was too low.
We note first that the district court’s dangerousness finding is not a purely “clinical” prediction. The district court’s opinion analyzed both base rate statistics and case-spe-eific facts. According to testimony at the hearing, some research on violence prediction indicates that combining actuarial methods with the clinician’s experience and knowledge of the peculiar circumstances of a given case may enhance accuracy. Moreover, contrary to Linehan’s claim, the county’s experts did not rely “exclusively on clinical prediction.” Dr. Millard and Dr. Fox both considered base rate statistics.
Linehan offers no statutory or precedential support for the argument that actuarial methods or base rates are the sole permissible basis for prediction. In fact, Linehan’s argument is contrary to the multi-factor analysis for dangerousness prediction outlined in Linehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 614. Linehan I offered six potential inquiries to aid courts in predicting whether future harm was likely under the PP Act. Id. These factors must be considered when such evidence is presented at a hearing, and they are particularly important when the last instance of harmful sexual conduct is remote in time from the petition for commitment. Id. Statistical evidence of recidivism is only one of the six factors. In this case, the district court properly followed Linehan I and evaluated evidence pertaining to each of the six factors for prediction. It was not error to consider evidence not specifically listed in Linehan I. If nothing else, the hearing in this case demonstrated that dangerousness prediction methodology is complex and contested. Linehan I did not foreclose good faith attempts by the courts to isolate the most important factors in predicting harmful sexual conduct. We conclude that the guidelines for dangerousness prediction in Linehan I apply to the SDP Act, and therefore we cannot accept Linehan’s attempt to confine the district court’s inquiry. On these facts, we are unpersuaded that Linehan I should be modified.
B.
Linehan also claims that the district court findings lack specificity. First, Line-han emphasizes that the district court did not *190identify the crimes listed in Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 7a that Linehan is likely to commit. Linehan seems to argue -that the risk of “low-level, non-violent” acts should not be included in light of the supposed purpose of the SDP Act to commit only the most dangerous sexual predators. But whatever the purposes of the Act, the scope of the statute is clear. Nonviolent but sexually harmful acts are included in its reach. See id. The Act calls for a general determination that seriously harmful sexual conduct is highly likely to occur. Therefore, the district court’s conclusion that Linehan was highly likely to engage in such conduct was adequate.
Second, Linehan notes that the “time horizon” for the district court’s prediction is indefinite. However, the Act does not limit the prediction by time period. In addition, the Act does not incorporate the factual specificity requirements for the commitment of mentally retarded, mentally ill, or chemically dependent persons. See id. § 253B.09, subd. 2 (requiring specific findings and identification of the patient’s conduct that formed the basis for a commitment order).
Third, Linehan asserts that the district court failed to make sufficiently specific findings regarding the causal link between the likelihood of sexually harmful conduct and his past conduct or his personality disorder. However, the factors in Linehan I and others balanced by the district court are appropriate for predicting dangerousness under the SDP Act. Their consideration satisfies the statute. We have demanded nothing more in PP Act commitments, and, as noted above, the factual specificity requirements for other civil commitment findings were not adopted in the SDP Act. See id. §§ 253B.09, subd. 2, 253B.18, subd. 1, 253B.185, subd. 1.
Linehan also asserts that his past sexual violence was caused by anger and shame, not his APD. However, finding that anger and shame played a role in Linehan’s prior harmful sexual conduct is not inconsistent with finding that Linehan’s APD will result in future harmful sexual conduct. These two motivating factors are not mutually exclusive. The district court had sufficient evidence to conclude that APD and the enduring pattern of behavior it can cause makes Linehan highly likely to sexually harm others in the future.
C.
Linehan also challenges six factual findings underlying the district court’s conclusion that he is highly likely to sexually harm others if he is not committed for treatment. Reviewing for clear error, we find sufficient evidence in the record to uphold the court’s findings.
First, the district court inferred from the videotape of Linehan masturbating after vigorous play with his stepdaughter that he was still attracted to young girls. This inference was permissible even if Line-han’s group therapist at Residence 4 had not noted any such attraction on other occasions. The court based its opinion on Linehan’s sudden departure to the upstairs bathroom during a time-limited visit. Second, there was adequate evidence that Linehan lacks truthfulness in sexual matters. Linehan testified that he masturbated at Residence 4, but he told Dr. Millard, “You probably won’t believe it, but I don’t.” Third, as Linehan concedes, there was evidence in the record that he continues to lack remorse for his past course of harmful sexual conduct. The court heard testimony that Linehan recently said that T.L. “deserved what she got,” and that Linehan still does not accept that he has caused more than 12 hours of misery to others. Fourth, whatever weight the court placed on Linehan’s irritability and verbal aggressiveness during confinement, the record supports the conclusion that such incidents occurred. Fifth, the court used Line-han’s age as a factor against commitment. Linehan believes that the evidence deserves more weight, but that determination was largely for the district court and its assessment of expert testimony. Minn.R.Civ.P. 52.01; Oliver Iron Mining Co. v. Commissioner of Taxation, 247 Minn. 6, 23-24, 76 N.W.2d 107, 118 (1956).
Sixth, there was sufficient evidence to conclude that Linehan is not presently willing to participate in Alcoholics Anony*191mous. It seems that the district court’s assertion that Linehan believes he has “licked” his alcohol problem was based on the phrase of a county attorney. Nevertheless, the transcript of Linehan’s examination with Dr. Millard indicates that Linehan believes he can control his urge to drink without external support, although he claimed that if he “started thinking about drinking” he would “go back to AA before [he] let it get out of hand.” Furthermore, a 1993 psychological review indicated that Linehan no longer participated in Alcoholics Anonymous because he does not believe that alcoholism is a disease. He also said that he relied on self control to prevent himself from returning to alcohol.
Finally, Linehan asserts that the ev-identiary standard used by the district court would allow almost any criminal to be civilly committed. We disagree. A thorough review of the record demonstrates the strength of the county’s case for Linehan’s commitment. Linehan has a long history of harmful sexual conduct, and the only opportunity for him to harm the public in the last 30 years was when he escaped from Stillwater’s minimum security facility. Within 11 days, he committed another sexual assault. Since Li-nehan was returned to custody, he has displayed less overt but persuasive signs of his dangerousness. In the last 2 years, Linehan expressed his absence of remorse and empathy. Linehan also recently displayed a continuing attraction to young girls; the district court identified three instances over a 2-day period of Linehan masturbating within minutes of vigorous play with his stepdaughter. Furthermore, Linehan’s failure to engage in treatment opportunities and lack of truthfulness about sexual matters are additional evidence that his commitment for treatment was proper.
Dangerousness prediction under the SDP Act is a difficult task that the legislature has delegated to district courts. In this case, the district court had to evaluate 20 days of testimony during Linehan’s initial commitment hearing. The evidence was voluminous and complex, but the record against Linehan was sufficient to civilly commit him. The district court’s careful balancing of all the relevant facts does not imply that the clear and convincing evidence standard was not . properly applied. Contrary to Linehan’s assertions, dangerousness prediction under the SDP Act is not simply a matter for statisticians. See Linehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 614.
VIII.
Linehan’s commitment under the SDP Act does not violate his rights to substantive due process or equal protection of the laws. The Act has not been shown to be so punitive that it constitutes an ex post facto law or violates the prohibition against double jeopardy. Finally, the district court did not clearly err in its findings of fact.
Affirmed.
BLATZ, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
TOMLJANOVICH and PAGE, JJ., dissent.
. A significant portion of the hearing was also occupied by consideration of a videotape of Line-han twice masturbating in the upstairs bathroom of Residence 4 soon after physical play with his stepdaughter. The conduct took place during a time-limited visit on January 1, 1995. There was also testimony that the same behavior occurred the day before, but a videotape was not preserved.
.Testimony regarding statistical predictions focused on base rates from the United States Department of Justice. Those statistics indicated that among prisoners released in 1983 whose most serious offense at the time of release was rape, 7.7% were rearrested for rape within 3 years of their release. Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Dep 't of Justice, Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1983, at 6 (1989) [hereinafter DOJ Recidivism Report ] (table 9).
Dr. Nelson testified that if the historical evidence of recidivism is low among a particular population (the "base rate”), and if one assumes that not all predictions are accurate (“accuracy” less than 100%), then the number of inaccurate predictions of future violent conduct for those who fit the characteristics of the population ("false positives") will be high when compared to all predictions of future violent conduct ("false positives” plus “true positives”). Dr. Nelson explained that if one predicts from a base rate of 8%, and if prediction accuracy is 75% — a number he considered the mean for expert attempts at predicting violence — then 79% of all predictions of future violence will be wrong.
. "Axis I" disorders generally include mental illnesses and sexual disorders, while "Axis II” lists personality disorders. Both personality disorders and sexual disorders are subsets of "mental disorders.” See DSM-IV at xxi-xxii.
. APD also requires a “conduct disorder” before age 15. DSM-IV at 646. Otherwise, DSM-IV does not set time parameters for the behavior used in diagnosing APD. Present exhibition of behavior satisfying the APD criteria is apparently not necessaxy for the diagnosis to persist: Dr. Hulsing testified that if a person has APD, that person's thinking and personality condition endures, even if the person's behavior changes.
. The court found that Linehan masturbated in privacy after physical play with his stepdaughter during visits at Residence 4 on December 31, 1994 and January 1, 1995.
. The court also cited the masturbation incidents to conclude that Linehan appeared to suffer from "a degree of impulsivity and lack of control in connection with sexual impulses.” On appeal to this court, Linehan inaccurately asserts that there was no evidence to support and the district court made no findings regarding "volitional impairment at this time.”
. The civil commitment statute also allows commitment for the treatment and care of persons who are chemically dependent and dangerous to themselves or others, Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 2; mentally retarded and dangerous to themselves or others, id. § 253B.02, subd. 14; mentally ill or mentally ill and dangerous to the public, id. § 253B.02, subds. 13, 17; and sexual psychopathic personalities, id. § 253B.02, subd. 18a. In addition, the Commissioner of Health is authorized to confine persons who constitute a health threat to others. Minn.Stat. §§ 144.12, subd. 1(7), 144.4171, subd. 1, 144.4172, subd. 8 (1994 & Supp.1995).
. "Sexual psychopathic personality” is equivalent to "psychopathic personality” under the 1994 amendments to the Civil Commitment Act. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a; Act of August 31, 1994, ch. 1, art. 1, sec. 5(a), 1995 Minn. Laws at 8.
. We doubt that the legislature would preserve the current bases for commitment if forced to create new and parallel criminal defenses. See, e.g., Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 2 (allowing commitment for persons chemically dependent and dangerous to themselves or others); id. § 253B.02, subd. 14 (allowing commitment for persons mentally retarded and dangerous to themselves or others). A theory of due process that threatens such civil commitments seems unsound. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914 n. 6 (interpreting Foucha in a limited fashion to avoid unintended threats to accepted bases for civil commitment).
. Other opinions indicate that idiosyncratic or "unusual” behavior is not a constitutionally sufficient basis for restricting liberty. See Addington, 441 U.S. at'426-27, 433, 99 S.Ct. at 1809-10, 1813 (emphasizing the risks of confinement for "isolated instances of unusual conduct. Loss of liberty calls for a showing that the individual suffers from something more serious than is demonstrated by idiosyncratic behavior.”); see also Post, 197 Wis.2d at 303, 541 N.W.2d at 122 (upholding Wisconsin’s sexual predator commitment statute, but acknowledging that substantive due process requires a “mental condition component”); In re Care & Treatment of Hendricks, 259 Kan. 246, 277, 279-81, 912 P.2d 129, 147, MS-49 (1996) (Larson, L, dissenting) (arguing for the constitutionality of Kansas's statute, but stating that "for constitutional purposes, ‘mental illness’ ¡8 * * * a iegai determination to be made with reference to some standard that establishes that the person suffers a condition that is an ailment of the mind, rather than mere 'idiosyncratic behavior’ within a range of conduct that is generally acceptable.”).
. The district court did not conclude that Line-han has a "dysfunction” under the SDP Act. That language is not at issue here.
We draw support for our conclusion from other courts that have upheld commitments of dangerous persons who suffer from medically recognized mental disorders. Before Young v. Weston, the Washington Supreme Court upheld its sexual predator statute against a substantive due process challenge. In re Personal Restraint of Young, 122 Wash.2d 1, 59-60, 857 P.2d 989, 1018 (1993). The majority conceded that Fou-cha bars civil commitment on the basis of antisocial behavior. However, the Washington statute applied to violent sexual predators with antisocial personality disorder, a "recognized mental disorder” under DSM-III-R. Id., 122 Wash.2d at 37 n. 12, 857 P.2d at 1006-07 n. 12; see also id., 122 Wash.2d at 63-64, 857 P.2d at 1020-21 (Johnson, J., dissenting).
The Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld a similar sexual predator statute as applied to a prisoner convicted of violent- sexual offenses and diagnosed with APD under DSM-IV criteria. The Wisconsin statute required a violent offense, a mental disorder and a substantial probability that the offender will commit future acts of sexual violence because of the disorder. Wis. Stat. Ann. §§ 980.01-.02 (West Supp.1995); see also id. § 980.01(2)' (defining mental disorder as "a congenital or acquired condition affecting the emotional or volitional capacity that predisposes a person to engage in acts of sexual violence”). The court acknowledged that substantive due process requires a "mental condition component” in civil commitment statutes applied to dangerous offenders, but held that this requirement was satisfied by a definition of mental disorder that targeted those predisposed to commit sexually violent acts. Post, 197 Wis.2d at 303, 306, 541 N.W.2d at 122, 123-24.
Amicus curiae Minnesota Civil Liberties Union (MCLU) points out that the Kansas Supreme Court recently held that the application of that state's sexual predator statute to a person with a *186"mental abnormality” violated substantive due process. The court interpreted Foucha to require some form of "mental illness” before commitment for dangerousness is permissible. Hendricks, 259 Kan. at 255, 260-61, 912 P.2d at 135, 137-38. Because Hendricks was not mentally ill under the legislature's own definition, the court held that Hendricks’s confinement violated substantive due process. See id., 259 Kan. at 261, 912 P.2d at 138.
Hendricics is not persuasive in light of our precedent. Like Hendricics, Blodgett noted that mental illness combined with dangerousness is an alternative basis for civil commitment under state law. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914. Still, Blodgett upheld the PP Act commitment. Id. at 914-16. A legislative definition of mental illness in one part of the civil commitment statute does not preclude other mental health bases for commitment. The MCLU’s reasoning is unavailing after Blodgett.
. MCLU also asserts that the Act might be ov-erinclusive because many sex offenders with personality disorders are not dangerous. This argument is unconvincing because the SDP Act confines its application to those who are highly likely to sexually harm others. Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a(a)(3).
. The United States Supreme Court has not established a scrutiny level under the federal constitution in this context. See Foucha, 504 U.S. at 85-86, 112 S.Ct. at 1788-89 (plurality opinion) (demanding a “particularly convincing reason” for imposing a burden of proof on sane insanity acquittees seeking release that is not demanded of the merely dangerous); id. at 88, 112 S.Ct. at 1789-90 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (concluding that equal protection analysis was unnecessary); Jones, 463 U.S. at 365 n. 13, 103 S.Ct. at 3050 n. 13. Blodgett held that the standard of scrutiny under the state constitution is at least as searching as the standard under the federal constitution. See Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 917. Therefore, we follow Blodgett and apply heightened scrutiny under both the state and federal constitutions.
. According to testimony at the hearing, clinical predictions are based on the clinician's observations, experience, and knowledge about the subject of predictions or about individuals in particular classes, such as rapists or child molesters. Actuarial predictions are based on statistics that can be determined mathematically (e.g., age and the number of previous offenses), and on a formula for evaluating the significance of such variables.

=== CASE 9741190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:06.592215+00 ===

TOMLJANOVICH, Justice
(dissenting).
The case before us illustrates better than most that the judicial power is often difficult in its exercise. * * * The hard fact is that sometimes we must make decisions we do not like. We make them because they are right, right in the sense that the law and the Constitution, as we see them, compel the result.
Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 420, 421, 109 S.Ct. 2533, 2548, 105 L.Ed.2d 342 (1989) (Kennedy, J., concurring).
By affirming the trial court’s civil commitment of Dennis Darol Linehan under the Sexually Dangerous Person’s Act (“SDP Act”), this court today chooses to make the easy decision. Not because it is right, not because it is compelled by the constitutions of either the United States or Minnesota, but because it is convenient. The United States Supreme Court in its affirmation of Pearson asserted that it was this court’s duty to “protect appellant in every constitutional right he possesses.” State ex rel. Pearson v. Probate Court of Ramsey County, 309 U.S. 270, 277, 60 S.Ct. 523, 527, 84 L.Ed. 744 (1940), aff'g 205 Minn. 545, 287 N.W. 297 (Minn.1939). Likewise, the state admitted during oral ar*192gument in the case at bar that “it is the function of the courts” to provide safeguards against the state’s improper use of civil commitment as a constitutionally invalid form of preventive detention.1 Yet today this court not only shirks its duty to uphold appellant’s right to substantive due process as mandated by the Supreme Court, it fails to provide a constitutionally necessary check upon the state’s restriction of appellant’s liberty. Even worse, the majority reaches this conclusion by relying almost entirely upon In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1994), cert. denied, — U.S. —, 115 S.Ct. 146, 130 L.Ed.2d 86 (1994), a case decided eight months before passage of the SDP Act, and six months before this court found that the appellant did not fit within the statute upheld in Blodgett. In re Linehan, 518 N.W.2d 609 (Minn.1994), reh’g denied, (Aug. 15, 1994) (Linehan I). And what is the basis upon which the majority reaches this conclusion? It is the fear of Dennis Darol Linehan and what he might do upon his release.
Before reaching the constitutional issue of substantive due process, which by itself invalidates the application of the SDP Act to the appellant, it is important to clarify that this court’s prior decisions regarding the Psychopathic Personality Commitment Act (“PP Act”) do not mandate, as the majority would have us believe, .today’s holding regarding the SDP Act. If anything, this court’s holdings in Pearson and Blodgett require us to conclude that the SDP Act is unconstitutional as applied to the appellant.
I. Precedent
It all started in 1939 when the legislature passed the PP Act after recognizing a “need for legislation to deal with sex offenders and a belief, shared in by the medical authorities and others, that sex crimes are committed because of a weakness of the will as well as of the intellect.” State ex rel. Pearson v. Probate Court of Ramsey County, 205 Minn. 545, 545, 287 N.W. 297, 298 (1939), aff;d, 309 U.S. 270, 60 S.Ct. 523, 84 L.Ed. 744 (1940). The statute effectively allowed the state to civilly commit those persons found to have a “psychopathic personality,” which the statute defined as:
[T]he existence in any person of such conditions of emotional instability, or impulsiveness of behavior, or lack of customary standards of good judgment, or failure to appreciate the consequences of his acts, or a combination of any such conditions, as to render such person irresponsible for his conduct with respect to sexual matters and thereby dangerous to other persons.
Psychopathic Personality Act, 1939 Minn. Laws, ch. 369 (codified as amended at Minn. Stat. § 526.09-526.10 (1992)). Upon a constitutional challenge for vagueness, this court stated that the statute “was imperfectly drawn,” and therefore redefined “psychopathic personality” as including only those persons who:
by a habitual course of misconduct in sexual matters, have evidenced an utter lack of power to control their sexual impulses and who, as a result, are likely to attack or otherwise inflict injury, loss, pain or other evil on the objects of their uncontrolled and uncontrollable desire.
Pearson, 205 Minn, at 555, 287 N.W. at 302 (emphasis added).2 Since that time, courts have considered the “utter lack of power to control their sexual impulses” to be a necessary criterion for civil commitment under the PP Act. E.g., Pearson, 309 U.S. at 273, 60 *193S.Ct. at 525 (“[W]e must take the statute as though it read precisely as the highest court of the State has interpreted it.”); Linehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 613 (stating that “testimony * * * fails to support the trial court’s finding that appellant exhibits an utter lack of control over his sexual impulses”); see also Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18a (1994) (incorporating the “utter lack of power to control sexual impulses” language into the PP Act).
The next significant case in which this court considered the constitutionality of the PP Act was In re Blodgett, only this time, the question was whether the statute as interpreted in Pearson remained valid in light of the Supreme Court’s holding in Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U.S. 71, 112 S.Ct. 1780, 118 L.Ed.2d 437 (1992). Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914. In Foucha, the Supreme Court held that Louisiana could not continue to hold a presently sane insanity acquittee without violating his fundamental right to liberty. Fou-cha, 504 U.S. at 78-83, 112 S.Ct. at 1784^87. More particularly, the Court ruled that a state could constitutionally deprive an individual of his or her fundamental right to liberty under only three circumstances: (a) imprisonment of convicted criminals for the purpose of deterrence and retribution; (b) confinement of persons shown to be mentally 111 and dangerous by clear and convincing evidence; and (c) detention of persons who pose a danger to others or to the community, and then only in extremely limited circumstances such as pretrial detention. Id. at 80, 112 S.Ct. at 1785-86. The appellant in Blod-gett argued that his commitment was unconstitutional under Foucha because it did not fit within the second of Foucha’s three circumstances.3 Although it was conceded that he fit within the statute’s definition of psychopathic personality,4 the appellant argued he was not mentally ill.5 Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914. This court did not agree, and held that Blodgett’s commitment under the PP Act was constitutionally consistent with Foucha because “[wjhatever the explanation or label, the ‘psychopathic personality’ is an identifiable and documentable violent sexually deviant condition or disorder.” Id. at 915. In other words, this court held that the criteria required by Pearson to prove a “psychopathic personality” were sufficiently similar to those criteria required under Fou-cha to prove mental illness. Id. (“The problem is not what medical label best fits the statutory criteria, but whether these criteria may, constitutionally, warrant civil commitment.”) What was essential to this court’s holding in Blodgett, and what the majority today fails to recognize, is that the criteria used to prove that the appellant in Blodgett fit within the restraints of Foucha necessarily included the finding that Blodgett had an uncontrollable sexual impulse dangerous to others (in other words, a psychopathic personality). Id. at 915 (“[Ojur legislature has provided for commitment of the ‘psychopathic personality’ who, because of an uncontrollable sexual impulse, is dangerous to the public.”). Although the majority today would have us believe that Blodgett stood for the proposition that appellant’s diagnoses of APD would be enough to satisfy the mental-illness requirement of Foucha, the words of Blodgett negate this conclusion:
A person committed as a psychopathic personality may petition the Commissioner of Human Services at any time for a transfer to an open hospital or for a provisional discharge to a community or other residential treatment facility, or for a temporary pass. These relaxations of security hospital confinement provide an opportunity (and an incentive) for the committed person to demonstrate that he has mastered his sexual impulses and is ready to take his place in society.
Id. at 916 (emphasis added). In other words, a person committed as a psychopathic personality who learns to control his sexual *194impulses no longer requires civil commitment. In fact, this was the very situation in Linehan I, when this court held that Linehan did not fit within the statute’s definition of “psychopathic personality” precisely because the state failed to prove he was unable to control his sexual impulses. Linehan I, 518 N.W.2d at 614 (“Because we hold that the county did not prove the utter lack of contrOl/uncontrollable element of the Pearson test, it is unnecessary to address whether there is clear and convincing evidence that appellant was likely to engage in future dangerous behavior.”). Although Linehan, like Blodgett, was diagnosed with APD, this court found that the state failed to prove he was utterly unable to control his sexual desires. Id. Consequently this court held that Line-han was different from Blodgett and could not be committed as a psychopathic personality.6 Id.
Of course that was not the end of In re Linehan. The legislature subsequently passed the SDP Act and provided civil commitment for those found to be sexually dangerous persons (“SDP”). See Sexually Dangerous Persons Act of August 31, 1994, ch. 1, art. 1, § 3-4, 1995 Minn. Laws 1st Spec. Sess. 5-7 (1994), codified at Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.02, 253B.185 (1994). Under the new law, the state needed to show that the person has engaged in a course of harmful sexual conduct, and that the person has manifested a “sexual, personality, or other mental disorder or dysfunction, and as a result, is likely to engage in acts of harmful sexual conduct.” Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a) (1994). The law additionally provides that for the purposes of proving a SDP, the state need not show that the person has an inability to control his or her sexual impulse's. Minn. Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(b) (1994).
What the legislature in essence did was throw out the “utter lack of power to control their sexual impulses” requirement: a requirement this court created to uphold the PP Act against an attack for vagueness in Pearson; a requirement this court relied upon to uphold the PP Act against an attack for substantive due process, equal protection, ex post facto and double jeopardy violations in Blodgett; and a requirement this court cited to release the committee in Linehan I. Yet today this court says the “utterly unable to control” element is of “no principled and constitutionally significant distinction between Linehan’s commitment under the SDP Act and the commitments of other sexual predators upheld under the PP Act.” Ante, at 180. Furthermore, the majority states that Blodgett stands for the proposition that APD alone is “a valid mental health basis for commitment” and that substantive due process does not preclude “milder forms of APD as the mental health basis for civil commitment.” Ante, at 182. Of course the majority fails to recognize that Blodgett involved a psychopathic personality and does not require this court to hold that APD alone is a sufficient mental-health basis for commitment.
That is why it is disingenuous, and perhaps a little too convenient, to assert, as the majority does, “that under Blodgett the SDP Act is sufficiently narrow to satisfy strict scrutiny as applied to Linehan.” Ante, at 182. This court in Blodgett upheld the commitment of the appellant only because he had a psychopathic personality, in other words, because he had an utter lack of power to control his sexual impulses. Despite the majority’s holding that Blodgett stands for the proposition that APD alone fits within the mental-illness requirement of Foucha, the fact remains that if Blodgett stood for such a proposition, it would have been contrary to rulings by the U.S. Supreme Court. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 82-83, 112 S.Ct. at 1786-87 (stating that substantive due process does not allow a state to civilly commit a person with “a personality disorder that may lead to criminal conduct” (emphasis added)).7 This *195court merely asserted in Blodgett that it would not embroil itself in a semantic argument based upon labels, and that it would analyze the appellant against the criteria used to identify a mental illness in Foucha. But now this court is using the label “antisocial personality disorder” to conclude that Linehan fits within Foucha’s definition of mental illness.
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we accept the legislature’s and the American Psychiatric Association’s determination that APD is an identifiable mental disorder that helps explain behavior.
Ante, at 185 (emphasis added). Although the majority is wont to admit as much, such a holding necessarily negates Pearson and grossly expands Blodgett. Even more importantly, it erodes the protections of substantive due process as established by Fou-cha.
II. Substantive due process
Foucha stands for the proposition that a state cannot deprive a person of his or her liberty simply because that person is. dangerous. Put another way, the Due Process Clause of the Constitution prohibits us as a society from locking up persons simply because we fear them. It matters not if our fear is based upon a rational assessment of the person’s likelihood to commit future bad acts, the fact remains that the Supreme Court has said we cannot remove a person from society for the sole purpose of preventing the future bad acts, even if the future bad acts are almost certain to occur. That is the baseline from which this court is required to begin its analysis of the SDP Act.
To that end, the majority correctly admits that the SDP Act deprives an individual of the fundamental right to liberty and therefore is subject to strict scrutiny. The majority also correctly adopts the form of strict scrutiny that asks whether the action is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest. The majority then recognizes that the state has two compelling interests in this case: 1) to ensure public safety from sexual assaults under the police powers and 2) to provide care and treatment of the mentally disordered. What the majority fails to recognize, however, is that the validity of the state’s action will vary depending upon which compelling interest the state is trying to serve.
If the state is attempting to serve only the first compelling interest, in other words it is trying only to protect the public from future sexual assaults, it cannot deprive a person of his liberty without first obtaining a criminal conviction for past acts. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 77-78,112 S.Ct. at 1784 (holding that dangerousness alone is not sufficient to civilly commit a person); Jackson v. Indiana, 406 U.S. 715, 92 S.Ct. 1845, 32 L.Ed.2d 435 (1972) (holding that a state could not continue to hold a person incompetent to stand trial); Baxstrom v. Herald, 383 U.S. 107, 86 S.Ct. 760, 15 L.Ed.2d 620 (1966) (holding that a state cannot continue to deprive a convicted criminal nearing the end of his penal term of his liberty without first committing him civilly ). If, however, the state is attempting to serve both the first and second compelling interests, in other words, it is attempting to provide care and treatment for a mentally ill person who poses a threat to himself and others, it can deprive a person of his liberty once it demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that the person is both mentally ill and dangerous. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 77-78, 112 S.Ct. at 1784; Jones v. United States, 463 U.S. 354, 369, 103 S.Ct. 3043, 3052, 77 L.Ed.2d 694 (1983); Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979); see also Young v. Weston, 898 F.Supp. 744, 748-49 (W.D.Wash.1995) (listing circumstances in which the Supreme Court has allowed incarceration for nonpunitive reasons); State v. Randall, 192 Wis.2d 800, 532 N.W.2d 94, 100-01 (1995) (stating that Supreme Court has held that states can treat civil and criminal committees differently). The majority in Foucha put it this way:
A State, pursuant to its police power, may of course imprison convicted criminals for the purposes of deterrence and retribu*196tion. But there are constitutional limitations' on the conduct that a State may criminalize. Here the State has no such punitive interests. As Foucha was not convicted, he may not be punished. * * ⅜
The State may also confine a mentally ill person if it shows ‘by clear and convincing evidence that the individual is mentally ill and dangerous.’ Here, the state has not carried that burden; indeed, the state does not claim that Foucha is now mentally ill.
Foucha, 504 U.S. at 80, 112 S.Ct. at 1785 (citations omitted) (emphasis added). Although the Supreme' Court was divided in Foucha, it was unanimous in concluding that strict scrutiny requires a state’s action to be narrowly tailored to the particular compelling interest at stake. Justice O’Connor in her concurrence stated “that acquittees could not be confined as mental patients absent some medical justification for doing so; in such a case the necessary connection between the natv/re and puvposes of confinement would be absent.” Id. at 88, 112 S.Ct. at 1789-90 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (emphasis added). Justice Kennedy, in fact, based his entire dissent on the fact that the validity of a state’s actions will differ depending upon whether it is acting in a criminal or civil context.
The criminal law defines a discrete category of conduct for which society has reserved its greatest opprobrium and strictest sanctions; past or future dangerousness, as ascertained or predicted in civil proceedings, is different in kind. * * * In the civil context, the State acts in large part on the basis of its parens patriae power to protect and provide for an ill individual, while in the criminal context, the State acts to ensure the public safety.
Id. at 95-96, 112 S.Ct. at 1794 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). And finally, Justice Thomas stated that “there is a real and legitimate distinction between insanity acquittees and civil committees that justifies procedural disparities.” Id. at 108, 112 S.Ct. at 1800 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Although Justice Thomas maintained that “freedom from bodily restraint” did not constitute a fundamental interest that merited strict scrutiny, he did admit that under such a test “[cjivil commitment as we know it would almost certainly be unconstitutional; only in the rarest of circumstances will a State be able to show a ‘compelling interest,’ and one that can be served in no other way, in involuntarily institutionalizing a person.” Id. at 122, 112 S.Ct. at 1807-08 (Thomás, J., dissenting). In summary, the court concluded that civil commitment of a non-mentally ill but dangerous person would be:
only a step away from substituting confinements for dangerousness for our present system which, with only narrow exceptions and aside from permissible confinements for mental illness, incarcerates only those who are proved beyond reasonable doubt to have violated a criminal law.
Id. at 83, 112 S.Ct. at 1786 (emphasis added).
Likewise, this court relied upon a compelling interest in Blodgett that encompassed more than mere protection.
Here the compelling government interest is the protection of members of the public from persons who have an uncontrollable impulse to sexually assault.
Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 914 (emphasis added). This court went on to say that “[s]o long as civil commitment is programmed to provide treatment and periodic review, due process is provided,” Id. at 916 (emphasis added). The state in Blodgett asserted its compelling interest to be protection of society from those persons tmable to control their impulses precisely because the Supreme Court in Foucha made clear that a civil commitment would not be narrowly tailored to the compelling government interest of protecting society alone.
Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418 [99 S.Ct. 1804, 60 L.Ed.2d 323] (1979), held that to commit an individual to a mental institution in a civil proceeding, the State is required by the Due Process Clause to prove by clear and convincing evidence the two statutory preconditions to commitment: that the person sought to be committed is mentally ill and that he requires hospitalization for his own welfare and protection of others.
*197Foucha, 504 U.S. at 75-76, 112 S.Ct. at 1783 (emphasis added).
The bottom line is that a state cannot incarcerate a person simply because it fears the person’s future acts. It can, however, civilly commit a person whom it fears, so long as the commitment is narrowly tailored to the state’s additional compelling interest in treating mentally ill people. See Addington, 441 U.S. at 429, 99 S.Ct. at 1811 (stating that the key question in civil commitment is “[w]hether the individual is mentally ill and dangerous to either himself or others and is in need of confined therapy ” (emphasis added)). The difference, though subtle, is essential to the disposition of this case. Foucha allows a state to involuntarily deprive a dangerous person of his or her liberty only when it does so for the purpose of treating that person. And that is why the majority misses the mark in holding that the SDP Act is narrowly tailored to the only compelling government interest asserted by the state in this case — protecting the public from sexual assault. As the majority stated:
[T]he SDP Act is an attempt to protect the public by treating sexual predators even more dangerous than those reached by the PP Act — the mentally disordered who retain enough control to ‘plan, wait, and delay the indulgence of their maladies until presented with a higher probability of success.’ And as the court of appeals recognized, the mental disorder requirement in the SDP Act serves the state’s interest in public safety by aiding the prediction of dangerousness.
Ante, at 182. We concede that the majority’s reliance on public safety alone would be sufficient to incarcerate Linehan for past criminal acts.8 Because the state already has punished Linehan for his past criminal acts, however, Foucha will not allow it to rely upon public safety alone to incarcerate him for predicted future acts. Instead, the state must show that his civil commitment is necessary to the additional compelling government interest of providing care and treatment of the mentally ill.9
Before going any further, it is revealing to note that the state did not even bother to argue that its compelling government interest in passing the SDP Act was to provide treatment for Dennis Linehan or any other subsequent committee. And for that, the state deserves credit for its honesty. Although the statute provides a treatment mechanism, it is clear given the following circumstances regarding the bill’s passage that the actual government interest was to lock up sexually dangerous persons in general and Dennis Linehan in particular.
Less than one week after this court ruled that Linehan could not be committed under the PP Act, the speaker of the house called for a meeting and was quoted as saying, “The prospect of these predators being released is frightening, especially for the women of Minnesota.” Donna Halvorsen, Sex Predators’ Status Sparks Insecurity; Commitment Law Appears Frayed, Star Trib., July 9, 1994, at IB. Approximately five weeks later, the attorney general proposed legislation that he said would keep sexual predators “locked up.” Robert Whereatt, Laws Proposed to Keep Sex Predators off Streets, Star Trib., Aug. 12,1994, at 1A. The Governor, who at the same news conference announced he would call for a special legislative session, said, “By all accounts, these two men10 remain a danger to the public.” Id.
*198After this court denied the state’s petition 'for rehearing in Linehan I, the governor announced that the state would move Line-han to an old staff residence just outside the prison and keep him under constant surveillance. Paul Gustafson & Robert Whereatt, Rapist/Murderer Wins Release — and Tight Surveillance, Star Trib., Aug. 16, 1994, at 1A. When Linehan’s attorney said the treatment was “appalling,” the governor responded by saying, “I’d much rather make a mistake on the side of public safety than be overwhelmingly concerned with some attorney’s perception of the civil rights of Mr. Linehan.” Id. The Ramsey County prosecutor, meanwhile, was quoted by USA Today as saying, “These are dangerous people and we’ve got to protect the women and children in our communities.” Mimi Hall, A Furor Breivs over Release of Sex Offenders, USA Today, Aug. 17, 1994, at 3A.
Just eight days before statewide primary elections, the governor officially called for a one-day, one-bill special legislative session. Robert Whereatt, Legislators, Carlson Agree to Session; Ground Rules Set With Goal of Avoiding Partisanship, Star Trib., Aug. 24, 1994, at IB. The legislature convened one week later and in just 1 hour, 37 minutes passed the SDP Act by a 65-0 margin in the senate and a 133-0 margin in the house. Donna Halvorsen & Robert Whereatt, Sexual Predator Bill OK’d, Signed, Star Trib., Sept. 1, 1994, at 1A. Immediately prior to the session, the bill’s drafters had told their colleagues to avoid speaking about Linehan specifically because, “Whatever we say on the floor will be used against us. * * * It’s going to be used to challenge the bill.” Id.
By themselves, these circumstances are enough to render this rather transparent effort at preventive detention unconstitutional.11 But we assert in the alternative that the SDP Act is not sufficiently narrow to serve even the government’s additional compelling interest in providing care and treatment of the mentally ill. Once again, the foundation for this conclusion is Foucha.
[T]he State asserts that because Foucha once committed a criminal act and now has an antisocial personality that sometimes leads to aggressive conduct, a disorder for which there is no effective treatment, he may be held indefinitely. This rationale would permit the State to hold indefinitely any other insanity acquittee not mentally ill who could be shown to have a personality disorder that may lead to criminal conduct. The same would be true of any convicted criminal, even though he has completed his prison term.
Foucha, 504 U.S. at 82-83, 112 S.Ct. at 1787 (emphasis added). Although Justice O’Con-nor’s concurrence intimates that something less than a bona' fide mental illness would suffice, the plurality in Foucha could not be more clear: A state cannot civilly commit a person who is dangerous and has a “personality disorder.” Foucha, 504 U.S. at 82-83, 112 S.Ct. at 1787 (explaining that a state cannot civilly commit a person who is dangerous and has either an “antisocial personality” or “a personality disorder”). The person must be both dangerous and mentally ill. It is debatable whether Blodgett’s holding that a person who has a psychopathic personality fits within the definition of mental illness as asserted in Foucha,12 but it could not be more clear that a person who has only an antisocial “personality disorder” does not fit within the definition of mental illness as asserted in Foucha.
This limitation is essential. Not because persons with “personality disorders” are any less dangerous than those who have recognized mental illnesses,13 but because the very *199essence of the state’s constitutionally required compelling interest in civilly committing a person is treatment of the mentally ill. When, in fact, the state’s only articulated interest in passing a law is protection of society, it becomes apparent that the real purpose of the law, despite its platitudes to treatment, is preventive detention. We do not maintain that the SDP Act violates substantive due process only because those with APD currently cannot be treated. We maintain only that the legislature’s reason for passing the SDP Act, once properly exposed under the spotlight of strict scrutiny, was not for the stated purpose of treatment, but for the actual purpose of detaining a person who frightens us. Cf. Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 113 S.Ct. 2217, 124 L.Ed.2d 472 (1993) (holding that facially neutral statute violated free exercise clause in part because of city council’s discriminatory motivation); Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 266-68, 97 S.Ct. 555, 563-65, 50 L.Ed.2d 450 (1977) (concluding that the circumstances surrounding the passage or enactment of legislation can be used to determine if the statute is a purposeful device for discriminatory treatment). Yet the majority, after noting that Foucha presents “constitutional limits to state-created definitions of mental illness in the civil commitment context,” somehow manages to dim the spotlight and instead “give[s] the legislature due regard in identifying medically recognized mental disorders, such as APD, that explain a person’s dangerousness and that are appropriate for civil commitment and treatment.” Ante, at 187. Never before has strict scrutiny been so lenient.
As the Kansas Supreme Court recently demonstrated, actual strict scrutiny necessarily leads to the opposite result. Matter of Care and Treatment of Hendricks, 259 Kan. 246, 912 P.2d 129 (1996) (striking down a civil commitment statute nearly identical to the SDP Act), cert. granted, — U.S. —, 116 S.Ct. 2522, 135 L.Ed.2d 1047 (1996). The majority in the case at bar distinguishes Hendricks by stating it was based upon Kansas’ own statutory definition of mental illness. Ante, at 185 n. 11. Although the Kansas Supreme Court did look at its mental illness statutes during its substantive due process analysis, it actually based its holding-on a strict reading of Foucha’s mental-illness requirement:
Therefore, as applied to Hendricks, the constitutionality of the Act depends upon a showing of dangerousness without a finding of mental illness. Clearly, the due process standard of Addington and Fou-cha is not met by the Act as applied to Hendricks.
Hendricks, 912 P.2d at 138.
Likewise, a federal district court in a ha-beas corpus proceeding found that Washington’s Sexually Violent Predator Statute, which had been upheld by the Washington Supreme Court,14 also failed strict scrutiny. “Like the scheme rejected in Foucha, the Statute here permits indefinite incarceration based on little more than a showing of potential future dangerousness. * * * Predictions of dangerousness alone are an insufficient basis to continue indefinitely the incarceration of offenders who have completed their prison terms.” Young v. Weston, 898 F.Supp. 744, 749, 751 (W.D.Wash.1995). Unlike the majority in this case, these courts fulfilled their constitutional duties, made difficult decisions, and followed Fou-cha’s mandate — namely that involuntary civil commitment is narrowly tailored to the government’s compelling interest in treatment only when the legislature’s actual reason for passing the statute is to give a mentally ill person the help he or she needs.15
*200III. Equal protection, ex post facto and double jeopardy
Technically speaking, we do not disagree with the majority’s equal protection analysis. Unlike substantive due process, which necessarily examines the statute’s effect on a person’s fundamental right of liberty, equal protection focuses on the distinction between those who fit within the statute’s reach and those who do not. Unless such a distinction involves a suspect classification, this court will ask only if there is any rational basis for such a selection. Pearson, 309 U.S. at 274, 60 S.Ct. at 525-26. When such a statute threatens a liberty interest, however, this court will apply heightened scrutiny and ask whether the statute delineates genuine and substantial distinctions. Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 917. The SDP Act distinguishes between those sexually dangerous persons who have a mental disorder and those who do not. Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 18b(a) (1994). The majority holds that the legislature’s decision to civilly commit the first group but not the second is valid because mental disorders help to “isolate sexually dangerous persons most likely to harm others in the future,” and because “the state’s interest in treating sexual predators is served by confining the scope of the SDP Act to those with mental disorders.” Ante, at 187. In short, this court is upholding the legislature’s determination that sexually dangerous persons with a mental disorder are both more dangerous and more amenable to treatment than are those without a mental disorder.
Although we do not disagree with this conclusion, we point out that the first justification for the distinction (dangerousness), while sufficient to uphold the act under the equal protection clause, is not sufficient to uphold the act under due process analysis. Likewise, the second justification for the distinction (treatment), while mere surplusage under equal protection requirements, is a necessity for this court’s conclusion that the SDP Act does not violate ex post facto or double jeopardy. Unlike substantive due process, which focuses on the government’s interests, ex post facto and double jeopardy focus on the statute’s purpose and whether it is “for treatment purposes and * * * not for purposes of preventive detention.” Call v. Gomez, 535 N.W.2d 312, 320 (Minn.1995) (emphasis added). Although it is apparent that the legislature’s motivation in passing the SDP Act was to lock up dangerous persons such as Linehan, the majority noted that “[t]he purpose and effect of the SDP Act is * ⅜ * predominantly remedial, not punitive.” Ante, at 188 (emphasis added).
As stated earlier, we elect not to quibble with this holding at this time. But see Young v. Weston, 898 F.Supp. 744, 751-54 (W.D.Wash.1995) (holding that Washington’s sexually violent predator statute violates ex post facto and double jeopardy). Despite the legislature’s motivation, the statute does include enough treatment provisions to conclude that its stated purpose is remedial. But we note that the Supreme Court has upheld as remedial only those civil commitment statutes that provide for both mandatory treatment at a psychiatric care facility and full discharge once the patient demonstrates that he or she no longer is in need of treatment. See Allen v. Illinois, 478 U.S. 364, 369-75, 106 S.Ct. 2988, 2992-95, 92 L.Ed.2d 296 (1986). The majority correctly states that “Linehan has not offered evidence that the treatment regime at MSH or MPPTC is a sham, or even that such treatment is inef*201fective.” Ante, at 189. But given the legislature’s real motivation behind the SDP Act, we are concerned that such evidence will become readily available in the near future. When that occurs, we will not hesitate to find that the SDP Act, in addition to violating substantive due process, also violates ex post facto and double jeopardy.
. During oral argument, Justice Anderson stated:
We’re all familiar with the Soviet Union gulag and Nazi Germany. * ⅞ * Let’s say people had antisocial conduct, dysfunctional in that particular society, and the state wanted to put them away for indeterminate confinement. * * * What are the safeguards here that would prevent that from happening in our society under a statute such as this?
In response, assistant attorney general John Kirwin said:
You, your honor. I think it is the function of the courts to draw those lines. * s 's Asking, 'At what level does the harm become so great that it's constitutional to have a civil commitment statute like this?’ * * * By its nature that standard is going to require the court to make some difficult decisions sometimes.
. As a further limitation on the permissible reach of the statute, this court said ”[i]t would not be reasonable to apply the provisions of the statute to every person guilty of sexual misconduct nor even to persons having strong sexual propensities.” Pearson, 205 Minn, at 555, 287 N.W. at 302.
. Neither the appellant nor the state argued that a commitment under the PP Act would have fit under either of Foucha 's other two categories.
. The trial court found that the appellant met the criteria for psychopathic personality under the standard imposed by Pearson. On appeal to this court, the appellant did not challenge the finding that he had "an uncontrollable sexual impulse dangerous to others." Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d at 912.
. Like Linehan, Blodgett suffered from an antisocial personality disorder.
. The majority concedes this point by stating that ”[i]t may be true, in a certain philosophical sense, that Blodgett was less blameworthy than is Linehan because Blodgett could not control his sexual impulses.”
. If it was clear that Foucha stood for the proposition that a mental disorder alone was a sufficient mental-illness justification for civil commitment, then there is no reason why the U.S. Supreme Court would have granted certiorari in Matter of Care and Treatment of Hendricks, 259 Kan. 246, 912 P.2d 129 (1996) (striking down *195Kansas statute nearly identical to SDP Act), cert. granted, - U.S. -, 116 S.Ct. 2522, 135 L.Ed.2d 1047 (1996).
. Such a compelling government interest can, depending on a state’s definition of an insanity acquittee, reach a person found to be not guilty by reason of insanity. See State v. Randall, 192 Wis.2d 800, 532 N.W.2d 94, 106-07 (1995) (holding that because Wisconsin considers an insanity acquittee to be "guilty beyond a reasonable doubt,” it can confine a presently sane insanity acquittee on dangerousness alone).
. The majority correctly rejected Linehan’s argument that criminal conviction and civil commitment are mutually exclusive. As this court stated in Pearson, "an uncontrollable and insane impulse to commit crime, in the mind of one who is conscious of the nature and quality of the act, is not allowed to relieve a person of criminal liability.” Pearson, 205 Minn, at 556, 287 N.W. at 303. However, this does not mean that the tests for a commitment’s validity under substantive due process are the same. In fact, they are very different.
.In addition to Linehan, we concluded that the state could not commit Peter Rickmyer under the PP Act.
.The Kansas Supreme Court in holding a similar statute unconstitutional noted that:
It is clear that the overriding concern of the legislature is to continue the segregation of sexually violent offenders from the public. Treatment with the goal of reintegrating them into society is incidental, at best.
Matter of Care and Treatment of Hendricks, 259 Kan. 246, 912 P.2d 129, 136 (1996), cert, granted, - U.S. -, 116 S.Ct. 2522, 135 L.Ed.2d 1047 (1996).
. The Supreme Court did not grant certiorari. In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1994), cert. denied, - U.S. -, 115 S.Ct. 146, 130 L.Ed.2d 86 (1994).
. In fact, the court of appeals noted that "[pier-sons whose mental afflictions leave them with a measure of self-control present an especially insidious risk, for they retain the ability to plan, wait, and delay the indulgence of their maladies until presented with a higher probability of suc*199cess.” Matter of Linehan, 544 N.W.2d 308, 318 (Minn.App.1996) (Linehan II).
. In re Young, 122 Wash.2d 1, 857 P.2d 989 (1993).
. While it is true that the Wisconsin Supreme Court recently upheld a civil commitment statute similar to our SDP Act, it did so by relying entirely upon Justice O’Connor’s concurrence in Foucha. State v. Post, 197 Wis.2d 279, 541 N.W.2d 115, 127 (1995). Unlike the Foucha plurality, which required a state to find a committee both mentally ill and dangerous, Justice O’Connor required only that there be some medical justification for commitment. Foucha, 504 U.S. at 88, 112 S.Ct. at 1789-90 (O'Connor, J., concurring). Consequently, the Wisconsin Supreme Court, much like majority in the case at bar, found that APD is a sufficient medical basis *200for commitment. Post, 541 N.W.2d at 127-28. Such a conclusion is not valid under federal constitutional jurisprudence however. Not only does Justice O’Connor’s concurrence lack the weight of law, it lacks any real guidance given the facts in both Post and Linehan II. The committee in Foucha had been found not guilty by reason of insanity. As Justice O'Connor put it, Foucha had "escape[d] punishment" by pleading insanity. Id. at 87, 112 S.Ct. at 1789 (O’Connor, J., concurring). Consequently, Justice O'Connor noted that ”[a]lthough insanity acquittees may not be incarcerated as criminals or penalized for asserting the insanity defense, this finding of criminal conduct sets them apart from ordinary citizens.” Id. (O'Connor, J., concurring). Line-han, like the committee in Post, did not escape criminal punishment for his prior bad acts. He was convicted and served his sentence. Accordingly, he is now outside the realm of the criminal justice system. To use Justice O'Connor’s words, Dennis Linehan is now an "ordinary citizen," one whom the state can civilly commit only upon a finding of both dangerousness and mental illness.