=== CASE 9739087 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:36.638946+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The pattern of voting in this dissent now advanced is exemplified by the rationale and authorities in State v. Hoenscheid, 374 N.W.2d 128, 132-3 (S.D.1985) (Henderson, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part), and State v. Neville (Neville II), 346 N.W.2d 425, 432-3 (S.D.1984) (Henderson, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part). In Oregon v. Hass, 420 U.S. 714, 95 S.Ct. 1215, 43 L.Ed.2d 570 (1975), the United States Supreme Court observed that each state may grant greater protection under its own constitution than is provided by the federal constitution. See, also, State v. Opperman (Opperman II), 247 N.W.2d 673 (S.D.1976) (search and seizure).* Here, such additional protection is mandated by the language of South Dakota Constitution, Art. VI, § 9, which provides, in pertinent part: “No person'shall be compelled in any criminal case to give evidence against himself This wording is substantively different than its federal counterpart, the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which protects against compulsion of a person “to be a witness against himself.” Even under the narrower wording of the federal constitution, an underlying principle in the enforcement of our criminal law is that ours is an accusatorial, not an inquisitorial, system. Rogers v. Richmond, 365 U.S. 534, 541, 81 S.Ct. 735, 739, 5 L.Ed.2d 760, 766 (1961). Here, our state highways are being converted into fields of inquisitorial activity.
The majority opinion asserts, at p. 50, relying on State v. Roadifer, 346 N.W.2d 438 (S.D.1984), that oral field sobriety tests and audio tapes thereof are admissible. This is incorrect, Roadifer notwithstanding. Field sobriety tests involving recitation of the alphabet while .one is under suspicion for intoxication yields evidence which is “essentially communicative in nature” Commonwealth v. Thompson, 377 Pa.Super. 598, 605, 547 A.2d 1223, 1227 (1988) (quoting Commonwealth v. Bruder, 365 Pa.Super. 106, 528 A.2d 1385, 1388 (1987). Similarly, the audio portion of a videotape of a defendant’s field sobriety test is to be suppressed on Fifth Amendment grounds. See, Commonwealth v. Conway, 368 Pa.Super. 488, 534 A.2d 541 (1987). Interestingly, Pennsylvania’s state constitution’s self-incrimination provision tracks the wording of the federal constitution, not South Dakota’s broader protection. Under this State’s constitution, evidence provided by the defendant is the focus, not function as a witness, which is all the more reason to suppress the evidence at hand.
Further, Meek was cajoled into taking the tests, an indication that his efforts were involuntary; note the majority opinion wherein police officer is quoted saying that it would be to Meek’s “advantage to try to do some tests ... ”, in other words, to incriminate himself. See, Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966). The purpose of the officer’s actions, here, were to elicit incriminating responses, i.e., to gather incriminating evidence. Meek was, consequently, under the functional equivalent of interrogation, as defined in Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 100 S.Ct. 1682, 64 L.Ed.2d 297 (1980).
The circumstances of this case warranted suppression. The majority’s reversal of the trial court is but one more in a series of cases which have chipped away constitutional protections for South Dakotans.
Erosions of liberty do not come in giant leaps, they come in miniscule encroachments often hidden to the trained and educated mind. Like a thief in the night, language can steal a liberty deeply in*52grained in the fabric of the American way of life. I am afraid of each little encroachment on the liberty of my fellow Americans on the highway.
State v. Anderson, 331 N.W.2d 568, 573 (S.D.1983) (Henderson, J., concurring in result). Here, the long-standing right against self-incrimination is being gradually eroded.
Opperman II was modified, on other grounds, in State v. Flittie, 425 N.W.2d 1 (S.D.1988).

=== CASE 9739088 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:36.644575+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
The fatal defect in the majority opinion readily appears in the too narrow statement of the issue. The correct question presented is:
WHETHER A CLAIM OF THE PRIVILEGE AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION IS EQUAL TO AN ABSOLUTE REFUSAL TO PERFORM TESTS.
This question is one of first impression in South Dakota. Our holding should be:
WHEN A PERSON IS SUBJECT TO COMPULSION AND NOT FREE TO LEAVE, AND CLAIMS HIS CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION, HE CANNOT BE COMPELLED TO GIVE EVIDENCE UNIQUELY WITHIN HIS CONTROL. FIELD SOBRIETY TESTS, WHETHER VERBAL OR NON-VERBAL, ARE UNIQUELY WITHIN THE CONTROL OF THE PERSON TO PERFORM OR NOT PERFORM.
The privilege against self-incrimination is recognized in both the state and federal constitutions. Article VI, Section 9 of the South Dakota Constitution provides: “No person shall be compelled in any criminal case to give evidence against himself....” (emphasis added). The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: “No person ... shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against him-self_” (emphasis added). The prohibition in both constitutions is against compulsion by the state in a criminal case.
The United States Supreme Court in Miranda v. State of Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 460, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1620, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, 715 (1966), recognized the danger of improperly compelled evidence and prohibited its use against a defendant in a criminal ease:
[O]ur accusatory system of criminal justice demands that the government seeking to punish an individual produce the evidence against him by its own independent labors, rather than by the cruel, simple expedient of compelling it from his own mouth.
This court has addressed improper coercion by the state following the assertion of a right guaranteed by Miranda. In State v. Cody, 293 N.W.2d 440 (S.D.1980), the defendant was informed of his Miranda rights prior to his questioning by a DCI agent. The defendant requested an attorney several times during the questioning, but the questioning continued. This court reversed his conviction, holding that the questioning should have ceased after the defendant requested an attorney. Cody held that the defendant did not waive his rights under Miranda by continuing to answer questions after he had asserted the right. The state has a heavy burden to demonstrate a person has waived the privilege against self-incrimination. Satter v. Solem, 434 N.W.2d 725 (S.D.1989), cert. denied, — U.S.-, 109 S.Ct. 2432, 104 L.Ed.2d 989 (1989); Cody, supra.
Since Miranda, the Supreme Court has consistently held that the use of “physical or moral compulsion” on a person asserting a Fifth Amendment right is prohibited. South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553, 103 S.Ct. 916, 74 L.Ed.2d 748 (1983) (.Neville I); Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391, 96 S.Ct. 1569, 48 L.Ed.2d 39 (1976); United States v. Dionisio, 410 U.S. 1, 93 S.Ct. 764, 35 L.Ed.2d 67 (1973). In Neville I, the Court found that a DWI suspect’s refusal to take a blood test was not compelled, as a suspect was given the choice between taking the test or refusing the test and suffering the statutory penalties for refusal. The Court stated:
Here the State did not directly compel respondent to refuse the test, for it gave him the choice of submitting to the test or refusing.
... Nor is this a ease where the State has subtly coerced respondent into *53choosing the option it had no right to compel, rather than offering a true choice, (emphasis added).
Id., 459 U.S. at 562-64, 103 S.Ct. at 922, 74 L.Ed.2d at 758-9.
On remand from the Supreme Court, we also discussed the question of moral compulsion in State v. Neville, 346 N.W.2d 425 (S.D.1984) (overruled on other grounds by State v. Hoenscheid, 374 N.W.2d 128 (S.D.1985)) (Neville II). Neville II states that moral compulsion is exerted where the state improperly attaches a penalty, punishment or detriment on an individual’s particular course of action. “If a defendant produces self-incriminating evidence to escape unwarranted consequences, that evidence is considered compelled and thus constitutionally inadmissible.” Id. at 429 (citing People v. Thomas, 46 N.Y.2d 100, 412 N.Y.S.2d 845, 385 N.E.2d 584 (1978)).
These cases protect defendants in criminal cases who have asserted or not clearly waived the privilege against self-incrimination. However, these cases differ from Meek’s in that each involves either of two situations. One is where the state has informed or failed to inform a suspect of his Miranda rights during a custodial interrogation. The other is where a person has asserted the privilege to avoid testifying. In this case, no Miranda warnings were necessary and Meek did not assert the privilege to avoid testifying. Instead, Meek asserted the privilege1 in a situation where he was not free to leave and was then inveigled and compelled by Officer Hofeldt to give incriminating evidence2 uniquely within his control.
As indicated above, this is a case of first impression in South Dakota. We should base our decision on the independent state grounds of S.D. Const, art. VI, § 93 and on the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Miranda.
The State raises two arguments in support of its claim that the trial court improperly suppressed the evidence in question. First, the State claims that the field sobriety tests were administered while Meek was being questioned pursuant to a routine traffic stop, and was not under custodial interrogation. State argues that the privilege against self-incrimination does not apply where an individual is not in custody. The State cites Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 104 S.Ct. 3138, 82 L.Ed.2d 317 (1984); Hoenscheid, supra; and State v. Hall, 353 N.W.2d 37 (S.D.1984), to support this claim.
In Berkemer, the Court recognized that any traffic stop curtails “freedom of action,” but held that under the circumstances of the roadside stop in Berkemer the defendant was not in custody for purposes of a Miranda warning. However, Ber-kemer refused to set out a bright line rule that a suspect need not be advised of his rights until he is formally placed under arrest.
If a motorist who has been detained pursuant to a traffic stop thereafter is subjected to treatment that renders him “in custody” for practical purposes, he will be entitled to the full panoply of protections prescribed by Miranda.
Id., 468 U.S. at 440, 104 S.Ct. at 3150, 82 L.Ed.2d at 335.
Unlike Berkemer, Meek does not claim that Officer Hofeldt failed to inform him of his Miranda rights. Rather, he argues that he specifically asserted his privilege *54against self-incrimination while he was not free to leave Officer Hofeldt’s vehicle, and that Officer Hofeldt then inveigled and compelled him to give incriminating evidence.
This court addressed the question of when a routine traffic stop rises to the level of a custodial interrogation in Hoen-scheid and Hall. In both Hoenscheid and Hall, the court held that a DWI suspect was not entitled to Miranda warnings because there was no custodial interrogation. Neither case involved a specific assertion of the privilege against self-incrimination followed by statements by the officer aimed at coercing incriminating evidence from the suspect. Further, neither involved a suspect being detained in the officer’s vehicle. Although these circumstances may indicate Meek was “in custody,” we need not base our decision on that determination. The privilege against self-incrimination applies in diverse situations even though the potential defendant is not entitled to be informed of his Miranda warnings. 3 Whartons Criminal Procedure, § 394-96 (12th ed. 1975). In other words, even though the State was not required to inform Meek of his rights under Miranda, he retained the right to remain silent and not incriminate himself.
The State also claims that the verbal sobriety tests were non-testimonial evidence and not within the reach of the privilege against self-incrimination. The Supreme Court has held that the federal constitutional right against self-incrimination applies only to testimonial or communicative evidence. Schmerber v. State of California, 384 U.S. 757, 86 S.Ct. 1826, 16 L.Ed.2d 908 (1966). Non-testimonial or real evidence is not protected by the right against self-incrimination. Neville I, supra; Schmerber, supra. This distinction is based on the language of the Fifth Amendment which protects an individual from being compelled “to be a witness against himself.” The Court acknowledged difficulty in determining this question and stated that “a distinction is not readily drawn.”4 Schmerber, supra, 384 U.S. at 764, 86 S.Ct. at 1832, 16 L.Ed.2d at 916; Neville I, supra.
Despite the broader language of the South Dakota Constitution, which by its terms protects against the compulsion of any evidence, this court has also distinguished between testimonial and non-testimonial evidence under the South Dakota Constitution. Hoenscheid, supra; Neville II, supra; State v. Roadifer, 346 N.W.2d 438 (S.D.1984); State v. Maher, 272 N.W.2d 797 (S.D.1978). The State and the majority opinion argue that this case is controlled by Hoenscheid and Roadifer, which state that sobriety tests are real physical evidence and not protected by the privilege against self-incrimination.
The State and the majority fail to recognize the distinction between this case and Hoenscheid and Roadifer. Meek specifically asserted his privilege against self-incrimination. Officer Hofeldt then coerced Meek into incriminating himself by misleading him to believe it would be to his “advantage.” As found by the trial court: “the purpose for seeking those field sobriety tests was to obtain further evidence against defendant and not for any purpose which would be beneficial to Meek.” This is exactly the type of coercion which our state and federal constitutions prohibit. We have specifically rejected the argument that the “use of the rubber hose, icy showers or marathon interrogations” is necessary to create a presumption of compulsion. Satter, supra, at 728. The distinction between testimonial and non-testimonial evidence is inadequate under these circumstances.
When a person is subject to compulsion and not free to leave, and claims his constitutional right against self-incrimination, he cannot be compelled to give evidence uniquely within his control. Field sobriety tests, whether verbal or non-verbal, are uniquely within the control of the person to *55perform or not perform. This is evidence from a person’s mind and heart. Accordingly, the State may not coerce a defendant to give such evidence after the specific assertion of the privilege against self-incrimination. Meek’s assertion of the privilege in this ease was the equivalent of refusing to perform the tests.
This rule would not prohibit the State from using real or physical evidence, such as fingerprints, photographs, measurements, appearance, hair, stance, body position, blood samples, and other physical evidence. Roadifer, supra. Nor would the rule prohibit officers or witnesses from testifying as to their observations of defendant’s appearance, speech, demeanor or other observations that may be taken from him without his consciousness or cooperation. Likewise, under proper circumstances, a court can clearly require a defendant to submit to voice prints, writing samples, gesturing or other tests which require his cooperation.
To permit the State to coerce or deceive a person into incriminating oneself after asserting the privilege is improper under the South Dakota Constitution, which prohibits the use of “compelled evidence.” This proposed holding is in line with Schmerber, which first created the distinction between testimonial and non-testimonial evidence. Schmerber states:
To compel a person to submit to testing in which an effort will be made to determine his guilt or innocence on the basis of physiological responses, whether willed or not, is to evoke the spirit and history of the Fifth Amendment. Such situations call to mind the principle that the protection of the privilege “is as broad as the mischief against which it seeks to guard[.]” (citation omitted).
Id., 384 U.S. at 764, 86 S.Ct. at 1832, 16 L.Ed.2d at 916.
The trial court was also correct in excluding testimony concerning Meek’s assertion of this constitutional right. See Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609, 85 S.Ct. 1229, 14 L.Ed.2d 106 (1965). This situation is distinguished from both Hoenscheid and Neville II where the court held the refusal to provide non-testimonial evidence did not violate the privilege against self-incrimination. The refusals in Hoenscheid and Neville II did not involve assertion of a protected constitutional right.
We should affirm the trial court's suppression of all testimony concerning Meek’s assertion of his right against self-incrimination and all statements made by Meek to Officer Hofeldt subsequent thereto, including the three verbal sobriety tests.
. Defense counsel points out the irony of the situation:
Some minutes after Defendant had attempted, on three occasions, to assert his privilege against self-incrimination, Officer Hofeldt formally placed the Defendant under arrest and then, ironically, informed Mr. Meek that he had certain rights, including the right against self-incrimination.
. During one of the sobriety tests, Meek admitted his nervousness and his belief that there was reason to be nervous.
.The State argues that Hoenscheid and Neville II hold that the privilege against self-incrimination, under our state constitution, is no broader than under the federal constitution. However, the language of our state constitution differs and the prohibition against compelled evidence is stronger. In addition, neither Hoenscheid nor Neville II involved the compulsion of evidence following the specific assertion of the privilege against self-incrimination, as here. See supra at p. 51-52.
. This difficulty can be seen in Neville I, where the Supreme Court avoided the question of whether the verbal refusal to take a blood test was testimonial evidence. The Court asserted that the line between testimonial and non-testimonial evidence was difficult to draw, and instead rested its decision upon the determination that there was no coercion.

=== CASE 2218707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:53.083807+00 ===

413 Mass. 243 (1992)
596 N.E.2d 333
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
RODNEY M. TAYLOR.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
May 6, 1992.
July 24, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, LYNCH, & GREANEY, JJ.
Bruce R. Taub for the defendant.
David B. Mark, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
This is the third case in which we consider challenges to G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, as inserted by St. 1989, c. 227, § 2, the so-called school zone statute.[1] The defendant stands convicted of a violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32C, possession of marihuana with intent to distribute, and a violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, possession of marihuana with intent to distribute within 1,000 feet of a school. One challenge by the defendant, styled as a double jeopardy issue, concerns the manner in which he was tried on the two charges in the primary and jury sessions of the Boston Municipal Court. The defendant's other challenges are directed at § 32J, and are constitutional in nature. There are also claims of inadequate jury instructions and ineffective assistance of counsel. We transferred the case to this court on our own motion.
*245 Before discussing the defendant's contentions, we summarize the facts which could have been found by the jury. On October 20, 1989, at about 11:38 A.M., Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority police Sergeant James Mulhern entered the New England Medical Center subway station to check on his officers. There, Sergeant Mulhern, who had experience in drug cases, observed the defendant to be engaged in what Mulhern believed to be a drug sale. When the defendant saw Mulhern, he tried to flee. Mulhern and other officers apprehended and arrested the defendant who was observed carrying a "beeper" (paging device). Fourteen sealed packets of marihuana, totalling 15.62 grams and having a "street value" of ten dollars a packet, were seized from the defendant. A total of $221 in cash was also seized. The defendant was first observed by Mulhern about 125 feet away from Don Bosco High School.
1. We first take up the defendant's double jeopardy argument which arises out of the following circumstances. The charges against the defendant were contained in a complaint filed in the Municipal Court for the city of Boston which alleged (in separate counts) a violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32C, and a violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32J. The defendant waived a jury trial in the first instance and was found guilty of both charges in the primary session by a judge of the Boston Municipal Court. The judge placed the defendant's § 32C conviction on file, and sentenced him on his § 32J conviction to two years in a house of correction. The docket on both cases in the primary session indicates that, at the time the defendant was convicted and sentenced, the defendant appealed only his § 32J conviction to the Boston Municipal Court jury-of-six session.
In the jury session, the defendant moved to dismiss the § 32J charge on the ground that it could not be tried independently of the § 32C charge. A judge in that session remanded the case to the primary session for "clarification" of the record there. According to the Commonwealth, the primary court docket was then "corrected" to record an appeal to the jury session by the defendant from the § 32C conviction *246 as well. Following this, both the § 32C charge and the § 32J charge were set down for a jury trial. The defendant then moved to dismiss the charges on the ground of double jeopardy and on the additional ground that § 32J was unconstitutional. That motion was denied, and the defendant was found guilty by a jury of both charges. The defendant was sentenced to a two-year term on the § 32C conviction, and a concurrent two-year term on the § 32J conviction.[2]
The defendant maintains that he never took an appeal to a jury from his conviction in the primary session of the Boston Municipal Court on the charge of possession of marihuana with intent to distribute under G.L.c. 94C, § 32C. Based on this assertion, the defendant argues that, because the § 32C offense was an essential component of the § 32J charge, he could not, consistent with double jeopardy principles, be tried anew on the § 32J charge from which he had taken an appeal.
It cannot be clearly determined on the record before us whether the defendant had in fact taken an appeal for a de novo jury trial on the § 32C offense. We need not resolve the ambiguity. We will assume in the defendant's favor that he did not appeal his § 32C conviction. Even with that assumption, he was not exposed to double jeopardy on the § 32J offense.[3]
In the usual case (as § 32J seems to contemplate), the school zone charge will be tried together with the predicate charge. This was done in this case in the primary session of the Boston Municipal Court when the defendant was tried on both the § 32C charge and the § 32J charge. The anomalous situation that appears to have occurred thereafter stems from the nature of the two-tiered system for trials that exists in most District and Municipal Courts. That system permits a *247 defendant who is convicted in a primary session on two distinct charges to accept conviction and disposition on one by not appealing, and to vacate conviction and disposition on the other by taking an appeal to the jury session for trial de novo.
General Laws c. 94C, § 32J, creates and punishes a distinct offense which can be charged separately from the underlying offense which gives rise to it. In this case, the defendant's appeal of his conviction on the § 32J charge had the effect of placing only that charge before the jury session of the Boston Municipal Court for trial de novo. See Commonwealth v. Hutchins, 410 Mass. 726 (1991). However, because (on the assumption we make) the defendant did not appeal his conviction under G.L.c. 94C, § 32C, for possession of marihuana with intent to distribute, that conviction stood. It was therefore unnecessary to retry the defendant on that charge in connection with the de novo trial on his appeal of the § 32J conviction.[4] The retrial of the § 32C offense was of no legal significance with respect to the de novo trial of the § 32J offense, and, as a consequence, double jeopardy principles do not prevent the latter conviction from standing.
In the interests of fairness, however, we think the defendant should not have been retried and sentenced on the § 32C charge without a clear demonstration in the record that he took an appeal from that conviction. Accordingly, as to that charge, we will vacate his conviction and sentence in the jury session, and order restored his § 32C conviction in the primary session.[5]
*248 2. The defendant next argues that the school zone provision in § 32J violates his due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution because that provision is too vague and overbroad to be enforced properly.[6] The defendant's argument is stated principally in conclusory terms to the effect that § 32J is (as his brief puts it) "overbroad, vague and uncertain ... because it does not equitably or sufficiently define the specific acts or conduct prohibited."
The "void for vagueness" doctrine requires that a penal statute "define the criminal offense with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited and in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement." Commonwealth v. Williams, 395 Mass. 302, 304 (1985), quoting Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352, 357 (1983). "A law is not vague ... if it requires a person to conform his conduct to an imprecise but comprehensive normative standard so that men of common intelligence will know its meaning." Commonwealth v. Gallant, 373 Mass. 577, 580 (1977), quoting Commonwealth v. Orlando, 371 Mass. 732, 734 (1977).
As to the circumstances of this case, § 32J meets this standard. The statute provides the possession of certain drugs with intent to distribute (or the actual distribution of drugs) within 1,000 feet of school property is prohibited. A person of average intelligence would understand the statute to prohibit such conduct, and the statute instructs the police on what is criminal, thereby deterring arbitrary and discriminatory law enforcement. Courts which have considered the question have consistently found drug-free school zone provisions not to be unconstitutionally vague.[7] See, e.g., United *249 States v. Agilar, 779 F.2d 123, 126 (2d Cir.1985), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1068 (1986) (Federal drug-free school zone statute not unconstitutionally vague); State v. Ogar, 229 N.J. Super. 459, 471-472 (1989) (same).
General Laws c. 94C, § 32J, is also not overbroad. "A statute is ... overbroad ... if, even though it is clear and precise, it prohibits constitutionally protected conduct." Commonwealth v. A Juvenile, 368 Mass. 580, 586-587 n. 4 (1975). There is no constitutional protection granted to the possession of illegal drugs with intent to distribute, and the defendant obviously cannot make any argument tying his conduct to any protected form of expression or conduct. Cf. Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, 404 Mass. 575, 583 (1989).
3. The defendant states in his brief that "there is no locus within the inner city of Boston which is not also `within one thousand feet of a school zone.'" Based on this assertion, he goes on to surmise that everyone in the inner city of Boston charged with one of the offenses described in § 32C will automatically be subject to prosecution and possible punishment under § 32J. He perceives this as imposing on inner city drug dealers a punishment to which drug dealers elsewhere may not be subject, thereby, in his view, creating a statute with discriminatory impact. It is difficult to tell where the argument is ultimately supposed to lead. The Commonwealth treats it as a contention by the defendant that § 32J violates the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. We also take the argument to be so based. It is without merit.
There is nothing in the record to support the defendant's contention that there is no location within the inner city of Boston that is not within 1,000 feet of a school. Even if that fact could be proved, it would not establish an equal protection violation.[8] The issue was succinctly discussed and disposed of by the Supreme Court of Utah in considering a location *250 challenge based on equal protection grounds to Utah's drug-free school zone statute. In State v. Moore, 782 P.2d 497, 503 (Utah 1989), that court said the following:
"Defendant cannot argue that he is treated any differently than any other similarly situated individual who deals drugs within the prescribed location. He resides in a small city. Consequently, the school yard may be more readily located within 1,000 feet of his residence ... than is the case with the drug dealers in larger cities. However, this increased proximity does not make defendant dissimilar and therefore entitle him to dissimilar treatment ... The "bright line test" is based strictly on distance from the school, regardless of the town's population or configuration. Such a test is constitutional."
We agree with these observations. No court has concluded otherwise. See United States v. Pitts, 908 F.2d 458, 460 (9th Cir.1990) (fact that 80% of the city of Spokane is within 1,000 feet of a school did not invalidate Federal school zone statute on equal protection grounds); United States v. Agilar, supra at 126 (Federal school zone statute did not violate equal protection principles by having disparate impact on drug dealers in urban areas); Harrison v. State, 560 So. 2d 1124, 1128 (Ala. Crim. App. 1989) (disparate impact of school zone statute on urban areas did not give rise to an equal protection claim). Section 32J does not discriminate against any group; it furthers a legitimate State interest of protecting children and adolescents by establishing a drug-free school zone and treats those who would disobey the law within the zone equally. See Dickerson v. Attorney Gen., 396 Mass. 740, 743 (1986).
4. The defendant's last two arguments deserve only brief comment.
(a) There was no objection to the judge's instructions to the jury on the issue of distribution. The instructions given followed those requested by the defendant's trial counsel. We *251 consider the instructions to be error free, and reject the defendant's unconvincing argument that the jury should have been told that the defendant could not be found guilty if they concluded that he intended only "to share" his marihuana with others.
(b) The defendant's trial counsel did not furnish ineffective assistance. Counsel's concession that the defendant did possess the marihuana found on him was an obvious tactical decision made to press the defense that the defendant did not have an intent to distribute. The tactic was reasonable because the defense mentioned was clearly the only strategy available to meet a very strong government case. See Commonwealth v. Sielicki, 391 Mass. 377, 382 (1984); Commonwealth v. Key, 381 Mass. 19, 33 (1980).
The defendant's conviction in the jury session of the Boston Municipal Court on the violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, is affirmed. His conviction in the jury session on the violation of G.L.c. 94C, § 32C, is vacated, and there his conviction as entered in the primary session of the Boston Municipal Court is reinstated on that violation.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The full text of the statute is set forth in Commonwealth v. Alvarez, ante 222, 225 n. 1 (1992).
[2]  This sentence is contrary to the directive of § 32J that the mandatory minimum two-year sentence required thereunder be made consecutive to the sentence imposed on the predicate offense.
[3]  The defendant's premise appears to be that the so-called corrected docket in the primary session was made without his assent in response to the remand by the judge in the jury session for "clarification."
[4]  In the jury session, the Commonwealth could have made out a case sufficient to withstand a motion for required finding of not guilty on the § 32J charge by introducing a certified copy of the defendant's first conviction in the primary session of the § 32C offense and proof that offense had taken place within 1,000 feet of school property.
[5]  The defendant also argues that punishment for both the § 32C and § 32J convictions constitutes improper multiple punishments prohibited by the double jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and our common law rules guarding against double jeopardy. The arguments on the State law grounds have been considered and rejected in Commonwealth v. Alvarez, supra at 232, and the Federal constitutional law arguments are without merit. See id. at 231.
[6]  The defendant makes no argument under any cognate provisions of the Massachusetts Constitution.
[7]  No question has been raised in this case on whether the statute would apply to a defendant who possesses drugs within 1,000 feet of school property but who intends to distribute the drugs elsewhere.
[8]  A suggestion that drug dealers in the inner city might constitute a "suspect class" worthy of special protection, and subjected to illegal discrimination under § 32J, would be ludicrous.

=== CASE 9739089 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:38.332001+00 ===

KEITH, Justice.
This case presents the difficult question of under what circumstances a defendant in a child sexual abuse case can be removed from the room during the testimony of the child abuse victim without violating the defendant’s constitutional right to confront the witnesses who testify against him.
Appellant Russell Duane Conklin was convicted of one count of first degree criminal sexual conduct, Minn.Stat. § 609.342, subd. 1(g) (1988) and one count of second degree criminal sexual conduct § 609.343, subd. 1(a) (1988) and was sentenced to 43 months in the Minnesota Correctional Facility at Stillwater. Hé was acquitted of one other count of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree, Minn.Stat. § 609.343, subd. l(h)(v) (1988) (multiple acts committed over an' extended period of time).
The sexual abuse involving his 4-year-old daughter, L.C., occurred sometime between December 1986 and February 22, 1987 during once a week day long visits made by L.C. and her 7-year-old brother, R.C., to appellant’s apartment. R.C. and L.C. do not live with appellant, but rather have been under the foster care of Diane and Harold Schroedl since shortly after L.C. was born. L.C.’s only contacts with appellant were through the scheduled visitations. The purpose of the visits was to gradually reconcile appellant with his chil- • dren, a process that would have resulted in reuniting the family sometime in mid-1987. The Schroedls had expressed some concern about the plan to reunite appellant with the children, and on earlier occasions had inquired about adopting the children themselves, or having other members of their family adopt L.C. and R.C.
The first suggestions of the existence of sexual abuse occurred on Tuesday, February 24, 1987. L.C. appeared to be sore, or uncomfortable in her vaginal area and had appeared uncomfortable for several weeks. Her foster mother Diane Schroedl asked her if anyone had hurt her there, and L.C. told her that appellant, who she calls Big Russ, had “punched” her there, and had showed her his “peter.” She demonstrated a punching motion with a closed fist, and *270claimed that it occurred while she was on the toilet at appellant’s apartment.
Diane Schroedl took L.C. and R.C. to the Anoka County Courthouse the next day, Feb. 25, where they spoke with Lonnie Payne, an investigator in the sexual abuse unit of the Sheriffs Department. Payne interviewed L.C., taping the conversation, and later interviewed R.C. Appellant was subsequently arrested. On March 3, 1987, L.C. was interviewed and examined by Dr. Carolyn Levitt, a pediatrician experienced in examining children for sexual abuse. The interview was videotaped, and the tape was later entered into evidence at trial and was shown to the jury.
On August 18, 1987, a hearing was held at which L.C. was found competent to testify. Immediately after the competency hearing, L.C.’s testimony was taken and videotaped for use at trial as permitted by Minn.Stat. 595.02, subd. 4(a) (1988). During her testimony, the court granted the state’s motion to remove appellant from the room. He watched the remainder of L.C.’s testimony via a video monitor in another room.
On September 15, 1987, a Rasmussen hearing was held and the court ruled that hearsay statements made by L.C. to her foster mother, to Lonnie Payne and to Dr. Levitt would be admissible at trial under Minn.Stat. 595.02, subd. 3 (1988). The videotaped interview with Dr. Levitt was ruled admissible under that statute and Minn.R.Evid. 803(4) (statements made to a physician for diagnostic purposes).
At trial, Lonnie Payne, the Sheriff’s Department investigator, testified to statements made by L.C. during her initial interview at the courthouse. L.C. told her of an incident where appellant showed his “peter” to her and R.C. in his apartment, and both children touched it. Payne asked L.C. if she had smelled the penis and L.C. responded that she had. L.C. told Payne she was told not to tell anyone about the incident. Payne also testified that when she interviewed R.C., he denied that any of this had ever happened. Lonnie Payne also asked L.C. “if anyone had ever touched her pee that she didn’t want them to.” L.C. answered that Big Russ had, and that she did not like it. The touching occurred in the bathroom and he used his finger. She said that the touching had hurt her. L.C. also said that appellant had eaten her “pee” with his mouth. She further claimed that he drank her urine which he collected in a glass while she was on the toilet. R.C. was not present during these last incidents.
Diane Schroedl, L.C.’s foster mother, testified that L.C. exhibited signs of discomfort beginning about February 1,1987; she was sore and itchy in her vaginal area. On February 24, L.C. told Schroedl of being “punched” “down there” by Big Russ with a closed fist. After her interview with Lonnie Payne on February 25, L.C. again told Schroedl the same things she had said the day before, but added the account of appellant drinking her urine. In July, before a scheduled hearing, L.C. told Schroedl her story again, “word for word” except adding a new part about appellant eating her “poop.” She demonstrated a closed fisted punch, again spoke of drinking urine, and said that she was not supposed to tell anyone.
Dr. Carolyn Levitt, the pediatrician, testified that during her examination of L.C., she touched L.C. on the clitoris and asked if anyone had ever touched her there. L.C. responded that appellant touched her there with his finger and mouth. Dr. Levitt also touched the anal opening and L.C. said she had not been touched there. Dr. Levitt testified that in her opinion, L.C. was abused; her vagina was penetrated. Her examination of the hymen indicated that it was “narrowed” and “thinned out.” The opening was larger than she was used to seeing in children that age, which could have been caused by the insertion of something, such as an object the size of a finger. On cross examination, she admitted the symptoms she noted in L.C. can also be found in girls who have had vaginitis.
Dr. Levitt’s videotaped interview of L.C. was admitted into evidence and played for the jury. On the tape Dr. Levitt asked L.C. if she remembered being touched in a way she didn’t like. L.C. responded that her father had touched in the vaginal area with *271his finger causing pain. She also said that appellant pulled down her clothes, and then drank her “pee” from a glass, and had showed her his “peter.”
L.C.’s previously videotaped trial testimony was also played for the jury. On the tape she said that appellant was never in the bathroom when she was there, and that he never took off his clothes in front of her or removed her clothing. She did not know what a “peter” was, and she had never smelled one. She remembered telling her foster mother that her “pee” hurt, but could not remember why, and she did not remember telling her that Big Russ had touched her there. She remembered telling her foster mother about a visit to Big Russ’ apartment, but could not remember what she said about it, or what happened at the apartment. She said that she was not afraid of Big Russ and denied that he ever told her to keep quiet about anything.
At this point in the videotaped testimony, the defendant was removed from the room, and this fact was noted to the jury by the prosecution during the actual trial. L.C. still could not name male or female sex organs when shown an anatomically correct doll. She denied that anyone had punched her. She remembered being sore when she urinated but did not know why. However, she finally did state that Big Russ “punched” her “down there,” with his fist, indicating her vaginal area. It occurred on the toilet, and she had her clothes on. He punched her only once, and then said “sorry.” He never took his clothes off, and she never saw his penis. He never told her to not tell anyone about being punched.
Appellant testified and denied all of the allegations. Several character witnesses also testified on his behalf. The jury returned a verdict of guilty. On appeal, appellant challenges the trial procedure used to exclude him from the room while L.C. testified, and the use at trial of out-of-court statements L.C. had made to her foster mother, Lonnie Payne and Dr. Levitt, all of which he claims violated his right to confront the witness against him. We ordered accelerated review of this case. We reverse appellant’s conviction and remand for a new trial.
1. The statute in question, Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c) (1988) permits the testimony of a child witness who is under age 10 to be taken outside the presence of the defendant in certain instances. It provides:
The court shall permit the defendant in a criminal or delinquency matter to observe and hear the testimony of the child in person. If the court, upon its own motion or the motion of any party, determines that the presence of the defendant during testimony taken pursuant to this subdivision would psychologically traumatize the witness so as to render the witness unavailable to testify, the court may order that the testimony be taken in a manner that:
(1) the defendant can see and hear the testimony of the child in person and communicate with counsel, but the child cannot see or hear the defendant; or
(2) the' defendant and child can view each other by video or television monitor from separate rooms.
Appellant was removed from the room during the testimony of L.C., and watched her testimony via a one-way closed circuit television monitor on which he could see and hear L.C. but she could not see or hear him.1 Appellant refused an offer for a telephone connection with his attorney who was present in the room when L.C. testified. Appellant argues that the statute on its face and as applied violated his right to *272confront the witnesses testifying against him.
The confrontation clauses of the United States and Minnesota Constitutions provide: “In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right * * * to be confronted with the witnesses against him.” U.S. Const, amend. VI; Minn. Const, art. 1, § 6. In Coy v. Iowa, — U.S. -, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 101 L.Ed.2d 857 (1988), decided after the trial in this case, the Supreme Court overturned the conviction of a sex offender because he was denied his sixth amendment right to confront witnesses giving testimony against him at trial. The Iowa statute permitted a screen to be placed between the defendant and the primary witnesses, two 13-year-old girls who were sexually assaulted by the defendant.2 The screen allowed the defendant to dimly perceive the witnesses, but prevented the witnesses from seeing the defendant. The Court stated that the confrontation clause provides two types of protections to the criminal defendant; “the right physically to face those who testify against him, and the right to conduct cross-examination.” Id. 108 S.Ct. at 2801. Face-to-face confrontation is “the core of the values furthered by the Confrontation Clause.” Id. (citation omitted). Analyzing the placement of the screen between the defendant and witnesses, the Court said “[i]t is difficult to imagine a more obvious or damaging violation of the defendant’s right to a face-to-face encounter.” Id. at 2802. However, the Court left open the question of whether exceptions existed to the confrontation requirement. Any exceptions, however, should they exist, would be permitted only when necessary to further an important public policy. Id. at 2803. The Iowa statute was unconstitutional because it allowed a screen to be placed in front of witnesses without any showing of necessity. The statute did not require any individualized finding by the court that the witnesses would be traumatized if forced to face the defendant, but rather presumed that all child witnesses would be traumatized. Id. at 2803.
Exceptions to the confrontation requirement have been found to exist with respect to other rights “implicit” in the confrontation clause, such as the right to cross examine witnesses. See Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 65 L.Ed.2d 597 (1980).
Unlike the Iowa statute at issue in Coy, Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c) establishes a permissible exception to the confrontation clause because it requires a specific finding that the denial of the right to confrontation is necessary to effectuate an important public policy. Protecting child witnesses under 10 years of age from trauma is certainly an important public policy. See Coy, 108 S.Ct. at 2805 (O’Connor, J., White, J., concurring) (“The protection of child witnesses is, in my view and in the view of a substantial majority of the States, just such an [important public] policy.”) The statute also requires the trial court to make a determination that “the presence of a defendant during testimony * * * would psychologically traumatize the witness so as to render the witness unavailable to testify.” This satisfies the requirement in Coy that there be an individualized finding of necessity. Thus, the statute on its face is constitutional. Similar conclu*273sions have been reached by other courts analyzing similar statutes.3
2. Coy v. Iowa makes clear that exceptions to the requirement of face-to-face confrontation are allowed only after the court makes an “individualized finding” that the particular witness needs special protection. 108 S.Ct. at 2803. Although the Court did not express what type of showing of necessity is required, it said that a generalized legislative finding of necessity as found in the Iowa statute was insufficient to establish necessity. Id. Thus the Supreme Court has given little guidance on what “individualized findings” of traumatization must be made before a defendant can be removed during the testimony of a witness.
Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c) is intended to protect child witnesses in sexual abuse cases from the psychological trauma of testifying in court. However, not all children experience trauma when testifying. See Minnesota Developments — Defendants’ Rights in Child Witness Competency Hearings: Establishing Constitutional Procedures for Sexual Abuse Cases, 69 Minn.L.Rev. 1377, 1385 n. 16 (1985). There are many obstacles at trial encountered by child witnesses which impede their testimony and often cause trauma. The unfamiliar courtroom setting, the necessity of speaking to strangers about embarrassing events, the presence of a jury, the problems with language and mutual comprehension all contribute to an oppressive environment in which child sexual abuse victims may face problems in testifying. Anxiety may also be increased by intimidating trial procedures such as cross-examinations, and by sequestration, repeated long delays and last minute postponements. The presence of the accused during the child’s testimony may heighten stress or trauma, and the outcome of the trial — either acquittal of the abuser or in some cases the conviction of a close family member — may result in trauma. See Libai, The Protection of the Child Victim of a Sexual Offense in the Criminal Justice System, 15 Wayne L.Rev. 977, 984 (1969); Parker, The Rights of Child Witnesses: Is the Court a Protector or Perpetrator? 17 New Eng.L.Rev. 643, 646, 652-53 (1982). The use of video-camera equipment and the necessity of speaking into a microphone may also increase the stress on the child.
The statute provides that a determination must be made that “the presence of the defendant during testimony * * * would psychologically traumatize the witness so as to render the witness unavailable to testify.” Minn.Stat. 595.02, subd. 4(c). The trial court found L.C. to be unavailable to testify because she lacked recollection and was unwilling to testify. See Minn.R. Evid. 804(a)(2) and (3). The findings are ambiguous on whether this was caused by the psychological traumatization of testifying in the presence of the defendant. The court said: “I don’t know if she is traumatized, as such, psychologically. I’m not an expert. I haven’t heard any testimony.” At the hearing, on the issue of psychological traumatization, Diane Schroedl was the only witness. She testified that L.C. was nervous and that was causing her problems with remembering the events about which she was questioned. She opined that the video camera might be the source of L.C.-’s nervousness. The trial court noted that L.C. appeared more nervous during the videotaping of her trial testimony than she had been during the competency hearing earlier that day which was not videotaped, and at which appellant was not present. Regarding L.C.’s nervousness the trial judge said: “I don’t know the reason for that. It could be the video camera. Who knows.”
Using the Coy requirement of an “individualized finding” or the statutory requirement, the trial court’s findings in this case are insufficient. The court made no finding that it was necessary to exclude *274the defendant during the witness’ testimony because his presence was causing psychological traumatization to the child witness. This is especially troublesome since the witness herself testified that she was not afraid of appellant. Like the defendant in Coy v. Iowa, appellant has been denied his right to confront the witness against him based on an impermissible presumption that his presence would traumatize the child witness.4
Other courts have reached this same result. In State v. Vincent, 159 Ariz. 418, 768 P.2d 150 (1989), the trial court had also failed to make a particularized showing that exclusion of the defendant during the testimony of two child witnesses would be necessary. The trial court stated merely that the child witnesses “could be traumatized.” Id. 159 Ariz. at 428, 768 P.2d at 160. There was no specific evidence concerning the likely impact of the courtroom testimony on the witnesses. The court held that statute permitting the testimony of a child witness to be videotaped out of the presence of the defendant, Ariz.Stat. § 13-4253 was unconstitutional as applied. Id. at 429, 768 P.2d at 160-61. See also People v. Thomas, 770 P.2d 1324, 1328 (Colo.Ct.App.1988) cert. granted (1989); State v. Eastham, 39 Ohio St.3d 307, 530 N.E.2d 409, 412 (1988).
Neither the Coy decision nor the statute provide any guidance on what constitutes an individualized finding or determination that the child witness would be psychologically traumatized so as to be unavailable to testify if required to testify in the presence of the defendant. The inquiry to be made by the trial court on this issue will necessarily vary with each case. However, in every case it must be established by specific evidence that the particular witnesses is or would be psychologically traumatized and that traumatization is substantially caused by the presence of the defendant rather than by other reasons. The evidence of psychological traumatization “must show more than mere nervousness or excitement or some reluctance to testify.” Craig v. State, 316 Md. 551, 569, 560 A.2d 1120, 1129 (1989) (citation omitted).
The finding may be based on the trial court’s personal observation of the witness, but there must be sufficient evidence in the record to support the court’s finding. The trial judge is permitted, if not encouraged, to question the child witness in camera if necessary. Additional testimony should be taken from witnesses having personal knowledge of the child. Their testimony must be about the consequences of having the child testify in the presence of the defendant, must be specific, and must be based on their experience with that particular child. This pertains to expert testimony as well. While expert testimony is not required in every case, it may be necessary in cases where the cause of the child’s testimonial difficulties and trauma is not clear.5
This standard is intended to require more than a showing of mere distress on the part of a child who is faced with the prospect of testifying. It is a strict standard, which is imposed in recognition of the fact that live testimony and cross-examination is the preferred mode of proof. It is not contemplated that the court will necessarily receive expert testimony concerning the minor’s emotional *275state in making this determination. The court is in an adequate position to assess the surrounding circumstances and to form a judgment concerning the likely effect of live testimony in open court on the minor without expert assistance.
The next question is whether the violation of the right to confrontation was harmless error. In Coy v. Iowa, the Court stated that the harmless error rule should be applied when a defendant’s rights under the confrontation clause have been violated. 108 S.Ct. at 2803. The harmless error analysis has been applied in other cases involving violations of the confrontation clause. See Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 682, 106 S.Ct. 1431, 1436, 89 L.Ed.2d 674 (1986). When constitutional errors are involved, the state has the burden to show that the errors are harmless beyond a reasonable doubt by showing that the error did not contribute to the verdict obtained. Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 23-24, 87 S.Ct. 824, 827-828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705 (1967), State v. Crisler, 285 N.W.2d 679, 682 (Minn.1979). Thus, constitutional errors are presumed to be prejudicial.
In. Coy the Court stated that the harmless error analysis in confrontation clause cases should not attempt to evaluate what effect the defendant’s presence or absence would have on a particular witness because that would involve mere speculation. 108 5.Ct. at 2803. In this case, however, the record clearly reflects the effect that appellant’s presence and then absence had on the testimony of L.C. Before the defendant was removed, L.C. said nothing in her testimony to implicate appellant. She denied or could not remember whether appellant had engaged in the conduct on which he was charged. Only after appellant was excluded did L.C. say that he “punched” her in the vaginal area. The only other evidence of guilt was L.C.’s out of court statements to her foster mother, Lonnie Payne and Dr. Levitt. Although those hearsay statements are deemed to be “substantive evidence” by Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3 if properly admissible, it is impossible to say that the jury would have convicted appellant anyway had appellant remained in the room during L.C.’s testimony, and she had continued to deny or lack recollection of her previous statements. The weight the jury would give to her prior unsworn, out of court statements is simply not known, and thus we cannot say that the error in removing appellant was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The state has not met its burden to show that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
3. The confrontation clauses of the United States and Minnesota Constitutions are also implicated by the use at trial of prior out-of-court statements that L.C. made to her foster mother, Lonnie Payne and Dr. Levitt. Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3 (1988) permits the admission of such statements at trial as “substantive evidence” in child sexual abuse cases.6 The underlying purpose of the confrontation re*276quirement is to “augment accuracy in the factfinding process by ensuring the defendant an effective means to test adverse evidence.” Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 65, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 2538, 65 L.Ed.2d 597 (1980). The use of hearsay statements deprives the defendant of the right to . confront and cross examine the witness, and violates the requirement that testimony be sworn, all of which are intended to protect the integrity of the factfinding process by ensuring that only reliable evidence will be used against a defendant. Thus hearsay can be used against a criminal defendant at trial only if its use is necessary, and only if the hearsay evidence is demonstrably reliable. Ohio v. Roberts 448 U.S. at 65-66, 100 S.Ct. at 2538-2539; State v. Hansen, 312 N.W.2d 96, 102 (Minn.1981).
The trial court in this case conducted a pretrial hearing to determine whether L.C.’s prior statements were reliable so as to be admissible under the confrontation clauses, and Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3 (1988). See State v. Dana, 422 N.W.2d 246, 249 (Minn.1988). Testimony was taken from Schroedl, Payne and Dr. Levitt, and the court ruled that the statements L.C. made to these three were reliable. The factors set out in the statute for determining the reliability of hearsay evidence include the “time, content and circumstances of the statement and the reliability of the person to whom the statement is made.” Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3. As part of this analysis, the court must consider, among other things, the spontaneity of the statements, the consistency of the statements, the knowledge of the declar-ant, the motives of the declarant and witnesses to speak truthfully and the proximity in time between the statement and the events described. See State v. Allen, 157 Ariz. 165, 174, 755 P.2d 1153, 1162 (1988). The court also should consider possible suggestiveness created by leading questions, particularly by a parent or close authority figure; and should evaluate corroborating factors, such as whether the declar-ant has recanted or reaffirmed the statement and also any corroborating physical evidence. Graham, The Confrontation Clause, the Hearsay Rule, and Child Sexual Abuse Prosecutions: The State of the Relationship, 72 Minn.L.Rev. 523, 532 (1988). In State v. Dana, 422 N.W.2d 246, we stated that “the heart of the matter of determining whether to admit hearsay is that unreliable evidence should be kept from the jury; this is a legal determination that the trial court makes on the basis of experience and legal education.” Id. at 249 (citation omitted). A ruling on the reliability of hearsay statements is for the court to make and is of vital importance in cases such as this.
Because of our disposition of this case, it is not necessary that we rule on whether the admission of those statements violated appellant’s right to confrontation. We note, however, that evidence was adduced at trial that may have some bearing on the reliability of some of those statements, specifically, the fact that the victim and some of the witnesses were unhappy or concerned about the county’s plan to reunite appellant with his children. This is another factor to be considered by the trial court in ruling on whether the out-of-court statements were reliable.
Finally, we note in passing that we are troubled by the prosecution’s conduct at trial of stopping the videotaped testimony of L.C. at the point where appellant was excluded from the room and noting that fact to the jury. The jury would have had no other way of knowing that the defendant had been removed during L.C.’s testimony. This practice was unnecessarily prejudicial to the defendant, and may have affected the fairness of the trial by undermining the presumption of innocence in favor of the accused. See Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 503-04, 96 S.Ct. 1691, 1692-93, 48 L.Ed.2d 126 (1976) (requirement that defendant stand trial in prison clothes unnecessarily impairs the presumption of innocence). However, this issue was not raised on appeal, and our disposition of this case does not require us to rule on it.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
. We note that the trial court did not follow the proper procedures under § 595.02, subd. 4(c) when it excluded appellant. The trial court used a one-way video monitor, on which appellant could see L.C. testify, but she could not see or hear appellant. Subdivision 4(c)(2) requires that if a video monitor is used the defendant and the witness must be able to view "each other.” This contemplates a two-way video connection. Subdivision 4(c)(1), the only other alternative, requires that the defendant be allowed to observe the witness “in person " while the child witness cannot see or hear the defendant. This section does not authorize a one-way video connection. The procedures used in this case violated the procedures outlined by the statute.
. Iowa Code § 910A.14(1) (1987) provides:
A court may, upon its own motion or upon motion of any party, order that the testimony of a child, as defined in section 702.5, be taken in a room other than the courtroom and be televised by closed circuit equipment in the courtroom to be viewed by the court. Only the judge, parties, counsel, persons necessary to operate the equipment, and any person whose presence, in the opinion of the court, would contribute to the welfare and well-being of the child may be present in the room with the child during the child’s testimony.
The court may require a party be confined to an adjacent room or behind a screen or mirror that permits the party to see and hear the child during the child's testimony, but does not allow the child to see or hear the party. However, if a party is so confined, the court shall take measures to insure that the party and counsel can confer during the testimony and shall inform the child that the party can see and hear the child during testimony.
. State v. Bonello, 210 Conn. 51, 554 A.2d 277, cert. denied, — U.S.-, 109 S.Ct. 2103, 104 L.Ed.2d 664 (1989); Glendening v. State, 536 So.2d 212, 218 (Fla.1988), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 109 S.Ct. 3219, 106 L.Ed.2d 569 (1989); Wildermuth v. State, 310 Md. 496, 518-20, 530 A.2d 275, 286-87 (1987); State v. Tafoya, 108 N.M. 1, 765 P.2d 1183 (Ct.App.1988), cert. denied, — U.S.-, 109 S.Ct. 1572, 103 L.Ed.2d 938 (1989). See also State v. Vincent, 159 Ariz. 418, 768 P.2d 150, 161 (1989).
. The insufficient finding of psychological trau-matization was not "cured prior to trial,” as the dissent asserts, by the findings of another judge who reviewed L.C.’s videotaped trial testimony and the record of the hearing four weeks after L.C.’s trial testimony was taken. The second judge ruled that the presence of appellant had a "chilling effect" upon L.C.’s testimony. He did not, however, make any finding that L.C. would be psychologically traumatized if required to testify in the presence of the appellant. Nor could the judge make such a finding. He relied solely on the same evidence that the first judge used in making his ruling, and that evidence is simply insufficient to support a finding of psychological traumatization since it did not show that L.C. was anything more than just nervous, excited or reluctant to testify. Moreover, the second judge had no opportunity to observe L.C. personally, and there is nothing in the record to indicate that he ever met her. This is not the finding of psychological traumatization needed to meet the requirements of the statute or the constitution.
. See also Uniform Rules of Evidence 807(a)(i) (adopted Nov. 1986) providing for special procedures to protect child witnesses upon a finding by the court that "there is a substantial likelihood that the minor will suffer severe emotional or psychological harm if required to testify in open court.” Comments to the rule provide in part:
. Section 595.02, subd. 3 provides:
An out-of-court statement made by a child under the age of ten years or a person who is mentally impaired as defined in section 609.-341, subdivision 6, alleging, explaining, denying, or describing any act of sexual contact or penetration performed with or on the child or any act of physical abuse of the child or the person who is mentally impaired by another, not otherwise admissible by statute or rule of evidence, is admissible as substantive evidence if:
(a)the court or person authorized to receive evidence finds, in a hearing conducted outside of the presence of the jury, that the time, content, and circumstances of the statement and the reliability of the person to whom the statement is made provide sufficient indicia of reliability; and
(b) the child or person mentally impaired as defined in section 609.341, subdivision 6, either:
(i) testifies at the proceedings; or
(ii) is unavailable as a witness and there is corroborative evidence of the act; and
(c) the proponent of the statement notifies the adverse party of the proponent’s intention to offer the statement and the particulars of the statement sufficiently in advance of the proceeding at which the proponent intends to offer the statement into evidence to provide the adverse party with a fair opportunity to prepare to meet the statement.
For purposes of this subdivision, an out-of-court statement includes video, audio, or other recorded statements. An unavailable witness includes an incompetent witness.
See also Minn.Stat. § 260.156 (1988).

=== CASE 9739090 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:38.33788+00 ===

YETKA, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I agree with the majority that Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. *2774(c) is facially constitutional, but I would also find that it is constitutional as applied in this case. Furthermore, even if appellant’s sixth amendment right was violated by allowing the victim to testify in his absence, such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The majority correctly concludes that Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c) is facially constitutional in light of Coy v. Iowa, — U.S.-, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 101 L.Ed.2d 857 (1988). The statute which requires face-to-face confrontation unless the court “determines that the presence of the defendant * * * would psychologically traumatize the witness so as to render [her] unavailable to testify,” clearly meets the Coy criteria that an individualized finding of necessity be made.
We are not concerned here with the type of generalized legislative finding at issue in Coy, nor does this case involve similar facts. In Coy, the victims were 13 years old and unrelated to the defendant. Here, the child is only 4 years old, and the defendant is her father, an authority figure in her life. These special circumstances justify taking the child’s testimony in the absence of the defendant. While the Iowa statute in Coy was found unconstitutional, the possibility was left open for future exceptions to the confrontation clause “when necessary to further an important public policy.” Coy, 108 S.Ct. at 2803. This case presents such an exception.
It is important to remember that the confrontation clause does not provide defendants with an absolute right to confront witnesses who testify against them. See Coy, 108 S.Ct. at 2803 (O’Connor, J., concurring). Rather, it is a general requirement that may, in appropriate cases, “bow to accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process.” Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284, 295, 93 S.Ct. 1038, 1045, 35 L.Ed.2d 297 (1973). Indeed, the right to confront witnesses is denied in a variety of unremarkable trial circumstances. For example, whenever a hearsay exception applies or a witness is unavailable or determined incompetent, the defendant cannot confront that witness. The right to confrontation depends on the particular case and may be affected by competing policy considerations.
The Minnesota Legislature has decided that a defendant’s right to confront witnesses may be denied in a proceeding where the witness is a child less than 10 years old who must talk about physical abuse or sexual contact. Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4. Our statute embodies the legitimate state interest of protecting victims of child abuse from the further trauma of testifying in front of their abuser. The statute also aids in the search for truth by making an otherwise unavailable child witness comfortable enough to testify in court and describe the abuse she or he has suffered.
Child abuse cases are more common today than ever before. The United States Supreme Court has said that “[c]hild abuse is one of the most difficult problems to detect and prosecute, in large part because there often are no witnesses except the victim.” Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 60, 107 S.Ct. 989, 1003, 94 L.Ed.2d 40 (1987). In cases of sexual abuse, the dilemma is especially poignant. Young children are asked to identify and describe adult acts which are beyond their knowledge and experience. It is easily understandable why it may be necessary to remove the defendant from the proceeding in order to get the child to speak at all.
When, as here, the witness is a 4-year-old child who was allegedly sexually abused by her father, it is highly probable that his presence in the courtroom would traumatize her. Especially if the child has been told to keep the abuse a secret, she is unlikely to talk about it in front of the accused parent. Often, a certain look from a parent is all that is needed to silence a child. Indeed, 4-years-olds will usually not even be deemed competent to testify or, once on the stand, will “freeze” or be led easily by defense counsel into making inconsistent statements. If a child of such tender years as L.C. is able to tell her story, but unwilling to do so because the defendant is present, it is in the best inter*278ests of the child and society to remove the defendant.
The majority believes that the trial court findings as to whether L.C. was traumatized by the presence of her father were ambiguous and insufficient. Accordingly, says the majority, Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c) was unconstitutional as applied in this case.
The initial finding made by the trial judge prior to appellant’s removal admittedly was vague. He found L.C. unavailable, but did not link that unavailability to the presence of appellant as the statute requires. Any ambiguity or defect in that finding was, however, cured prior to trial. The majority opinion ignores the finding of the trial judge at the Rasmussen hearing. The judge there expressly concluded that L.C.’s unavailability was, at least, partially due to her father’s presence. He stated:
This court finds that [L.C.] was intimidated by the courtroom setting. That she was embarrased by the very nature of the act she was interrogated about, and that the presence of Big Russ, even though it was not a confrontation, had a chilling effect upon her testimony and her ability to testify.
(Emphasis added.)
This finding was adequate to fulfill the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 4(c). The statute does not require that appellant’s presence be the only reason the child is traumatized. Indeed, it would be practically impossible for judges, experts or even the child witnesses themselves to isolate a single cause of the child’s trauma and unavailability. All the statute requires is a finding that appellant’s presence traumatized L.C. to the point of making her unavailable. The trial judge made that determination, and it is clearly supported by the evidence. See State v. Burns, 394 N.W.2d 495, 497 (Minn.1986) (trial record can cure inadequacy of pretrial hearing).
It is true that the trial judge did not hear expert testimony on whether L.C. was traumatized by the presence of her father, however, such testimony is not required. This court has previously noted that a parent is the “ultimate expert” with respect to a child, State v. Myers, 359 N.W.2d 604, 611 (Minn.1984), and before removing appellant, the trial judge questioned L.C.’s foster mother. She said that L.C. appeared more nervous than when she had testified at the competency hearing. The judge also observed that L.C. was more nervous during the taping of her trial testimony than she had been when appellant was not present. She had also previously been willing to talk about the incident outside the presence of appellant.
Most persuasively, L.C. had been told by her father not to tell anyone what had happened. There is also testimony in the record from L.C.’s foster mother that L.C. had been afraid to visit Big Russ over the preceding months. Moreover, this was the first time in 5 months that L.C. had seen her father. These facts all clearly support a finding that L.C. was traumatized by the presence of her father and not just the courtroom setting. The propriety of the trial judge’s determination became especially apparent once her father was removed and L.C. admitted that he “punched” her “down there.”
The trial court’s decision to remove appellant is not based, as the majority alleges, on an impermissible presumption that his presence would traumatize L.C., but is an individualized finding based on the child’s age, relationship with the accused, observed behavior during the testimony, past and present fear of the accused and testimony from the child’s foster mother.
It is important to note that, in examining whether the record supports the trial court’s finding that L.C. was traumatized by the presence of her father, the majority opinion ignores the standard of review for such a factual determination. This court cannot reverse a specific finding of the district court unless it is clearly erroneous. State v. Linder, 268 N.W.2d 734, 735 (Minn.1978). Deference must be given to the fact-finder, and the majority fails to do so.
It is difficult to imagine what additional evidence the majority would require to find that a defendant’s presence would traumatize a child witness. Asking the traumatized child herself if she is afraid of the *279accused is unlikely to lead to the truth. If we must wait for the child to announce her trauma or an expert to declare that its cause is the defendant’s presence beyond a reasonable doubt, the statute will become meaningless. The trial judge’s finding here was in accordance with the statutory requirement and supported by ample evidence.
We must also keep in mind that this court has “the primary responsibility under the separation of powers doctrine for the regulation of evidentiary matters * * State v. Burns, 394 N.W.2d 495, 498 (Minn.1986); see also State v. Dana, 422 N.W.2d 246, 249 (Minn.1988); State v. Mitjans, 408 N.W.2d 824, 830 (Minn.1987). The mere fact that statutory procedures or standards may not have been followed precisely here is not conclusive. This is especially true with regard to the use of the one-way video connection used once appellant was removed from the courtroom. See Maj.Op. at 271 n. 1. Additionally, there was no objection to the procedure when it was used; therefore, any allegation of error was waived. See, e.g., State v. Martin, 294 Minn. 469, 199 N.W.2d 419 (1972) (defendant not allowed to raise a jury instruction error for first time at appeal).
After deciding that the confrontation clause was violated by removing appellant during L.C.’s testimony, the majority proceeds to examine whether the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Even if we were to conclude, on the basis of the entire record, that the absence of the appellant during the second part of L.C.’s testimony violated his right of confrontation under Coy, it does not necessarily follow that his conviction should be reversed. In Coy, the U.S. Supreme Court acknowledged the possibility that error in denying the defendant face-to-face confrontation may not be necessarily prejudicial. The Court said:
The State also briefly suggests that any Confrontation Clause error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt under the standard of Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 24, 87 S.Ct. 824, 828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705 (1967). We have recognized that other types of violations of the Confrontation Clause are subject to that harmless error analysis, see e.g., Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S., [673], at 679, 684,106 S.Ct., [1431], at 1436,1437[, 89 L.Ed.2d 674], and see no reason why denial of face-to-face confrontation should not be treated the same. An assessment of harmlessness cannot include consideration of whether the witness’s testimony would have been unchanged, or the jury’s assessment unaltered, had there been confrontation; such an inquiry would obviously involve pure speculation, and harmlessness must therefore be determined on the basis of the remaining evidence. The Iowa Supreme Court had no occasion to address the harmlessness issue, since it found no constitutional violation. In the circumstances of this case, rather than decide whether the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, we leave the issue for the court below.
Coy v. Iowa, — U.S.-, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 2803, 101 L.Ed.2d 857 (1988). Less speculation is involved here than in Coy because L.C. testified first with appellant in the room and then outside his presence. While not in the defendant’s presence, she testified that she remembered telling her foster mother some things defendant did to her, but could not remember what those things were. After defendant was removed, she stated that defendant had “punched” her “down there,” pointing to her groin area, when they were in the bathroom together.
Nevertheless, the majority opinion states: “The weight the jury would give to her prior unsworn, out of court statements is simply not known, and thus we cannot say that the error in removing appellant was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Maj.Op. at 275. If this were the proper analysis, harmless error could never be found because, under that standard, a reviewing court would need to know the jury’s thoughts. Instead, for there to be harmless error, it must be determined that the record contains overwhelming evidence of guilt and, thus, the evidence admitted as a result of the constitutional violation was merely cumulative and could not have *280played a significant role in the conviction. See State v. Forcier, 420 N.W.2d 884, 886—87 (Minn.1987). L.C.’s testimony that appellant punched her was not prejudicial given the other evidence of guilt; therefore, any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Except for L.C.’s statement that appellant punched her, the other evidence at trial consisted primarily of the out-of-court statements that L.C. made to her foster mother, Lonnie Payne, and Dr. Levitt. The majority recognizes that Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3 permits the use of these hearsay statements as substantive evidence in child sexual abuse cases, but suggests that the trial court erred by admitting the statements.
Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3 requires that, prior to admitting the hearsay statements in this ease, the court must conduct a hearing and find that “the time, content, and circumstances of the statement and the reliability of the person to whom the statement is made provide a sufficient indicia of reliability * * Minn.Stat. § 595.02, subd. 3(a) (1988). At the Rasmussen hearing, the trial judge made the necessary preliminary finding of reliability and admitted the statements. He set out thorough and detailed findings which cleárly meet the statutory requirement as well as comport with the analysis recommended by the majority:
The Court finds that the out-of-court statement made by [L.C.] to Diane Schro-del [sic] on February 24th and 25th of 1987 and July 12th of 1987, and the statements made by [L.C.] to Investigator Payne made on February 25, 1987 shall be received in evidence pursuant to Minnesota Statute 509.02 Sub. 3. The Court finds that the content and circumstances of the statement provides sufficient indicia of a reliability for the following reasons.
That [L.C.]’s statement on February 24th to Mrs. Schroedel [sic] which gave rise to further inquiry in the matter to the effect that her bottom here [sic] was clearly a spontaneous nonsolicited statement. Secondly there is no evidence to suggest that [L.C.] had any reason to make up or fabricate such a tale. Thirdly, it is extremely unlikely that [L.C.] could have made up such a story, that the acts she has stated had not in fact occurred. It would be — would appear that would be beyond her imagination and experiences in life. Fourthly, there is no testimony to the effect that [L.C.] is a person who is accustomed to fabricating or making up stories or fantasizing the testimony of Mrs. Schrodel [sic] is to the contrary. Fifth, the statement made and the circumstances surrounding the time of there [sic] being made does not indicate that they are the result of coaching or solicitation. Nor were they the result of unfairly framed or leading or suggestive questions. There is no testimony to suggest that [L.C.] would have any reason to want to hurt the defendant or any reason that she would have to fabricate or make up such a story.
Lastly, the defendant had the opportunity to commit the offenses with which he is charged. The Court further finds that Diane Schrodel [sic] is a reliable person. The Court finds that her testimony was candid and believable. The Court does not find any evidence to suggest that she had any reason or motive of any kind to testify falsely or to be motivated to cause harm to this defendant.
The Court further finds that there is nothing in the testimony to suggest that Mrs. Schrodel [sic] asked unfairly leading questions or that she attempted to coach or influence the testimony or the statements made by [L.C.]
The Court likewise finds that Investigator Payne is a reliable witness. The Court finds that her testimony is credible. The circumstances surrounding her interview with the child was [sic] fair and reasonable and the interrogation was fairly conducted. The Court has in mind the defendant’s position that the statements should not be admitted because of inconsistencies in [L.C.]’s trial testimony and her testimony in the out-of-court statement. It has been indicated [L.C.]’s testimony for trial was available to the *281Court. It hadn’t been, it having been taken before Judge Shumaker on August 18, 1987. It is true that the most aggre-gious [sic] acts that [L.C.] stated in her out-of-court statement were not given in her video tape of trial testimony. The Court has carefully viewed [L.C.]’s appearance and demeanor on the video of her trial testimony. It is apparent to this Court that in neutral type of questions of [L.C.], [she] was relaxed and responsive. The many questions zeroed in on Big Russ or the sexual conduct aspects of the matter that she became obviously embarrassed. The Court noticed she would look down, would look away, would not answer or would be evasive in respect to the questions. This does not persuade this Court that her out-of-court statement were [sic] therefore untrue or fabricated.
[[Image here]]
The Court in conclusion finds that the out-of-court statement does have sufficient indicia of reliability and will be received and it will be for the jury to determine their believability, and if there are such inconsistencies that shall cause a jury to reject her out-of-court statements or not believe them.
The admissibility of evidence is a preliminary question to be determined by the court. Minn.R.Evid. 104. Additionally, the trial court’s threshold finding of reliability can only be set aside if this court finds that it was an abuse of discretion. State v. Gustafson, 379 N.W.2d 81, 84 (1985). The inconsistencies in L.C.’s story at different times are neither troublesome nor a reason to exclude the out-of-court statements. It is easily understandable why a child who is a victim of sexual abuse, and reluctant to discuss the incident at all, may speak more or less freely in different settings to different people. The fact that L.C. is inconsistent about the details of the abuse does not mean that it did not occur. Those inconsistencies should not preclude the admission of evidence that there was abuse. I agree with the trial judge that the out-of-court statements were reliable and alone support appellant’s conviction beyond a reasonable doubt.
The confrontation clause was not violated in this case. There was an adequate finding made that appellant’s presence traumatized L.C. so as to make her unavailable as a witness. Even if the judge did not say the “magic words” the majority wants to hear, the finding is clearly made and supported by a preponderance of the evidence. The majority’s harmless-error analysis fails by discounting the out-of-court statements of Diane Schroedl, Lonnie Payne and Dr. Levitt as unreliable without considering their impact. Because the trial court did not abuse its discretion by finding those statements reliable, they were properly admitted and make any constitutional violation harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
In conclusion, I do not quarrel with the proposition that every defendant is entitled to a fair trial and that constitutional protections ensure that defendants will have the right to confront witnesses; however, because the right to confront witnesses is a general proposition only, the rule must be interpreted and modified in light of the facts of each particular case. In this case, the witness was 4 years of age. While the court decided to admit her testimony, the conditions for permitting her to testify must surely be different than those for a fully mature and competent adult. Here, it was clear from the record that L.C.’s father had an enormous influence over her, and his presence caused her to be nervous and silent. While it is true that the prosecutor and the judge could have been more procedurally exact, it is also true that one is entitled to a fair trial, not a perfect trial. I do not believe that the defendant is in a position to claim that he was denied a fair trial.
While it is true that constitutional rights cannot be eroded due to the expediency of the times, it is also true that society must attempt to eliminate child abuse. Thus, the rules of evidence must be interpreted carefully to protect the rights of the defendant, but also to allow the truth to prevail. To do otherwise would result in prosecutors being reluctant to prosecute child abuse *282cases. I believe this case meets the required balance of being fair to the defendant while protecting the child victim. I would affirm.

=== CASE 9739091 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:38.342306+00 ===

COYNE, Justice
(dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Justice Yetka, but write to emphasize my agreement with the majority opinion of Justice Keith that the hearing on the motion to remove defendant from the room was not the sort of hearing contemplated by the statute. However, as the dissent makes clear, as a reviewing court we are not narrowly restricted to the record made at the hearing on the motion to remove. State v. Burns, 394 N.W.2d 495, 497 (Minn.1986). A review of the entire trial record establishes that special circumstances justifying defendant’s removal were present. The record on appeal shows that the victim was only four years old; that defendant, as her father, was in a position of authority over her and had warned the victim that she should not tell anyone about the abuse; that in the latter days of the abuse the victim had become frightened about visiting defendant; that the victim had not seen defendant in five months; and that, in the opinion of her foster mother, the victim was nervous and her nervousness was interfering with her ability to remember or recount the abuse. This record bears out the child’s functional unavailability to testify in defendant’s presence and justifies his removal despite the trial court’s failure to specifically find that this four-year-old child was “psychologically traumatized.” I also agree with the dissent that the record and our cases, including State v. Dana, 422 N.W.2d 246, 248-51 (Minn.1988), and State v. Burns, 394 N.W.2d 495, 497-98 (Minn.1986), support the trial court’s admission of the extrajudicial statements of the victim. I agree with the majority opinion that it was unnecessary for the prosecutor to stop the video tape and inform the jury that defendant had been removed from the room at that point, but I am satisfied that defendant received a fair trial, that the evidence of his guilt was strong, and that his conviction therefore should be affirmed.

=== CASE 2218845 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:55.995425+00 ===

633 N.E.2d 746 (1993)
262 Ill. App. 3d 464
198 Ill. Dec. 905
In re Paul RENDE (The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. Paul RENDE, Defendant-Appellant).
No. 1-91-1250.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fifth Division.
March 19, 1993.
*747 George P. Lynch, Chicago, for defendant-appellant.
State's Atty. of Cook County, Renee Goldfarb, Theodore Burtzos, Margaret J. Faustmann and Robin L. Kerensk, Chicago, for plaintiff-appellee.
Presiding Justice GORDON delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal challenges the asserted power of a Cook County grand jury to issue a subpoena to compel an appearance in a lineup. In March 1991, appellant was served with a subpoena commanding him to appear before a grand jury of the circuit court of Cook County to testify and to "[s]tand lineup for identification purposes."
In requesting the grand jury issue this subpoena, the State's Attorney made the following unsworn statement to that body: "I am an Assistant State's Attorney from the Organized Crime Unit here today on March 195. [sic] And I am here today requesting three subpoenas. * * *
The first one is for an individual to appear before this body some time next week and ordered to stand a lineup. We have information that he may be a subject of  target of the investigation which, as you may or may not recall, a burglary investigation that stretches as far as Arlington Heights north and as far south as, I believe, Orland Park. He has not been arrested. We don't have enough information yet to approve yet, but we are asking that he stand a lineup. At this point he's refused. So, we are going to bring him in and ask he be ordered to stand a lineup. That is Mr. Paul Rende."
No arrest warrant was issued for the defendant and no finding of probable cause was made or elicited.
Defendant thereupon filed a motion to quash the subpoena which was orally argued in the circuit court in April 1991. The motion and argument challenged the authority of the grand jury to direct him to attend a lineup for identification without a preliminary finding of probable cause. Based upon thenexisting precedents, defendant's motion to quash was denied and defendant was ordered to appear for lineup.
Over defendant's specific objection the trial court further ruled that the lineup could be held outside of the "confines and presence" of the grand jury but provided that defendant had the right to the presence of his counsel at that lineup. Defendant thereupon requested a contempt finding against him to permit an immediate appeal. The trial court complied by entering a finding of contempt against the defendant and thereafter assessing a fine of $500 against him with execution stayed during the pendency of the appeal.
On appeal, defendant urges that a grand jury subpoena compelling his appearance at a lineup violated his rights under the fourth and fifth amendments of the United States Constitution as well as his rights under article 1, section 6, of the Constitution of the State of Illinois. In addition defendant contends that compelling appearance at a lineup is beyond the scope of the statutorily granted powers of the grand jury pursuant to Article 112 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 112-1 et seq.) Lastly, defendant argues that the issuance of a subpoena to compel a person to participate in a grand jury lineup before indictment violates Supreme Court Rules 411 and 413. 134 Ill.2d Rules 411, 413.
We begin our discussion of defendant's constitutional arguments with the United States Supreme Court's decision in United States v. Dionisio (1973), 410 U.S. 1, 93 S. Ct. 764, 35 L. Ed. 2d 67. There the Court held that a grand jury subpoena for voice exemplars and other relatively nonvince *748 physical evidence does not encroach upon rights which are protected under the fourth amendment. In its analysis, quoting from the decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in United States v. Doe (Schwartz) (2nd Cir.1972), 457 F.2d 895, the court in Dionisio stated:
"There is no basis for constructing a wall of privacy against the grand jury which does not exist in casual contacts with strangers. Hence no intrusion into an individual's privacy results from compelled execution of handwriting or voice exemplars; nothing is being exposed to the grand jury that has not previously been exposed to the public at large." Dionisio, 410 U.S. at 14 [, 93 S. Ct. at 771]; accord United States v. Mara (1973), 410 U.S. 19, 93 S. Ct. 774, 35 L. Ed. 2d 99.
Whether the rationale of Dionisio should be applied to a lineup appearance has been the subject of some debate among the Federal circuits. In In re Melvin (1st Cir. 1977), 550 F.2d 674, the first circuit explicitly held that the rationale of Dionisio applied to lineup appearances just as to voice exemplars, stating:
"The Court's rationale in finding that the `seizure' of a `person' necessary to bring him before the grand jury for the purpose of furnishing a voice exemplar does not implicate the fourth amendment seems controlling in the present context. Appearance at a lineup could take longer and be more distasteful, but it is difficult to see that the procedure is so much more burdensome as to be distinguishable for that reason from the ordered identification procedures accepted in Dionisio and Mara." 550 F.2d at 676.
Reaching a contrary result, the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals, in the case In re Kelley (D.C.1981), 433 A.2d 704, stated:
"We are unpersuaded by the government's arguments that a lineup appearance involves no greater intrusion than the orders in Dionisio and Mara * * * A lineup appearance is not simply showing one's face to the public. It involves considerable social stigma and personal risk. It entails the humiliation of standing on a stage under floodlights, removed from counsel, subject to being compelled to speak certain words and perform actions directed by the police, all at considerably more risk of mistake and misidentification than the more scientifically grounded fingerprinting and, to some extent, voiceprinting techniques involved in Dionisio and Mara" (433 A.2d at 706.)
However, having distinguished between the constitutional ramifications of a lineup appearance and the voice exemplars sought in Dionisio, the Kelley court abruptly retreated from its constitutional analysis, and proceeded to decide the matter on non-constitutional grounds by invocation of the court's supervisory powers over the grand jury. Pursuant to those powers the court required only "in summary terms a minimal showing of a legitimate basis for requiring the particular lineup where enforcement of a grand jury directive is before the court". 433 A.2d at 710.
There is far less debate that a compulsory lineup does not violate a person's fifth amendment right against self-incrimination. Since the decisions of the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Wade (1967), 388 U.S. 218, 87 S. Ct. 1926, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1149, in Gilbert v. California (1967), 388 U.S. 263, 87 S. Ct. 1951, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1178, and in Schmerber v. California (1966), 384 U.S. 757, 86 S. Ct. 1826, 16 L. Ed. 2d 908, it has been resolved that the privilege against self-incrimination applies only to compulsory communications or testimony. "[C]ompulsion which makes a suspect or accused the source of real or physical evidence" does not violate the fifth amendment. Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 764, 86 S. Ct. at 1832.
Thus, as is the case with voice and handwriting exemplars, or other attempts to use an individual as a source of physical evidence, compelling a witness to appear in a lineup does not violate his fifth amendment rights even though it enlists that person's will and cooperation. But see dissent of Justice Marshall in U.S. v. Mara, 410 U.S. at 33, 93 S. Ct. at 782 (Marshall, J., dissenting) ("I cannot accept the notion that the government can compel a man to cooperate affirmatively in securing mcriminating evidence when the evidence *749 cannot be obtained without the cooperation of the suspect").
The major issues raised in this appeal have been addressed by the Illinois Supreme Court in the the case of In re May 1991 Will County Grand Jury Subpoena (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 381, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929 (hereinafter referred to as "In re May"), which was decided after the contempt judgment was entered in this cause by the able trial judge.
Under its holding, the court in In re May treats a grand jury subpoena compelling an appearance in a lineup as being similar to a subpoena requiring production of fingerprints and palm prints. Each is characterized as "physical evidence of a noninvasive nature". In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 393, 178 Ill.Dec. .406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
Thus our supreme court apparently agrees with the decision in In re Melvin, that pursuant to U.S. v. Dionisio, a grand jury subpoena calling for a lineup appearance receives no greater fourth amendment protection than one calling for voice exemplars.
However, in this context our State Supreme Court invoked the privacy provision under article I, section 6, of the Illinois Constitution, holding that this provision "offers greater [privacy] protection than does the Federal Constitution." In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 390, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
The privacy provision of our State constitution provides:
"The people shall have the right to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and other possessions against unreasonable searches, seizures, invasions of privacy or interceptions of communications by eavesdropping devices or other means." Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 6; In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 390-91, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
Pursuant thereto, our supreme court extended the protection of the privacy provision of our State constitution to a grand jury subpoena compelling lineup appearances, stating:
"A person has a reasonable expectation that his private records will not be exposed to public view. Similarly, a person has a reasonable expectation that he will not be forced to submit to a close scrutiny of his personal characteristics, unless for a valid reason. We believe that the individual's privacy interest in his physical person, as well as his privacy interest in his documents, must be protected."
In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 391-92, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
In balancing the public's interest in a functioning grand jury against the right of an individual to the protection of his privacy, the court in In re May contrasted the relatively non-intrusive nature of a lineup with the more intrusive invasion involved in a request for hair or blood samples. The court went on to hold that unlike requests for hair or blood samples, a mandatory lineup does not require a showing of probable cause. But nonetheless even where the evidence sought is non-intrusive the correlative right of privacy would require that the State must show relevance and individualized suspicion:
"Thus, we hold that some showing of individualized suspicion as well as relevance must be made before physical evidence of a noninvasive nature, such as an in-person appearance in a lineup or fingerprinting, is demanded of a witness. This may be done through affidavit by the State's Attorney." In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 393, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
While our supreme court has not specified in detail the quantum of proof required to establish the threshold level of relevance and individualized suspicion, it is clear that more is required than was provided here. Here the only representations to justify the issuance of the lineup subpoena were made to the grand jury in an unsworn statement of the prosecutor. That statement identified the crimes being investigated and simply asserted that the prosecutor had "information that he may be a subject of  (sic) target of the investigation." This statement does not identify the source of the information nor give any inkling as to its quality or reliability. Nor does the statement positively assert that defendant was a target. It simply states that he "may be a subject of  target." Consequently aside from being unsworn, the *750 statement does not provide sufficient assurance that defendant's appearance at a lineup was not required as part of a general dragnet rather than on the basis of unique knowledge pertaining to the defendant's involvement in the subject crimes.
Moreover aside from the informational insufficiency of the statement, it was addressed to the grand jury only and not to the court where the subpoena's enforcement was sought. Under the holding in In re May, the enforcing court must be persuaded by a showing of relevancy and individualized suspicion. It does not appear to be sufficient simply to provide those facts to the grand jury.
"Without the necessity of presenting some degree of individualized suspicion to the court, it is conceivable that a grand jury investigating a rape allegedly committed by a man of Oriental appearance might subpoena physical evidence from all 50 Asian-American males in the local community, none of whom was suspect for reasons other than his race." (Emphasis added.) In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 393, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.
This requirement that the demonstration of relevancy and individualized suspicion be made to the court from which enforcement is sought is also consistent with the supervisory requirement in In re Kelley (D.C.1981), 433 A2d 704, 707, stating:
"Consequently, to insure that the prosecutor and the grand jury are acting in good faith and not arbitrarily or to harass putative defendants, we hold that a prosecutor seeking judicial enforcement of a grand jury directive to appear in a lineup must, by affidavit of law enforcement officer or a formal representation of an Assistant United States Attorney, make a minimal factual showing sufficient to permit the judge to conclude that there is a reason for the lineup which is consistent with the legitimate function of the grand jury." See also In re Grand Jury Proceeding (3rd Cir.1973), 486 F.2d 85 (government was required to make a preliminary showing of reasonableness to district court before grand jury subpoena for handwriting exemplars would be enforced).
We do not mean to connote that a sworn statement originally made to the grand jury would not suffice if subsequently shown to the trial court. Undoubtedly such a sworn statement would be no different from an affidavit which, under In re May, is acceptable. Here, however, in addition to being unsworn and factually insufficient, there is no record that the statement was brought to the trial judge's attention. There is nothing in the record to show that the trial judge examined or was guided by that statement. Accordingly the order compelling enforcement of this subpoena and the finding of contempt for refusal to comply must be overturned.
Defendant's contention however, that the grand jury is without statutory power to issue a subpoena to compel a lineup appearance is without merit. Defendant contends that since article 112 of the Criminal Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 112-1 et seq.), which purports to specify the investigation powers of the grand jury, does not specifically provide for lineup appearances, we must conclude that it is without such powers. This contention attempts to circumscribe the investigatory power of the grand jury too narrowly. See People v. Florendo (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 155, 158, 69 Ill. Dec. 65, 447 N.E.2d 282 ("the public also has an interest in maintaining the breadth of the grand jury's power to conduct investigations necessary to ferret out criminal activity").
Defendant's contention predicated upon article 112 was directly addressed and rejected by our supreme court in In re May. The court there reasoned that a "statute should not be construed to effect a charge in the settled law of the State unless its terms clearly require such a construction." (In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 388, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929.) Based upon this rationale the court dispositively concluded that section 112-4 "gives the grand jury the right to demand that the person subpoenaed provide evidence within the limitation imposed by constitutional guarantees of individual rights." In re May, 152 Ill.2d at 389, 178 Ill. Dec. 406, 604 N.E.2d 929. *751 Defendant further contends power of the grand jury to order a lineup appearance is specifically abridged under nois Supreme Court Rules 411 and 413, and limits the power of a judicial officer "to require an accused to appear at a lineup only after indictment or information."
Rule 411 provides:
"These rules shall be applied in all criminal cases wherein the accused is charged with an offense for which, upon conviction, he might be imprisoned in the penitentiary. They shall become applicable following indictment or information and shall not be operative prior to or in the course of any preliminary hearing." 134 Ill.2d R. 411.
Rule 413 provides in pertinent part:
"(a) The Person of the Accused. Notwithstanding the initiation of judicial proceedings, and subject to constitutional limitations, a judicial officer may require the accused, among other things, to:
(i) appear in a lineup;
(ii) speak for identification by witnesses to an offense;
(iii) be fingerprinted;
(iv) pose for photographs not involving reenactment of a scene;
(v) try on articles of clothing;
(vi) permit the taking of specimens of material under his fingernails;
(vii) permit the taking of samples of his blood, hair and other materials of his body which involve no unreasonable intrusion thereof;
(viii) provide a sample of his handwriting; and
(ix) submit to a reasonable physical or medical inspection of his body." 134 Ill.2d R. 413.
It is clear from the face of these provisions that these rules are intended to be additive rather than proscriptive. They are designed to provide the State with a right to obtain discovery even after initiation of judicial proceedings but in no way diminish the scope of grand jury investigation prior to indictment. Given defendant's interpretation, the grand jury's power to obtain any real or physical evidence would be effectively eliminated, since a strong argument can be made to vitiate the use of a grand jury subpoena altogether after indictment. See People v. DeLaire,(2nd Dist.1993), 240 Ill.App.3d 1012, 1029, 183 III 33, 44, 610 N.E.2d 1277 1288, where it considers the contention that,
"Where the investigation focuses on the facts already covered by the indictment, the subpoena must be quashed because the inquiry of the grand jury has ended. Without the extraordinary purpose of the grand jury, the State lacks the reason behind the relaxation of the fourth amendment protections overridden by a subpoena. After the indictment, the State must comply with ordinary discovery means."
Moreover, defendant's contention is inconsistent with and would render moot the decision of our supreme court in In re May, which analyzes the powers of the grand jury to obtain the types of physical evidence, prior to indictment, for which Rule 413 provides discovery after indictment.
We note however, in the event enforcement is again sought with respect to this grand jury subpoena, the trial court should bear in mind that a grand jury subpoena cannot be deployed merely to assist a police investigation. Its power cannot be used as a means simply to further an independent police investigation. See People v. DeLaire, (2nd Dist.1993), 240 Ill.App.3d 1012, 1022, 183 Ill. Dec. 33, 39, 610 N.E.2d 1277, 1283:
"The prosecutor or police may not usurp the powers of the grand jury.
'The subpoena power of the grand jury is designed for its own use, not to further independent investigations of the prosecutor or police. In most jurisdictions, the prosecutor may have subpoenas issued without advance authorization of the grand jury, but the purpose of the subpoena must be to produce evidence for use of the grand jury.' [Citation.]
The prosecutor may screen the materials prior to the presentation to the jurors, but he may not use the subpoena as a ruse to obtain information."
*752 Thus while we do not believe that the lineup must necessarily be conducted in the presence of the grand jury, if it does take place on the outside, it must still be conducted on behalf of the grand jury to assist its investigative function.
Therefore in enforcing a subpoena which seeks to compel a lineup appearance outside of the grand jury's presence, as was the case here, the trial court should obtain the assurance of the State's Attorney that the lineup be conducted on behalf of the grand jury and that the results will be reported back to it.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment of contempt from which this appeal is taken is reversed and vacated.
JUDGMENT REVERSED and VACATED.
MURRAY and McNULTY, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739135 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:23.606159+00 ===

JOHNSON, Justice.*
Arthur Paul Schaible appeals from a judgment of the Williams County District Court which awarded his ex-wife $8,450, plus interest, for child support arrearages incurred during the period of September 1977 through August 1981. We reverse and remand.
Arthur and Vicki Schaible were divorced on January 22, 1976. The divorce judgment gave Vicki sole care and custody of their three minor children and required Arthur to pay child support of $66.66 per child per month. Arthur immediately fell in arrears on the support obligation. In November of 1976, Arthur was notified he was $1,400 behind in his payments. In January of 1977, the district court found Arthur in civil contempt. A bench warrant was issued in November of 1977, and Arthur was jailed in July of 1978. He was released and ordered to return for a hearing once he received a medical exam at the Veteran’s Administration Hospital in St. Paul, Minnesota. Arthur failed to return, and Vicki claims she did not know of his whereabouts until 1990 when Arthur came to his son’s graduation ceremony.1
Vicki remarried in 1977, and the Schaible children were adopted by her new spouse in September of 1981.2 The adoption terminated the parental rights of Arthur and released him from further child support obligations.
On March 13, 1991, Vicki brought a “motion for judgment” on the child support arrears which were owed by Arthur for the period of September 1977 through August 1981. Arthur moved to dismiss the motion on the grounds that he did not owe the money; that he was not capable of paying the arrearages; and, that Vicki’s motion was procedurally improper because she should have commenced the action with a *595summons and complaint. The district court rejected Arthur’s argument, ruling that a motion to reduce the arrearages to a sum certain was a proper procedure since a divorce judgment ordering child support had already been obtained in 1976. The district court then scheduled an evidentiary hearing to determine the amount of the arrearages owed, and Arthur’s capability to pay. During arguments, Arthur’s counsel raised the statute of limitations as a defense, arguing that judgment for these amounts was barred, in whole or in part, because of the age of the claims. The court allowed post-hearing briefs on the issue, and on February 25, 1992, ordered judgment for Vicki of $8,450 in child support arrearages, plus interest at six percent per annum, from August 1981 through January 1991, which must be paid at a minimum rate of $150.00 a month. The court held that Arthur’s statute of limitations defense was barred, since it was not raised in his written response to the motion, and Arthur did not subsequently seek to amend his response.
Arthur appeals, arguing that the district court did not have jurisdiction to render judgment because Vicki’s motion was procedurally deficient, and Vicki’s action is barred by the statute of limitations.
Arthur contends that since Vicki is seeking a money judgment, Rule 3, N.D.R.Civ. P,3 requires that she bring a separate action initiated with a summons and complaint. In short, Arthur contends that a new judgment is being sought, therefore, a new action must be brought. Vicki’s argument is less clear. She argues that the district court has continuing jurisdiction over the divorce decree and contends her motion is merely seeking to reduce the order for child support to a judgment. She also argues that her motion is merely seeking to amend the original divorce judgment to reflect the debt on the arrearages.
We first note that this issue has been clarified for post-1987 arrearages in other cases with the passage of N.D.C.C. § 14-08.1-05.4 That statute declares that a child support payment once due and unpaid becomes a judgment by operation of law. Since the statute creates a judgment for each accrued installment, a custodial parent seeking to docket a judgment need only comply with the requirements of Rule 58, N.D.R.Civ.P. In Baranyk v. McDowell, 442 N.W.2d 423 (N.D.1989), we ruled that the statute does not apply retroactively. Since the arrearages in this case were incurred between 1977 and 1981, the statute does not control.
This Court has not previously ruled on the issue, but it appears that, prior to 1987, motions under the district court’s continuing jurisdiction, as well as separate actions, were used to secure judgments for child support arrearages. See e.g., McWethy v. McWethy, 366 N.W.2d 796, 798 (N.D.1985); Kinsella v. Kinsella, 181 N.W.2d 764 (N.D.1970). We conclude that pre-1987 arrearages may be reduced to a money judgment through a motion. The judgment rendered, however, is not an amendment of the divorce judgment as Vicki argues, but a money judgment on arrearages.
A motion, as opposed to a new action, is appropriate since enforcement of *596child support payments differs from traditional actions seeking the enforcement or protection of a right. Once due and unpaid, child support arrearages cannot be modified. Kinsella v. Kinsella, supra. In effect, once accrued the right to payment becomes vested. This right accrues under the trial court’s continuing jurisdiction on matters pertaining to the custody, care, support, and education of the children of the marriage. Corbin v. Corbin, 288 N.W.2d 61, 64 (N.D.1980). To require that a custodial parent file a new law suit every time a judgment on arrearages is sought would fracture the trial court’s continuing jurisdiction and do little to promote judicial economy. We would be required to elevate form over substance. Vicki’s motion performed the essential functions of a summons and complaint. It provided notice, set out the basis of Vicki’s claim, and provided Arthur with an opportunity to be heard. A separate action to obtain a money judgment may have been an acceptable, but not an exclusive remedy. Our holding is consistent with other jurisdictions. “The reduction of arrearage to judgment is not a new cause of action but is a continuation of efforts to obtain support and maintenance for minor children, and it is not necessary that new process issue.... The party against whom relief is sought does, however, have a right to notice even if the court does have jurisdiction.” Talbot v. Talbot, 99 Mich.App. 247, 297 N.W.2d 896, 899, (1980). “[A] divorce court has continuing jurisdiction over its decrees for alimony, separate maintenance, and custody and support of children. An application for modification or enforcement of such decree is a supplementary proceeding incidental to the original suit. It is not an independent proceeding or the commencement of a new action.” Hershey v. Hershey, 467 N.W.2d 484, 486 (S.D.1991), citing Eggers v. Eggers, 82 S.D. 675, 153 N.W.2d 187, 189 (1967).
Arthur also contends that Vicki’s action is barred in whole, or in part, by the statute of limitations. He states that child support is an obligation which falls under the six-year limitations period. N.D.C.C. § 28-01-16. Alternatively, he argues that under a ten-year limitations period for actions on judgments or decrees, all but a few of the payments are barred. N.D.C.C. § 28-01-15. He also suggests that N.D.C.C. § 28-20-355 cancels the 1976 judgment which ordered child support since it was not renewed within ten years of the judgment date.
Vicki contends that she was prejudiced by the late assertion of the defense since she could not test it against N.D.C.C. § 28-01-32, which provides that a statute of limitations may be tolled when a defendant is outside the state. She also contends that N.D.C.C. § 28-01-256 allows her to bring an action for payments owed to her youngest child since the child’s infancy tolled the limitations period.
The trial court statqd its decision was based on Rule 8(c), N.D.R.Civ.P., which requires that the statute of limitations defense be set forth affirmatively in a re*597sponse to a pleading. The court noted that Arthur did not raise the issue in his response to Vicki’s motion, nor did he subsequently seek to’ amend his response. The court stated it “hesitates to rule against a party on a technicality, but here [the court] has no choice.” Arthur contends that Rule 8(c), N.D.R.Civ.P., does not apply to motions and that Vicki was not prejudiced by his assertion of the defense during closing arguments since the trial court allowed post-hearing briefs on the matter. We agree.
Rule 8(c) refers to pleadings. If not affirmatively set forth in a response to a pleading, or in an amended pleading, an affirmative defense may be waived.7 In a motion proceeding, however, a trial court has more leeway. See Boschee v. Boschee, 340 N.W.2d 685 (N.D.1983). In Boschee, the defendant failed to file and serve an affidavit in response to a motion as required by Rule 6, N.D.R.Civ.P. We held the trial court did not commit error when it allowed the defendant to respond to the motion orally at the hearing. We noted a trial court should consider a petition primarily on its merits. We stated that when the court considers an oral return, it should continue the hearing to allow the moving party time to respond to material not covered in the moving party’s affidavit. Although the district court properly allowed post-hearing briefs on the limitations issue, it seems clear its decision barring assertion of the defense was based on a belief that Rule 8(c) required waiver.
We conclude that the applicable statute of limitations is § 28-01-15. We have not previously reviewed this issue. However, in Richter v. Richter, 126 N.W.2d 634 (N.D.1964), we applied § 28-01-15 to alimony arrearages. We stated that where a divorce decree provides for payments of alimony in installments, the right to enforcement accrues upon each installment as it matures, and that the statute of limitations begins to run against each installment from the time fixed for its payment. Id. at 638. The same rationale may be applied to child support arrearages.8
Arthur’s contention that the 1976 judgment is cancelled for nonrenewal is unpersuasive. As we have stated, pre-1987 arrearages do not become judgments until they are adjudicated through a motion proceeding or separate action. N.D.C.C. § 28-20-35 provides that a previously entered judgment is cancelled if it is not renewed within ten years. Since the ar-rearages here were not reduced to judgment and entered until 1991, the statute does not apply. In addition, the renewal requirement does not apply to the original divorce judgment, as it relates to child support, since the divorce judgment does not set out a fixed sum. Renewal requirements could apply, however, to a divorce judgment for a fixed amount in the division of property or settlement of debts. See Leifert v. Wolfer, 74 N.D. 746, 24 N.W.2d 690, 696 (1946).9
Vicki argues that the statute of limitations may be tolled, if Arthur was absent from the state, under N.D.C.C, § 28-01-32. *598We leave this issue for the district court.10 However, § 28-01-25, which tolls a statute of limitations period while a disability exists, such as the minority of their children, is inapplicable to Vicki’s claims.
We have recognized an interest of the child in the obligation of child support, particularly where asserted by a governmental agency. Sprynczynatyk, Director of Stark Co. Social Services Bd. v. Celley, 486 N.W.2d 230 (N.D.1992). In this case, neither the child, nor an agency or entity acting on behalf of the child, are parties. The purpose of the tolling statute is to allow a person under a disability to bring an action that would otherwise be barred by a statute of limitations. “Statutes of limitation begin to run against everyone, including minors, when the cause of action accrues, and tolling statutes only extend the time for completing the bar of the statute so that the minor shall have an opportunity to act for himself after the disability caused by his minority has been removed.” Slade v. Slade, 81 N.M. 462, 468 P.2d 627, 631 (1970). Imputing the rights of the adult child to the parent in this situation conflicts with the justification for the statute. As a result, N.D.C.C. § 28-01-25 does not toll the statute for claims brought by Vicki. We reverse the district court’s judgment and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., concurs.
Although the opinion authored by Justice Johnson was prepared as a proposed majority opinion, the effect of Justice VandeWalle's special concurrence and dissent is to make the opinion written by Justice Levine, and concurred in by Justice Meschke, the majority opinion on the issue of the running of the statute of limitations, and, therefore, the judgment of the district court is affirmed.
. Arthur states that he is a truck driver and is often on the road. He disputes Vicki’s contention and claims that he has maintained Jamestown as his residence through the years leading up to these proceedings.
, Chad was 21 at the time Vicki brought her motion. Sean was 19 and Kellie Jo was 18.
. Rule 3, N.D.R.Civ.P., states: "[a] civil action is commenced by the service of a summons."
. N.D.C.C. § 14-08.1-05, states:
Support order to be judgment.
1. Any order directing any payment or installment of money for the support of a child is, on and after the date it is due and unpaid:
a.A judgment by operation of law, with the full force, effect, and attributes of a judgment of the district court, including the ability to be entered in the judgment book pursuant to rule 58 of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure and otherwise enforced as a judgment;
b. Entitled as a judgment to full faith and credit in any jurisdiction which otherwise affords full faith and credit to judgments of the district court; and
c. Not subject to retroactive modification. 2. Failure to comply with the provisions of a judgment or order of the court for the support of a child may be punished as civil contempt. All remedies for the enforcement of judgments apply. A party or the party’s assignee may also execute on the judgment, and the obligor is entitled only to the exemptions from process set forth in section 28-22-02.
. N.D.C.C. § 28-20-35, states: "[ajfter ten years after the entry of a judgment that has not been renewed, or after twenty years after the entry of a judgment that has been renewed, the judgment must be canceled of record."
. N.D.C.C. § 28-01-25, states:
Disabilities extend limitations on actions generally — Exceptions. If a person who is entitled to bring an action other than for the recovery of real property, or for a penalty or forfeiture, or against a sheriff or other officer for an escape is:
1. Under the age of eighteen years;
2. Insane; or
3. Imprisoned on a criminal charge or in execution under the sentence of a criminal court for a term less than for life,
at the time the claim for relief accrues, the time of such disability is not a part of the time limited for the commencement of the action. However, the period within which the action must be brought cannot be extended more than five years by any such disability except infancy, nor can it be extended in any case longer than one year after the disability ceases. In cases alleging professional malpractice, the extension of the limitation due to infancy is limited to twelve years.
Vicki contends that the statute of limitations on all of the arrearages owed and attributable to her daughter was tolled until her daughter's 19th birthday in March of 1992. Since Vicki initiated her motion well before that date, she claims she may collect the arrearages.
. However, amendments are to be freely given when justice requires. Rule 15(a), N.D.R.Civ.P.
. Many jurisdictions apply a statute of limitations on actions on a judgment or decree to child support payments. "These courts reason that since each child support payment becomes a separate, final judgment as of its date of accrual, the statute of limitations pertaining to final judgments applies.” In Re Marriage of Hooper, 247 Mont. 322, 806 P.2d 541, 544 (1991). This reasoning certainly applies to arrearages incurred after the passage of N.D.C.C. § 14-OS.1-05 in 1987. However, we have noted that pre-1987 arrearages did not automatically become judgments. Since pre-1987 arrearages are not automatic judgments, the judgment or decree acted on, for statute of limitations purposes, is the original divorce decree ordering child support payments. The statute of limitations doesn’t begin to run on the judgment, however, until the right to enforce the judgment accrues. The right to enforce the judgment occurs when the payments are due and unpaid. See Richter v. Richter, 126 N.W.2d 634, 638 (N.D.1964). While the application of N.D.C.C. § 28-01-15 to pre- and post-1987 child support arrearages is conceptually different, the results are essentially the same.
.Post-1987 arrearages also do not fall under the ten-year renewal provision of N.D.C.C. § 28-20-35 until a judgment has been entered and docketed pursuant to Rule 58, N.D.R.Civ.P.; See N.D.C.C. 14-08.1 — 05(l)(a); Baranyk v. McDowell, 442 N.W.2d 423, 426 (N.D.1989).
. The tolling provisions of N.D.C.C. § 28-01-32 may be restricted in certain situations. In Muller v. Custom Distributors, Inc., 487 N.W.2d 1 (N.D.1992) we adopted the rationale of Bendix Autolite Corp. v. Midwesco Enterprises, 486 U.S. 888, 108 S.Ct. 2218, 100 L.Ed.2d 896 (1988), and found that the statute violated the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution when it required a non-resident corporation to subject itself to the general jurisdiction of the state in order to claim the protection of the statute of limitations. Additionally, § 28-01-32 was amended in 1989 so that its provisions "do not apply if this state’s courts have jurisdiction over the person during the person's absence." The amendment apparently refers to the availability of "long-arm” service of process under Rule 4, N.D.R.Civ.P. and under N.D.C.C. §§ 39-01-11 and 39-01-12. See Muller, supra at n. 4.

=== CASE 2222273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.387405+00 ===

667 N.W.2d 501 (2003)
NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, d/b/a Xcel Energy, Appellant,
v.
MINNESOTA METROPOLITAN COUNCIL, Respondent,
Minnesota Department of Transportation, et al., Respondents.
No. C4-03-67.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 19, 2003.
*503 Timothy R. Thornton, Thomas J. Basting, Jr., Briggs & Morgan, P.A., Minneapolis, MN, for appellant.
Lewis A. Remele, Jr., Andrew L. Marshall, Bassford, Lockhart, Truesdell & Briggs, P.A., Minneapolis, MN, for respondent Minnesota Metropolitan Council.
Mike Hatch, Attorney General, David M. Jann, Ann K. Bloodhart, Assistant Attorneys General, St. Paul, MN, for respondent Minnesota Department of Transportation.
Considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, Presiding Judge, HUDSON, Judge, and FORSBERG, Judge.[*]
*504 OPINION
HUDSON, Judge.
Appellant Northern States Power, now known as Xcel Energy, challenges the district court's dismissal of its writ of mandamus. Xcel Energy argues the district court erred by holding that (1) there is no factual dispute in this matter; (2) Xcel Energy's claim is premature and speculative; and (3) Xcel Energy has an adequate legal remedy. Appellant also argues that the district court improperly considered evidence outside the four corners of Xcel Energy's verified petition. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
The Hiawatha Light Rail Transit project (LRT) is an 11.6-mile mass-transit system that will connect downtown Minneapolis to the Minneapolis/St. Paul International Airport and the Mall of America. Respondent Minnesota Department of Transportation (MNDoT) is overseeing the design and construction of the light-rail line, and co-respondent Minnesota Metropolitan Council (Met Council) will own and operate the transit system once it is operational.
LRT's current route through downtown Minneapolis takes the train down Fifth Street and in close proximity to the underground electrical substation owned by Xcel Energy.[1] The substation is comprised of four massive power transformers, each of which weighs 120 tons and is four stories tall. The transformers are housed in a subsurface vault under the plaza in front of Xcel Energy's office complex at Fifth Street and Nicollet Avenue. Xcel Energy operates this facility pursuant to a franchise agreement with the City of Minneapolis. The franchise agreement states that in exchange for an annual $18 million franchise fee, Xcel Energy has the right to use the city's "streets, alleys and public grounds" in order to distribute power in Minneapolis.
The substation is the source of 80% of downtown Minneapolis's energy. The transformers are designed in such a way that it would take a simultaneous failure of three transformers before there was a disruption in the downtown area's power supply. The roughly 1,000 similar transformers in service elsewhere enjoy a one percent failure rate. Although the transformers in Minneapolis have never needed to be replaced, statistical failure rates indicate that one transformer will need to be replaced every 25 years. Three of Xcel Energy's transformers were installed in the 1960's, and the fourth was put in place in the mid-1980's.
Replacing one of the transformers requires Xcel Energy to obtain a city permit to close Fifth Street so that it can be torn up in order to access the transformers. Because failed transformers cannot be repaired in place, two 300-ton capacity cranes must then be positioned on Fifth Street to lift the transformer out. With the construction of LRT, Fifth Street would still need to be closed off and torn up, but Xcel Energy would now need to position the two 300-ton capacity cranes on the LRT tracks in order to access the transformers. In addition, once the cranes are in place, the crane booms must be extended over the transformer vault to extricate the transformers; thus LRT's poles and overhead wires must be removed. The entire process would take approximately two months. Xcel Energy maintains that LRT's installation on Fifth Street will prevent the utility from setting up the equipment needed to access and *505 replace their transformers. Without the Met Council's or MNDoT's permission to shut down train service and remove the train equipment from Fifth Street, Xcel Energy claims it could not access the transformers to perform these time-consuming and critical projects. Therefore, Xcel Energy argues, power supply dependability is seriously compromised, and its substation is rendered essentially worthless.
In 1999, the parties began trying to negotiate an agreement to ensure the utility's reasonable access to its substation. These initial discussions focused on moving the substation itself; however, the parties were unable to agree on their respective financial responsibilities for such an endeavor. The Met Council ultimately requested federal funding for the LRT initiative, but it did not seek funds to help offset the cost of moving the substation. Xcel Energy then refused to move its equipment without a guarantee of reimbursement. Xcel Energy brought suit against MNDoT, the Met Council, and the Federal Transportation Agency (FTA) in federal district court, seeking compensation for the cost of relocating its substation. However, in 2002, all three defendants were granted summary judgment.
Xcel Energy then filed a verified petition for alternative writ of mandamus in Hennepin County District Court seeking to compel MNDoT and Met Council to initiate inverse-condemnation procedures, arguing that the ability to access its substation is a property right, and that respondents' refusal to guarantee access renders the substation worthless. In lieu of an answer, the Met Council and MNDoT moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim.
In granting respondents' motion to dismiss, the district court concluded that (1) Xcel Energy did not have a right to unfettered access to its property; (2) the LRT project did not change the ultimate fact that in order to access its equipment, Xcel Energy would still need to acquire a permit from the city, and Xcel Energy had produced no facts to suggest the construction of the light-rail line would make the acquisition of this permit any more difficult; (3) injunctive relief provided Xcel Energy with an adequate legal remedy; and (4) Xcel Energy's petition was premature and speculative because the overhead wires are removable and the track beds have been designed to withstand the increased loads of the cranesthus Xcel Energy has reasonable access. This appeal follows.
ISSUES
I. Did the district court err when it declined to apply the legal standard governing summary judgment to respondent's rule 12 motion when it accepted and considered extrinsic evidence submitted by the Met Council?
II. Did the district court err by ruling that the construction of the light rail transit system does not unreasonably restrict appellant's access to its underground substation?
III. Did the district court err by ruling that appellant had an adequate remedy at law and its petition was premature and speculative?
ANALYSIS
I
Following Xcel Energy's filing of the petition for mandamus, MNDoT and Met Council moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim pursuant to Minn. R. Civ. P. 12.02(e). The district court, however, accepted extrinsic evidence submitted by Met Council, including an affidavit from *506 the LRT project director, Edward Hunter, which stated that the contractors had been directed to provide removable supports for the overhead wires in order to accommodate substation access. Thus, the first issue we address is whether the district court erred by considering evidence outside the four corners of Xcel Energy's petition for mandamus. Xcel Energy argues that the district court committed reversible error by considering extrinsic evidence submitted by respondents. In particular, Xcel Energy claims the district court impermissibly relied on the Hunter affidavit to reach its conclusion that LRT's overhead wires and supporting structures are removable, and that the track beds can support the cranes and other equipment necessary for repairing the transformers. At a minimum, Xcel Energy argues that, upon accepting the Hunter affidavit, the district court should have treated the rule 12 motion as a summary judgment motion.
On a motion to dismiss, the only question before the court is whether the petition states a legally sufficient claim for relief. Elzie v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 298 N.W.2d 29, 32 (Minn.1980). When deciding whether to grant a motion to dismiss pursuant to Minn. R. Civ. P. 12.02(e), the district court is only to consider the evidence alleged in the petition. In re Milk Indirect Purchaser Antitrust Litig., 588 N.W.2d 772, 775 (Minn.App.1999). A claim prevails against a motion to dismiss if it is possible on any evidence that is consistent with the plaintiff's theory to grant relief. Geldert v. Am. Nat'l Bank, 506 N.W.2d 22, 25 (Minn.App.1993). And the allegations contained in the pleading must be considered as true and viewed in the light most favorable to the pleader. N. Star Legal Found v. Honeywell Project, 355 N.W.2d 186, 188 (Minn.App.1984), review denied (Minn. Jan 2, 1985). Significant to our analysis here, rule 12.02 requires the court to regard a motion to dismiss as a summary judgment request when matters outside the pleadings are presented to and not excluded by the court. Minn. R. Civ. P. 12.02.
Here, as Xcel Energy accurately notes, the district court considered extrinsic evidence submitted by respondents. Among other evidence, the district court considered the affidavit of MNDoT's expert, Edward Hunter. Hunter's affidavit directly contradicts Xcel Energy's claim that LRT's poles and wires are not removable, and that therefore the location of LRT's poles, wires and tracks significantly impedes Xcel Energy's access to the downtown substation. We conclude that by considering evidence not found within Xcel Energy's petition, the district court changed this proceeding from a motion to dismiss under rule 12, to a request for summary judgment pursuant to rule 56. Thus, the district court erred by not applying the summary judgment standard. Therefore, on appeal, we will review the district court's determination under the summary judgment standard. Peoples State Bank Truman v. Triplett, 633 N.W.2d 533, 537 (Minn.App.2001), review denied (Minn. Oct 16, 2001).
II
On an appeal from summary judgment, we ask two questions: (1) whether there are any genuine issues of material fact, and (2) whether the district court erred in its application of the law. State by Cooper v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2, 4 (Minn.1990).
A motion for summary judgment shall be granted when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that *507 either party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. On appeal, the reviewing court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the party against whom judgment was granted.
Fabio v. Bellomo, 504 N.W.2d 758, 761 (Minn.1993) (citation omitted). A genuine issue of material fact exists when the nonmoving party presents evidence that creates a doubt as to a factual issue that is "probative with respect to an essential element of the nonmoving party's case to permit reasonable persons to draw different conclusions." DLH, Inc. v. Russ, 566 N.W.2d 60, 71 (Minn.1997).
Mandamus is an extraordinary remedy that should only be awarded
upon a showing that a party has suffered harm that is direct, substantial and peculiar * * * in that it differs markedly from the damages suffered by the public at large.
Vern Reynolds Constr., Inc. v. City of Champlin, 539 N.W.2d 614, 617 (Minn. App.1995) (quotation omitted), review denied (Minn. Dec. 20, 1995). Mandamus is available only to compel a duty clearly required by law. Zaluckyj v. Rice Creek Watershed Dist., 639 N.W.2d 70, 74 (Minn. App.2002), review denied (Minn. Apr. 16, 2002). It is, however, the proper vehicle to assert for a claim of inverse condemnation. Vern Reynolds, 539 N.W.2d at 616. To obtain mandamus relief the petitioner must show
(1) the failure of an official duty clearly imposed by law; (2) a public wrong specifically injurious to petitioner; and (3) no other adequate specific legal remedy.
Walther v. Lundberg, 654 N.W.2d 694, 697 (Minn.App.2002).
At the heart of this controversy is Xcel Energy's contention that LRT's installation on Fifth Street will deny Xcel Energy reasonable access to its substation, rendering it worthless. Therefore, Xcel Energy claims, the construction of LRT represents a taking entitling the utility to just compensation. As the district court properly found, Xcel Energy has a right to access its underground substation in a reasonable, convenient manner and government actions that unreasonably interfere with this right constitute a taking. The difficult question presented on appeal here, however, is what constitutes "reasonable access" to this very unique property? Or, put another way: does the installation of LRT's poles, wires, and track beds so restrict the right of access to Xcel Energy's substation as to require compensation under the Minnesota Constitution?
A. Eminent Domain / Taking
The Minnesota Constitution requires the government to pay a property owner just compensation when the government performs an act that, although in the public good, takes, damages or destroys private property. Minn. Const. art. I, § 13. A claim for inverse condemnation is appropriate when a government entity appropriates the land without formally exercising its power of eminent domain. Vern Reynolds, 539 N.W.2d at 616.
But not every annoyance and inconvenience with the use and enjoyment of one's property that is caused by a government action requires compensation. Alevizos v. Metro. Airports Comm'n of Minneapolis & St. Paul, 298 Minn. 471, 486-87, 216 N.W.2d 651, 662 (1974). Any statement of what constitutes property is "nebulous at best," and not every economic or social advantage is a property right that must be compensated when it is taken. Id. at 485, 216 N.W.2d at 661.
We also note, however, to be a taking that requires compensation under the Minnesota constitution, the taking need not be a taking in a strictly physical *508 sense. Johnson v. City of Plymouth, 263 N.W.2d 603, 605 (Minn.1978). A constitutional taking can also arise out of interference with the ownership, possession or enjoyment of the property. Id. Property owners have a right of reasonable, convenient and suitable access to the public streets that abut their property. County of Anoka v. Esmailzadeh, 498 N.W.2d 58, 60 (Minn.App.1993), review denied (Minn. May 28, 1993); Hendrickson v. State, 267 Minn. 436, 446, 127 N.W.2d 165, 173 (1964).
B. Reasonable Access
What constitutes reasonable access depends on the nature of the property itself. Johnson, 263 N.W.2d at 605. Clearly, this case involves a very unique factual situation. Xcel Energy's characterization of its substation as a "special use property" is quite apt, making this case very different from the typical access dispute. For example, this controversy does not involve the mere re-routing of a road or other traffic control device that makes access to a particular piece of property more difficult. See Id. (a property owner was not entitled to compensation despite the fact that a city's decision to install curbs and gutters along on the streets abutting the owner's business restricted the owner's access to his property because the city's project did not substantially diminish access to the property); County of Anoka v. Blaine Bldg. Corp., 566 N.W.2d 331, 336 (Minn.1997) (holding loss of traffic access to property from one side of the highway caused by the construction of a highway median does not constitute a taking requiring compensation where the corporation still enjoyed reasonable access to its business from the other side of the road). By contrast, here we are presented with a complex government mass-transit project that may or may not prevent reasonable access to a massive power-distribution facility. There are few cases in Minnesota, or elsewhere, that present similar facts.
We do, however, find the supreme court's decision in Alevizos helpful in analyzing this case. In Alevizos, property owners in south Minneapolis, whose property was situated under or near the Minneapolis-St. Paul Airport's take-off and landing flight paths, filed a petition for a writ of mandamus claiming that the operation of the airport interfered with their use and enjoyment of their property "to such an extent as to amount to a taking." Alevizos, 298 Minn. at 473-75, 216 N.W.2d at 655-56. The district court dismissed the petition concluding that a physical trespass had not taken place. Id. at 477, 216 N.W.2d at 657. The supreme court held that although not every inconvenience entitles a property owner to relief, relief should be granted where the property owner could show
a direct and substantial invasion of his property rights of such a magnitude he is deprived of the practical enjoyment of the property and that such invasion results in a definite and measurable diminution of the market value of the property. To justify an award of damages it must be proved that these invasions of property rights are not of an occasional nature, but are repeated and aggravated, and that there is a reasonable probability that they will be continued in the future. We recognize that with the test we have prescribed there may well be a dispute as to the property, if any, that is to be included in the inverse condemnation proceedings.
Id. at 487-88, 216 N.W.2d at 662. The Alevizos court remanded the matter to determine whether facts existed to show the airport had indeed adversely affected the plaintiffs' land. Id. at 488, 216 N.W.2d at 663.
*509 California has recently dealt with similar issues in addressing the effects of the construction of a light-rail line in the Los Angeles area. Although not controlling, these cases also aid our analysis here. In Perrin v. Los Angeles County Transp. Comm'n, 42 Cal.App.4th 1807, 50 Cal. Rptr.2d 488, 489 (1996), a property owner brought an inverse condemnation claim alleging that the installation of a light-rail line in front of her business unreasonably blocked access to her property and diminished the property's value. The train eliminated parking on the side of the street where the property was located, and the installation of a guard rail and concrete divider made it more difficult for pedestrians to cross the street. Id. at 489-90. Although the train made access more inconvenient, because access had not been denied altogether, the California court held that the train did not substantially impair access to the property. Id. at 492-93, see also Brumer v. Los Angeles County Metro. Transp. Auth., 36 Cal.App.4th 1738, 43 Cal.Rptr.2d 314, 322 (1995) (construction of light rail train that eliminates vehicles' ability to pass and park directly in front of the property was not a substantial impairment because facts did not demonstrate customers' access would actually be diminished). Finally, in Lane v. San Diego Elec. Ry. Co., 208 Cal. 29, 31-35, 280 P. 109 (Cal.1929), the California Supreme Court held that installation of a train turn-around loop placing the train's tracks across a business's driveway constituted a substantial impairment.
As the district court correctly found, Xcel Energy has a right to reasonable access to its Fifth Street substation. To establish a taking, the court in Alevizos required a direct and substantial invasion of property rights, resulting in a measurable diminution of market value of the property. Alevizos, 298 Minn. at 487, 216 N.W.2d at 662. Xcel Energy has arguably satisfied this test. Here, Xcel Energy alleged facts in its petition that could prove LRT construction and installation substantially impairs Xcel Energy's access to its property. Specifically, Xcel Energy has presented evidence that could lead a fact finder to conclude that LRT's poles, wires and tracks present a physical barrier to accessing the substation, resulting in a significant diminution of market value to this "special use" property.
Respondents claim, however, that LRT's wires, tracks and poles do not impose an unreasonable impediment because LRT has been designed so the poles and wires on Fifth Street can be removed to allow access to the substation. Likewise, respondents claim that the track beds have been constructed to sustain the weight of the cranes necessary to extricate a damaged transformer. But Xcel Energy fiercely denies this claim.
Xcel Energy notes that the Hunter affidavit is the basis for respondents' claim that the wires are removable and the track beds are properly reinforced. That affidavit, however, was improperly considered by the district court in the context of respondents' rule 12 motion. But even on its merits, Xcel notes that the affidavit states that the LRT track bed could be designed to withstand the weight of the cranes; nothing in the recordaccording to Xcel Energysuggests that the LRT track bed has been so constructed. Thus, Xcel Energy continues to maintain that LRT's wires and track beds are not removable and indeed create a physical barricade preventing Xcel Energy's access to its substation.
Respondents also claim that LRT's presence on Fifth Street does not unreasonably block access to Xcel Energy's property, because removing or repairing a transformer has always been an incredibly *510 challenging undertaking that requires the appropriate permits from the City of Minneapolis. In other words, according to respondents, nothing has changed; Xcel Energy must still get a permit from the City of Minneapolis to tear up Fifth Street. While this is true, respondents' position appears to assume that LRT's poles and wires are removable and thus Xcel Energy has no significant additional impediment to accessing its substation as a result of LRT. Again, this assumption is hotly disputed by Xcel Energy.
In our view, the parties' insistence on their respective positions illustrates the materiality of the factual disputethat is: whether the construction and installation of LRT denies Xcel Energy's reasonable access to its downtown substation. Because under rule 56, all facts must be viewed in a light most favorable to Xcel Energy, on this record, we conclude that Xcel Energy has produced sufficient facts in its petition to present a material factual dispute as to the question of whether Xcel Energy has been denied reasonable access to its property. This factual dispute can only be answered in trial, and thus the district court erred in dismissing Xcel Energy's mandamus petition.
III
Xcel Energy also challenges the district court's conclusion that Xcel Energy has an adequate legal remedy. The district court concluded that should respondents deny Xcel Energy access to its substation at some future date, Xcel Energy could seek injunctive relief. As previously stated, mandamus is an extraordinary remedy and is only to be granted where the party seeking mandamus has no other legal remedy. Walther, 654 N.W.2d at 697.
Xcel Energy claims that the critical nature of its downtown substation makes injunctive relief impracticable because any impediment in its ability to access the transformers in a timely fashion creates a risk to the downtown's power supply. Xcel Energy asserts that, if forced to ask for MNDoT's or the Met Council's permission or seek injunctive relief, critical time in replacing a damaged transformer would be lost. Xcel Energy also argues that it faces a literal, physical barrier to its substation; not just a procedural/administrative one.
Xcel Energy's argument has merit. It is true, Xcel Energy does not have an unfettered right to access the substation any time it wants, and it must seek a permit from the City of Minneapolis in order to close the city's street to repair the transformers. But it is unreasonable to require Xcel Energy to first seek permission from respondents to access its property and be denied before granting Xcel Energy relief. A property owner is entitled to seek mandamus if it becomes obvious that the state's proposed plans will cause a future, substantial loss of access to his or her property. See Hendrickson v. State by Mondale, 267 Minn. 436, 127 N.W.2d 165 (1964) (holding that mandamus may be appropriate if highway construction plans show that access to a property will be limited to such an extent that there was no longer reasonably convenient and suitable access to the property).
Similarly the district court erred in concluding Xcel Energy's claim was premature and speculative. Writs of mandamus are to be issued only when the government actions have inflicted actual harm on the property and not on speculative possible future harms. Thomsen v. State by Head, 284 Minn. 468, 472, 170 N.W.2d 575, 578-79 (1969). Here, like other cases where the appellate courts have found actual-present harm done to a property owner's interests, Xcel Energy *511 has suffered real, actual harm by virtue of the construction and installation of LRT. LRT is more than a proposed plan. The tracks are in and the poles and wires will soon be installed. It appearsviewing the facts in a light most favorable to Xcel Energythat the LRT wires are not removable and the tracks cannot withstand the weight of the cranes necessary to repair a damaged transformer. Thus, Xcel Energy has already suffered a real, substantial loss of access to its property. The Minnesota Supreme Court has held that mandamus was appropriate where the government designed and constructed an interstate in such a way that access to a grocery store was no longer accessible except via a "very circuitous route." Johnson Bros. Grocery Inc. v. State Dept. of Highways, 304 Minn. 75, 77-78, 229 N.W.2d 504, 505 (1975). Likewise in County of Anoka v. Esmailzadeh, the court held that a taking occurred where a highway construction made it nearly impossible to access the plaintiff's business. Esmailzadeh, 498 N.W.2d at 61-62. Similarly here, respondents have designed LRT in such a way that it creates a physical barrier to Xcel Energy's property. Just as we would not require a store owner to wait until customers were actually thwarted in their attempts to reach a store before seeking relief, it is unreasonable to expect Xcel Energy to wait until its substations have failed and the utility is unable to access them for extrication before we determine whether its right of access has in fact been unreasonably denied.
DECISION
Because the record demonstrates that there are material facts in dispute as to whether the installation of LRT along Fifth Street in downtown Minneapolis unreasonably denies Xcel Energy access to its property, and because the district court erred in finding that Xcel Energy's claim was premature and that Xcel Energy had an adequate legal remedy, we reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 10.
[1]  The track bed on Fifth Street was constructed during the spring and summer of 2002. The rail and overhead catenary (power) wires are presently being installed.

=== CASE 9739098 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:44.128593+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring.
In this case the jury, after convicting appellant of two counts of murder and two counts of felony murder and hearing the additional evidence at the sentencing hearing, recommended life for codefendant Nicksich but was unable to render a penalty recommendations as to appellant Roche, Jr. When there is no such penalty recommendation by the fury, the statute requires the court to "discharge the jury and proceed as if the hearing had been to the court alone." LC. 85-50-2-9(f). I do not agree with the majority that this proscription requires that "no meaning" be given to the failure to make a recommendation. The quandary of the jury represents at least the sentiment of one conscientious juror, who survived voir dire, who heard the shocking evidence of sudden injury and death, who voted for conviction, and finally whose conscience could not support imposition of the death penalty. In my opinion, that sentiment cannot rationally be rejected as a mitigating circumstance as falling within the catch-all, "I.C. 85-50-2-9(C)(8) Any other cireumstances appropriate for consideration." The weight of it is not great, falling I would say in the low range. I agree, however, that the mitigation claims that appellant acted under the domination of Niksich and that appellant was less culpable than Niksich are properly rejected as insufficiently supported.
Here, the trial judge found to exist the mitigator of no significant history of prior criminal conduct. This mitigator is in this case in the low range. Appellant was convicted of burglary in 1982 at age 20, and received a prison sentence of ten years. He was released on parole in March 1989, and committed these offenses fourteen months later in May 1991. According to his own testimony at trial, after release he was conducting three or four drug sales a week from his home, used alcohol and various drugs to excess, and possessed several guns, all in violation of his parole.
The trial court also concluded that appellant's traumatic childhood and resulting psychiatric treatment during puberty together with his addiction to drugs and alcohol constituted a mitigating circumstance. I agree and accord it weight in the middle range.
Here, these three mitigators must be weighed against the two aggravators found to exist by the trial court, namely the intentional killing during a robbery, and the double killing in the episode. I.C. 35-50-2-9(b)(1) and (b)(8). This type of double killing where the intent to kill is present is of the highest range. I find both aggravators to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, the total value of the three mitigating circumstances to be outweighed by it, and the death penalty appropriate.
KRAHULIK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739099 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:46.163504+00 ===

JUSTICE RIZZI delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial, defendant, Felix Stuckey, Jr., was convicted of attempted murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4) and aggravated criminal sexual assault (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 12— 14). Defendant Stuckey was sentenced to a term of 60 years’ imprisonment in the Illinois Department of Corrections. Defendant Bruce Davis received a bench trial and was found guilty of attempted murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4) and aggravated battery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 12 — 4). Defendant Davis was sentenced to a term of 40 years’ imprisonment in the Illinois Department of Corrections. The following issues are before this court for review: (1) whether the trial court erred when it ruled that the police had probable cause to arrest defendant Davis; (2) whether defendants were denied effective assistance of counsel and a speedy trial because defense counsel failed to move for a speedy trial discharge pursuant to the sixth amendment of the United States Constitution, article I, section 8, of the Illinois Constitution, and the Speedy Trial Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 103 — 5(a)), or, in the alternative, if we find for the State on this issue, whether the trial court’s ruling was against the manifest weight of the evidence giving defendants the right to obtain specific performance of an alleged pretrial agreement; (3) whether the cumulative impact of prosecutorial comments during closing arguments violated defendants’ rights to a fair trial and due process of law guaranteed by the sixth and fourteenth amendments of the United States Constitution; (4) whether defendants were proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt; and (5) whether the trial court abused its discretion when it sentenced defendants Stuckey and Davis to 60 years’ and 40 years’ incarceration, respectively. We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand. On March 30, 1986, at 1:30 a.m., Mary Merrill was awake waiting for her daughters to return home. Upon hearing dogs barking, she looked through the window on her back door and observed a young girl lying on the ground. Merrill informed the police of the girl’s presence in her yard and requested their assistance. Officer Kevin Barry and his partner drove to Merrill’s home in response to the report. The police found the victim in the yard at 10416 South Martin Luther King Drive in Chicago, Illinois. The victim was identified as T.S. T.S. told Officer Barry that she had been raped by Felix Stuckey. T.S. was 14 years of age at the time of this incident, and she had run away from home a few weeks prior to her assault. T.S. was taken to Roseland Community Hospital and was later transferred to Cook County Hospital around 1 p.m. on March 30, 1986. At that time, T.S. was almost comatose. There was blood in her posterior vagina although she was not menstruating. In addition, 50% of the skin on the right side of her face, and 70% of the skin on the left side of her face, had been avulsed revealing her orbit bone, her facial muscles, and the muscles surrounding her right eye. The victim also had abrasions on her right shoulder, right arm, buttocks, and heels. In addition, the top of her right ear was missing, her eyes were swollen shut, and she was barely able to breathe because her nose and neck were swollen. T.S. was placed on a respirator to aid her breathing. She was also given several skin grafts, and was required to wear a “jobst stocking” to help prevent her skin from scarring. T.S. was treated in Cook County Hospital’s burn unit because most of her injuries were similar in nature to third degree burns. The victim’s mother, W.S., visited her daughter at Cook County Hospital. During this visit W.S. asked T.S. who hurt her. W.S. testified that T.S. responded: “James, Felix and Bruno.” T.S. was referring to James Stuckey, defendant Felix Stuckey, and defendant Bruce Davis. W.S. told the police about this conversation, and she later testified that her daughter’s account of the crime and identification of defendants remained “consistent.” Officer Barry searched the area of the crime for evidence. Officer Barry found a trail of blood which ran down the alley from 104th Street north to 103rd Street, with a pool of blood and a beige jacket lying at the end of the trail. Officer Barry also discovered human hair, beads, two sweaters, a pair of blue jeans, and a pair of red and white striped panties scattered on the pavement between 10332 and 10306 South Calumet Avenue. Officer Stephen Sharp drove to 109th Street and South Michigan Avenue, where he met two witnesses, Alana White and Yolanda Harrington. Harrington and White were prostitutes who worked in the same geographical area as the victim. White and Harrington were then taken to the police station for questioning. During the course of the interview, the officers discovered that defendant Stuckey was Harrington’s “man.” In addition, Harrington told Officer Thomas Sheehan that “Bruno” was also known as Bruce Davis, and that defendant Davis was “an associate of her man, Felix, and his brother, James.” Harrington gave the police defendant Stuckey’s name and address. On the morning of March 31, 1986, the police went to 147 West 103rd Street and arrested defendant Stuckey. Afterwards, Harrington told the police that defendant Stuckey had nothing to do with the victim’s assault, and that defendant Davis was involved. Harrington gave the police defendant Davis’ address. The police subsequently arrested defendant Davis without a warrant on March 31, 1986, at 119th Street and South Edbrooke. Defendants were photographed and fingerprinted at the police station subsequent to their arrests. T.S. later identified defendants from said photographs. James Stuckey was never apprehended. Assistant State’s Attorney Kevin Horan visited T.S. at Cook County Hospital. Assistant State’s Attorney Horan showed T.S. photographs of defendant Stuckey, James Stuckey, Philip Conley, and defendant Davis. T.S. identified all of these men as her assailants. Philip Conley and defendants were indicted. The defense made three pretrial motions. First, defendant Davis made a motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence in the form of his photograph because the police failed to obtain search and arrest warrants. During the hearing on the motion, the court heard testimony from defendant Davis, his brother and the arresting officers. Officer Thomas Sheehan testified that upon arriving at 119th and South Edbrooke, he went to the front door while another officer went to the rear of the house. Officer Sheehan told the court that two men answered the front door, and that he identified himself as a police officer. Officer Sheehan testified that after he identified himself, he asked to speak to “Bruno,” and that he was told by an unidentified male that “Bruno” was asleep in the basement. Officer Sheehan stated that he subsequently left the front door and walked to the rear of the property. Officer Sheehan testified that he arrested defendant Davis after defendant Davis exited the rear door of the house. Officer Sheehan admitted that he did not know of the existence of a search warrant for the home, or a warrant for Davis’ arrest. Defendant Davis testified that he was awakened and arrested while he was in his bedroom. Similarly, Terrell Davis, defendant Davis’ brother, testified that he was sitting on his couch in his home when two plainclothes police officers entered his house. Terrell stated that he did not invite the officers inside. The trial court found that defendant Davis’ arrest was proper because the police had probable cause to arrest him. The trial judge stated: “[T]he police certainly had probable cause and a clear duty to look to [defendant Davis,] who had been accused by the victim and the witnesses ***. * * * As to Davis, they clearly had probable cause to arrest him. And as to the warrant question, they had no warrant for Davis, but either they were admitted into the house, which is what I might conclude from the brother’s testimony, because he says they suddenly appeared there as far as he knows, or they arrested him in the back yard ***. Either way police were justified in what they did.” The trial court denied defendant Davis’ motion to quash and suppress. In addition, defendants moved to dismiss the indictments on the basis that they relied upon an agreement with the State, and the State subsequently breached said agreement. Defendant Davis’ attorney argued that when the State experienced difficulty preparing its witnesses for trial, the State asked defendants to “defer from demanding trial” and to “go by agreement” in order to allow it sufficient time to obtain samples of bodily fluids from defendants and to conduct laboratory tests upon the specimens. Defendant Davis’ counsel maintained that the State agreed to dismiss its case against defendants, nolle prosequi in return for defendants’ reservation of rights to object to the State’s continuances. On February 9, 1987, the State nol-prossed Philip Conley’s charges, but continued its prosecution of defendants. Defendants also moved to bar testimony relating to photographs of them which T.S. viewed at Cook County Hospital. Defendants argued that the State failed to inform them that T.S. had previously identified them in the photographs shown to her while she was hospitalized. Defendants also argued that the State did not accurately inform them of the identity of the attorneys and detectives involved in the photo identification session, and that the State failed to specify the manner in which the process was conducted. Testimony relating to the photographs was later admitted. At trial, T.S. testified that on the night of March 29, 1986, she and James Stuckey were “looking for a place to prostitute.” T.S. stated that she earned $120 from prostitution, and that she kept $60 in her boot and gave $60 to James Stuckey. T.S. further testified that she was later approached on the street by James Stuckey and defendants on that same night. T.S. maintained that the three men forced her into a car and drove to defendant Stuckey’s residence. T.S. then stated that James Stuckey and defendant Stuckey exited the car, leaving her in the car with defendant Davis. T.S. testified that defendant Davis made her engage in sexual intercourse with him without her consent. T.S. later stated on cross-examination that although she did not agree to have intercourse with defendant Davis, he did not force her to have sex, and that he did not beat her or threaten her before they had intercourse. T.S. further testified that defendant Stuckey and James Stuckey returned to the car and drove everyone to the park. T.S. stated that upon arriving at the park, defendant Stuckey held a gun in her face and ordered her to exit the car, and she complied. The victim further stated that defendant Stuckey forced her to remove her clothes, that he touched her vagina with his penis, and that defendant Davis again made her engage in sexual intercourse with him without her consent. T.S. stated on cross-examination that defendant Davis did not force her to have sex, and that defendant Davis did not threaten her or beat her prior to intercourse. T.S. also admitted that she did not resist defendant Davis’ sexual advances. T.S. testified that after defendants sexually assaulted her, they removed a rope from the trunk of the car, and tied one end of the rope around her body and hands. She recalled that defendants attached the opposite end of the rope to the back of the car. T.S. testified that defendants then got back into the car, drove the car forward and dragged her along the pavement behind the automobile. T.S. testified that defendants stopped the car a few minutes later whereupon defendant Davis got out of the car and untied her. T.S. stated that he then got back in the car and left her lying in the street. T.S. testified that she went to two houses for help, and that the police found her and sent her to the hospital. Dr. Demetra Soter also testified on behalf of the State. Dr. Soter examined the victim upon her admission to Cook County Hospital. Dr. Soter testified as to the nature of T.S.’ injuries. Dr. Soter opined that T.S.’ injuries were consistent with being dragged along a concrete road. Dr. Soter further stated that the act of someone forcing his penis into T.S.’ vagina could account for the presence of blood in her vagina. Phillip Conley testified on behalf of defendant Stuckey, and Dr. Rogelio Rodriguez testified on behalf of both defendants. Dr. Rodriguez, a psychology intern at Cook County Hospital, interviewed T.S. daily for more than six weeks. Dr. Rodriguez stated that T.S. suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome and suicidal ideation. Dr. Rodriguez testified that on April 18, 1986, T.S. told him that defendants did not harm her. Dr. Rodriguez, however, admitted on cross-examination that he observed that T.S. appeared frightened and confused when she stated that she wasn’t sure that she had correctly identified her assailants. Dr. Rodriguez further admitted that on April 14, 1986, T.S. told him that she was nervous because James Stuckey had not been apprehended, and she feared that he would return and attack her in the hospital during hospital visiting hours. T.S. admitted on redirect that she lied to Rodriguez when she told him that she did not know the identity of the persons in the pictures because she wanted him to leave her alone. T.S. identified both defendants in court. Next, Phillip Conley testified that James Stuckey picked him up in a car at 10:30 p.m. on the night of March 30, 1986, and that T.S. was in the car when James picked him up. According to Conley, the three then drove to 103rd and South Michigan Avenue, where T.S. got out of the car and entered another automobile. Conley stated that he and James then went to the Famous Lounge bar on 129th and South Michigan Avenue, and that they remained there until closing time. Conley testified that after the bar closed, he and James went to the White Castle restaurant at 111th and South State Streets where they saw defendant Davis. Conley maintained that he and James then returned to his house. Conley said that he did not see defendant Stuckey at all on that night. Defendants made several objections during the State’s closing argument. First, defendants objected to the State’s statement that T.S. had “one foot in the grave,” and that “she was obviously within inches from dying.” Second, the defense objected to the prosecutor’s statement that “[W.S.] *** maintained the same consistent story *** from start to finish.” Next, defendants objected to the State’s statement of its theory of defendants’ motive for attacking T.S. The prosecutor characterized T.S. as a runaway who James Stuckey made “work on the street.” The prosecutor further stated that T.S.: “[Mjakes a big mistake she keeps some of the money and James Stuckey doesn’t know initially they wanted her to prostitute some more, this time he’s got this friend, Bruno Davis, and his friend Felix Stuckey, they go to Felix Stuckey’s car, Bruno Davis decides he wants some sex and ain’t going to pay for it, he takes [T.S.] in the back seat and have sex against her will and takes her clothes off, he finds the sixty dollars ($60.00) that’s missing ***. When James Stuckey and Felix Stuckey come out of Felix Stuckey’s house, he tells them about the sixty dollars, ($60.00), they got to teach her a lesson, not only will this ruin her as far as a prostitute but its going to ruin James Stuckey’s other prostitutes, what are they going to do, a prostitute can keep money from James and get away with it, they got to teach her a lesson. What did they do, they *** rape her, they are not satisfied, she’s not knocking under *** and she tells these people there is no way I am not going to do what you want, and what happens, she gets tied up and she gets dragged down the street He Hs * ff Defendants also found the prosecutor’s statement, “I think that everything that I am about to say is supported by the evidence” objectionable. Similarly, defendants objected to the State’s explanation of its theory as to why T.S. recanted her identification of defendants, and why Dr. Rodriguez didn’t question her confession. The prosecutor said: “Mr. Rodriguez didn’t know that she knew Felix Stuckey for a year, Mr. Rodriguez didn’t have the opportunity to say what do you mean you are unsure you know the guy, how could you be unsure ***.” In addition, defendants objected to the prosecutor’s statement that “[T.S.] will never be able to walk into a restaurant and order up a meal and not have the entire restaurant look at her, never again, thanks to [defendant Stuckey].” The defense also objected to the State’s comment upon defendant Davis’ appearance. The prosecutor said: “[T.S.’] blood is on his feet and it’s on his conscience he knows he did it, he knows that he was the one that raped her as he sits here now in that suit and tie, clean shaven with a nice haircut.” Finally, defendants objected to the State’s statement during its rebuttal argument that T.S. was “engaged in the kind of activity that would shock most of us.” After closing arguments, the jury found defendant Stuckey guilty of attempted murder, aggravated criminal sexual assault, and aggravated battery. Defendant Davis was convicted of attempted murder and aggravated battery. First, defendant Davis alleges that he is entitled to a new trial because the trial court erred when it denied his motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence obtained therefrom, and ruled that the police had probable cause to arrest him without a warrant.  The State maintains that the quantum of information known by the police at the time of defendant’s arrest was more than sufficient to establish probable cause where the victim’s mother testified that the victim identified defendant as one of the offenders immediately after the assault, and where Yolanda Harrington gave the police defendant’s name and address. We agree. “Probable cause to arrest exists where the police have knowledge of facts which would lead a reasonable person to believe a crime has been committed by the person arrested.” (People v. Erby (1991), 213 Ill. App. 3d 657, 664, 572 N.E.2d 345, 349.) When making a warrant-less arrest, “an officer ‘may rely upon information received through an informant *** so long as the informant’s statement is reasonably corroborated by other matters within the officer’s knowledge.’ ” (Illinois v. Gates (1983), 462 U.S. 213, 242, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527, 550, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 2334, quoting Jones v. United States (1960), 362 U.S. 257, 269, 4 L. Ed. 2d 697, 707, 80 S. Ct. 725, 735.) The inquiry which should be made by a trial court in determining if there was probable cause for a warrantless arrest, is whether a reasonable person in the police officer’s position would have believed that a crime had been committed. (People v. Adams (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 387, 398, 546 N.E.2d 561, 566.) “If the trial court finds that a warrantless arrest was based on probable cause, the arrest is deemed lawful, and evidence obtained during a warrantless search incident to that arrest is admissible to prove defendant’s guilt.” (People v. Tisler (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 226, 237, 469 N.E.2d 147, 153.) The decision of a trial court on a motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence will not be disturbed by a reviewing court unless that finding is manifestly erroneous. People v. Foskey (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 66, 76, 554 N.E.2d 192, 197; People v. Redd (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 252, 268, 553 N.E.2d 316, 322. In the present case, we find that there was probable cause for defendant Davis’ arrest. First, the circumstances here were sufficient to lead a reasonable person to believe that a crime had been committed by defendant Davis. Officer Sheehan’s reliance upon the information he received from Harrington was proper because it was reasonably corroborated by other matters within his knowledge. Sheehan knew that T.S. had been severely injured, and that Harrington and T.S. worked as prostitutes in the same geographical area.  Moreover, defendant Davis has failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling on his motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence was manifestly erroneous. It is the function of the trial court to weigh evidence and to determine the witnesses’ credibility during a hearing on a motion to quash and suppress. (People v. Redd (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 252, 268, 553 N.E.2d 316, 322.) The trial court heard the testimony of Officer Sheehan, defendant Davis, and Terrell Davis during the hearing, and concluded that the police had probable cause to arrest defendant Davis, and that the police were “justified” in arresting him without a warrant. The trial court’s ruling was supported by the evidence. Since the police had probable cause to arrest defendant Davis, the trial court correctly ruled that photographs taken of defendant Davis subsequent to his arrest should not have been suppressed. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s ruling on the motion to quash and suppress. Defendants next contend that they were denied effective assistance of counsel and a speedy trial because defense counsel failed to move for a speedy trial discharge pursuant to the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution, article I, section 8, of the Illinois Constitution, and the Speedy Trial Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 103—5(a)). Defendants argue in the alternative that the trial court’s denial of their motion to dismiss was against the manifest weight of the evidence because the trial court ignored evidence of a pretrial agreement between them and the State, and they are therefore entitled to specific performance of said agreement. The State maintains that it did not violate defendants’ constitutional and statutory rights because defendants’ trial commenced before the 120-day term passed, and that there is no evidence of defendants’ alleged agreement with the State. The Speedy Trial Act makes the following relevant provision: “Speedy trial, (a) Every person in custody in this State for an alleged offense shall be tried by the court having jurisdiction within 120 days from the date he was taken into custody unless delay is occasioned by the defendant ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 103 — 5(a).  Defendants were arrested on March 31, 1986. Defendants calculated their time in custody from April 1, 1986, until their time of arraignment on June 18, 1986. We find that defendants miscalculated the amount of time they were in custody. Defendants cannot count the period of time between May 8, 1986, and June 18, 1986, because the trial court granted a continuance by agreement, continuing defendants’ cases until June 18, 1986. Where the parties expressly agree to a continuance on the record, it constitutes an affirmative act attributable to the defendant and suspends the 120-day time period. (People v. Turner (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 540, 553, 539 N.E.2d 1196, 1201.) In the present case, the delay in the commencement of defendants’ trial was occasioned by them. For this reason, 95 days in custody are attributable to defendants. Defendants’ total days in custody are reduced by 39 days since the period of time between May 8, 1986, and June 18, 1986, may not be counted. Accordingly, we rule that defendants received a speedy trial.  Defendants’ argument that they received ineffective assistance of counsel also fails. In order for a defendant to obtain a reversal of his conviction on the basis that he received ineffective assistance of counsel, defendant must prove “(1) that his counsel made errors so serious, and his performance was so deficient, that he was not functioning in a manner commensurate with the standards established by the sixth amendment, and (2) that those deficiencies so prejudiced [him] as to deprive him of a fair trial with a reliable result.” (People v. Jenkins (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 249, 258-59, 568 N.E.2d 122, 128-29; see also Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064.) In the present case, defense counsel did not err by failing to move for a speedy trial discharge because there was no violation of the Speedy Trial Act. Accordingly, we find that defendants’ attorneys may not be deemed ineffective for failing to move for a speedy trial discharge.  Furthermore, we rule that defendants’ alternate contention that the trial court erred when it denied their motion to dismiss because their convictions were obtained in violation of an alleged agreement between them and the State lacks merit. We will not grant defendants’ request for specific performance of the alleged agreement because defendants cannot substantiate the existence of an agreement. There is no evidence in the record that the State promised defendants that it would dismiss the charges against them. Moreover, the State has absolute discretion both to commence prosecution and to nol-pros a charge. (People v. Matuck (1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 592, 593-94, 528 N.E.2d 1102, 1103-04.) In the present case, the State exercised its discretion when it nol-prossed Phillip Conley’s charges and indicted defendants. Accordingly, we find that the trial court’s ruling on defendants’ motion to dismiss was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Next, defendants allege that the cumulative impact of improper prosecutorial comments made during closing arguments violated their rights to a fair trial and due process of law guaranteed by the sixth and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution, article I, section 8, of the Illinois Constitution, and the Speedy Trial Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 103 — 5(a)). Defendant Davis argues that his rights to due process and a fair trial were violated on the basis that the prosecutorial misconduct in defendant Stuckey’s closing argument affected the judge’s ability to render a fair decision in his case because there was a possibility of prejudice and confusion inherent in the simultaneous trial of two defendants before a judge and a jury. The State maintains that defendants received a fair trial because its closing argument was based upon the evidence presented at trial and reasonable inferences drawn therefrom. In instances where individual errors committed by a trial court would not merit reversal alone, the cumulative effect of said errors may deprive a defendant of a fair trial. (People v. Johnson (1991), 215 Ill. App. 3d 713, 734-35, 575 N.E.2d 1247, 1260-61.) In such cases, due process and fundamental fairness require that the cause be remanded for a new trial. Johnson, 215 Ill. App. 3d at 735, 575 N.E.2d at 1261.  We will address each of the nine alleged errors before addressing their cumulative impact. First, defendants argue that they were prejudiced by the State’s comment that T.S. had “one foot in the grave, [and] was obviously within inches from dying.” Defendants maintain that the trial court should have sustained their objection to this comment because there was no testimony at trial that T.S. nearly died as a result of her injuries. We find that the State’s comment concerning T.S.’ physical condition was supported by the evidence adduced at trial. T.S. was almost comatose when she arrived at Cook County Hospital, she was placed on a respirator because she had trouble breathing, and she suffered from severe abrasions which were similar in character to third degree bums. “A prosecutor’s comments cannot be labelled improper if those comments are based upon facts in the record or reasonable inferences drawn from those facts.” (People v. Moya (1988), 175 Ill. App. 3d 22, 24, 529 N.E.2d 657, 659.) “A prosecutor has wide latitude during closing argument, and the trial court’s determination regarding the propriety of [an] argument will not be [overruled] on appeal absent a clear abuse of discretion.” (People v. Williams (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 231, 234, 468 N.E.2d 807, 810.) Accordingly, we find that the prosecutor’s statement was proper and that the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection to this comment. Next, defendants argue that the prosecutor, improperly bolstered the credibility of W.S. when he stated that W.S. “maintained the same consistent story *** from start to finish.” Defendants argue that this statement was improper because there was no testimony presented at trial which would support this argument. We disagree. This argument was proper because it was based upon testimony presented at trial. W.S. testified that she asked her daughter who hurt her, and that T.S. said: “James, Felix and Bruno.” The prosecutor then asked W.S.: “Did your daughter tell you *** a man by the name of Conley was driving the car[?]” W.S. responded: “At anytime when I talked to my daughter, she was consistent.” Accordingly, we find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection to this statement. Third, defendants contend that the trial court erred when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection to the prosecutor’s comment concerning defendants’ motive for harming T.S. Motive is a proper subject to argue to the jury, where there is some evidence of a defendant’s motive to commit a crime. (People v. Lasley (1987), 158 Ill. App. 3d 614, 629, 511 N.E.2d 661, 672.) T.S. testified that on the night of the assault she earned $120 from prostitution, she kept $60 for herself, and she gave the remaining $60 to James Stuckey. Therefore, the State’s argument that defendants’ motive for attempted murder that T.S. kept half of the money she earned from prostitution was proper, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection to this statement. Next, defendants contend that the prosecutor’s comment, “I think everything I am about to say is supported by the evidence,” was improper because the prosecutor expressed his personal opinion. We disagree. A prosecutor may comment on the strength of his case based upon the evidence. (People v. Smith (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 1043, 1052, 568 N.E.2d 482, 488.) The record reveals that the prosecutor outlined the evidence presented against defendant Stuckey at trial, and that he then stated that the evidence proved defendant Stuckey’s guilt. Therefore, the prosecutor’s statement was proper, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection. Defendants next argue that the prosecutor’s comment describing T.S. and W.S. as being “in tears” was improper. We agree. This remark was improper because there is no evidence in the record that either woman was “in tears.” However, improper comments made during closing arguments will not constitute reversible error unless they result in substantial prejudice to the accused. (People v. Jenkins (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 249, 261, 568 N.E.2d 122, 130; People v. Williams (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 231, 234, 468 N.E.2d 807, 810.) Improper comments made during closing arguments which are not material do not deprive a defendant of a fair trial. (People v. Cobb (1989), 186 Ill. App. 3d 898, 914, 542 N.E.2d 1171, 1182-83.) In the present case, we find that the State’s reference to T.S. and W.S. being “in tears” was not material, and as such, it did not prejudice defendants or deny them a fair trial. In addition, defendants argue that the trial court erred when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection to the State’s comments concerning T.S.’ statement to Dr. Rodriguez that she was uncertain about her identification of defendants, and his subsequent failure to ask her how she could be unsure since she knew defendant Stuckey. Defendants maintain that there is no evidence that T.S. was uncertain as to her identification of defendants due to anxiety concerning the missing assailant, James Stuckey, and that there was no testimony at trial which addressed whether Dr. Rodriguez knew that T.S. had known defendant Stuckey for one year. We find that a portion of this statement was proper because it was supported by the evidence. Dr. Rodriguez admitted on cross-examination that he observed that T.S. appeared frightened and confused when she stated that she wasn’t sure she had identified the correct assailants. Dr. Rodriguez further admitted that on April 14, 1986, T.S. told him that she was nervous because James Stuckey had not been apprehended, and that she feared he would return and assault her during hospital visiting hours. There is no evidence, however, that Dr. Rodriguez was aware that T.S. had known defendant Stuckey for one year; therefore, this portion of the statement was improper. This assertion, however, was not material, and therefore it did not deprive defendants of a fair trial. Next, defendants contend that the prosecutor’s comment that T.S. “will never be able to walk into a restaurant and order a meal and not have the entire restaurant look at her” was prejudicial. A prosecutor has wide latitude to comment upon the evidence presented to the court and the evils of the crime committed. (People v. Moya (1988), 175 Ill. App. 3d 22, 24, 529 N.E.2d 657, 659.) The record shows that T.S. was disfigured because she sustained injuries similar in nature to third degree bums. Therefore, the State’s comment was proper, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it overruled defendant Stuckey’s objection. In addition, defendants argue that the prosecutor’s comment upon defendant Stuckey’s guilt and his neat appearance was improper. We find that this remark was improper. However, an error is harmless if it is not prejudicial to the rights of the party assigning it, and where the defendant would not have been entitled to prevail even if the error had not been committed. (People v. Jenkins (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 249, 257, 568 N.E.2d 122, 128.) We find that the error was rendered harmless by the overwhelming evidence against defendants. Finally, defendants argue that the prosecutor’s remark that T.S. was “engaged in the kind of activity that would shock most of us” created a trial of the defense attorney rather than a determination of the defendants’ guilt or innocence. The State maintains, however, that the remarks were made in response to the defense attorney’s argument referring to T.S. as a prostitute. We agree. The State properly argued that even though T.S. had engaged in prostitution on the night she was injured, T.S.’ engaging in prostitution did not give defendants license to assault her. After a careful review of the record, we conclude that the cumulative effect of the errors at trial did not deprive defendants of a fair trial or due process of law. Defendants next allege that they were not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The State maintains that defendants were proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt because overwhelming evidence of defendants’ guilt was presented at trial. The relevant inquiry upon review of the sufficiency of the evidence in a criminal case is “whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.” (Emphasis in original.) (Jackson v. Virginia (1979), 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789; People v. Trimble (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 338, 350, 580 N.E.2d 1209, 1216; People v. Schorle (1991), 206 Ill. App. 3d 748, 759, 565 N.E.2d 84, 91.) A guilty verdict will not be reversed on appeal unless it is “inconclusive, improbable, unconvincing, or contrary to human experience.” Trimble, 220 Ill. App. 3d at 350, 580 N.E.2d at 1216; Schorle, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 758, 565 N.E.2d at 90. Defendants maintain that there is a reasonable doubt as to their guilt because T.S.’ testimony was not credible because (1) she told police officers that defendant Davis and Phillip Conley tied her to the back of the car rather than defendant Stuckey; and (2) she told Dr. Rodriguez that her identification of her assailants was erroneous.  After considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, we find that the trial court’s ruling is neither improbable, unconvincing, inconclusive, nor contrary to human experience. The trial court could have found defendants guilty of the crimes for which they were charged. Officer Barry testified that T.S. identified defendant Stuckey as the person who sexually assaulted her, T.S. later testified that she was assaulted, and Dr. Soter testified that she found blood in T.S.’ vagina during an examination. In addition, T.S. sustained great bodily harm. T.S. testified that she was dragged across the pavement by a rope attached to the back of a car. Dr. Soter testified that T.S.’ injuries were consistent with being dragged along the pavement. T.S. identified defendant Stuckey, defendant Davis and Phillip Conley as her assailants upon viewing their photographs, and she identified defendants in court. Dr. Rodriguez testified that T.S. suffered from post traumatic stress syndrome, and that she feared one of the defendants would assault her again. Dr. Rodriguez concluded that T.S. was apprehensive about identifying defendants for these reasons. Accordingly, we find that defendants were proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Finally, defendants allege that the trial court abused its discretion when it sentenced defendants Stuckey and Davis to 60 years’ and 40 years’ incarceration, respectively. Defendant Stuckey maintains that his sentence should be vacated and his cause remanded because his criminal history was not included in his presentence investigation report as required by section 5 — 3—2 of the Unified Code of Corrections. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 3—2.) If we find for the State on this issue, defendant Stuckey argues in the alternative that his sentence is excessive and should be vacated and his cause remanded for resentencing. The State maintains that defendant Stuckey was not prejudiced by the missing adult criminal history, and that he benefitted from its omission. The State also argues that defendant Stuckey waived his right to appellate review of the issue of a defect in the presentence investigation report pursuant to People v. Dye (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 125, 126, 438 N.E.2d 211, 212, because he failed to bring the alleged omission of his adult criminal history to the attention of the trial court, and he made no objeption to the alleged defect in the report at his sentencing hearing. Defendant Davis argues that his sentence is excessive and therefore should be vacated and reduced. In the alternative, if we are not convinced by this argument, defendant Davis maintains that his aggravated battery conviction must be vacated because his convictions for aggravated battery and attempted murder arise from the same incident. The State, in reliance upon section 5 — 3—2(bX2) of the Unified Code of Corrections, maintains that defendant Davis was properly sentenced to a 40-year term of incarceration because the trial court may impose an extended-term sentence upon a defendant where the defendant is convicted of any felony and the court finds that the offense was accompanied by exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005—3—2(b)(2). In defendant Stuckey’s case, the presentence investigation report was filed on July 24, 1987. The report lacked a description of defendant Stuckey’s adult criminal history. The report indicated that his adult criminal history had not been submitted at the time the report was written. On the date of the sentencing hearing, the report indicated that defendant Stuckey’s adult criminal history had been ordered, but had not been received. Defendant Stuckey made no objection to the incomplete presentence investigation report during the sentencing hearing.  We find that defendant Stuckey was prejudiced by the omission of his adult criminal history from his presentence investigation report. The doctrine of waiver is inapplicable to the present case because the trial court committed plain error when it sentenced defendant Stuckey without a complete presentence investigation report. Illinois Supreme Court Rule 615(a) provides that plain error which affects a party’s substantial rights may be noticed on appeal even though the error was not brought to the attention of the trial court. 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a); see also People v. Sherrod (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 429, 433, 581 N.E.2d 53, 56. The doctrine of plain error “encompasses those errors which are obvious, which affect the substantial rights of the accused, and which, if uncorrected, would be an affront to the integrity and reputation of judicial proceedings.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1035 (5th ed. 1979). In People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 47, 538 N.E.2d 461, 471, our supreme court ruled that “[t]he criterion for the application of the plain error rule in criminal cases is whether the evidence is closely balanced or the error is of such magnitude that the commission thereof denies the accused a fair and impartial trial or sentencing hearing.” In People v. Bass (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 230, 239, 580 N.E.2d 1274, 1280, quoting Young, 128 Ill. 2d at 46, 538 N.E.2d at 471, we noted that “[tjhis rule serves the dual purposes of ‘correcting serious injustices’ and preserving ‘the integrity and reputation of the judicial process.’ ” The prior criminal record of a defendant must be considered when the court imposes a sentence. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005—3-1; see also People v. Hart (1971), 132 Ill. App. 2d 558, 563, 270 N.E.2d 102, 105.) Section 5 — 3—1 of the Unified Code of Corrections provides that “[a] defendant shall not be sentenced for a felony before a written presentence report of investigation is presented to and considered by the court.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 3—1; see also People v. Youngbey (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 556, 564, 413 N.E.2d 416, 420-21.) In addition, the Unified Code of Corrections makes the following provision governing the contents of presentence investigation reports: “Presentence Report, (a) The presentence report shall set forth: (1) the defendant’s history of delinquency or criminality ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-3-2. At the time defendant Stuckey was sentenced, the Unified Code of Corrections explicitly required that the trial court consider his history of delinquency or criminality. This was not done in the present case since the presentence investigation report did not contain information concerning defendant Stuckey’s adult criminal history. It is clear that the trial court violated section 5 — 3—2 of the Unified Code of Corrections. The omission of defendant Stuckey’s criminal history from the presentence investigation report was an obvious error which encroached upon the accused’s right to due process. This error was of such magnitude that it denied defendant Stuckey a fair and impartial sentencing hearing. Accordingly, we find that the trial court abused its discretion when it sentenced defendant Stuckey to 60 years’ imprisonment. We therefore vacate defendant Stuckey’s sentence and remand his case for a new sentencing hearing. At defendant Stuckey’s new sentencing hearing, the trial court must obtain and consider his adult criminal history, in conjunction with the existing information in his presentence investigation report, and sentence defendant Stuckey for committing the crimes of attempted murder and aggravated criminal sexual assault.  Next, we find that the trial court abused its discretion when it sentenced defendant Davis to 40 years’ imprisonment. Defendant Davis’ convictions for attempted murder and aggravated battery were both based upon tying T.S. to the rear of a car and dragging her across the pavement. We rule that defendant Davis’ conviction for aggravated battery must be reversed, and the portion of his sentence based upon his conviction for aggravated battery vacated, because aggravated battery was a lesser included offense of attempted murder. See People v. Washington (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 365, 389, 468 N.E.2d 1285, 1302; People v. Bingham (1979), 75 Ill. App. 3d 418, 428, 394 N.E.2d 430, 437. For the reasons stated herein, defendant Stuckey’s convictions for attempted murder and aggravated criminal sexual assault are affirmed, and his case remanded for a new sentencing hearing. Defendant Davis’ conviction and sentence for attempted murder is affirmed, but his conviction for aggravated battery is reversed, and the portion of his sentence based upon the offense of aggravated battery is vacated. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand. Affirmed in part; reversed in part; vacated in part; and remanded. CERDA, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:46.169007+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREIMAN, specially concurring: This special concurrence is written not to disagree with the majority’s holdings on any issue but to address the consequences of a defective presentence investigation report. The majority opinion correctly holds that the facts of this case necessitate remandment for resentencing under the plain error doctrine because the presentence report did not contain defendant’s criminal history as required by statute. To determine an appropriate sentence, a sentencing court should clearly be apprised of defendant’s status as either a first-time offender or recidivist. However, the absence of a presentence report or the failure of such report to include all factors enumerated in the statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 3—2) does not automatically require remandment for resentencing. The parties have a duty to bring to the attention of the sentencing authority any alleged deficiency or inaccuracy in the presentence report. (People v. Meeks (1980), 81 Ill. 2d 524, 533, 411 N.E.2d 9.) Accordingly, the issue of a defective presentence report can be deemed waived where a party fails to object to the trial court about any alleged deficiency or inaccuracy in the report. Meeks, 81 Ill. 2d at 533 (where the presentence report at issue did not fully comply with the statutory requirements, resentencing was not required because defense counsel failed to preserve the error for review); see also People v. Madej (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 201, 478 N.E.2d 392; People v. Godinez (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 47, 434 N.E.2d 1121 (and cases cited therein); People v. Laramore (1987), 163 Ill. App. 3d 783, 516 N.E.2d 401 (the defendant was found to have waived any errors in the presentence report by failing to object at the hearing); People v. Dye (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 125, 438 N.E.2d 211 (the defendant, by failing to object, waived his contention that the report was untimely or insufficient). In addition, where no formal written presentence report was available to the sentencing court, remandment for resentencing was not ordered because the defendant was not prejudiced by the absence of the report. People v. Gacy (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 1, 107-08, 468 N.E.2d 1171 (in rejecting the defendant’s argument that resentencing was required, the supreme court observed that it saw “no basis upon which to find that a formal written presentence investigation report would alter the judge’s determination on the facts of this case”); People v. Calhoun (1986), 144 Ill. App. 3d 829, 837, 494 N.E.2d 498 (this court held that the trial court’s error in failing to order a presentence report was harmless because the “omission of statutorily required procedure in a sentencing hearing, when the omission amounts to a technical or formal error which does not prejudice defendant, does not require remand for resentencing”); People v. Casper (1981), 97 Ill. App. 3d 787, 423 N.E.2d 510 (the deficiencies in the presentence report did not warrant remandment in light of the trial court’s well considered conclusion that a sentence of imprisonment was necessary).

=== CASE 9739101 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:46.430163+00 ===

OPINION
DAVIES, Judge.
In February 1986 respondent Beltrami County Social Services Agency denied appellant Aid to Families with Dependent Children (“AFDC”) benefits for her personal needs on the ground that she was not cooperating in establishing the paternity of her child. This decision was affirmed by respondent Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Human Services (“DHS”) in 1986, by the district court in 1987, again by the Commissioner in 1991, and by the district court in 1992. Appellant now challenges the district court’s 1992 order affirming the Commissioner’s 1991 decision. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
The parties do not dispute the material facts. On January 6, 1982, appellant Bonnie Erickson gave birth to a son. She applied for and began receiving AFDC benefits from the Beltrami County Social Services Agency (“BCSSA”). In order to receive benefits, appellant was required to cooperate in establishing the paternity of her child.
She stated that the only possible fathers of her son were R.O., who gave a blood sample in Minnesota, and J.S., who gave a blood sample in Texas. The blood tests excluded both men as possible fathers. Because the blood tests excluded the only men named by appellant as possible fathers, the BCSSA determined appellant was not cooperating in establishing the paternity of her child. Consequently, it sanctioned her in February 1986 by eliminating AFDC benefits allotted for her personal needs.
Appellant appealed the BCSSA’s decision to the DHS. At a hearing before an ap*61peals referee, appellant testified that she could supply no other names and questioned whether the man who gave a blood sample in Texas was in fact J.S. She introduced photographic exhibits on the point.
The referee made express findings of fact: (1) appellant attended interviews as required by the BCSSA to provide information about the paternity of her son, (2) she named two men who could be the possible father, (3) she stated there were no others who could be the father, and (4) blood tests excluded both men as the possible father. The referee stated the “courts have held that * * * blood tests are worthy of ‘decisive and controlling evidentiary weight’ when determining the paternity of a child.” Since both men named by appellant were excluded as possible fathers, the referee, on behalf of the Commissioner, affirmed the BCSSA’s decision.
Appellant appealed this decision and, in 1987, the district court affirmed the ruling in a decision that was not appealed.
Three years later, in 1990, appellant reapplied for full AFDC benefits. The BCSSA denied the application for benefits for her personal needs by reaffirming its earlier decision. Appellant appealed the BCSSA’s decision to the DHS.
At a hearing held before an appeals referee, appellant called a new witness, J.S.’s former wife, who supported appellant’s contention that J.S. was not the man who gave the blood sample in Texas. Appellant’s testimony at the hearing did not change from her original testimony. The BCSSA offered no new evidence.
The referee recommended that the BCSSA’s decision be affirmed because appellant’s new evidence was not sufficient to overturn the district court’s 1987 decision and because the original decisions by the Commissioner and the district court were res judicata. The Commissioner adopted the referee’s recommendation and dismissed the appeal. Appellant appealed the decision to the district court, which, in 1992, affirmed the Commissioner’s decision. Appellant now appeals from the district court order.
ISSUES
I. Is appellant’s second administrative proceeding controlled by res judicata, collateral estoppel, or law of the case?
II. Did the Commissioner’s decision that appellant did not cooperate in establishing the paternity of her child prejudice her substantial rights?
ANALYSIS
I.
Respondent BCSSA argues that this court should not reach the merits of appellant’s claim because the claim is barred by the doctrine of res judicata. We review de novo whether the doctrine of res judicata can apply to a given set of facts. Hennepin County v. Hanneman, 472 N.W.2d 149, 152 (Minn.App.1991), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Aug. 29, 1991). If the doctrine applies, the decision whether to actually apply it is left to the discretion of the trial court. Regents of Univ. of Minn. v. Medical Inc., 382 N.W.2d 201, 207 (Minn.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Apr. 18, 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 910, 107 S.Ct. 307, 93 L.Ed.2d 282 (1986).
The doctrines of res judicata, collateral estoppel, and law of the case may apply to successive “administrative decisions when an agency acts in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity.” Graham v. Special Sch. Dist. No. 1, 472 N.W.2d 114, 115-16 (Minn.1991); Hough Transit, Ltd. v. Harig, 373 N.W.2d 327, 332 (Minn.App.1985). Collateral estoppel and res judicata are not rigidly applied, however, and they “ ‘are qualified or rejected when their application would contravene an overriding public policy.’ ” AFSCME v. Arrowhead Regional Corrections Bd., 356 N.W.2d 295, 299 (Minn.1984) (quoting Tipler v. E.I. duPont deNemours & Co., 443 F.2d 125, 128 (6th Cir.1971)).
More recently, we have stated “res judi-cata may not be as applicable to administrative agencies as it is to courts.” Wangen v. Commissioner of Pub. Safety, 437 N.W.2d 120, 123 (Minn.App.1989), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. May 12, 1989).
*62“Court decisions are reflected in a judgment which is docketed and final; the trial court’s work is at an end with regard to the matter. In the administrative process, however, agencies typically exert continuing supervisory and regulatory jurisdiction over the affected person. In addition, administrative policies are in a constant state of change, and administrative decision-makers are not only adjudicating but often policy-making. Finally, administrative agencies are charged by a legislative body with protecting public health, safety, and welfare, not merely resolving past adjudicative facts in light of existing law.”
Id. (quoting William J. Keppel and Dayton Gilbert, Minnesota Administrative Practice and Procedure § 624 at 119-20 (1982)).
The rationale stated in AFSCME and Wangen for not giving preclusive effect to earlier decisions applies here. First, public policy is involved because the AFDC program provides financial assistance on the basis of need to children and the parents or relatives who care for them. See Heckler v. Turner, 470 U.S. 184, 189, 105 S.Ct. 1138, 1141, 84 L.Ed.2d 138 (1985). Second, the BCSSA has continuing supervisory and regulatory jurisdiction over appellant, which could continue until the year 2000, when her son will become 18 years old. Third, the BCSSA is charged with protecting the welfare of AFDC recipients. Finally, the passage of time under the particular facts of this case renders the earlier decision inapplicable to the changed circumstances of the situation as it is today. For these reasons, we hold that appellant’s claim is not barred by res judicata or related doctrines.
II.
Since appellant’s claim is not barred, we reach the merits of her claim. When a district court has acted as an appellate tribunal by reviewing an agency decision, this court independently reviews the agency’s record. Evenson v. City of St. Paul Bd. of Appeals, 467 N.W.2d 363, 365 (Minn.App.1991), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. May 10, 1991).
Under the Administrative Procedure Act, a reviewing court must uphold the decision of an administrative agency unless the substantial rights of the petitioner have been prejudiced because, among other defects, the decision is not supported by “substantial evidence in view of the entire record as submitted” or the decision is arbitrary or capricious. Minn.Stat. § 14.69(e)-(f) (1990). The party appealing the agency decision has the burden of proving that the agency decision violates one of the statute’s provisions. See Markwardt v. State, Water Resources Bd., 254 N.W.2d 371, 374 (Minn.1977).
If a state administers its AFDC program in accordance with applicable federal statutes and regulations, the state will be partially reimbursed for the grants it makes. Heckler, 470 U.S. at 189, 105 S.Ct. at 1141; 42 U.S.C. § 602 (1988). Minnesota administers its AFDC program in accordance with federal law. See Minn.R. 9500.2000 (1991). By federal statute each AFDC applicant must
cooperate with the State * * * in establishing the paternity of a child born out of wedlock with respect to whom aid is claimed.
42 U.S.C. § 602(a)(26)(B) (1988).
Federal regulations define cooperation: The [State] plan shall specify that cooperate includes any of the following actions that are relevant to, or necessary for, the achievement of [among other things, establishing paternity]:
(1) Appearing at an office of the State or local agency or the child support agency as necessary to provide verbal or written information, or documentary evidence, known to, possessed by, or reasonably obtainable by the applicant or recipient;
[[Image here]]
(3) Providing information, or attesting to the lack of information, under penalty of perjury.
45 C.F.R. § 232.12(b) (1991) (emphasis in original). If the child’s caretaker fails to cooperate, the state must deny assistance *63to the caretaker (while continuing to provide full assistance to the child). Id. at § 232.12(d).
Since appellant first applied for AFDC benefits (after her son was born in 1982), she has steadfastly maintained that the only possible fathers of her son are J.S. and R.O. Twice in DHS hearings she has attested to this fact under penalty of perjury. This is an attestation of lack of further information sufficient to satisfy 45 C.F.R. § 232.12(b)(3).
An AFDC applicant’s attestation of lack of further information creates a presumption of cooperation. Tomas v. Rubin, 926 F.2d 906, 910 (9th Cir.1991). The agency, the BCSSA in this case, must accord some weight to the attestation in deciding whether an AFDC applicant is cooperating. See S.N.S. v. North Dakota Dep’t of Human Servs., 474 N.W.2d 717, 720-21 (N.D.1991); B.K. v. Department of Health & Rehab. Servs., 537 So.2d 633, 636 (Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1988); R.K. v. Department of Human Servs., Div. of Pub. Welfare, 215 N.J.Super. 342, 521 A.2d 1319, 1322 (App.Div.1987). The agency can overcome this presumption of cooperation if it can show, by substantial evidence, either that the attestation was false or that the applicant failed to cooperate according to one of the other categories specified by 45 C.F.R. § 232.12(b). Tomas, 926 F.2d at 910. Accord Doston v. Duffy, 732 F.Supp. 857, 871 (N.D.Ill.1988); S.N.S., 474 N.W.2d at 720-21.
We conclude the district court’s order must be reversed for two reasons.
First, the BCSSA’s continuing determination of noncooperation, as applied to the facts and circumstances of appellant’s situation today, is arbitrary and capricious. See Minn.Stat. § 14.69(f). Assuming the BCSSA’s original noncooperation determination in February 1986 was reasonable, as we must, the passage of time without supporting evidence has rendered it unreasonable, and therefore arbitrary, today.
Implicit in the BCSSA’s noncooperation determination is the assumption that appellant is withholding the name of the possible father of her son and that appellant has it within her power to have the sanction lifted at any time by naming the father of her son. We believe appellant’s attestation of no further information, together with the facts that she has not named anyone else as a possible father in the more than six and a half years she has been subject to the sanction and that the agency offers no evidence she has further information, are sufficient for a determination under 45 C.F.R. § 232.12(b) that she is cooperating adequately in establishing the paternity of her son. Under these facts, the BCSSA’s conclusion that she has information is no longer reasonable.
Second, the BCSSA’s decision is not supported by “substantial evidence in view of the entire record as submitted.” See Minn.Stat. § 14.69(e). The BCSSA bases its claim of noncooperation by appellant exclusively on the presumption, treated by the agency as conclusive, that since both men named by appellant were excluded by allegedly valid blood tests, appellant is not cooperating. The BCSSA has not alleged any other facts to show that appellant has failed to cooperate.
The record shows that the BCSSA never accorded any weight to appellant’s attestation of no further information concerning who could be the father of her son. The cases uniformly hold that exclusion of all named possible fathers by blood tests cannot alone establish noncooperation. Doston, 732 F.Supp. at 871 (“a policy of presuming [AFDC] clients, who named a father excluded by blood tests, are noncoop-erative on the basis of the blood test alone,” violates the due process clause of the U.S. Constitution and also 45 C.F.R. § 232.12(b)); S.N.S., 474 N.W.2d at 720-21; B.K., 537 So.2d at 636; Atkinson v. Ledbetter, 183 Ga.App. 739, 360 S.E.2d 66, 67 (1987); R.K., 521 A.2d at 1322.
Respondent BCSSA argues that it must be able to rely on blood tests to establish noncooperation. For support, the BCSSA indicates that the Minnesota Legislature has, at least for purposes of establishing paternity, given controlling weight to blood test results in which the likelihood *64of paternity is 99 percent or greater. Minn.Stat. § 257.62, subd. 5(b) (1990). We are not saying blood tests cannot constitute evidence of noncooperation. We are saying that blood tests alone do not create a conclusive and perpetual presumption of noncooperation, that all evidence must be considered in making the determination of noncooperation, and that blood tests are only a part of that evidence.
Having ruled that appellant is eligible for full benefits, we further hold that appellant’s eligibility is retroactive to the time of her renewed application. See Grubb v. Sterrett, 315 F.Supp. 990, 995-96 (N.D.Ind.) (stating there is a “federal requirement that corrective payments are to be made retroactive to the date the incorrect action was taken when an appeal hearing is favorable to the claimant,” holding AFDC benefits were to be paid “retroactive to the date of the incorrect denial or termination”), aff'd, 400 U.S. 922, 91 S.Ct. 187, 27 L.Ed.2d 182 (1970). We reverse the district court’s affirmance of the Commissioner’s decision and remand to the Commissioner for appropriate action in accordance with this opinion.
DECISION
Res judicata and related doctrines do not bar appellant’s second administrative proceeding for benefits. The fact that appellant has been subject to the sanction for more than six and a half years but has not named anyone else as a possible father, indicates, absent contrary evidence, that she is cooperating. The BCSSA cannot rely on blood tests alone to presume conclusively that appellant is not cooperating. The BCSSA must pay appellant the AFDC benefits she is entitled to, retroactive to the date of her application to the BCSSA giving rise to this appeal.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:47.34525+00 ===

YETKA, Justice.
This case arises on Ettinger’s appeal of a decision of the court of appeals reversing the trial court holding that the amount Ettinger is to recover from Schaper in a subrogation action pursuant to Minnesota’s workers’ compensation third-party statute, Minn.Stat. § 176.061 (1990), was equivalent to the amount of compensation benefits Ettinger paid the employee and also reversing the trial court's refusal to submit the issue of Ettinger’s comparative fault to the jury. We affirm, but remand for a new trial on damages.
Ettinger is in the business of transporting goods. On Saturday, October 29, 1983, two of its employees, Stanley Julson and Leroy Yobbie, were directed to take two semi-trailer trucks to Schaper, a manufacturer of games and toys, to pick up a shipment of toys. Julson was to arrive first, and he was supposed to have his trailer loaded by the time Yobbie arrived.
Julson arrived at 7:00 a.m., but he had not yet begun loading his truck when Yob-bie arrived at 8:00 a.m. The two then began to load Julson’s trailer, assisted by Peter Sullivan, an employee of Schaper, who used a “clamp truck” to push boxes of toys into the trailers.
Clamp trucks are similar to forklift trucks, the difference being that, because clamp trucks “clamp”, lift and push the items to be moved, the use of pallets is unnecessary. Boxes moved by clamp truck are arranged in “cubes”, which are approximately 6 or 7 feet high and either 4 feet by 4 feet or 6 by 6 on the sides. The driver sits directly behind the load, and because of the height of the goods, the driver cannot see over them and must look to either side to see. As the goods are being moved into the trailer, the trailer driver is to stack them in the truck. The engine of the clamp truck is quite loud so communication in the trailer is usually done by the use of hand signals. The hand signals allow the clamp truck driver to know where he or she is and whether to stop or keep pushing. Because of the need for hand signals and the height of the goods in the clamp truck, the trailer *31driver is to stand to the side of the trailer to be seen by the clamp truck driver.
At the time of the injury which is the cause of this subrogation action, Julson was standing on the right side of the trailer and Yobbie was on the left. Ettinger and Schaper seem to agree that communications between the trailer drivers and Sullivan were oral and not by hand signal as there is no allegation that hand signals were being used. The factual content of the oral communication is in dispute. Sullivan alleges that Julson and Yobbie were chanting “Let’s go. Let’s go. Let’s go.” and told him that they didn’t have all day. Julson and Yobbie, however, deny making such statements, alleging instead that Yob-bie yelled “whoa” immediately before the incident which caused Julson’s injury.
Julson’s injury was caused during the course of Sullivan’s pushing cubes into the trailer. It occurred after about 15 feet of the 45-foot trailer had been filled. Allegedly, because he had not been given the hand signal to stop, Sullivan kept pushing cubes into the trailer when suddenly the cube farthest inside the trailer veered to the right and pinned Julson against the side of the trailer, hitting him in the lower back and hip and allegedly injuring him. After a short rest following the accident, Julson rejoined Yobbie and Sullivan to finish loading the trailers.
Julson subsequently sought workers’ compensation benefits from Ettinger for his injuries and settled his claim for non-workers’ compensation recovery on a Naig basis with Schaper. Ettinger paid Julson $95,000 in workers’ compensation benefits and became subrogated to his claim against Schaper. Minn.Stat. § 176.061. Ettinger, therefore, filed suit against Schaper. On November 16, 1990, the trial court granted Ettinger’s motion for partial summary judgment on the issue of damages, ruling, as a matter of law, that the amount recoverable by Ettinger from Schaper is the amount of benefits paid by Ettinger to Julson — $95,000. As to Schaper’s argument that it should be able to contest the necessity, reasonableness, and causal relationship of the payments to Julson’s injury, the trial judge stated:
The payments made to injured party Jul-son were made pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act and therefore, there can be no dispute as to their reasonableness, necessity, or causal relationship to the incident of October, 1983.
The trial judge also denied Schaper’s request that Ettinger’s comparative negligence be submitted to the jury. Minn.Stat. § 604.02 (1990).1 Instead, the judge ruled that Ettinger could not be found at fault, and the jury was instructed to apportion solely the respective negligence of Schaper and Julson. The jury returned a special verdict finding Schaper 60 percent negligent and Julson 40 percent negligent. The trial judge then ordered Schaper to reimburse Ettinger in the amount of $57,000, an amount equal to 60 percent of the $95,000 in workers' compensation benefits paid to Julson, together with interest, costs, and disbursements.
On appeal to the Minnesota Court of Appeals, Schaper alleged two errors. First, Schaper argued that the trial judge erred by not requiring Ettinger to prove the reasonableness, necessity, or causal relationship of the benefits paid to the injury. Schaper sought to have two experts testify that Ettinger overpaid workers’ compensation benefits to Julson. Second, Schaper argued that the trial judge erred by not submitting the issue of Ettinger’s negligence to the jury. The court of appeals agreed with Schaper on both arguments and reversed the decision of the trial court.
Ettinger then sought review from this court, asking that we reverse the court of appeals and reinstate the judgment of the trial court. Ettinger first argues that the trial court was correct in ruling that the amount at stake was the amount of compensation benefits paid to Julson and that the measure of damages is not an issue for the jury. Second, Ettinger argues that the *32court of appeals erred in reversing the trial court’s refusal to submit the issue of Et-tinger’s fault to the jury because the testimony at trial presented no factual issues of negligence on the part of Ettinger.
The issues raised on appeal are:'
1. When an employer acquires a subro-gation interest in a cause of action of its employee against a third-party tortfeasor because the employer paid workers’ compensation benefits to the employee, must the employer prove the extent of damages?
2. Was it error for the trial court not to submit the issue of Ettinger’s negligence to the jury?
The major dispute in this case concerns the measure of damages that Ettinger may recover from Schaper. Ettinger argues, and the trial court ruled, that damages recoverable from a third-party tort-feasor in a workers’ compensation subrogation action are equal to the amount of compensation benefits paid to the employee. The practical effect of such a rule would be to require employers only to prove the degree of fault of the third party because the amount of damages would be set as a matter of law at the amount of benefits paid. Under such a rule, the third-party tortfeasor would be unable to contest the extent of its monetary liability beyond the sole exception of litigating the proportion of fault. The court of appeals reversed the trial court, holding instead that an employer in a subrogation action must prove the nature, extent, and causal relation of the damages. M.W. Ettinger Transfer & Leasing Co. v. Schaper Mfg., Inc., 482 N.W.2d 796, 800 (Minn.App.1992).
Under Minnesota workers’ compensation law, an employee injured at work has two possible causes of action against two possible defendants. First, a claim may be brought against the employer, against whom workers’ compensation benefits are the sole remedy. Minn.Stat. § 176.031 (1990). Second, the employee may bring an action in negligence against any existent third-party tortfeasors. Minn.Stat. § 176.-061, subd. 5 (1990). Such third-party negligence claims are often settled on a Naig basis wherein the employee recovers from the third party all damages not recoverable under workers’ compensation, notifies the employer of the settlement negotiations, and expressly reserves the employer’s right to be subrogated to the employee’s negligence claim pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 176.061. Naig v. Bloomington Sanitation, 258 N.W.2d 891, 894-95 (Minn.1977).
Ettinger argues that damages recoverable under an employer’s subrogation right to its employee’s negligence claim are coextensive as a matter of law with the amount of workers’ compensation benefits paid to the employee. Ettinger states that Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 102 supports this assertion. The court of appeals noted that this argument has been rejected previously by this court. In Allstate Insurance Co. v. Eagle-Picher Industries, Inc., 410 N.W.2d 324 (Minn.1987), two workers’ compensation insurers sought indemnity from several asbestos manufacturers pursuant to subdivision 10. Id. at 325. The court held that subdivision 10 did not provide for a right to indemnity for workers’ compensation benefits paid on account of an injury sustained as a result of exposure to asbestos. Id. at 327. In so ruling, this court explained the difference between traditional notions of contractual indemnity and indemnity pursuant to the workers’ compensation statutes.
The rights afforded by the Workers’ Compensation Act are incidents of the employment relationship and are contractual in nature. * * * The liability of the employer to pay compensation benefits clearly does not depend on whether the employee does or does not have a cause of action against a third party. The employer’s liability exists in any event where the injury, including occupational *33disease, arose out of and in the course of employment, regardless of anyone’s negligence. * * * Furthermore, the extent of the employer’s obligation under the Workers’ Compensation Act is not determined according to the common law measure of damages. * * *
It seems to us most unlikely that the legislature intended to shift the employer’s obligations under the employment contract to third parties who are strangers to that contract in complete disregard of the principles of respondeat superior, comparative negligence, and the common law measure determinative of the nature and extent of damages recoverable in actions sounding in tort. * * *
Id. at 328 (citations omitted). In other words, in Allstate, we stated our opinion that the indemnity provision in the Workers’ Compensation Act differed from traditional notions of contractual indemnity because there is no actual agreement for reimbursement between the parties. Because there is no actual agreement between the parties, traditional tort notions requiring the plaintiff to prove the extent of damages were not eliminated by the Workers’ Compensation Act.
Ettinger argues that requiring an employer to prove the extent of damages in a subrogation action against a third-party tortfeasor would cause employers to contest payments of workers’ compensation claims, thus delaying employees’ receipt of benefits. Ettinger states that establishing the damages recoverable in the third-party action as being the amount of benefits paid or payable to the employee effectuates the intent of the legislature in enacting the Workers’ Compensation Act, that intent being the “quick and efficient delivery of indemnity and medical benefits to injured workers at a reasonable cost to the employers who are subject to the provisions” of the Workers’ Compensation Act. Minn. Stat. § 176.001 (1990).
While we agree with Ettinger that this is the intent of the Act, we disagree with any inference that such intent should be taken to mean that an employer may pay benefits to an employee and then automatically recover the amount of benefits paid from a third-party tortfeasor without allowing that third party to contest the nature and extent of the employee’s damages. Instead, the Act puts the burden on employers as evidenced by the many penalty provisions which discourage employers from delaying or refusing to pay benefits. See, e.g., Minn.Stat. § 176.82 (1990).
This court has previously ruled that workers’ compensation statutes that apportion fault without allowing a party to contest the extent and measure of its fault violate the due process clause of the fifth and fourteenth amendments of the United States Constitution and Minn. Const, art. 1, § 8. Carlson v. Smogard, 298 Minn. 362, 369, 215 N.W.2d 615, 620 (1974). If this court were to accept Ettinger’s suggested reading of indemnification under the Workers’ Compensation Act, Schaper could very well raise the same due process challenge.
As the employee has the right to bring a negligence action against the third party, it is this right which the employer becomes subrogated to upon accruing the duty to pay workers’ compensation benefits. Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 5(a) (1990).3 The employer derives its cause of action against the third-party tortfeasor by virtue of the claim that the employee had against that third person before the Naig settlement. As the plaintiff employee would have to prove the nature and extent of damages against the third party in a common law negligence action, so must the employer who is subrogated to its employee’s right to bring such an action.
We have previously stated:
Precisely how the employer's subrogation suit against the tortfeasor is to be presented to a jury is not before us now, but this much is clear: in presenting its *34subrogation claim, the employer will require the assistance of the employee and will have to prove to the satisfaction of a jury not only the liability of the tortfea-sor but the nature and extent of the employee’s disability.
Easterlin v. State, 330 N.W.2d 704, 708 (Minn.1983). This statement is still a correct understanding of the mechanics of bringing a subrogation suit against a third-party tortfeasor under the Workers’ Compensation Act. Although parties should be encouraged to settle third-party claims under the Workers’ Compensation Act because benefits under the Act are limited to a certain percentage of wages whereas loss of income at common law can be fully recovered, a third party is entitled to its day in court and should it desire to contest the reasonableness of the payments made, it has the right to do so. We, therefore, affirm the court of appeals in its holding that Ettinger must prove the nature and extent of its employee’s injury in its subro-gation action against Schaper.
The second issue in this case is whether the trial court was correct to grant a directed verdict for Ettinger on the issue of its fault separate and apart from the fault of its employee Julson. The court of appeals disagreed with the trial court and reversed, stating that there appeared to be evidence which, if resolved in Scha-per’s favor, would allocate a portion of fault to Ettinger. Ettinger, 482 N.W.2d at 800.
A motion for a directed verdict presents a question of law for the trial court regarding the sufficiency of the evidence to present a fact question for the jury to decide. J.N. Sullivan & Assoc., Inc. v. F.D. Chapman Constr. Co., 304 Minn. 334, 336, 231 N.W.2d 87, 89 (1975). In this case, although Schaper has offered to this court examples of possible negligence on the part of Ettinger, Schaper failed to offer evidence of such negligence at trial. Schaper did present evidence of negligence by Jul-son and Yobbie, but failed to present any testimony as to the negligence of Ettinger. Instead, Schaper argued that the jury could infer acts of negligence on the part of Ettinger from the negligent acts of Julson and Yobbie that were offered. If such an inference were permissible, then a party could establish negligence of another party without allowing that second party an opportunity to cross-examine the statements of the witness upon which the inferred negligence is based.
Because Schaper failed to present evidence to the trial court that would establish any independent negligence on the part of Ettinger, the trial judge was correct not to allow the issue of Ettinger’s fault to go to the jury. We, therefore, reverse the court of appeals and reinstate the decision of the trial court to grant Ettinger’s motion for a directed verdict on its fault separate and independent from the fault of its employee. On the issue of whether Ettinger must prove the nature and extent of its employee’s damages, however, we affirm the court of appeals, reverse the trial court, and remand to the trial court for a new trial on damages only.
The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed as modified by this opinion.
SIMONETT, J., concurs specially.
. Minn.Stat. § 604.02, subd. 1 states in part: "When two or more persons are jointly liable, contributions to awards shall be in proportion to the percentage of fault attributable to each, except that each is jointly and severally liable for the whole award.”
. "Subd. 10. Indemnity. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 65B or any other law to the contrary, an employer has a right of indemnity for any compensation paid or payable pursuant to this chapter, including temporary total compensation, temporary partial compensation, permanent partial disability, economic recovery compensation, impairment compensation, medical compensation, rehabilitation, death, and permanent total compensation.”
. "If the injured employee or the employee’s .dependents or any party on their behalf receives benefits from the employer * * * or institutes proceedings to recover benefits or accepts from the employer * * * any payment on account of the benefits, the employer * * * is subrogated to the rights of the employee or the employee’s dependents or has a right of indemnity against a third party.”

=== CASE 9739104 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:47.350347+00 ===

SIMONETT, Justice
(concurring specialty)-
I join in the court’s opinion, but because there will be a new trial on damages, I thought I might comment on a matter likely to reoccur at re-trial.
In this subrogation action, Ettinger is seeking to recover $95,000 from the defendant tortfeasor, this sum being the amount of workers’ compensation benefits paid its injured employee. Ettinger (and Fireman’s Fund, the compensation insurer) must prove its employee sustained injuries which resulted in medical expenses, lost wages past and future, and loss of earning capacity insofar as they duplicate the losses covered by the compensation benefits. If the jury’s award is more than the amount of the subrogation claim, the court reduces the recovery to the amount of benefits paid.
Here defendant sought to call an expert on workers’ compensation to testify that *35Fireman’s Fund overpaid temporary total disability, temporary partial disability, and permanent partial disability. The expert would also have testified that the compensation carrier was at fault in not obtaining an independent medical examination and in not attempting to find work for the employee. The trial court correctly rejected this testimony, but only because it had ruled damages were not a fact issue.
It is of no concern to the third-party tortfeasor if the workers’ compensation carrier paid too much in benefits. The employer in this suit stands in the shoes of the employee, and the defendant tortfeasor is not in a position to revive the workers’ compensation claim, which is a matter between the employee and the employer-insurer. The defendant tortfeasor is the defendant in a common law negligence action, and its defense on damages is whether the wage claim (not the benefit claim) is reasonable and caused by the injury and whether medical expenses were reasonably incurred and reasonable in amount.
The fact that benefits were paid and the amount paid should be made part of the record for the court’s information. The jury, however, need only be told generally that Ettinger (who appears in court as the party plaintiff) has paid compensation benefits for which it seeks recovery, with no mention of specifics such as the amount. So long as the employer does not introduce the amount of benefits paid in an effort to lend credence to its common law damages claim, there is no reason for the defendant to bring in experts on workers’ compensation. These third-party tort actions are complicated enough without complicating them further.

=== CASE 9739105 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:48.331867+00 ===

Doctoroff, C.J.
The Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board found that plaintiff had not proven a personal injury and therefore denied his claim for benefits based upon an alleged mental disability. We affirm.
Plaintiff was employed as a teacher for almost thirty years. For most of the last fifteen years of his employment with defendant, plaintiff worked as a high school art teacher. Plaintiff believed that the character and nature of the students he taught declined over the years. By the end of his tenure in 1983, his classes had a very high level of absenteeism, and he gave failing grades to a large percentage of his students. He found that many, if not most, of his students were rude, noisy, and *257disrespectful, and he felt his classes were too crowded. He attributed the generally poor quality of his students to, among other things, curriculum changes that forced disinterested students to take art classes. He also testified that his students on at least one occasion called him a "crazy, old loon.” He claimed that the emotional stresses connected with teaching his students contributed to his mental disability.
Plaintiff also found stressful what he perceived to be a lack of concern or cooperation from his superiors in alleviating the problems with his students. He further attributed his mental disability-to the conduct and lack of care of a fellow teacher who shared a classroom with him and to the fact that some teachers dated students, conduct he believed was unprofessional. In his last year of employment, he was affected by not being able to teach advanced art classes, which had been deleted from the curriculum because of lack of . student interest.
On October 28, 1983, plaintiff’s drawing hand trembled uncontrollably while he was helping a student. When he returned home that evening, he drank whiskey, lost control of himself, destroyed much of his property, and apparently attempted suicide. Plaintiff contacted psychiatrist Howard Friedman, who admitted him to a hospital for several weeks, where he received psychiatric and alcohol treatment. Plaintiff admitted being a heavy drinker, almost daily, for four or five years. However, he denied being an alcoholic, and Dr. Friedman agreed, finding that plaintiff resorted to alcohol as a way to cope with the pressures of his job. Another psychiatrist, Dr. Harvey Ager, believed that plaintiff was an alcoholic and that whatever was bothering plaintiff in October 1983 *258was still bothering him in February 1984, when Dr. Ager examined him.
Several of plaintiffs superiors testified. They indicated that he was a satisfactory teacher, that he did not lodge any formal complaints although he was a "common grumbler,” that he never sought a transfer or filed a grievance, that as a senior teacher he at times taught only three or four classes, and that classes were limited to thirty students. There was further evidence that showed that plaintiff had sought nonteaching jobs with defendant and other employment.
The wcab denied plaintiffs claim, because it found that the "events” alleged by plaintiff did not establish that a work-related "personal injury in the form of a precipitating, work-related event actually occurred as a physical trauina or a mental stimulus or continuing mental stimuli.” In doing so, the wcab found that plaintiff alleged only general conditions of stress that were common to all teachers — e.g., disinterested and unruly students. The wcab found that plaintiff became discouraged in his last four or five years of employment because he felt the caliber of students had deteriorated, and the wcab rejected plaintiffs claim of lack of administrative support on the basis of the testimony of several of plaintiffs superiors.
Our review of a decision of the wcab is limited. Factual determinations of the wcab are conclusive, absent fraud, if supported by any competent evidence in the record. Aquilina v General Motors Corp, 403 Mich 206, 213; 267 NW2d 923 (1978); Dressler v Grand Rapids Die Casting Corp, 402 Mich 243, 250; 262 NW2d 629 (1978); MCL 418.861; MSA 17.237(861).
As the wcab recognized, it was plaintiff’s burden to prove his case by a preponderance of the evi*259dence. Aquilina, supra at 210. As part of his case, plaintiff had to prove a disability resulting from a personal injury or a work-related disease, MCL 418.301(4); MSA 17.237(301X4), and "a personal injury arising out of and in the course of employment,” MCL 418.301(1); MSA 17.237(301X1). The existence of a personal injury is a question of fact. Harris v Checker Cab Mfg Corp, 333 Mich 66; 52 NW2d 599 (1952); Lizut v Peerless Novelty Co, 74 Mich App 199; 255 NW2d 637 (1977).
Because he alleged a mental disability, plaintiff also had to establish that his mental disability was aggravated or contributed to by employment "in a significant manner” and that his claim was based on "actual events of employment, not unfounded perceptions thereof.” MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301X2) and MCL 418.401(2)(b); MSA 17.237(401)(2)(b). These requirements were added to the act by 1980 PA 357, effective January 1, 1982. See Iloyan v General Motors Corp, 187 Mich App 595, 599; 468 NW2d 302 (1991).
The required injury in mental disability cases was characterized as "a precipitating, work-related event,” in Deziel v Difco Laboratories, Inc (After Remand), 403 Mich 1; 268 NW2d 1 (1978), and as "an actual, precipitating, work-related physical trauma, event, or events; and not just an unfounded perception thereof’ in Hoyan, supra at 600. Hoyan was decided against the backdrop of 1980 PA 357, which added particular requirements for mental disability cases to § 401(2)(b) and to § 301(2), which provides:
Mental disabilities and conditions of the aging process, including but not limited to heart and cardiovascular conditions, shall be compensable if contributed to or aggravated or accelerated by the employment in a significant manner. Mental disa*260bilities shall be compensable when arising out of actual events of employment, not unfounded perceptions thereof.
While the nature of mental disability claims often leads to analyses in terms of "events,” the act necessarily requires that these events amount to injuries. The wcab was unpersuaded that plaintiff suffered an injury,.even though it found many of the "events” that had been alleged by him had occurred. The wcab’s findings and reasoning were sound. In finding that plaintiff had not established a work-related injury, the wcab was entitled to rely on the fact, as it found, that plaintiff was exposed to nothing more than the general stresses faced by many teachers who were not disabled by those same stresses. The wcab also knew that Dr. Ager did not believe that plaintiff’s employment contributed to his mental disability. The wcab did not have to determine what, if anything, was the cause of plaintiffs alleged mental disability. Koschay v Barnett Pontiac, Inc, 386 Mich 223; 191 NW2d 334 (1971).
Workers’ compensation benefits are not available just because a plaintiff establishes the existence of some incident or "event” that is upsetting to the plaintiff. There must be an injury. The Legislature has required the injury to be based upon "actual events” of employment. Sections 301(2) and 401(2)(b). This requirement would become meaningless if the ordinary daily conditions and minutiae of employment were sufficient to support a mental disability claim. Thus, ordinary stresses of employment (existing in probably all jobs) are not sufficient to establish the required injury. Consistent with this conclusion are Bachula v General Motors Corp, 191 Mich App 193, 197; 477 NW2d 486 (1991), where this Court indi*261cated that general allegations of stress and anxiety, as opposed to specific incidents, are insufficient to establish a personal injury for a mental disability claim, and Sobh v Frederick & Herrud, Inc, 189 Mich App 24, 30; 472 NW2d 8 (1991), where this Court applied an objective test in finding that the plaintiff’s claimed injuries could not have significantly aggravated her preexisting mental condition. An idiosyncratic reaction to the ordinary stresses of employment does not create the injury necessary to sustain a claim of mental disability.
Plaintiff argues that because an employer is generally considered to accept an employee with all the employee’s personal weaknesses, preexisting conditions, and susceptibilities, Zaremba v Chrysler Corp, 377 Mich 226, 231; 139 NW2d 745 (1966); Riddle v Broad Crane Engineering Co, 53 Mich App 257, 260; 218 NW2d 845 (1974), an objective standard cannot be used to determine whether a seemingly innocuous or ordinary event constituted a work-related injury to a particular employee. But objective standards are applied under the act. Indeed, an objective standard has traditionally been used to determine the existence of an injury. See Bach v Flint Bd of Ed, 197 Mich App 247; — NW2d — (1992). Plaintiff’s argument also fails because it leads to the unacceptable conclusion that in requiring "actual events of employment” the Legislature was addressing only the limited number of cases where an employee is delusional or hallucinates.
Our conclusion that hypersensitive or idiosyncratic reactions cannot establish an injury in a mental disability case is consistent with Miklik v Michigan Special Machine Co, 415 Mich 364, 370; 329 NW2d 713 (1982). Miklik held that general conclusions of stress, anxiety, and exertion over a period of time cannot satisfy the requirement in *262"heart damage” cases that there must be a relationship proved between the heart damage and specific incidents or events at work.
Although plaintiff does not cite Carter v General Motors Corp, 361 Mich 577, 585; 106 NW2d 105 (1960), it must be mentioned. The plaintiff there attributed his paranoid schizophrenia to "emotional pressures produced by production line employment [e.g., the pace of the job and being berated by a foreman] not shown by him to be unusual in any respect.” Carter employed a subjective standard in determining whether the plaintiff’s claimed disability and injury involving a psychosis was compensable. Deziel, supra, at 31. This was one of the reasons a subjective causal nexus standard was adopted in Deziel. Id. at 26. We do not know how our Supreme Court would decide Carter under the amended act that applies to the present plaintiff, but it appears that the subjective standard of causation used in Carter and adopted in Deziel has been invalidated. Sobh, supra at 27. In this case, the wcab applied the post -Deziel and post-Carter requirements of the act to facts it found based on the record. We find no error in the wcab’s rejection of plaintiff’s claim, which claim was based on the ordinary stresses of his job.
Affirmed.
Corrigan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2220111 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.767207+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 600 (2007)
In re PETITION FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST James L. BERG, a Minnesota Attorney, Registration No. 139105.
No. A07-563.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 29, 2007.
*601 Cassie Breta Hanson, Office of Lawyer's Professional Responsibility Saint Paul, MN, for Petitioner.
Phillip A. Cole, Lommen, Nelson, Cole, Stageberg, Minneapolis, MN, for Respondent.
*602 Heard, considered, and decided, by the court en banc.
OPINION
PER CURIAM.
This attorney discipline case concerns the appropriate discipline to be imposed on respondent James L. Berg. The Director of the Office of Lawyer's Professional Responsibility filed a petition and a supplementary petition for discipline alleging several acts of misconduct. Berg agreed that he committed the acts of misconduct alleged in the petitions by entering a stipulation for discipline with the Director. In the stipulation, Berg and the Director jointly recommended that Berg be suspended from the practice of law in Minnesota for a minimum of five years with conditions placed on reinstatement. Because of the presence of numerous mitigating factors and because it is appropriate in this case to give some deference to the Director's recommendation in the stipulation, we impose the discipline of a five-year suspension.
In October 1982, Berg was admitted to practice law in Minnesota. Until the Director filed the petition in this case, Berg had never been the subject of a disciplinary action. Berg initially filed an answer to the petition, but withdrew that answer and agreed to the allegations and those of the supplementary petition. Berg's acts of misconduct include misappropriation and mishandling of client funds, a single instance of forgery, making false statements, failing to communicate with clients, neglecting client matters, failing to enter written contingency fee agreements, and failing to cooperate with the disciplinary investigation underlying this case.
Berg admitted to misappropriating the funds of six different clients. During his representation of C.W., Berg misappropriated funds he received on C.W.'s behalf by disbursing the proceeds from his client trust account prior to April 1, 2005. To whom Berg made these disbursements is unclear, but his trust account retained a sufficient balance to cover the C.W. funds at other times during the Director's audit of this account. Then in May and June 2005, Berg misappropriated settlement funds he received on behalf of J.R. by withdrawing the entire amount from his client trust account. In October or November 2005, Berg misappropriated settlement funds he received on K.S.'s behalf by disbursing those funds from his client trust account. Berg made these disbursements after negotiating the check by forging K.S.'s signature on the endorsement. Sometime before November 18, 2005, Berg misappropriated funds he received on behalf of B.C. by disbursing them from his client trust account for his own use. Berg also misappropriated insurance premium and mortgage escrow funds he received for L.H. by disbursing them for his own use in February 2007. Finally, Berg misappropriated funds he received from G.B. as an advance fee payment and an appellate filing fee, by failing to deposit them in his client trust account. Berg agreed that each of these disbursements, and his failure to deposit money he received from G.B., violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.15(a) & (b) and 8.4(b) & (c). Berg agreed that his forgery of K.S.'s signature, though made under the mistaken belief that he was authorized to negotiate the check for K.S., violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 8.4(b) and (c).
During an audit of Berg's trust account from April 2005 through April 2006, the Director discovered that Berg deposited personal funds into and made personal cash withdrawals from his client trust account. Berg also authorized his own creditors to make electronic withdrawals from that account. He also failed to disburse *603 funds to clients by trust account checks. Berg and the Director agreed that these actions violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.15(a) and (b).
Berg failed to enter written contingency fee agreements with four different clients. Berg made these unwritten contingency fee arrangements with J.R. in March 2005, with K.S. in October 2003, with L.L.P. sometime before December 23, 2005, and with T.L. sometime before January 4, 2006. Berg also received settlement funds on behalf of J.R. for which he has never accounted. Berg agreed that his failure to execute written contingency fee agreements violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.5(c).
Berg disbursed to L.L.P. the portion of the settlement funds to which she was entitled, but he did not provide her a written statement showing the outcome of the matter or the method by which the funds were divided between his fees and her remittance. Berg did not provide K.S. and T.L. with documentation showing the outcome of their cases. Nor did he provide them with documentation showing the method of division between his fees and their remittance. Berg agreed that his failure to provide appropriate documentation to these clients violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.5(c).
Berg made false statements to G.B. and L.H. while representing them. He also made false statements to the Director during the disciplinary investigation. Berg told L.H. that he was unable to release funds to which she was entitled without first obtaining additional signatures. This statement was false because Berg had actually misappropriated the funds. Berg told G.B. that opposing counsel had asked Berg to withdraw G.B.'s appeal in March 2007 in order to settle the case. This statement was false because opposing counsel had actually contacted Berg about settling the case more than a month earlier. In response to a complaint K.S. made to the Director about Berg's representation, Berg falsely stated that he had received a settlement offer in December 2005 to which K.S. agreed. Berg had actually agreed to the settlement without K.S.'s consent in August 2005. Berg agreed that these acts violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 4.1 and 8.4(c).
Berg admitted to several instances of failing to communicate with clients and neglecting client matters. He failed to communicate with J.R.'s bankruptcy attorney in late 2005 about the status of funds Berg held on J.R.'s behalf. Berg also failed to resolve a lien on J.R.'s property. Berg failed to respond to K.S.'s attempts to contact him from August through December 2005. While handling an appeal for G.B., Berg failed to file a memorandum ordered by the court of appeals. This failure led to the dismissal of G.B.'s appeal. Berg never informed G.B. of the dismissal. Berg agreed that these acts violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.1, 1.3, 1.4(a), 1.4(a)(4), 3.2, 3.4(c), and 8.4(d).
Finally, Berg did not cooperate with the disciplinary investigation. He failed to comply with the district ethics committee investigator's and the Director's requests that he provide trust account records; failed to return settlement funds to J.R. pending the resolution of Berg's claim that Berg was entitled to them; failed to respond to the Director's March 2006 notice of investigation of Berg's representation of C.W. and another request regarding that representation in November 2006; failed to provide the Director with the file, retainer agreement, and trust account records related to his representation of G.B.; failed to provide trust account records related to his representation of L.H.; and failed to provide records related to the overdraft of his trust account. Berg *604 agreed that his lack of cooperation with the investigatory process violated Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 8.1(b) and Rule 25 of the Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR).
Initially, Berg responded to the petition for discipline by denying many of its allegations. He later withdrew that answer and admitted all the allegations of the petition and supplementary petition as part of the terms of the stipulation. In the stipulation, the parties jointly recommended an indefinite suspension for a minimum of five years with conditions placed on reinstatement. Because the agreed acts of misconduct would justify disbarment, we invited the parties to file briefs explaining why Berg should not be disbarred.
In the memorandum attached to the stipulation, the Director described certain aspects of Berg's conduct and of his physical and psychological condition that were considered in mitigation of some of his misconduct. First, at the time briefs were filed the Director had verified that Berg had made restitution to all of his clients other than J.R. At oral argument, the Director confirmed that Berg had made restitution to J.R. Second, prior to this disciplinary action, Berg had no disciplinary history in over 20 years of practice. Third, before any of the events leading to this disciplinary action occurred, Berg was diagnosed with a terminal heart condition known as idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. For Berg, this condition carries with it a 70 percent likelihood of death within the next five years. Berg's treating cardiologist indicated that the loss of function in Berg's heart caused by his condition has resulted in a deterioration of the quality of Berg's life which may have had an impact on his ability to handle client matters effectively. Finally, Berg suffers from depression and anxiety as a result of this diagnosis. The Director recognizes Berg's depression as a mitigating factor with respect to his unintentional misconduct, but not with respect to his intentional misconduct.
Because Berg does not challenge the allegations in the petitions and admits to engaging in professional misconduct, the only issue before us is the appropriate discipline to be imposed. See In re Dovolis, 572 N.W.2d 734, 736 (Minn.1998). "Disciplinary sanctions for professional misconduct are imposed to protect the public and the judicial system, and to deter future misconduct." In re Crandall, 699 N.W.2d 769, 771 (Minn.2005). In determining the appropriate sanction for professional misconduct by an attorney, we consider four factors: "(1) the nature of the misconduct; (2) the cumulative weight of the disciplinary violations; (3) the harm to the public; and (4) the harm to the legal profession." In re Nelson, 733 N.W.2d 458, 463 (Minn. 2007). Analogous cases provide guidance on the appropriate discipline in a given case, but sanctions are imposed on a case-by-case basis in light of aggravating and mitigating circumstances. Id. at 463-64.
Nature of the Misconduct
We have generally said that cases involving misappropriation result in disbarment. In re Wentzel, 711 N.W.2d 516, 520-21 (Minn.2006). But we have occasionally imposed the less severe sanction of a lengthy suspension where substantial mitigating circumstances are present. And we have occasionally deferred to recommendation of the Director for suspension even where mitigating factors were not emphasized. In re Rooney, 709 N.W.2d 263, 272 (Minn.2006) ("[E]xtraordinary stress in an attorney's personal life, such as the serious illness of a loved one, is a mitigating factor that can lead to a sanction less than disbarment in a misappropriation *605 case."); In re Neal, 733 N.W.2d 117 (Minn.2007) (imposing 18-month suspension as jointly recommended where attorney misappropriated funds, without mention of mitigating factors); In re Singer, 630 N.W.2d 404 (Minn.2001) (accepting stipulation for indefinite suspension where attorney misappropriated funds, without mention of mitigating factors).
Berg's misconduct involved concealment of the misappropriation, failure to cooperate with the disciplinary investigation and other misconduct in addition to misappropriation. See Rooney, 709 N.W.2d at 269 (noting cases where disbarment followed several types of misconduct in addition to misappropriation). But Berg's misappropriations were accompanied by a number of mitigating factors.
In misappropriation cases it is appropriate to consider restitution to the affected clients as a mitigating factor so long as restitution is not "prompted by [an attorney's] fear of getting caught." Rooney, 709 N.W.2d at 271 (citing In re Stromwall, 481 N.W.2d 60, 62 (Minn.1992)). We agree with the parties that Berg's complete restitution to each of his clients should be considered in mitigation of his misconduct.
A factor that mitigates Berg's unintentional misconduct is his depression. Ordinarily, for an attorney's psychological disability to be considered a mitigating factor proof of five factors is required: (1) that the attorney has a severe psychological disability; (2) that the disability caused the misconduct; (3) that the attorney is seeking treatment; (4) that the treatment has stopped the misconduct; and (5) that the misconduct is not likely to recur. In re Weyhrich, 339 N.W.2d 274, 279 (Minn. 1983). We agree with the Director that Berg's depression does not mitigate his intentional misconduct, such as misappropriation and the forgery of K.S.'s signature. See In re Jellinger, 655 N.W.2d 312, 316 (Minn.2002) (recognizing causal link between depression and "passive misconduct"). The Director acknowledges that Berg likely only meets the first of the Weyhrich factors, but our decisions have occasionally considered depression in mitigation where an attorney's psychological condition does not completely satisfy the Weyhrich test. See Jellinger, 655 N.W.2d at 316 (mitigating discipline where attorney made partial showing of causative relationship between depression and passive misconduct, receipt of treatment for the disability, and lack of pecuniary loss to clients stemming from misconduct); In re Bergstrom, 562 N.W.2d 674, 678 (Minn. 1997) (considering the significant role depression played in causing misconduct).
Cumulative Weight of Disciplinary Violations
"[T]he cumulative weight and severity of multiple disciplinary rule violations may compel severe discipline even when a single act standing alone would not have warranted such discipline." Nelson, 733 N.W.2d at 464 (citing In re Oberhauser, 679 N.W.2d 153, 160 (Minn.2004)). In Nelson we noted that an attorney's prior disciplinary history can be considered as an aggravating factor while considering the cumulative weight of an attorney's misconduct. 733 N.W.2d at 464-65. But we have also considered an attorney's lack of a disciplinary history as a mitigating factor in determining the appropriate discipline. See, e.g., In re Hottinger, 731 N.W.2d 827, 828 (Minn.2007) (noting the lack of a prior disciplinary record in 34 years of attorney's practice). We emphasize here that prior to the events leading to this disciplinary action, and before Berg's diagnosis with a terminal heart condition, he had no disciplinary history.
*606 Because Berg engaged in multiple acts of misappropriation, dishonesty, and other forms of misconduct, however, the cumulative weight of his misconduct is great and warrants serious discipline. See In re Holker, 730 N.W.2d 768, 776 (Minn.2007) (imposing indefinite suspension where attorney mishandled trust account, failed to diligently represent clients, and failed to cooperate with the disciplinary investigation).
Harm to the Public and Harm to the Legal Profession
We must also consider the harm to the public and to the legal profession resulting from Berg's misconduct. The purpose of attorney discipline is not to punish the attorney but rather to protect the courts, the public, and the legal profession. Jellinger, 655 N.W.2d at 316. All of Berg's misappropriations have been repaid. But the harm to the public and the perception of the legal profession caused by an attorney's misappropriation of funds warrants serious discipline. See In re Wentzel, 711 N.W.2d at 522 (noting that misappropriation of client funds "reflects poorly on the entire legal profession and erodes the public's confidence in lawyers"). Berg's false statements and forgery also warrant serious discipline as they are akin to a "breach of trust." See Nelson, 733 N.W.2d at 465 ("Honesty and integrity are chief among the virtues the public has a right to expect of lawyers.").
Because of the Director's prominent role in the administration of the attorney discipline process, we give some deference to the Director's recommendation of discipline, particularly where contained in a stipulation with the attorney. We observe that under Rule 5, RLPR, the Director "shall be responsible and accountable directly to the [Lawyers Professional Responsibility] Board and through the Board to this Court for the proper administration of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility and [the RLPR]." Although we are ultimately responsible for determining the appropriate discipline to be imposed in cases involving professional misconduct by attorneys, we recognize that Director is in the best position to weigh the cost and risk of litigation and to determine when a stipulated discipline will best serve the interests of the Board.
The Director and Berg stipulated to discipline based on the existence of mitigating factors. As in Rooney, "[t]he presence of numerous mitigating circumstances, none of which alone would suffice to avoid disbarment, persuades us that disbarment in this case is not necessary to achieve the goals of attorney discipline." 709 N.W.2d at 272. Because we agree that the presence of numerous mitigating factors makes disbarment unnecessary to achieve the goals of attorney discipline, we hold that Berg's misconduct warrants the discipline recommended by the stipulation.
Accordingly, we order that:
1. Respondent James L. Berg is indefinitely suspended from the practice of law in the State of Minnesota, effective 14 days from the date of this decision, and is ineligible to apply for reinstatement for a minimum of five years;
2. Berg shall comply with the notice requirements or Rule 26, RLPR;
3. Berg shall pay to the Director costs in the amount of $900 plus interest and disbursements in the amount of $583.66 plus interest pursuant to Rule 24, RLPR; and
4. If Berg seeks reinstatement, he shall comply in all respects with Rule 18, RLPR.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9739106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:48.335858+00 ===

Jansen, J.
(dissenting). The Worker’s Compensation Appeal Board applied an incorrect standard, and, therefore, this case should be remanded. The wcab’s reasoning was essentially that because most teachers do not become mentally disabled by the nature of their job and their students, plaintiff was not so disabled. A condition or event of em*263ployment does not become compensable because most similarly situated employees, or an objective employee, would be disabled by the condition. Benefits are payable when a particular employee suffers a loss of that particular employee’s wage-earning capacity because of a personal injury at work. MCL 418.301(1); MSA 17.237(301X1), MCL 418.351(1); MSA 17.237(351)(1), and MCL 418.361(1); MSA 17.237(361X1).
Plaintiff established numerous events that led to his disability. The wcab agreed that almost all these events were "actual events,” and there was no dispute that the events arose out of plaintiff’s employment. Thus the "actual event” requirement of §§ 301(2) and 401(2)(b) was satisfied. The act does not say that an event must be unusual, highly stressful, or extraordinary for the event to lead to a compensable disability. It does not matter what effect actual events might have on other employees, because the act compensates individual employees for their respective personal losses.
The act compensates an employee with a preexisting condition that makes the employee more susceptible to a physical injury than a typical employee. Zaremba v Chrysler Corp, 377 Mich 226; 139 NW2d 745 (1966). Once an employee proves a mental disability arising out of an actual event of employment that affects his condition in a significant manner, that employee is as entitled to disability benefits in the same manner as a physically disabled employee. In the present case, the wcab did not express any meaningful doubt that the events occurred as alleged by plaintiff. Once plaintiff established the events he claimed had injured him, the wcab should have weighed the expert testimony or otherwise determined causation.
There is little difference between this case and Carter v General Motors Corp, 361 Mich 577; 106 *264NW2d 105 (1960). The Legislature invalidated the decision in Deziel v Difco Laboratories, Inc (After Remand), 403 Mich 1; 268 NW2d 1 (1978). Hurd v Ford Motor Company, 423 Mich 531; 377 NW2d 300 (1985). Hurd says nothing about Carter being invalidated.

=== CASE 9739107 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:50.905144+00 ===

Reilly, J.
This case involves a dispute regarding Wayne County Sheriff Robert Ficano’s request to the Wayne County Board of Commissioners for payment of attorney fees incurred in defending against a petition to appoint a receiver for the Wayne County Jail. The petition was filed by the Wayne County Executive, Edward McNamara, in a Wayne Circuit Court action brought by prisoners in 1971 against the Wayne County Executive, the chairman of the Wayne County Board of Commissioners, the sheriff, and the jail administrator seeking to improve jail conditions.
McNamara petitioned the court to relieve Sheriff Ficano of his jail responsibilities and have himself appointed as receiver of the jail on August 15, 1988. The hearing on the motion was scheduled for August 29, 1988. In separate letters dated August 16 and 17, 1988, both the Wayne County Prosecuting Attorney and the Wayne County Corporation Counsel advised the sheriff that their offices would be unable to represent him to defend against the receivership petition. On August 15, *5011988, Ficano sought authorization from the board of commissioners to retain outside legal counsel to represent his interests. On the same day, Ficano retained outside legal counsel. McNamara objected to the request for outside counsel, arguing to the board that Ficano’s in-house counsel, Adam Angelas, should represent Ficano in the receivership proceeding. On August 25, 1988, the board, by resolution, tentatively approved Ficano’s request for use of outside legal counsel in the receivership proceeding.1 It is undisputed that the board rejected McNamara’s argument when it authorized outside counsel, but the record does not indicate its reasons for doing so.
On September 1, 1988, the inmates filed their own petition requesting that an independent receiver be appointed. On September 13, 1988, McNamara formally withdrew his petition to be appointed receiver. However, after his withdrawal, McNamara filed court documents and made appearances through counsel, arguing that should the court decide to appoint a receiver, he was the logical choice.
On October 6, 1988, the commissioners passed a second resolution, revoking their approval of pay*502ment of fees to Ficano’s outside legal counsel, conditioned upon their chairman’s receipt of a letter from the corporation counsel that his office could represent - Ficano. Again, nothing in the resolution or in the record refers to the availability of Angelas to represent the sheriff in the receivership proceedings. On October 7, 1988, the corporation counsel sent the chairman, Arthur Carter, a letter stating that because McNamara had withdrawn his petition to be appointed receiver, he could lawfully provide legal representation to the sheriff. Nevertheless, Ficano continued to retain outside legal counsel to represent him in the receivership proceeding.
In late 1988, Ficano submitted an invoice to the board of commissioners for attorney fees for the period August 15, 1988, to September 30, 1988. The board referred the invoice to its legislative tribunal, which adopted a resolution authorizing payment in full. However, the board refused to pay the invoice except for $3,457.25 in counsel’s out-of-pocket expenses.
On February 16, 1989, the trial court granted the motion for receivership, naming McNamara as the receiver. Ficano appealed and filed a motion for stay, which was denied by this Court, McDonald, P.J., and Holbrook, Jr., and Murphy, JJ., on March 16, 1989 (Docket No. 115672). Our Supreme Court reversed, stayed the receivership order on March 24, 1989, and ordered this Court’s expeditious hearing and decision of the case. Wayne Co Jail Inmates v Wayne Co Chief Executive Officer #2, 432 Mich 882 (1989). This Court, Cynar, P.J., and Wahls and Marilyn Kelly, JJ., then held, inter alia, that the receivership order was proper. Wayne Co Jail Inmates v Wayne Co Chief Execu*503tive Officer, 178 Mich App 634; 444 NW2d 549 (1989). Our Supreme Court again stayed the receivership order in an order dated August 15, 1989, while an application for leave to appeal remained under' consideration. On November 30, 1989, the parties entered into a consent judgment whereby McNamara and Ficano agreed to jointly appoint Peter Wilson as Director of Jail Operations, who would report to McNamara on all budget matters and to Ficano on all security and operational matters. On February 21, 1990, the Supreme Court entered an order dismissing the appeal pursuant to the consent judgment.
On June 21, 1989, before entry of the consent judgment, Ficano commenced this action against the Wayne County Board of Commissioners, seeking to recover attorney fees in excess of $400,000, allegedly incurred by him in defending against the petition for receivership. On February 28, 1990, intervening defendant McNamara filed a motion for summary disposition of the issue of the board’s liability for attorney fees. In March 1990, Ficano and the board filed similar motions. On May 8, 1990, the trial court issued a written opinion and order granting defendants’ motions for summary disposition regarding the board’s liability for Ficano’s attorney fees incurred before August 25, 1988, and after October 7, 1988. The court also granted Ficano’s motion for summary disposition regarding the .board’s obligation to pay those fees incurred between August 25, 1988, and October 7, 1988. All the motions were granted pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10). Basically, the court determined that the board was liable only for those fees incurred by Ficano for the period August 25, 1988, to October 7, 1988, while the resolution authorizing outside counsel was in effect. On August 24, 1990, the trial court entered a final judgment, ordering the board to pay plaintiff $56,560.75 in attorney fees *504for that period. Plaintiff Ficano appeals as of right from the final order granting defendants’ motions. Defendants have not filed a cross appeal.2
i
Plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in recognizing the validity of the commissioners’ October 6, 1988, resolution wherein the commissioners revoked their authorization for plaintiff to retain outside counsel.
Plaintiff argues that the board could not legally revoke its authorization for plaintiff’s outside counsel and that the October 6, 1988, resolution is void because: (1) the board had a statutory duty to provide him with counsel, (2) the conflict between him, the board, and McNamara was not extinguished with McNamara’s withdrawal, and (3) the corporation counsel could not represent him while the conflict existed. Plaintiff also contends that the crisis situation demanded immediate retention of outside counsel and Angelas could not handle the increase in work without the continued assistance from the corporation counsel’s legal staff.3 The board argues that no conflict of interest existed after McNamara’s withdrawal of his petition that would preclude representation of Ficano by the corporation counsel. McNamara does not contend that no conflict existed, but, rather, that it is irrelevant because the county’s statutory obligation to provide legal counsel to the sheriff was satisfied by the continued employment of Angelas, *505who was paid by the county to represent the sheriffs interests exclusively.
The trial court determined that "factual questions may exist as to whether Corporation Counsel was able to represent the Sheriff in the 'jail case’ with respect to the receivership motion.” Nonetheless, the court proceeded to make a factual finding that the presence of Angelas as Director of the Service Division of the Wayne County Sheriffs Department, and plaintiffs in-house counsel in the jail case for the previous thirteen years, satisfied the commissioners’ statutory duty to provide plaintiff with counsel in the receivership action. In essence, the trial court determined that because the county paid Angelas to represent the sheriffs office, and because he was competent and had unquestioned loyalty to the sheriff, it had complied with MCL 49.73; MSA 5.826, and had no obligation to provide additional legal counsel.
MCL 49.73; MSA 5.826 provides in pertinent part:
The board of commissioners of a county shall employ an attorney to represent elected county officers, including the sheriff, ... in civil matters, as a defendant, when neither the prosecuting attorney or county corporation counsel is able to represent the particular officer. Legal advice, counsel, or court action shall be required under this section only in a case which involves an official act or duty of the office of the county officer. The attorney shall receive reasonable compensation as shall be determined by the board of commissioners.
As noted above, the record does not reveal the reason for the commission’s initial resolution authorizing outside counsel to represent Ficano rather than requiring Ficano to utilize Angelas as *506his counsel. Nor does the record reveal why the board did not look to Angelas to represent plaintiff following the withdrawal of McNamara’s petition. We only know from the language of the board’s second resolution that the board was concerned about the ability of the corporation counsel to represent Ficano in view of the conflict between Ficano and McNamara.4
There is no question that the county, acting through its board of commissioners, was statutorily obligated to provide the sheriff with legal counsel to defend against the receivership proceeding. We agree with the trial court that the statute does not require retention of outside legal counsel as opposed to in-house counsel. Therefore, the real controversies in this case are: (1) whether a conflict of interest remained after McNamara’s withdrawal of his petition that would render the corporation counsel ethically unable to represent Ficano in the receivership litigation;5 (2) if so, whether *507Angelas, who was employed by the county to represent the sheriff exclusively, had the time and staff necessary to adequately represent Ficano in the receivership proceeding without the assistance of corporation counsel’s legal and administrative staff;6 and (3) if Angelas could not adequately *508provide the representation required, whether exigent circumstances existed.
The trial court recognized that factual issues were presented regarding the first issue, even though McNamara was represented by his own counsel rather than the corporation counsel in the receivership proceedings.7 Nevertheless, the court concluded that because Angelas was indisputably competent and loyal to the sheriff, his presence was, as a matter of law, sufficient to show the board’s compliance with its statutory obligation to provide legal representation to the sheriff.
We disagree Although Angelas’ competence and loyalty is not in dispute, the factual issue remains whether Angelas had the time and staff to properly represent the sheriff if Angelas was unable to utilize the assistance of the staff of the corporation counsel’s office because of that office’s purported conflict of interest.8 Because questions of fact must be resolved regarding issues 1 and 2, the trial court erred in granting summary disposition. SSC Associates Limited Partnership v General Retirement System of the City of Detroit, 192 Mich App 360, 366; 480 NW2d 275 (1991); Jubenville v West End Cartage, Inc, 163 Mich App 199, 203; 413 NW2d 705 (1987). We therefore reverse the grant of summary disposition in favor of defendants and remand to the trial court for a determination of the factual issues.
On remand, if it is determined that Angelas was *509not able to adequately represent the sheriff between August 15 and August 25, 1988, the trial court shall also consider whether exigent circumstances existed that would excuse Ficano from obtaining the board’s authorization, as required by Wayne County Ordinance No. 83-13, effective October 7, 1983, before retaining outside legal counsel.9 Plaintiff argues that because McNamara’s petition action was scheduled for hearing on August 29, 1988, a crisis situation necessitated plaintiffs immediate retention of outside counsel. Michigan courts have recognized the principle that public officials acting in their official capacity may retain outside counsel without the permission of the local governing body if the retention is justified' by exigent circumstances. See Smedley v Grand Haven, 125 Mich 424; 84 NW 626 (1900); City of Warren v Dannis, 136 Mich App 651; 357 NW2d 731 (1984); Exeter Twp Clerk v Exeter Twp Bd, 108 Mich App 262; 310 NW2d 357 (1981). Whether exigent circumstances are present that justify the unauthorized retention of private counsel is a *510question for the finder of fact. Smedley, supra at 429. As noted above, the statutory obligation to provide legal representation is mandatory. Nevertheless, we find no reason to ignore the provisions of the ordinance that provide for notice to the board of the officials’ need for legal representation. The board is thus afforded an opportunity to determine whether adequate in-house representation is available (i.e., corporation counsel or an attorney, such as Angelas, who is employed to provide legal representation to an official exclusively) avoiding the necessity of engaging outside legal counsel.
ii
Plaintiff also argues that he is entitled to a jury trial to determine the reasonableness of the attorney fees he incurred in the receivership action. We disagree. MCL 49.73; MSA 5.826 specifically states that compensation shall be determined by the board of commissioners. Additionally, plaintiffs complaint, although phrased as an action for money damages, is in actuality an equitable action for reimbursement of fees or for mandamus. Plaintiff has not suffered any damages by reason of breach of a contract, but, rather, is asserting his statutory rights. See City of Warren v Dannis, supra, and Exeter Twp Clerk, supra. Plaintiff is not entitled to a jury trial in this equitable action.10
in
We decline to review plaintiffs argument that *511he is entitled to recover fees and expenses incurred in bringing this action. An issue not decided by the trial court is not preserved for review by this Court. McKelvie v Mount Clemens, 193 Mich App 81, 86; 483 NW2d 442 (1992). We conclude that a miscarriage of justice will not result from our declining to review this issue. Id. On remand, plaintiff is free to pursue his motion for attorney fees.
iv
Finally, we have considered plaintiffs claim that the October 6, 1988, resolution was adopted in violation of the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; MSA 4.1800(11) et seq., and agree with the trial court that the claim is without merit.
Accordingly, the order granting summary disposition for defendants for the periods August 15 to August 25, 1988, and after October 7, 1988, is reversed. We remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Hood, J., concurred.
The resolution provided for appointment of a mediation panel to evaluate jail conditions and meet with the parties to resolve the dispute. The panel was given twenty-eight days to accomplish its assignment. The resolution concluded as follows:
Resolved, that Corporation Counsel be directed to go into Wayne County Circuit Court to request the postponement of all hearings regarding the central administration of the Jail Petition by the County Executive until the end of the 28 day mediation period and, be it further
Resolved, that no expenditures for outside counsel will be made until after the 28 day period and/or unless any party progresses the suit; outside counsel is approved, pending the outcome of the 28 day period review, and be it finally
Resolved, that the Chairman of the Board, with the advice of the Commissioners, appoint this Mediation Panel no later than September 8, 1988.
The board has acknowledged liability for payment for services rendered by outside legal counsel for the period August 25, 1988, to October 7, 1988.
In support of his position that the October 6, 1988, resolution is void, Ficano cites only cases where the Michigan courts have invalidated ordinances that were unconstitutional. None of those cases are applicable in this case because no one has claimed that the resolution was unconstitutional.
The October 6, 1988, resolution provided in pertinent part:
[PJayments of legal fees shall cease to outside legal firms representing the Sheriff immediately upon the Chairman of the Commission’s personal receipt of a letter from the Corporation Counsel indicating that the Corporation Counsel can represent the Sheriff in the lawsuit Jail Inmates v Wayne County, et al.
Rule 1.7 of the Michigan Rules of Professional Conduct governs conflicts of interest as follows:
(a) A lawyer shall not represent a client if the representation of that client will be directly adverse to another client, unless:
(1) the lawyer reasonably believes the representation will not adversely affect the relationship with the other client; and
(2) each client consents after consultation.
(b) A lawyer shall not represent a client if the representation of that client may be materially limited by the lawyer’s responsibilities to another client or to a third person, or by the lawyer’s own interests, unless:
(1) the lawyer reasonably believes the representation will not be adversely affected; and
(2) the client consents after consultation. When representation of multiple clients in a single matter is undertaken, the *507consultation shall include explanation of the implications of the common representation ánd the advantages and risks involved.
According to the May 18, 1990, affidavit of Adam Angelas, filed in support of Ficano’s motion:
5. I have represented the Sheriff for many years in litigation titled Wayne County Jail Inmates, et al v Edward McNamara, et al, Wayne County Circuit Court No. 71-173-217-CZ. From the beginning of my representation in 1975 until as recently as mid 1988, whenever needed, I was able to work with, and draw upon the resources of the Wayne County Corporation Counsel and his staff. From 1983 to 1986, the Jail case was not highly adversarial, rather the parties were engaged in the process of attempting to bring Jail conditions into compliance with the various court orders. From 1986 until mid 1988, the parties were in the process of attempting to consolidate all court orders into one final judgment and my work was primarily involved in attendance at meetings and negotiations with other counsel and the jail monitors in the preparation of the final judgment and other pleadings concerning the findings of the monitor and implementation of the court’s final judgment in the jail case.
6. In August and September of 1988, the County Executive and the Jail Inmates filed motions in the Jail Inmates litigation seeking the appointment of a receiver for the Wayne County Jail. Those motions substantially changed the nature of the litigation and created a highly adversarial relationship between the Sheriff and the County Executive, and also created conflicts between the Sheriff and the Board of Commissioners and the Corporation Counsel. . . .
7. No single lawyer, particularly a single lawyer like myself with ongoing administrative and legal duties, could possibly have provided the Sheriff with the resources and quality of representation given him in the Receivership litigation. I did not have the time, staff or resources to do so. I regularly reviewed the briefs and other materials filed by the Bodman firm in the case, and attended most, if not all, of the Court proceedings. It is my opinion that the extensive services performed by the Bodman firm in representing the Sheriff in the Receivership litigation were necessary in light of the vigorous advocacy of the multiple lawyers representing the adverse parties and the time constraints imposed for the completion of the case.
The trial court’s opinion of May 8, 1990, stated:
However, because the Corporation Counsel’s Office did represent the Commissioners, and because of the conflict that may be created because of the legal relationship between the CEO and Corporation Counsel, it appears to the Court that factual questions may exist as to whether Corporation Counsel was able to represent the Sheriff in the "jail case” with respect to the receivership motion.
See uncontested affidavit of Adam Angelas, footnote 6, supra.
Wayne County Ordinance No. 83-13 provides in pertinent part:
SECTION 3: SEPARATE LEGAL COUNSEL
The County Commission shall employ an attorney to represent the County Commission, its members, the Chief Executive Officer, or any other officials, departments, officers, agencies or instrumentalities or their directors, trustees, officers or employees when neither the Prosecuting Attorney nor the Corporation Counsel is able to provide representation; however, legal advice, counsel or court action shall be required under this section only in civil matters when such County Commission, its members, the Chief Executive Officer, or any other officials, departments, officers, agencies or instrumentalities or their director, trustees, officers or employees is a party defendant and the case involves an official act or duty of the office.
SECTION 4: WRITTEN REJECTIONS REQUIRED
Any request for engaging separate legal counsel shall be preceded by a written request with written rejections by the Prosecuting Attorney and the Corporation Counsel.
Plaintiff cites Smedley v Grand Haven, 125 Mich 424; 84 NW 626 (1900), as support for his right to a jury trial. However, Smedley is distinguishable from this case because the plaintiff in Smedley was the mayor’s attorney and was asserting his contractual rights against the city.

=== CASE 9739108 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:50.9094+00 ===

Fitzgerald, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that there is a factual dispute regarding Angelas’ ability to represent Ficano in the receivership proceeding. MCL 49.73; MSA 5.826 requires the board of commissioners to employ an attorney to represent the sheriff when he is named as a defendant and corporation counsel and the prosecuting attorney are unable to represent him. Thus, the decision whether to employ counsel to defend the sheriff is made case by case. I do not believe that the full-time employment of *512in-house counsel satisfies the board’s duty to provide counsel where the board decides not to employ the in-house counsel in any given case. In this case, the board, which is the party that may ultimately be responsible for the payment of the outside legal fees, has conceded that Angelas’ employment as in-house counsel is irrelevant in the determination whether the board satisfied its statutory duty to defend.1
I concur with the remainder of the majority opinion.
Only McNamara contends that the county’s statutory obligation to provide legal counsel to the sheriff was satisfied by the continued employment of Angelas.

=== CASE 2218755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:54.118803+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 31 (1992)
230 Ill. App. 3d 795
172 Ill. Dec. 752
Patrick MITCHELL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE, Glenn E. Jackson, and Edward Crotty, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-90-2176.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
June 10, 1992.
*32 Griffin & Fadden, Ltd., Chicago, (Lawrence G. Staat, John E. Fish, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellant.
Roland W. Burris, Atty. Gen., Chicago (Rosalyn B. Kaplan, Sol. Gen., Jerald S. Post, of counsel), for Illinois Dept. of Revenue.
Presiding Justice GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Patrick Mitchell appeals from the circuit court's administrative review which affirmed the assessment of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) that defendant is liable to the Illinois Department of Revenue (DOR) for penalties totaling $39,774.78 for willful failure to remit employer's withholding tax payments for 1981, 1982 and the first and fourth quarters of 1983.
Our decision in this case turns upon a determination as to the appropriate section of the Illinois Income Tax Act employed to impose the assessment against defendants and accordingly which statute of limitations is applicable to that assessment.
Section 905(c) provides that if no return is filed, a notice of deficiency may be issued at any time. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 9-905(c).
Section 905(j), however, deals expressly with withholding taxes and provides that in the case of returns required by the Act, a notice of deficiency shall not be issued later than three years, three months and 15 days following the close of the calendar year. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 9-905(j).
Defendant contends that (1) he was improperly found liable for the penalties under section 905(c) of the Illinois Income Tax Act, since section 905(j) and its statute of limitation should have been applied to find the action against him time-barred, and (2) even if this court finds him liable under 905(c), he cannot be penalized for the 1981 and 1982 returns because the DOR failed to make a prima facie showing that those returns were not filed.
We affirm the lower court's finding that defendant is liable under section 905(c) for *33 the 1983 penalties, but we reverse as to the 1981 and 1982 penalties since we find the DOR failed to make a prima facie showing that those returns were never filed.
Mitchell was president, chief executive officer and a 50% shareholder of Mitco Sales, Inc., which, having accumulated federal payroll tax arrearages, was dissolved in December 1983. After an audit conducted by the DOR's Bureau of Criminal Investigation, the DOR determined that Mitco had failed to file withholding returns for all quarters of 1981, 1982 and the first and fourth quarters of 1983. On May 27, 1988, DOR then issued notices of deficiency to Mitchell and other Mitco officers seeking penalties for willful failure to collect and pay over withholding taxes for the quarters in question, pursuant to section 1002 of the Illinois Income Tax Act. Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 10-1002.
Mitchell and the other officers filed protests and after an evidentiary hearing, the ALJ found Mitchell to be the responsible officer for payment of withholding taxes, that he willfully failed to remit those taxes, and that he was liable for penalties under section 1002(d) of the Act for $39,774.
After that finding was accepted by the Director of the DOR, Mitchell sought administrative review in the Circuit Court of Cook County. That court affirmed the DOR's decision.
Defendant first contends section 905(j) should apply to his situation instead of section 905(c) and that issuance of the DOR's notice of deficiency was barred by section 905(j) which provides:
"(j) Withholding tax. In the case of returns required under Article 7 of this Act (with respect to any amounts withheld as tax or any amounts required to have been withheld as tax) a notice of deficiency shall be issued not later than 3 years after the 15th day of the 4th month following the close of the calendar year in which such withholding was required." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 9-905(j).
Defendant argues that pursuant to the statute of limitations set out in 905(j), the notice of deficiency sent to him on May 27, 1988, was time-barred since the final day for issuing a notice for each of the years in question was: For 1981, the last day to issue a notice was April 15, 1985; for 1982, the last day was April 15, 1986; for 1983, the last day was April 15, 1987.
Defendant argues that the plain language of section 1002(e)(1) also supports his contention that the 905(j) time limitation applies since that section provides that as to any penalty assessed, the notice, demand and collection shall be in the same manner as the original tax upon which the penalty is predicated. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 10-1002(e)(1).[1]
Defendant claims 1002(e)(1) provides that any notice of deficiency asserting penalties for failure to pay withholding taxes must be issued within the period permitted for the assessment of withholding taxes, and that the DOR's notice for penalties was time-barred in this case.
We disagree with defendant's contentions.
While an administrative agency's factual findings are considered prima facie correct and will not be set aside unless they are against the manifest weight of the evidence, a reviewing court is not bound to give the same deference to an agency's conclusions of law since a reviewing court must exercise independent review and judgment. Kankakeeland Community Action Program, Inc. v. Department of Commerce and Community Affairs (1990), 197 Ill.App.3d 1067, 1077, 145 Ill. Dec. 507, 557 N.E.2d 277; Russell v. Department of Central Management Services (1990), 196 Ill.App.3d 641, 644, 143 Ill. Dec. 529, 554 N.E.2d 464; Illinois Bell Telephone Co. v. Human Rights Commission (1989), 190 Ill.App.3d 1036, 1045-46, *34 138 Ill. Dec. 332, 547 N.E.2d 499; Rodgers v. Department of Employment Security (1989), 186 Ill.App.3d 194, 198, 134 Ill. Dec. 168, 542 N.E.2d 168.
The penalties at issue here were imposed upon Mitchell in his capacity as a responsible officer of Mitco for his willful failure to cause a return to be filed and to collect and pay withholding taxes, pursuant to section 1002(d) of the Act.
Section 905(a) provides the general three-year statute of limitation for notices of deficiency.[2]
Section 905(c) provides an exception to the general statute of limitations and is applicable in this instance.[3] This section addresses the consequences of a total failure to file any return.
By its express terms, section 905(j) applies only to those withholding tax situations where returns have actually been filed. Where the return has been filed, a notice of deficiency must be filed within three years, three months and 15 days after the close of the calendar year.
The General Assembly further provided that there be an additional penalty for the failure to file withholding returns. Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 10-1004.
This seemingly minor penalty is "in addition to any other penalties imposed by (the) Act." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 10-1004.
Accordingly, the circumstances of this case are governed by section 905(c) which relates to taxpayer's or persons derivatively liable for taxes who fail to file tax returns. In such cases, the notice of deficiency may be issued at any time without limitation.
The legislature's distinction in this regard is perfectly reasonable. On the one hand (under section 905(j)), a return has been filed and the State may examine it, determine its reasonableness, conduct an audit or such other inquiry as may be appropriate. On the other hand (under section 905(c)), the State is not on notice that any wages were paid and sums withheld and ought not to be foreclosed from asserting the claim against the employer or someone derivatively liable for such taxes.
In order to come within the penumbra of section 905(c), the State must allege and prove that returns were not filed for the years in question, since the filing of returns would make section 905(j) applicable.
As to the returns for the years 1981 and 1982, defendant contends, and we agree, that the DOR made no attempt to check its records to determine whether the returns were filed and therefore did not carry its burden in showing that the returns were not filed.
The DOR's investigator testified that he requested copies of Form IL-941 from the DOR Taxpayer Record Section for the quarters of 1983 only, and stated that he did not know if anyone else at DOR had requested copies of the 1981 and 1982 returns. Without foundation, he testified that it was his "recollection" that returns were not filed for 1981 and 1982. The DOR's auditor acknowledged that she did not attempt to determine whether returns for the 1981 and 1982 period were filed, but rather relied upon the evidence produced in the investigation. She simply used the returns provided, which were for two quarters in 1983, to project back to 1981 and 1982 to compute defendant's penalties for those years.
The Code of Civil Procedure specifies that "the findings and conclusions of the administrative agency on questions of *35 fact shall be held to be prima facie true and correct." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110. par. 3-110.) However, whether an agency has properly stated a prima facie case is a question of law, and a reviewing court must determine whether an agency abused its discretion. (Chicago v. Illinois Local Labor Relations Board (1988), 182 Ill. App. 3d 588, 594, 130 Ill. Dec. 8, 536 N.E.2d 1219.) It is an abuse of discretion if the agency's factual determinations are against the manifest weight of the evidence. Basketfield v. Police Board of Chicago (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 351, 358, 307 N.E.2d 371; Campbell v. Department of Employment Security (1991), 211 Ill.App.3d 1070, 1080, 156 Ill. Dec. 336, 570 N.E.2d 812; Wilson v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners (1990), 205 Ill.App.3d 984, 990, 150 Ill. Dec. 814, 563 N.E.2d 941.
While we do not reweigh the evidence, we cannot say that the ALJ's finding that defendant did not file returns for 1981 and 1982 is just and reasonable in light of the evidence presented. The evidence presented was merely the investigator's "recollection" that those returns were not filed. There was no evidence introduced to establish that the returns were not filed, nor even any testimony that a search had been made for the 1981 and 1982 returns. There was no indication in the record of the basis of the investigator's recollection.
A court may not hesitate to grant relief where the record does not disclose evidentiary support for the agency's determination. (Basketfield, 56 Ill.2d at 359, 307 N.E.2d 371; Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Property Tax Appeal Board (1983), 115 Ill.App.3d 371, 378, 71 Ill. Dec. 92, 450 N.E.2d 780; Greene v. Board of Election Commissioners (1983), 112 Ill.App.3d 862, 871, 68 Ill. Dec. 484, 445 N.E.2d 1337.) We find that the record in this case is devoid of any evidentiary support for the agency's factual determination that returns were not filed for 1981 and 1982.
We disagree with the trial court that the DOR's allegations that returns were not filed for 1981 and 1982 are entitled to a "prima facie presumption of correctness" so as to encourage taxpayers to keep comprehensive and accurate records, relying on Smith v. Department of Revenue (1986), 143 Ill.App.3d 607, 97 Ill. Dec. 846, 493 N.E.2d 653. That case involved owners' failure to pay taxes due under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act for seven furniture stores operated in Missouri and Illinois. However, in that case, the DOR had already established that the defendants filed no returns for taxes owed. The Smith court held that the DOR, having established a failure to file returns, was entitled to a presumption of correctness regarding its computation of the amount of tax owed. Smith, 143 Ill.App.3d at 608, 610-11, 97 Ill. Dec. 846, 493 N.E.2d 653.
Plaintiff also contends that there is a presumption of correctness that attaches to the DOR's determination and that defendant did not adequately rebut that presumption by testifying that he believed the returns were filed. However, we point out that before any presumption of correctness attaches, the agency must properly make its prima facie showing. Only after that is done is any presumption of correctness taken by a reviewing court. There was no prima facie showing here since the record fails to establish the DOR's contention as being in accordance with the manifest weight of the evidence presented.
We acknowledge, however, that where the issue is merely one of conflicting testimony and a witness's credibility, the agency's determination is generally sustained. (Keen v. Police Board of Chicago (1979), 73 Ill.App.3d 65, 70-71, 29 Ill. Dec. 31, 391 N.E.2d 190; Letourneau v. Department of Registration and Education (1991), 212 Ill.App.3d 717, 726, 156 Ill. Dec. 803, 571 N.E.2d 783.) But in the case at bar, the issue is whether the evidence provides just and reasonable support for the agency's conclusion and is not a matter of witness credibility. See Letourneau, 212 Ill. App.3d at 728, 156 Ill. Dec. 803, 571 N.E.2d 783.
Therefore, we must reduce the penalties assessed defendant under section 1002(d) to exclude those penalties charged for 1981 and 1982. According to the ALJ's figures, a penalty was assessed against plaintiff for *36 a total of $14,384.09 for all 1981 and $20,143.60 for all of 1982. Subtracting these two amounts from the total penalty of $39,774.58 originally assessed defendant, we find defendant now owes only $5,246.89.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and reverse in part by reducing defendant's section 1002(d) penalties to exclude the amounts from 1981 and 1982.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
RIZZI and CERDA, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120 par. 10-1002(e)(1) provides:
"Except as provided in paragraphs (2), (3) and (4), the penalties provided by this Act shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as taxes and any reference in this Act to the tax imposed by this Act shall be deemed also to refer to penalties provided by this Act."
[2]  Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 120, par. 9-905(a) provides:
"Except as otherwise provided in this Act:
(1) A notice of deficiency shall be issued not later than 3 years after the date the return is filed, and
(2) No deficiency shall be assessed or collected with respect to the years for which the return was filed unless such notice is issued within such period."
[3]  Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 120, par. 9-905(c) provides:
"No return or fraudulent return. If no return is filed or a false and fraudulent return is filed with intent to evade the tax imposed by this Act, a notice of deficiency may be issued at any time."

=== CASE 2218761 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:54.217693+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 903 (1992)
In the matter of Kevin B. RELPHORDE.
No. 45S00-9009-DI-592.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
July 30, 1992.
Thomas W. Vanes, Merrillville, for respondent.
Jeffrey D. Todd, Acting Executive Secretary, Indianapolis, for Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Com'n.
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
PER CURIAM.
The Disciplinary Commission of the Supreme Court charged the Respondent, Kevin B. Relphorde, with violations of the Rules of Professional Conduct for Attorneys at Law arising from his court-appointed representation of a criminal defendant in the Lake County Superior Court. The Disciplinary Commission alleged that Respondent collected a fee for his representation of the defendant after he had been appointed to represent the defendant as an indigent.
The parties have submitted a Statement of Circumstances and Conditional Agreement for Discipline on the basis of which we find that Respondent is now and was at all relevant times an attorney in good standing in Indiana. We find that on or about February 4, 1988, Respondent was appointed by the Lake Superior Court to represent George A. Finney (Finney) who had been charged with a Class B felony. At the time of his appointment, Respondent was acting as an attorney for the Office of the Public Defender, Superior Court of Lake County, Criminal Division. During the course of his representation of Finney, Respondent negotiated and entered into a fee agreement with his client. In furtherance of this agreement, Respondent received the sum of One Thousand Eight Hundred Dollars ($1,800.00). As a mitigating factor, the parties agree and we find that the Respondent has refunded the entire fee to his client.
Respondent has admitted that he engaged in professional misconduct. We find specifically that he violated Rule 1.11(c)(2) of the Rules of Professional Conduct for Attorneys at Law by negotiating for private employment in a matter in which he was participating as a public employee or officer. We find further that the agreed sanction, a public reprimand is appropriate. Accordingly, we accept the Conditional Agreement. It is, therefore, ordered that Respondent, Kevin B. Relphorde, is reprimanded and admonished.
Costs of this proceeding are assessed against the Respondent.

=== CASE 9739109 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:56.924466+00 ===

*271COYNE, Justice.
On May 21, 1990, Independent School District No. 281 gave Shirley Johnson, a probationary teacher, written notice that on May 20, 1990 the school board had resolved not to renew her contract for the following school year. The writ of certiorari was issued July 18, 1990. Nevertheless, the court of appeals treated Ms. Johnson’s petition as if the writ had not issued and as if she sought extraordinary relief, such as that provided by a writ of prohibition or mandamus. The court of appeals then held that although Johnson had no claim to reinstatement because the school district had unquestioned statutory authority pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 (1990) to decline to renew her contract, the school district was, nevertheless, required to grant Johnson a hearing, which the court of appeals recommended be conducted by an independent hearing examiner. Johnson v. Independent School District No. 281, 479 N.W.2d 392 (Minn.App.1991). We reverse.
The current dispute arises out of these events:
Independent School District No. 281 engaged Shirley Johnson as a probationary teacher for the 1990-91 school year at an annual salary of $56,126.00. The contract stated that it was “based on 44 weeks beginning July 30, 1990 as elementary principal at Meadow Lake Elementary School on MA + 60, step 1 (26-pay option).”
The employment of teachers,1 their contracts and the termination of those contracts are governed by Minn.Stat. § 125.12 (1990), which provides at subdivision 3 for a probationary period of employment. Pursuant to subdivision 3, a school district must adopt a plan for written evaluation of teachers during the probationary period, and evaluation must occur at least three times each year for a teacher performing services on 120 or more school days. On October 18, 1990 the school district gave Ms. Johnson its first written evaluation of her performance, accompanied by a notice of deficiency from Don Wagner, director of elementary education. Although the evaluation indicated that Ms. Johnson had met major expectations in many respects, the evaluation also stated that she needed improvement in one area and immediate improvement in five areas. A discussion of the deficiencies was set out in the four page single-spaced notice of deficiency.
The performance appraisal was discussed at a meeting on October 22, 1990 attended by Shirley Johnson, Don Wagner, and Gwen Martinson, the director of special education. A second meeting was held on November 5, 1990, with Ms. Johnson; Mr. Wagner; Ann Eilbracht, director of human resources; and Donald Lewis, Ms. Johnson’s lawyer.
Ms. Johnson took exception to several items in the appraisal and notice of deficiency. In a written memorandum dated November 14, 1990, provided at Mr. Wagner's request, Ms. Johnson enumerated and discussed those items in the deficiency notice that she contended were misstatements. The discussion was prefaced by this statement: “This letter also constitutes my submission of a grievance pursuant to the school district’s collective bargaining agreement with the Principals’ Association, as well as my demand that the false, inaccurate, and misleading statements be expunged from my personnel records.”
On December 4, 1990 Mr. Wagner responded to Ms. Johnson’s grievance, providing a copy of a revised notice of deficiency dated October 18,1990 and notifying her that the original notice had been removed from her personnel file. On December 21, 1990 Ms. Johnson filed a second level grievance with the superintendent of schools, asserting the inadequacy of the revision of the October notice of deficiency and requesting that both original and revised notices of deficiency and the probationary principal performance appraisal be expunged from her personnel file.
*272In the meantime, however, on December 19th, the district superintendent of schools and a group of about 40 members of the teaching and administrative staff of Meadow Lake Elementary School met to discuss their concerns about Ms. Johnson’s performance as principal. As a result of this meeting, the superintendent initiated an investigation which was to begin on December 21, 1990. Although Ms. Johnson was neither invited to the meeting nor notified of it, word of it was somehow disseminated among the parents of minority pupils. On December 21st, the day the investigation ordered by the superintendent was to begin, a group of parents appeared at the district central office; after a brief meeting with district administrators concerning perceived racial inequity in the treatment and education of their children, the group moved to Meadow Lake Elementary School — in both instances accompanied by members of the news media. According to Ms. Johnson the visit at the school was an orderly show of support for her leadership of the school and her efforts on behalf of their children. The school district, on the other hand, contends that the visitors’ “loud and angry” voices frightened the school children and caused teachers to fear for their pupils’ safety.
On January 2, 1991 the school district suspended Ms. Johnson with full pay and benefits pending the outcome of an investigation of her performance as principal and of the December 21st incident at Meadow Lake Elementary School. The notice of suspension included advice that the administrative suspension was not in any way disciplinary or punitive. The following day the superintendent notified the parents of children attending Meadow Lake Elementary School of the school district’s concerns and priorities and its response to the December 21st incident at the school. The substance of the superintendent’s letter is contained in the following lengthy excerpt:
First and foremost, the safety and security of all children and staff in District 281 has and will continue to be a top priority for my administration. We are committed to providing a safe and secure environment that fosters learning for all students. Any issue or situation that interferes with the district’s ability to provide such an environment goes against the district’s mission and will not be tolerated.
The incident on December 21 involving a group of parents and members of the media is just such a situation. This unfortunate incident compromised the district’s ability to control the learning environment and more importantly, jeopardized the safety of students and staff members. In response to this incident and the ongoing situation at Meadow Lake, the district has taken several actions.
On Wednesday, January 2, Meadow Lake principal Shirley Johnson was suspended with pay pending the outcome of an investigation of the situation. Effective immediately, Don Wagner, director of elementary education, will assume the responsibilities of principal at Meadow Lake pending the outcome of the investigation.
The district is also taking action in response to the concerns expressed by parents during the December 21 meeting. A meeting is being scheduled with the group and the district’s multicultural education task force to gather further information and to address their concerns.
On her lawyer’s recommendation, Ms. Johnson rejected the school district’s repeated requests for an interview. The school district contended the interview was necessary to complete its investigation. Finally, on February 19,1991, after Ms. Johnson formally requested reinstatement as principal of Meadow Lake Elementary School and filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission alleging that her suspension was the result of racial discrimination, Ms. Johnson’s lawyer advised the school district that Ms. Johnson was willing to provide written response to written questions regarding matters relevant to the investigation. The school district submitted written questions, but after reviewing them, Ms. Johnson declined to answer them.
*273On March 5, 1991 the school district ended Ms. Johnson’s paid suspension and reassigned her as a “principal on special assignment” pending the outcome of the investigation. Following Ms. Johnson’s refusal to be interviewed or to submit answers to written questions, the school district brought the investigation to a close and on April 8,1991 issued its report, detailing the investigative process and making findings critical of Ms. Johnson’s administration of Meadow Lake Elementary School.
A second probationary principal performance appraisal covering the period from October 19, 1990 to December 21, 1990 had been prepared and Mr. Wagner, Ms. Johnson and Ms. Eilbracht met to review the evaluation. Ms. Johnson declined to discuss the evaluation; three weeks later she returned the appraisal with the notation that her signature only acknowledged receipt of the appraisal, that she categorically denied all “negative charges”, and that she believed the “appraisal reflected] the retaliation and discrimination that School District 281 and its representatives have subjected me to during the 1990-91 school year.”
On May 13, 1991 Ms. Johnson, Barbara Nemer, director of curriculum and media services, to whom Ms. Johnson reported while working as a principal on special assignment, and Jackie Fraedrich, coordinator of multicultural education and director of Indian education, met to review the third periodic review of Ms. Johnson’s performance as a probationary principal; this time the review was of her performance as a principal on special assignment. Ms. Johnson objected to the meeting, complaining that she was being subjected to “intense scrutiny” and asked for five days to review the evaluation. Refusing to attend a subsequently scheduled meeting, Ms. Johnson gave Ms. Nemer a note containing the statement, “I’m convinced your assignment is to build a case against me.”
On May 21, the clerk of the school board served Johnson with formal notice of the school board’s declination to renew her contract for the following school year. On the same day the superintendent of the school district notified Ms. Johnson of the school board’s action and also informed her that Ms. Johnson should continue in her current assignment as principal on special assignment for the remainder of the 1990-91 school year.
On July 18, 1991 Ms. Johnson interposed her petition for a writ of certiorari to review the school board’s decision not to renew her contract; to review her suspension and reassignment without a hearing; for reinstatement; and for income lost during the 1991-92 school year and thereafter to the conclusion of the litigation. The writ issued that same day for review of the May 20, 1991 decision of the board of education of Independent School District No. 281.
Although it acknowledged that the school district had lawfully declined to renew Ms. Johnson’s contract and that she had no claim to reinstatement, the majority opinion of the court of appeals nevertheless declared that Ms. Johnson’s suspension and reassignment effected a de facto termination during the probationary period so that the hearing provided by Minn.Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 (1990) for mid-year contract termination was required; that the decision not to renew Ms. Johnson’s contract constituted a ratification of the de facto termination; that the January 2, 1991 letter to parents of Meadow Lake Elementary School pupils stigmatized Ms. Johnson, thereby implicating a liberty interest; and that due process requires that Ms. Johnson be afforded the opportunity to restore her professional reputation in a public hearing conducted by an independent hearing officer.
As the court of appeals recognized, Minn.Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 (1990), provides that the contract of a probationary teacher may or may not be renewed “as the school board shall see fit.” The statute does not require a hearing but only requires the school board to give the teacher written notice before June 1st of its declination to renew his or her contract for the following year. Only if a teacher is discharged during the probationary period for cause, effective immediately, is a hearing required. Id. The court of appeals deter*274mined that suspension with full pay and benefits, accompanied by the advice that it was an administrative suspension which was in no way disciplinary or punitive, terminated Ms. Johnson’s contract for cause, effective immediately, thereby necessitating a hearing pursuant to section 125.12, subd. 3. That determination simply flies in the face of the record.
Neither can Ms. Johnson’s subsequent reassignment as principal on special assignment be characterized as a discharge effective immediately. Following her reassignment Ms. Johnson worked for the entire remainder of the term of her contract for the full salary and benefits provided by that contract. The school district asserts that Ms. Johnson’s reassigned position was at the same organizational level as her position as principal of Meadow Lake Elementary School and that her status as an administrator was unchanged. Henderson v. City of St. Paul, 236 Minn. 353, 359, 53 N.W.2d 21, 25 (1952) (transfer to a position of equal rank and pay is ordinarily within the sound discretion of the school superintendent). But even if, as Ms. Johnson alleges, the reassignment was a demotion, nothing in the governing statute requires a hearing.
Nor do we discern any legislative intent to require a hearing on either administrative suspension or reassignment. Minn. Stat. § 125.17 (1990), the teacher tenure' statute applicable to teachers in the public schools in cities of the first class provides, like section 125.12, subd. 3, that the contract of a probationary teacher may or may not be renewed “as the school board shall see fit.” Unlike section 125.12, however, section 125.17, subd. 2 goes on to provide that the school board may, during the probationary period, “discharge or demote a teacher” for cause. All that is required is that written notice of the cause be given the teacher at least 30 days before the discharge or demotion is to become effective, and the teacher has no right of appeal. Subdivision 10 of section 125.17 sets out provisions regarding suspension and salary in the event charges are filed against a teacher.
Inasmuch as suspension, demotion and discharge of probationary teachers in the public schools of cities of the first class have all been addressed in section 125.17, the absence of provision with respect to suspension and demotion in section 125.12 can hardly be regarded as an oversight. The differences between these two frequently amended teacher tenure acts — the one, Minn.Stat. § 125.17, applicable to cities of the first class and the other, Minn. Stat. § 125.12, applicable to all other school districts, including Independent School District No. 281 — can only be regarded as differences intentionally provided to meet somewhat differing requirements and conditions.
Finally, if either the suspension on January 2, 1991 or the reassignment on March 5, 1991 had actually constituted a discharge, effective immediately, then Ms. Johnson’s July 18th petition for a writ of certiorari would have been untimely. Minn.Stat. § 606.01 (1990) provides that a writ of certiorari “shall be issued within 60 days after the party applying for such writ shall have received notice of the proceeding sought to be reviewed thereby.” A timely writ is a “jurisdictional prerequisite to judicial review.” Roseville Education Ass’n v. Independent School District No. 623, 391 N.W.2d 846, 849 (Minn.1986). Ms. Johnson argues that the writ is timely for review of these actions because the school board ratified them when it decided on May 20, 1991 not to renew her contract, but nothing in the record suggests that the school board reviewed or even considered ratification of these earlier actions by the superintendent of the school district. The school board only decided not to renew Ms. Johnson’s contract.
Moreover, a writ of certiorari is timely only if issued within 60 days after the challenged action, not within 60 days after some claimed subsequent approval of the action. If the harm suffered by a petitioner is to be redressed through review on certiorari, the writ must have issued within 60 days of notice of the adverse action.
It may be that because Ms. Johnson’s suspension and subsequent reassign*275ment prevented her from carrying out her undertaking to serve as principal of Meadow Lake Elementary School, the school district could be said to have breached its contract. While that question might have been grieved or addressed in an action for breach of contract (although damages would seem highly speculative), it is not before us on review by certiorari. Ms. Johnson has already filed charges of racial discrimination with the EEOC, and other avenues of recourse are available for individuals who allege racial discrimination. Finally, Ms. Johnson asserts that the school district’s statements concerning the December 21, 1990 incident at Meadow Lake Elementary School stigmatized her, implicating her liberty interest, and violated her right to due process. We have observed on an earlier occasion that a teacher claiming a right of constitutional protection of a liberty interest “must bear the burden of proof that [s]he has a constitutionally protected interest.” Setty v. Minnesota State College Board, 305 Minn. 495, 498, 235 N.W.2d 594, 596 (1975). Here there is no proof of record; Ms. Johnson seeks to try that issue on appeal. But this court does not make findings of fact on review by certiorari. From a legal standpoint none of the statements suggests dishonesty or immorality (the kinds of statements which have been identified as stigmatizing).2 The worst that can be said of them is that they question Ms. Johnson’s judgment and professional competence. But it has been held that discharge on grounds of poor performance, poor judgment, incompetence, unsatisfactory performance, or even insubordination is not stigmatizing. E.g., Nathanson v. United States, 630 F.2d 1260, 1264 (8th Cir.1980), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 939, 104 S.Ct. 352, 78 L.Ed.2d 316 (1983); Elkin v. Roudebush, 564 F.2d 810, 813 (8th Cir.1977); Stretten v. Wadsworth Veterans Hosp., 537 F.2d 361, 366 (9th Cir.1976); and Ventetuolo v. Burke, 596. F.2d 476, 483 (1st Cir.1979). On the record before us we cannot hold that the school district violated a constitutionally protected liberty interest. Even if we assume arguendo that nonrenewal of her contract as principal makes her less desirable to other employers, her eligibility for such other employment is not foreclosed. Setty v. Minnesota State College Board, 305 Minn. 495, 235 N.W.2d 594 (1975). If, as Ms. Johnson contends, the statements were false, the common law may afford a vehicle for the “name-clearing hearing” which she seeks.
Reversed.
. Minn.Stat. § 125.12, subd. 1 (1990) provides that a "principal * * * shall be deemed to be a ‘teacher’ within the meaning of this section.”
. See Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 573, 92 S.Ct. 2701, 2707, 33 L.Ed.2d 548 (1972).

=== CASE 9739110 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:56.928891+00 ===

WAHL, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. Even a probationary teacher is entitled to due notice and a hearing, under Minn.Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 (1990), when a “discharge * * * during the probationary period for cause, effective immediately * * * ” occurs. Shirley Johnson was “immediately discharged” from all her duties and responsibilities as principal of Meadow Lake Elementary School, summarily suspended for 68 days, then reassigned to duties lesser and not comparable to those of an elementary school principal. Amicus Curiae Minnesota Elementary School Principals’ Association properly asserts that the “extraordinary circumstances alleged to warrant removal of a * * * principal from her position, duties and responsibilities during the term of an annual probationary contract must be * ⅜ * subjected to an adversary hearing.”
The majority states that Johnson was not discharged from her job since she "worked for the entire remainder of the term of her contract for the full salary and benefits provided by that contract.” She did not work, however, at the job of being principal of an elementary school but performed vague, specially created duties as a “media specialist.” Furthermore, nothing in Minn. Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 suggests that a probationary teacher must be completely severed from a school district before hearing rights attach. When Johnson was suspended and then reassigned by Robbinsdale, never to return as principal of Meadow Lake or any other Robbinsdale elementary school, she was effectively discharged from the job for which she had contracted and *276thus entitled to a subdivision 3 hearing. Any other reading of the statute would allow a school district to avoid the hearing requirements by simply reassigning a probationary teacher to any position within the district, no matter how undesirable or far removed from teaching responsibilities the reassignment may be, so long as salary and benefits remained unchanged. The district then need only not renew the contract at the end of the year. The plain meaning of the statute does not suggest that the legislature intended this result.
The majority goes on to state that even if the suspension or reassignment constituted a discharge, Johnson’s July 18th petition was untimely. I cannot agree. This court has long held that certiorari will not lie unless a final determination of rights has been made. State ex rel. Mosloski v. County of Martin, 248 Minn. 503, 506, 80 N.W.2d 637, 639 (1957). A writ will not issue to prevent an anticipated wrong. Id. While Johnson was effectively discharged by her removal as an elementary school principal, her right to a hearing did not mature until she was notified that the reassignment was permanent.
Communications between Johnson and the superintendent were too indefinite to give rise to an appealable decision before May 21. When Johnson was notified, by letter of January 2, that she was being placed on suspension while the district investigated staff complaints against her, the superintendent advised her that the “administrative suspension is not disciplinary or punitive in any way,” and that the suspension was effective only until the investigation was completed. The investigation was expected to be completed within three weeks. When Johnson was notified, by letter of March 5, that she was being reassigned as Principal on Special Assignment, the superintendent assured her that the reassignment was not disciplinary and led her to believe that it was temporary since it would be “reevaluated upon conclusion of the investigation.” Only after the Board voted not to renew Johnson’s contract did the superintendent notify Johnson that the investigation was completed and that her reassignment was permanent. Thus, a final, appealable determination of Johnson’s contractual rights was not communicated to Johnson until the superintendent’s letter of May 21st. Johnson filed her writ on July 18th, within the 60 day statutory period.
Whether or not the board actually reviewed or officially considered the superintendent’s earlier actions, it is clear that the board knew of the suspension and reassignment and acquiesced in or ratified the superintendent’s prior course of action concerning Johnson at least by the time it affirmatively voted on the superintendent’s recommendation not to renew Johnson’s contract. The board’s ratification is implicit in the fact that the superintendent gave Johnson both the notice of contract nonre-newal required by section 125.12, subd. 3, and the notice of permanent reassignment in the same letter, dated May 21, the day following the board meeting. This notice provided finality to the superintendent’s earlier actions terminating Johnson “effective immediately” from her duties and responsibilities as elementary school principal. The writ was, therefore, timely filed. I would affirm the court of appeals and hold that under these circumstances Johnson is entitled to a hearing under Minn. Stat. § 125.12, subd. 3 (1990).

=== CASE 9739111 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:57.163407+00 ===

ON CIVIL PETITION TO TRANSFER
SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
This appeal presents questions about what evidence a trial court may consider in proceedings contesting municipal annexations. It has been about twenty years since this Court last spoke on the subject.1 During these decades, both the statutes and case law in this area have continued to evolve. We grant transfer to address certain issues of statutory interpretation which have developed since our last visit.
I Case History
This case arose after the City of Hobart adopted ordinances to annex certain adjacent and contiguous portions of Ross Township. Jeffrey L. Chidester and a number of landowners from the annexed area objected to the annexation and filed a complaint against the annexation ordinance. The trial court heard ten days of evidence and arguments in May and June 1990. On July 11, 1990, the trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law. It found for the city on some of the points in contention but sustained the remonstrance on grounds that the city's fiscal plan did not set out which areas in the city were similar in topography, patterns of land use, and population density to the annexed area. While there was extensive evidence offered during trial about these comparisons, the trial court apparently felt obliged by Drake v. City of Fort Wayne (1989), Ind.App., 543 N.E.2d 1145, to decide the case without reference to that evidence. The trial court's findings did not indicate whether the evidence presented at the hearing was insufficient to show these comparisons, or whether the services proposed for the annexed territory would not be equivalent to services provided in Hobart. The Court of Appeals affirmed. City of Hobart v. Chidester (1991), Ind.App., 582 N.E.2d 457.
IL - Evolution of Indiana Annexation Law
The framework of Indiana's annexation law has long featured three basic stages: (1) legislative adoption of an ordinance annexing of certain territory and pledging to deliver certain services within a fixed period, (2) an opportunity for remonstrance by affected landowners, and (3) judicial review. Earlier versions of the statute did not require the city to set out in writing its plan for providing services; it was sufficient that the city present evidence at the trial court's hearing on remonstrance to show that the statutory preconditions to annexation (sometimes called the primary determinants) had been met. See, eg., *1376Burns' Ind.Stat.Ann. § 48-702 (1963);2 Burns' Ind.Stat.Ann. § 48-722 (Supp.1974), Ind.Code § 18-5-10-253
The courts which were hearing annexation remonstrances, however, began to feel the need for a more tangible description showing what measures the annexing city intended to initiate to provide the required services. In Harris v. City of Muncie (1975), 163 Ind.App. 522, 325 N.E.2d 208, the Court of Appeals considered whether a city must adopt a written plan. Not quite willing to say that the statute so required, the Court held that the city should have "some observable and reviewable program for providing the required services." Id. 325 N.E.2d at 213. To satisfy this requirement, evidence showing the adequacy of the city's fiscal plan (of factor (c), the predecessor of present (d)(4) and (5)), must be "sufficiently specific to enable court to determine whether the proposed schedule is reasonable and whether it would enable the city to provide services as required." Id. at 214. In 1979, the General Assembly amended the statute by adding a requirement that the city develop a written fiscal plan showing that the primary determinants were met. Ind.Code Ann. § 18-5-10-25 (Burns Supp.1980). That same year the Court of Appeals finally held that the former statute required city to offer into evidence at the remonstrance hearing written records reflecting its fiscal plan. Stallard v. Town of St. John (1979), Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 648.
Although the annexation statutes have gone through many changes over the years, certain general propositions of law continue to apply. The statutes invest exclusive authority to annex territory in the governing body of a municipality. City of Aurora v. Bryant (1960), 240 Ind. 492, 165 N.E.2d 141. Annexation is a legislative function and becomes a question subject to judicial cognizance only upon review as provided by statute. City of Indianapolis v. Wynn (1959) 239 Ind. 567, 157 N.E.2d 828. Indeed, to the extent annexation statutes have seemed to require courts to make determinations of a non-judicial nature, courts have refused, finding themselves to be without the power to do so under the separation of powers clause of the Indiana Constitution, Art. 3, § 1. See, e.g., In re City of Mishawaka (1972), 259 Ind. 530, 289 N.E.2d 510. The court is not authorized to act unless a remonstrance is filed; if a remonstrance is not filed, the annexation becomes effective. Wynn, 239 Ind. 567, 157 N.E.2d 828. The effect of filing a remonstrance is to abate the culmination of the annexation pending review in the courts, where the burden is on the munici*1377pality to sustain the annexation by showing that it has complied with the requirements of the statute. Id. Because the city's authority to annex territory is limited by statute, the court's duty is to determine whether the city has exceeded its authority and met the conditions imposed by the statute. King v. City of Bloomington (1959), 239 Ind. 548, 159 N.E.2d 563; Bryant, 165 N.E.2d at 147.
IIL The Present Requirements for Fiscal Plans
Municipal annexation is today governed by Indiana Code Ann. §§ 36-4-3-1-36-4-3-22 (West 1983 & Supp.1991). The focus of this litigation has been on the interpretation of Ind.Code § 36-4-3-13(d) which states:
The requirements of this subsection are met if the evidence establishes that the municipality has developed a written fiscal plan and has established a definite policy, by resolution of the legislative body, as of the date of passage of the annexation ordinance. The resolution must show:
(1) the cost estimates of planned services to be furnished to the territory to be annexed;
(2) the method or methods of financing the planned services;
(3) the plan for the organization and extension of services;
(4) that the planned services of a non-capital nature, including police protection, fire protection, street and road maintenance, and other noncapital services normally provided within the corporate boundaries, will be provided to the annexed territory within one (1) year after the effective date of annexation, and that they will be provided in a manner equivalent in standard and scope to those noncapital services provided to areas within the corporate boundaries that have similar topography, pattern of land use, and population density;
(5) that services of a capital nature, including street construction, street lighting, sewer facilities, water facilities, and storm water drainage facilities, will be provided to the annexed territory within three (8) years after the effective date of the annexation, in the same manner as those services are provided to areas within the corporate boundaries that have similar topography, patterns of land use, and population density, and in the same manner consistent with federal, state, and local laws, procedures, and planning criteria;
(6) the plan for hiring the employees of other governmental entities whose jobs will be eliminated by the proposed annexation, although the municipality is not required to hire any employees.
This controversy centers around the language in subsections (d)(4) and (5) requiring that services provided to the annexed area be like services "provided to areas within the corporate boundaries that have similar topography, patterns of land use, and population density". Ind.Code § 36-4-3-13(d)(4),(5). Plainly, the statute requires the city to spell out what services it plans to provide to the annexed area. The issue is whether the comparisons between the annexed area and areas of the city with similar topography, patterns of land use, and population density must be set out in the plan and resolution 4, or whether it is sufficient to prove at trial that such comparisons were made. The city argues that the statute requires only that it set out a definitive policy to provide equivalent services and that the comparisons may be shown at trial. The remonstrators argue that such an interpretation would permit a resolution to be found sufficient if it merely recites the statutory language.
We assess the legislature's requirement of a written fiscal plan as having three purposes. First, the publication of a written plan permits landowners to make an intelligent decision about whether to *1378accept annexation or remonstrate. Second, requiring a written plan makes the opportunity for remonstrance and judicial review more realistic. As a practical matter, more than vague promises are needed for a court to test a city's ability to provide like service-es to the annexed territory. Third, a fiscal plan needs to be in writing to protect the right of landowners to institute proceedings to force an annexing city to provide the services promised under the plan. Sedlak v. Town of St. John (1980), Ind.App., 403 N.E.2d 1126.5 If a written plan were not required, a landowner could be faced with attempting to establish the failure of a plan whose existence he might be incapable of proving in the first place. Id. Therefore, the plan must be sufficiently specific to enable the landowners to determine whether the services promised have been provided. Cf. Harris v. City of Muncie, 163 Ind.App. 522, 325 N.E.2d 208.
The main concern of Ind.Code § 36-4-3-13(d)(4) and (5) is ensuring that services provided to the annexed territory are equivalent to services existing in the city. The qualification in (d)(4) and (5), that services be equivalent to those in the city with "similar topography, patterns of land use, and population density", provides a guidepost for cities in determining what services should be provided to the annexed territory. It would be unreasonable to require the city to provide services to the annexed territory that are not needed because of differences in topography, patterns of land use, and population density. For example, storm drains may be provided in neighborhoods which are very flat and have no natural drainage; such drains are not often provided in areas where the topography provides natural drainage. The idea is to provide like services to like areas.
Remonstrators are correct in that the plan must be more than a mere recital of the statutory language. We do not think, however, that comparisons between the city's topography, patterns of land use, and population density and those of the annexed territory need be set out in the plan itself. Such comparisons would do little to advance the ability of landowners to enforce their rights to services under the plan. In addition, the comparisons are most helpful to the evaluation of whether the services promised to the annexed territory are equivalent to services provided in the city, a determination the trial court must make at the remonstrance hearing. The statutes do call upon the trial court to determine whether the city's written resolution and plan are according to statute, but they also tell the court to "enter judgment on the question of the annexation according to the evidence which either party may introduce." Ind.Code § 36-4-3-12(a)(2) (West Supp.1991). Evidence that topography, land use, and population density comparisons were made when the city decided what services to provide to the annexed territory is a proper part of that evidence.6
The trial court felt itself constrained by Drake, 543 N.E.2d 1145, to require that comparisons based on topography, land use, and population density be set out in the plan itself. Drake appeared to hold that evidence on this point should be ignored.
There would be no need for an evidentia-ry hearing, however, if all proof of a city's ability to provide like services had to be set out in the written plan. We cannot read legislative intent as requiring the courts to ignore the evidence adduced at the hearing. See Ind.Code Ann. § 36-4-3-12(a)(2) (West Supp.1991). The decision in Drake seems to so require, and it is hereby disapproved.
VI - Conclusion
The trial court's findings on much of the remonstrance were unchallenged on appeal *1379and they therefore stand.7 The trial court should not have been obliged, as it thought Drake commanded, to ignore the evidence at trial about the adequacy of the city's fiscal plan. We therefore vacate that portion of the trial court's ruling and remand to the trial court for reconsideration in light of all the evidence.
DeBRULER, DICKSON, and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Only a few cases even involved annexation requirements. See In re City of Mishawaka (1972), 259 Ind. 530, 289 N.E.2d 510 (trial court finding that certain portions of annexation statute were unconstitutional did not invalidate entire statute); Elberfeld v. Annexation of Certain Territory of Elberfeld (1973), 260 Ind. 499, 296 N.E.2d 653 (statute requires annexed area be both "abutting" and "contiguous"). For cases dealing with other aspects of annexation, see City of Whiting v. City of East Chicago (1977), 266 Ind. 12, 359 N.E.2d 536 (dispute over land-filled territory governed by principle of acquiescence in assumed boundaries); Board of Trustees v. City of Fort Wayne (1978), 268 Ind. 415, 375 N.E.2d 1112 (standing and subject matter jurisdiction).
. The primary determinants of the annexation's merit were:
(a) The annexation is in the best interests of the city and of the territory sought to be annexed.
(b) The area is urban in character, being an economic and social part of the annexing city.
(c) The terms and conditions set forth in the ordinance are fair and just.
(d) The city is financially able to provide municipal services to the annexed area within the reasonably near future.
(e) The area sought to be annexed, if undeveloped, is needed for development of the city in the reasonably near future.
(f) The lines of the annexation are so drawn as to form a compact area abutting the municipality.
Burns' Ind.Stat.Ann. § 48-702.
. Although no longer termed primary determinants, the statute required evidence at the hearing to establish that:
(a) The resident population of the area sought to be annexed is equal to at least three [3] persons for each acre of land included within its boundaries or that the land is zoned for commercial, business or industrial uses or that sixty percent [60%] of the land therein is subdivided; and
(b) At least one-eighth [%%] of the aggregate external boundaries of the territory sought to be annexed coincide with the boundaries of the annexing city; and
(c) The annexing city has developed a fiscal plan and has established a definite policy to furnish the territory to be annexed within a period of three [3] years, governmental and proprietary services substantially equivalent in standard and scope to the governmental and proprietary services furnished by the annexing city to other areas of the city which have characteristics of topography, patterns of land utilization and population density similar to the territory to be annexed; the court shall order the proposed annexation to take place notwithstanding the provisions of any other law of this state.
Burns' Ind.Stat.Ann. § 48-722.
. The statute states "The resolution must show ...", however, it is sufficient for the resolution to incorporate by reference the contents of the plan as the city did in this case. Our use of the term "plan" in this opinion assumes a plan which has been incorporated into a resolution.
. See Ind.Code § 36-4-3-16 (West Supp.1991).
. - The trial court found that the fiscal plan failed to set forth areas in Hobart similar to the proposed annexed area in topography, patterns of land use, and population density with respect to a number of the statutory requirements. Findings of Fact 13-20. There was, however, evidence offered at trial by both sides showing such comparisons. E.g., Record at 1120-25, 1139-40, 1386-88, 1394-99, 1409-11, 1413-25, 2646-47.
. The only challenge on appeal is to the court's denial of the city's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. The Court of Appeals properly held against the city on this claim and we summarily affirm their determination. Ind.App. Rule 11(B)(3).

=== CASE 9739206 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:32.15753+00 ===

Sawyer, P.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. While I understand the concerns of the majority about the extent of the voir dire and would perhaps agree that a somewhat more extensive voir dire would have been appropriate, there remains the question whether these concerns rise to the level of necessitating reversal. That is, while I would perhaps agree that the voir dire could have been handled better and that the trial court should have made, or allowed defense counsel to make, a more extensive inquiry into the subject of media exposure, that does not equate with a finding of an abuse of discretion. On balance, I cannot say that the trial court’s handling of the voir dire rises to the level of an abuse of discretion.
The majority seems to be in search of the perfect trial when our concern is whether defendant received a fair trial. After reviewing the voir dire and the trial transcript, I am satisfied that while defendant may not have received a perfect trial, he did receive a fair trial by an impartial jury of his peers. Therefore, I would affirm.

=== CASE 9739112 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:57.167492+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. I believe the case of Drake v. City of Fort Wayne (1989), Ind.App., 543 N.E.2d 1145 discussed in the majority opinion was decided correctly. I also believe the trial court in this case correctly followed Drake and the statute involved.
To say that it is not necessary for the City to set forth its capability to provide services within the proposed annexation in its resolution and plan, but only to do so in the evidence presented before the court in the hearing on the remonstrance, leaves the remonstrators without adequate information upon which to base their case.
The majority observes that if the City were required to set forth all of this information within its resolution and plan, there would be no necessity for an evidentiary hearing. I cannot agree with this observation. It certainly would be appropriate for remonstrators to present evidence that the proposals in the City's plan were unrealistic and the statements in the plan concerning topography, ete. were not accurate. For example, engineers could be called as expert witnesses to demonstrate that the City's presumptions on topography were grossly in error.
I do not perceive it to be an unconscionable burden upon the City to set forth all of the statutory requirements in its resolution and plan. Absent this information, the residents of the proposed annexation area can engage only in a guessing game as to what the City actually is proposing prior to the presentation of evidence at the hearing on the remonstrance.
I would affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 9739113 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:58.973647+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.
Since these cases involve similar issues, they were consolidated for argument in this court.
Case No. S-90-333 is an action brought by Wats Marketing of America, Inc., in the nature of an action for a declaratory judgment declaring that the taxes assessed and levied against the personal property of the plaintiff in Douglas County, Nebraska, for the years 1982 through 1989 were wholly void.
Case No. S-90-334 is a similar action brought by First Data Resources Inc., for a judgment declaring that the taxes assessed and levied against the personal property of the plaintiff in Douglas County, Nebraska, for the years 1972 through 1989 were wholly void.
The defendants in each case are the Tax Commissioner of the State of Nebraska; the Department of Revenue of the State of Nebraska; the County of Douglas, Nebraska; and the County Treasurer of Douglas County, Nebraska.
All of the defendants filed demurrers. Each of the demurrers of the county defendants alleged that the trial court had no *254jurisdiction of the subject matter of the action and that the petition failed to state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. The demurrers of the State defendants included an additional allegation that there was a defect of parties defendant.
On March 9, 1990, the trial court sustained all of the demurrers and dismissed the petitions. From those judgments the plaintiffs have appealed.
At the time the original petitions in these cases were filed, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-1736.04 (Reissue 1986) provided for a refund of taxes which had been previously adjudged and determined to be illegal. The statute stated in part:
If, by judgment or final order of any court of competent jurisdiction in this state, in an action not pending on appeal or error, it has been or shall be adjudged and determined that any personal property or real estate tax, assessment, or penalty or any part thereof was illegal and such judgment or order has not been made or shall not be made in time to prevent the collection or payment of such tax, assessment, or penalty, then such tax, assessment, or penalty, whether expended or not, which has been collected pursuant to such illegal tax, assessment, or penalty for the year such tax, assessment, or penalty is determined to be illegal shall, without the necessity of filing a claim therefor, be repaid and refunded in the county where originally paid to the person paying such tax, assessment, or penalty. Where the tax, assessment, or penalty so declared illegal is applicable either throughout the state or in taxing districts beyond the geographic jurisdiction of the court making such declaration of illegality then, for the purpose of this section, a judgment or final order shall mean a judgment or final order of the Supreme Court____
Although the statute seems to contemplate an automatic refund of taxes which have been held to be illegal, we have held that a taxpayer may sue under the statute to obtain a declaration that taxes which have been paid were illegal. See Higgs v. Hall County, 184 Neb. 508, 168 N.W.2d 920 (1969).
In order to state a cause of action under § 77-1736.04, it must *255be alleged that the plaintiff has paid taxes which have been held to be illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction.
The plaintiffs’ amended petitions were filed in these cases on November 6, 1989. The petition in case No. S-90-334 alleged that First Data Resources had paid general personal property taxes to Douglas County for the taxable years 1972 through 1989, and the petition in case No. S-90-333 alleged that Wats Marketing had paid general personal property taxes to Douglas County for the taxable years 1982 through 1989. The petitions further alleged:
8. In Northern Natural Gas Co. v. State Board of Equalization . . . the Nebraska Supreme Court held that the state could not constitutionally tax the personal property of one taxpayer while exempting the personal property of other taxpayers.
9. The system of taxing personal property in Nebraska has resulted in the personal property of railroads, car line companies, associated railroad property, pipeline personal property, certain agricultural income producing machinery and equipment, business inventory, and certain household goods and other items of tangible personal property listed in Neb. Rev. Stat. §77-202 (Reissue 1988) escaping taxation.
10. The personal property taxes subject to this action are wholly void in that Plaintiff[s were] not subject to taxation and accordingly, there is no tax which the plaintiff[s] should in equity be bound to pay; alternately, the tax is wholly void in that it was assessed for an unlawful purpose; alternatively, under the holdings of Trailer-Train Car Co. v Leuenberger [and] Northern Natural Gas Co. v. State Board of Equalization [and] under the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment to the U. S. Constitution, Article VIII, Section 1 of the Nebraska Constitution, and the equal protection clause of Article I, Section 1 of the Nebraska Constitution, the personal property taxes which are the subject of this action are wholly void and illegal in that such taxes are not assessed in compliance with provisions of the law imposed.
*256The plaintiffs prayed for judgments declaring the taxes assessed and levied against the personal property of the plaintiff First Data Resources for the years 1972 through 1989 and against Wats Marketing for the years 1982 through 1989 “are void, illegal and without force of law,” for costs, and for such other relief as the court deemed equitable and just.
The defendants argue that the judgments of the trial court should be affirmed because no court has held that the taxes assessed and levied against the property of the plaintiffs were illegal and the decisions referred to in the petitions of the plaintiffs dealt with issues of equalization, and since the property of the plaintiffs is locally assessed, the plaintiffs’ sole remedy was by protest to the county board of equalization. This argument is an incorrect characterization of the plaintiffs’ petitions.
Although the decisions referred to in the plaintiffs’ petitions did not involve the particular taxes which were assessed and levied against the property of the plaintiffs, the plaintiffs rely upon those decisions as establishing the legal basis for determining that the taxes assessed and levied against the property of the plaintiffs were illegal and void.
Any language in Northern Natural Gas Co. v. State Bd. of Equal., 232 Neb. 806, 443 N.W.2d 249 (1989), which might support the defendants’ argument that the plaintiffs’ cases are for equalization of their personal property’s value with that of other similarly situated personal property was specifically disapproved in MAPCO Ammonia Pipeline v. State Bd. of Equal., 238 Neb. 565, 471 N.W.2d 734 (1991). In the MAPCO decision, we stated the process of equalization cannot be applied to property that is not taxed. The plaintiffs’ personal property cannot be equalized with property that is exempt from taxation.
Since we determine that the judgments appealed from must be reversed as to some of the defendants in each case and the causes remanded for further proceedings, it is appropriate to note that in the event the plaintiffs prevail on the merits in their respective cases, they are not entitled to recover a refund for all of the years alleged in their petitions. Section 77-1736.04 provides for a refund only of tax paid during the year for which *257the tax is determined to be illegal. If the plaintiffs are successful in their cases, they will be entitled to a refund only of any illegal tax they paid in 1989. Furthermore, if the plaintiffs are successful in their separate actions under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-1735 (Reissue 1986), in which the plaintiffs requested refunds of taxes paid on November 23, 1988, and June 22, 1989, any taxes paid on June 22, 1989, cannot be refunded under both sections.
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-208 (Reissue 1989) provided in part:
In the absence of any other shorter applicable statute of limitátions, any action for the recovery of any excise or other tax, which has been collected under any statute of the State of Nebraska, which has been finally adjudged to be unconstitutional, shall be brought within one year after the final decision of the court declaring it to be unconstitutional.
Under § 25-208, the plaintiffs had the right to bring actions for a refund within 1 year or less after the decision in Northern Natural Gas Co., supra. The statute of limitations begins to run from the time the tax is paid, not from the time the illegality is judicially determined. Dorland v. City of Humboldt, 129 Neb. 477, 262 N.W. 22 (1935); Monteith v. Alpha High School District, 125 Neb. 665, 251 N.W. 661 (1933). Therefore, for taxes paid in 1989, the plaintiffs’ causes of action were brought within the time prescribed in the statute of limitations, but for taxes paid in years prior to 1989 the plaintiffs’ causes of action are barred by § 25-208.
With respect to the demurrers of the State defendants alleging a defect of parties defendant, the Department of Revenue and the defendant Boehm argue that the district court properly sustained their demurrers because the allegations of the amended petitions provided no basis for joining the Tax Commissioner or the Department of Revenue as party defendants to the action. We agree.
In order for a person to be a necessary party to a cause of action, it must appear that the person may be compelled to respond to the prayer of the plaintiff’s petition, and where there is nothing such person is called upon to do, or can be compelled to do as a duty, the person is not a necessary party. Mills v. *258Ehler, 407 Ill. 602, 95 N.E.2d 848 (1950).
The amended petitions in these cases establish that the plaintiffs are locally assessed taxpayers and their taxable property is subject to assessment and levy for tax purposes by the county in which their property is located. If the plaintiffs prevail on the merits in these cases, Boehm and the Department of Revenue cannot be compelled to respond to the relief sought by the plaintiffs. Under § 77-1736.04, it is the duty of the county treasurer to pay any refund due under this section.
The only references in the plaintiffs’ amended petitions to Boehm and the Department of Revenue are statements that “Boehm is the . . . Tax Commissioner . . . and is the chief executive officer of the Nebraska Department of Revenue” and that the “Department of Revenue is . . . responsible for executing faithfully the revenue laws of the State of Nebraska.” No relief was requested against Boehm or the Department of Revenue, and in the event the plaintiffs are successful in obtaining a declaration that the taxes assessed and levied against their personal property were void and illegal, Boehm and the Department of Revenue cannot be compelled to respond in any way. We conclude that the demurrers were properly sustained as to Boehm and the Department of Revenue.
Since the plaintiffs have a right to amend after a demurrer has been sustained, the judgments dismissing the petitions are reversed and the causes remanded for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded for FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
Caporale, J., not participating in the decision.

=== CASE 2218776 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:54.511764+00 ===

197 Mich. App. 174 (1992)
494 N.W.2d 829
PEOPLE
v.
BLOUNT
Docket No. 151314.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1992, at 9:00 A.M.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Thomas L. Casey, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of Research, Training, and Appeals, and Jeffrey Caminsky, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
*175 Roman S. Karwowski, for the defendant.
Before: HOOD, P.J., and CONNOR and TAYLOR, JJ.
HOOD, P.J.
Defendant pleaded guilty in the Recorder's Court of Detroit of second-degree murder, MCL 750.317; MSA 28.549, and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2), in exchange for the dismissal of a charge of first-degree murder, MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548. Pursuant to the parties' sentencing agreement, defendant was sentenced to a term of twenty to forty years plus the mandatory two years for the firearm conviction. He appeals as of right, arguing that the sentence is disproportionate and not individually tailored. We disagree and affirm.
The sentencing guidelines recommended a minimum term of twelve to twenty-five years. The minimum imposed on defendant was within the guidelines and is therefore presumptively proportionate. People v Milbourn, 435 Mich. 630; 461 NW2d 1 (1990); People v Broden, 428 Mich. 343; 408 NW2d 789 (1987).
Further, we note and emphasize that defendant received exactly the sentence to which he previously had agreed and may not now challenge that sentence, because he has made no effort to withdraw his plea. People v Vitale, 179 Mich. App. 420; 446 NW2d 504 (1989); see also People v Nixten, 183 Mich. App. 95; 454 NW2d 160 (1990). A bargain is indeed a bargain. Further, in this case, we have no claim of ineffective assistance of counsel nor any indication that the plea was in any way tainted or that the prosecutor in any way violated the terms of the agreement.
We therefore hold that a defendant who pleads guilty and is sentenced in accordance with a plea *176 bargain and sentencing agreement waives the right to challenge the sentence unless there is also an attempt to withdraw the plea for a sound legal reason.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2218782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:54.639696+00 ===

494 N.W.2d 565 (1993)
242 Neb. 306
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Clarence VICTOR, Appellant.
No. S-91-933.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 29, 1993.
*567 J. Joseph McQuillan and Mark A. Weber, of Walentine, O'Toole, McQuillan & Gordon, Omaha, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and J. Kirk Brown, Lincoln, for appellee.
*568 HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
WHITE, Justice.
The defendant, Clarence Victor, appeals a decision of the district court for Douglas County to deny his pro se request for postconviction relief under Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-3001 et seq. (Reissue 1989 and Cum.Supp. 1992).
Victor was convicted of first degree murder and use of a weapon to commit a felony in the 1987 death of 82-year-old Alice Singleton. Victor was sentenced to death for the murder offense and given a consecutive sentence of 20 years for the felony weapon offense. The convictions were upheld on direct appeal. State v. Victor, 235 Neb. 770, 457 N.W.2d 431 (1990) (Victor I). The U.S. Supreme Court denied Victor's application for a writ of certiorari, Victor v. Nebraska, ___ U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 1091, 112 L. Ed. 2d 1195 (1991), and Victor sought state postconviction relief from the district court. Victor was represented at both the trial and the appellate level by the same attorney, but was denied court-appointed counsel on his motion for postconviction relief.
Defendant sought relief from the district court based on alleged violations of the 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, and 14th Amendments to the U.S. Constitution and alleged violations of article I, §§ 3, 9, and 13, of the Nebraska Constitution. These claims summarily contended that (1) the trial court improperly instructed the jury on the law regarding the concept of "reasonable doubt"; (2) the reweighing process for aggravating and mitigating circumstances engaged in by the Nebraska Supreme Court was unconstitutional; (3) the death penalty was improperly imposed because the aggravating circumstance in Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2523(1)(d) (Reissue 1989) is vague and results in an arbitrary imposition of capital punishment; (4) the sentencing panel and the Nebraska Supreme Court erroneously refused to consider defendant's inability to conform his conduct to law because of mental defect or intoxication as required by § 29-2523(2)(g); (5) neither the sentencing panel nor the Nebraska Supreme Court compared the facts of defendant's case with other "criminal homicides" of same or similar circumstances to determine the proportionality of defendant's sentences with the results of similar cases; (6) at the sentencing hearing, the sentencing panel erroneously admitted defendant's confession to a 1964 homicide because the confession did not conform to Miranda requirements; (7) defendant's confession to the present homicide was not voluntary, was a product of an unlawful arrest, and was obtained without a valid waiver of his Miranda rights; and (8) trial and appellate counsel was ineffective in failing to raise or in improperly raising each of the aforementioned issues.
On September 17, 1991, the district court denied defendant's motion for an evidentiary hearing and simultaneously entered an order overruling the motions for postconviction relief and vacation of sentences. After obtaining court-appointed counsel, defendant perfected this appeal. He now asserts that the district court erred in (1) refusing to grant an evidentiary hearing; (2) failing to appoint counsel to represent defendant for his motion to vacate sentences and convictions; (3) finding that defendant was not denied effective assistance of counsel; and (4) failing to retroactively apply Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39, 111 S. Ct. 328, 112 L. Ed. 2d 339 (1990), with regard to the reasonable doubt jury instruction. On this appeal, defendant also argues, for the first time, the failure of previous counsel to disclose a conflict of interest in representing defendant and in failing to submit evidence in support of the pretrial motion for change of venue.
In an appeal from a denial of a motion for postconviction relief, the lower court's findings will be upheld unless clearly erroneous. State v. Sanders, 241 Neb. 687, 490 N.W.2d 211 (1992).
Victor first argues that he was entitled to an evidentiary hearing under § 29-3001 on the additional allegations raised in his motion to vacate sentences filed before the district court.
*569 "An evidentiary hearing on a postconviction motion is required on an appropriate motion containing factual allegations which, if proved, constitute an infringement of the movant's rights under the Nebraska or federal Constitution." Sanders, 241 Neb. at 689, 490 N.W.2d at 214. See, also, State v. Schneckloth, 235 Neb. 853, 458 N.W.2d 185 (1990); State v. Start, 229 Neb. 575, 427 N.W.2d 800 (1988); State v. Jackson, 226 Neb. 857, 415 N.W.2d 465 (1987); State v. Malek, 219 Neb. 680, 365 N.W.2d 475 (1985).
Conversely, an evidentiary hearing on a motion for postconviction relief may properly be denied when the records and files of the case affirmatively establish that the defendant is not entitled to relief. State v. Maeder, 240 Neb. 955, 486 N.W.2d 193 (1992); State v. Keithley, 238 Neb. 966, 473 N.W.2d 129 (1991).
The bulk of assigned errors raised in defendant's motion for relief before the district court were previously raised on direct appeal and finally determined by this court in Victor I. The record discloses that trial and appellate counsel did raise and argue the legality of Victor's confession, the constitutionality of § 29-2523(1)(d), the receipt into evidence of the 1964 manslaughter confession at the sentencing hearing, the determination that the aggravating circumstance found in § 29-2523(1)(d) existed and the mitigating circumstance found in § 29-2523(2)(g) did not exist, and the contention that the sentences were disproportionate and excessive.
We have repeatedly held that a motion for postconviction relief cannot be used as a substitute for an appeal or to secure a further review of issues already litigated on direct appeal. It is not the purpose of affording postconviction relief to permit the defendant endless appeals on matters already decided. See, State v. Whitmore, 238 Neb. 125, 469 N.W.2d 527 (1991); State v. El-Tabech, 234 Neb. 831, 453 N.W.2d 91 (1990). Defendant's only attempt to avoid the procedural bar of the previously raised issues is by asserting that he was denied effective assistance of counsel because trial and appellate counsel improperly raised these issues. However, defendant failed to advance, either in the motion before the district court or in the present appeal to this court, allegations of specific facts to support these bare conclusions. Since defendant failed to make a factual showing to indicate he was entitled to relief, the district court did not err in denying defendant an evidentiary hearing on these previously litigated issues.
Relying on the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39, 111 S. Ct. 328, 112 L. Ed. 2d 339 (1990), defendant further argues that the jury instruction on reasonable doubt was unconstitutional in that it confused the jury and suggested a higher degree of doubt than is required under the 14th Amendment. Subsequent to defendant's trial and appeal, this court has had the opportunity to review the constitutionality of a jury instruction identical to the one challenged here. See State v. Morley, 239 Neb. 141, 474 N.W.2d 660 (1991). In Morley, we upheld the constitutionality of the reasonable doubt language of the Nebraska jury instruction, finding the language distinguishable from that found unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in Cage. Therefore, whether or not trial and appellate counsel failed to object to or appeal the jury instruction and whether or not the district court should have provided Victor the opportunity to advance this claim in an evidentiary hearing are now irrelevant, causing this assignment of error also to be without merit.
The majority of Victor's claims were raised and fully reviewable from the record on direct appeal. Defendant's contentions that counsel failed to disclose a conflict of interest and failed to submit evidence in support of the pretrial motion for change of venue were not raised before the district court and are accordingly irrelevant to the court's decision to deny an evidentiary hearing. Victor's assigned error addressing the reasonable doubt instruction was decided by our opinion in State v. Morley, supra, and is consequently without merit. Finding that Victor has failed to allege facts that would constitute a denial or violation *570 of his constitutional rights causing the judgments and convictions against him to be void or voidable, we hold that the district court did not err in denying an evidentiary hearing on his postconviction motion.
In his motion for relief to the district court, defendant alleged that the Nebraska Supreme Court committed error on his direct appeal. Victor first argued that the reweighing process for aggravating and mitigating circumstances engaged in by the Nebraska Supreme Court was unconstitutional. Victor also argued that the Nebraska Supreme Court erroneously refused to consider his inability to conform his conduct to law because of mental defect or intoxication. Defendant does not now further argue or advance these previously assigned errors except, perhaps, as they arise under the alleged errors of the district court in denying an evidentiary hearing and court-appointed counsel. In the absence of a factual allegation, an initial demonstration of an extraordinary and relevant novel argument, or a reference to binding precedent not appearing in the record on direct appeal, errors of a state appellate court that are assigned for review before a state trial court in a motion for postconviction relief are without merit. Consequently, it was proper for the district court to address these errors without providing an evidentiary hearing and without appointing counsel.
When the defendant in a postconviction proceeding
alleges a violation of his constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel as a basis for relief, the standard for determining the propriety of the claim is whether the attorney, in representing the accused, performed at least as well as a lawyer with ordinary training and skill in the criminal law in the area.
State v. Carter, 241 Neb. 645, 650, 489 N.W.2d 846, 852 (1992). A defendant who asserts a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel and who seeks reversal of his convictions "`"must show that (1) counsel's performance was deficient and (2) such deficient performance prejudiced the defense, that is, a demonstration of reasonable probability that, but for counsel's deficient performance, the result of the proceeding would have been different." ...'" State v. Lyman, 241 Neb. 911, 915, 492 N.W.2d 16, 19 (1992).
Defendant asserts that previous counsel failed to disclose a conflict of interest in the representation of defendant at both the trial and appellate level and in allegedly assisting defendant in drafting the petition for postconviction relief. Defendant also claims that trial counsel failed to submit evidence in support of the pretrial motion for change of venue.
These issues were not raised in the motion for postconviction relief filed with the district court, nor were they specifically assigned as error in defendant's brief. "Absent plain error, where an issue is raised for the first time in this court, it will be disregarded inasmuch as the court whose judgment is being reviewed cannot commit error regarding an issue never presented and submitted for disposition." State v. Whitmore, 238 Neb. 125, 132, 469 N.W.2d 527, 532 (1991). Additionally, when a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel has not been raised or ruled on by the trial court and necessitates an evidentiary hearing, the matter will not be addressed on appeal. State v. Morley, 239 Neb. 141, 474 N.W.2d 660 (1991).
Considering that the allegation of an undisclosed conflict of interest was not raised or ruled on by the trial court and recognizing that there is not a record to review, we will not address the matter. Nor are we able to review the claim that trial counsel failed to submit evidence in support of the pretrial motion for change of venue. The only reviewable record about trial counsel's efforts to seek a change of venue is an inexplicit three-line notation on the criminal docket sheet. This notation merely references that a hearing was held on defendant's motion for a change of venue and that the motion was overruled after "evidence" was presented. Therefore, the ineffective assistance of counsel claim based on these two newly *571 alleged grounds is not properly before this court.
As previously determined in the evidentiary hearing analysis, the failure of counsel to object to or appeal the reasonable doubt jury instruction is now moot in light of our decision in State v. Morley, supra. The claims advanced by defendant regarding whether trial and appellate counsel failed to raise, or improperly raised, issues numbered (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) in the motion filed by defendant before the district court are also without merit. Defendant failed to advance, either in the motion before the district court or in the present appeal to this court, allegations of specific facts to support a conclusion that appellate counsel improperly raised the six constitutional issues challenged here. Defendant has failed to demonstrate how counsel's performance in raising the constitutional issues on direct appeal was deficient, and defendant has not attempted to advance a theory to show how this unknown deficiency prejudiced the defense.
In sum, defendant's assertion that he was denied effective assistance of counsel for various failures by trial and appellate counsel is without merit based on the record before us.
Victor alleges that in light of his undisputed indigency, the district court erred in failing to provide him court-appointed counsel. Under § 29-3004 (Cum. Supp.1992), a district court may appoint an attorney to represent a prisoner in all postconviction proceedings under §§ 29-3001 through 29-3004. This power is within the discretion of the district court, and failure to appoint counsel in postconviction proceedings is not error in the absence of an abuse of discretion. State v. Wiley, 228 Neb. 608, 423 N.W.2d 477 (1988).
Neither the Eighth Amendment nor the Due Process Clause of the federal Constitution requires states to appoint counsel for indigent death row inmates seeking state postconviction relief. See State v. Otey, 236 Neb. 915, 464 N.W.2d 352 (1991) (citing Murray v. Giarratano, 492 U.S. 1, 109 S. Ct. 2765, 106 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1989)), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 2279, 115 L. Ed. 2d 965. See, also, Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U.S. 551, 107 S. Ct. 1990, 95 L. Ed. 2d 539 (1987).
Victor contends, however, that since he was represented at both the initial trial and direct appeal by the same attorney, his motion for postconviction relief was his "`first appeal as of right'" to raise an ineffective assistance of counsel claim. Brief for appellant at 23. Defendant relies on a criminal defendant's constitutional right to appointed counsel established by the U.S. Supreme Court in Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353, 83 S. Ct. 814, 9 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1963). In Douglas, the U.S. Supreme Court stated that "where the merits of the one and only appeal an indigent has as of right are decided without benefit of counsel, we think an unconstitutional line has been drawn between rich and poor." (Emphasis omitted.) 372 U.S. at 357, 83 S.Ct. at 816. By postulating that the postconviction proceeding provided him was his one and only appeal as of right to allege ineffective assistance of counsel, Victor maintains that it was error for the district court to deny him appointed counsel to assist him in advancing these claims.
Defendant further relies on the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Coleman v. Thompson, ___ U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 2546, 115 L. Ed. 2d 640 (1991), reh'g denied, ___ U.S. ___, 112 S. Ct. 27, 115 L. Ed. 2d 1109, to argue that the district court was constitutionally required to provide him with appointed counsel for his postconviction motion. In Coleman, the issue pertinent to this review was whether ineffectiveness of counsel on appeal from the state habeas trial court judgment was an independent constitutional violation to constitute cause for federal habeas relief. Noting that the prisoner could only prevail if he were constitutionally entitled to appointed counsel in state postconviction proceedings, the U.S. Supreme Court reiterated the general rule that there is no right to counsel in state collateral proceedings. The Court queried whether there should be an exception to this general rule for those cases where state collateral review is the first place a prisoner can present a challenge to his conviction. *572 The Court declined to answer the question, however, in light of the fact that effectiveness of counsel before the state habeas trial court was not at issue. Any language in the Coleman opinion suggesting that a state trial court collateral proceeding may be considered a prisoner's "one and only appeal" was merely a passing inquiry and provides little insight or authority to defendant's argument here. ___ U.S. at ___, 111 S.Ct. at 2568.
The U.S. Supreme Court has consistently recognized that the states have no obligation to provide postconviction relief proceedings and that when states do so provide, due process does not require that the states supply lawyers as well. See Pennsylvania v. Finley, supra.
Under Nebraska case law, where the record shows that a justiciable issue of law or fact is presented to the court in a postconviction action, an indigent defendant is entitled to the appointment of counsel. State v. Wiley, supra. Here, however, the assigned errors in the postconviction petition before the district court were either procedurally barred or without merit, establishing that this postconviction action contains no justiciable issue of law or fact. We therefore find that it was not an abuse of discretion for the district court to deny court-appointed counsel.
Finding no merit in the assignments of error properly before this court, we affirm the decision of the district court in its entirety.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739115 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:03.496519+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice.
R. Daniel Ringhausen (Ringhausen) appeals a trial court order sanctioning his noncompliance with a discovery order by striking his answer to a complaint and directing the entry of a default judgment against him. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
On April 15, 1991, Roger Aberle (Aberle) mailed Ringhausen a summons and complaint raising several causes of action against Ringhausen and three other defendants for an injury sustained while Aberle was an employee of two corporations allegedly operated by Ringhausen. Ringhausen failed to sign an admission of service and, on May 23, the summons and complaint was personally served on Ringhausen in Bloomington, Minnesota.
On June 26, 1991, Ringhausen filed a special appearance and a motion to dismiss Aberle’s complaint for lack of personal and subject matter jurisdiction. Ringhausen’s motion was denied in an order entered August 7. The order incorporated the trial court’s memorandum opinion which noted: 1) Ringhausen had recently served as president of the two corporations which allegedly employed Aberle at the time of his injury; 2) Ringhausen sold the assets of those businesses to S.D. Express, Inc., a South Dakota corporation and a named defendant in Aberle’s complaint; 3) the sale agreement between Ringhausen and S.D. Express specifically stated that Ringhausen was to be employed to oversee the interstate trucking business of S.D. Express. The August 7 order also directed Ringhau-sen to “forthwith answer” Aberle’s complaint.1
On August 8, Aberle served a set of twenty-eight interrogatories and a request for the production of thirteen items on Ringhausen, S.D. Express and Armond Schopp, another defendant in the action. On September 7, Ringhausen’s thirty day time limit to respond to Aberle’s interrogatories and request to produce expired without response or objection by Ringhausen2.
*181On September 12, Aberle served a motion to amend his complaint to add Ringhau-sen’s sister, the president of S.D. Express, as a party defendant. Aberle’s motion also requested a trial court order, “[t]o require all defendants ... to produce for copying and inspection all items specified in the Request to Produce served on August 8, 1991, as to which there has been no response.”
Aberle’s motions were heard on September 25. On October 15, the trial court entered its order granting Aberle’s motion to amend and further providing that, “[a]ll defendants ... shall produce for copying and inspection all items specified in the request to produce served on August 8, 1991.” Notice of entry of the order was served by mail on October 15.
Because of Ringhausen’s continued failure to provide discovery, Aberle served a motion on November 14, “[f]or sanctions against defendants Ringhausen, South Dakota Express and Schopp as permitted by SDCL 15-6-37(b), including an order requiring such parties to pay all reasonable expenses, including attorneys’ fees, caused by the failures of such defendants and an order striking the answers and rendering a default judgment against such parties.” Aberle’s motion advised the court that on November 5, his counsel had informed defendant’s local counsel that continued failure to obey the order of the court and answer interrogatories would result in a motion to strike their answers and for entry of a default judgment.
No response was made to Aberle’s motion and the matter was heard by the trial court on November 22. Ringhausen’s local counsel appeared at the hearing with an affidavit from the Minneapolis attorney for S.D. Express averring that he had filed a petition for bankruptcy on behalf of S.D. Express on November 15, 1991, thus staying Aberle’s state court action against the corporation. At the hearing, Ringhausen also filed a response to Aberle’s request for production of documents which recited that, “none of the documents requested are in the possession of R. DANIEL RINGHAUSEN. Any such documents are in the possession or under the control of S.D. EXPRESS, INC.” Ringhausen also filed answers to Aberle’s interrogatories. His answers to twelve of the twenty-eight interrogatories referred Aberle to the corporate records of S.D. Express or the two corporations whose assets had been transferred to S.D. Express.
On December 5, 1991, the trial court entered its order providing in pertinent part:
1. The defendants R. Daniel Ringhau-sen and Armond A. Schopp failed and refused to timely answer interrogatories and to comply in good faith and in • a timely manner with the Order of this court entered on October 11, 1991, as to which such parties received notice on October 15, 1991, and sanctions should therefore be awarded, jointly and severally, against R. Daniel Ringhausen and Armond A. Schopp, in the amount of $300 to be paid forthwith to the attorney for plaintiff and no later than ten days from the service of notice of entry of this Order, the court finding that sanctions are proper under SDCL 15-6-37(b).
2. Defendant Ringhausen has made no good faith attempt to answer the interrogatories or to produce documents and is attempting to frustrate the purposes of discovery and the right of the plaintiff to receive information and documents in a timely fashion. Mr. Ringhausen has failed to comply with the Order of this court and even the answers to interrogatories and the answers to the request for production of documents as finally made on November 21, 1991, are intentionally incomplete, evasive and in bad faith. The answer of R. Daniel Ringhausen should be, and the same is, hereby stricken and a judgment by default will be rendered against him based upon an evidentiary hearing to be scheduled by plaintiff with notice to the attorneys for R. Daniel Ringhau-sen. The purpose of the evidentiary hearing will be to determine the amount of damages to be awarded plaintiff against R. Daniel Ringhausen.
*182Notice of entry of the order was served by mail on December 5, 1991. Ringhausen appeals.
ISSUE
WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION IN STRIKING RINGHAUSEN’S ANSWER AND DIRECTING ENTRY OF A DEFAULT JUDGMENT AGAINST HIM AS A SANCTION FOR VIOLATION OF ITS DISCOVERY ORDER?
The parties agree that the standards for reviewing the trial court’s sanction in this case were established in Chittenden & Eastman Co. v. Smith, 286 N.W.2d 314, 316 (S.D.1979):
SDCL 16-6-37 is adopted from Fed. R.Civ.P. 37. This rule is flexible and allows a trial judge broad discretion with regard to sanctions imposed thereunder for failure to comply with discovery orders. Although the trial judge’s latitude in penalizing failure to comply is broad, it is not limitless. Orders imposing sanctions are generally appealable, but in any event are reviewable on appeal from a final judgment, and the appellate court will reverse if it considers that the trial court abused its discretion, (citations omitted).
In Chittenden, the plaintiff commenced an action on a note against the defendant as its guarantor. The plaintiff served a set of interrogatories on the defendant. After approximately four months passed, the plaintiff moved for an order striking defendant’s answer for failure to answer the interrogatories. The hearing on the motion was delayed, for reasons unclear in the decision, for two years. After the hearing, the trial court issued an order giving the defendant twelve days to answer the interrogatories indicating that if defendant did not answer the interrogatories in the time specified, plaintiff could introduce such motions as deemed necessary. The trial court also imposed costs of $250.00. Defendant mailed his answers to plaintiff’s attorney two days after the deadline had passed. The day after the answers were mailed, plaintiff served and filed a motion to strike defendant’s answer for failure to comply with the discovery order. Without any hearing on the motion, the trial court issued an order striking defendant’s answer. A hearing was held on plaintiff’s subsequent motion for a default judgment which judgment was ultimately entered for plaintiff.
The defendant in Chittenden appealed to this Court. Applying the previously quoted standard of review, we noted “[t]he mere failure to comply with an order to answer brings the discretionary sanctions of Rule 37 into play, but the reason for the failure to disclose is an important consideration in determining what sanction to impose.” Chittenden, 286 N.W.2d at 316. We went on to caution:
Entry of a default judgment, however, is one of the most severe of all the sanctions available and is only to be resorted to when the “failure to comply has been due to ... willfulness, bad faith, or any fault of petitioner.” These drastic sanctions under Rule 37 are not authorized, however, when the failure to comply is the result of inability rather than willfulness or bad faith. Although dismissal and judgment by default are provided for by Rule 37(b) (SDCL 15-6-37(b)), these drastic remedies should be applied only in extreme circumstances, and should not be liberally implemented in order to eliminate the actual trial of cases.
Rule 37(b) is designed to empower the court to compel production of evidence by the imposition of reasonable sanctions, and not as punishment for general misbehavior. “Dismissal and entry of a default judgment should be the rare judicial act.” Where an alternative, less drastic sanction would be just as effective, the court should utilize it first.
Id. (citations omitted).
Applying the above considerations, we reversed Chittenden’s default judgment and remanded the matter to the trial court with instructions to reinstate the defendant’s answer. However, we did leave intact the $250.00 assessment of costs and attorney’s fees. In reaching this conclusion, we observed that the record did not *183indicate whether consideration was given to imposition of less severe sanctions or whether defendant’s failure to comply was willful or in bad faith. We also noted plaintiffs failure to actively pursue his cause of action. Finally, we observed:
Defendant did attempt to answer the interrogatories, but was unable to fully complete them due to inaccessibility of the records. His failure to comply was the result of his inability, not a willful or bad faith abuse of the discovery process. Inability to comply should not preclude him from his day in court. On remand, the trial court may consider the imposition of less extreme sanctions set forth in SDCL 15-6-37 (b)(2)(A)-(E).
Chittenden, 286 N.W.2d at 317. We most recently reaffirmed Chittenden in Magbuhat v. Kovarik, 382 N.W.2d 43 (S.D.1986). There we reversed a trial court order limiting the scope and use of depositions taken by the plaintiffs as a sanction for their failure to supplement their answers to earlier defense interrogatories.
Although various actions taken by Ringhausen in the present case are disturbing3, Chittenden compels the conclusion that the trial court abused its discretion in striking Ringhausen’s answer and ordering the entry of a default judgment against him. First, it is difficult to say that any delay in Aberle’s pursuit of his cause of action was occasioned by Ringhausen’s nonresponse to the discovery order. Summary judgment was not even granted to one of the codefendants in this case until February 1992, over two months after entry of the order granting a default judgment against Ringhausen.
Second, the trial court’s discovery order merely provided in general terms that all defendants should produce for copying and inspection all of the items specified in the “request to produce served on August 8, 1991.” Defendant was not required to respond to Aberle’s interrogatories. No specific sanction was mentioned for failure to comply with the discovery order. Nor was defendant given a date certain for compliance. “Where no specific date js ordered for compliance with a discovery order, dismissal is an inappropriate sanction. Instead, the trial court should fix a deadline for compliance and provide for dismissal only if compliance does not occur.” Bio-Line, Inc. v. Wilfley, 365 N.W.2d 338, 340-41 (Minn.Ct.App.1985) (citations omitted).
Third, Ringhausen did tender responses to the request to produce and the interrogatories on the day set for hearing on Aberle’s motion for sanctions. Because the trial court never set any date certain for compliance with its discovery order, it is difficult to characterize Ringhausen’s response as tardy. We note that in Chitten-den, the defendant mailed his answers two days after the date the trial court set for compliance. Nevertheless, despite that tardy response, we reversed the default judgment against that defendant.
Fourth, although the trial court characterized Ringhausen’s response to the request to produce and answers to the interrogatories as, “intentionally incomplete, evasive and in bad faith,” much the same could have been said in Chittenden. In Chittenden, we described the defendant’s answers to interrogatories as, “not all complete and many were answered with this notation: ‘Defendant is without specific information and knowledge to answer the question.’ ” Chittenden, 286 N.W.2d at 315. This response is indistinguishable from Ringhausen’s numerous references to the documents in the possession or under the control of S.D. Express.
Finally, as in Chittenden, the record in the present case does not indicate that the trial court gave consideration to imposition of less severe sanctions. We hold therefore, that the trial court abused its discretion when it sanctioned Ringhausen by striking his answer and granting Aberle a default judgment against him. The default judgment is reversed and the matter remanded to the trial court with instructions to reinstate Ringhausen’s answer, and, if *184appropriate to impose a less severe sanction on Ringhausen for his noncompliance with the discovery order.
WUEST, SABERS and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., specially concurs.
. In fact, by the time of entry of the order, Ringhausen had served his answer but the answer was not filed until March 6, 1992.
. SDCL 15-6-33(a) provides in pertinent part that, "[t]he party on whom the interrogatories have been served shall serve a copy of the answers, and objections, if any, within thirty days after the service of the interrogatories ...” SDCL 15 — 6—34(b) similarly provides that, "[t]he party upon whom the request [to produce] is served shall serve a written response within thirty days after the service of the request ...”

=== CASE 9739116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:03.501087+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
Our decision is postured entirely on procedure. For benefit of the Bar and Bench, these additional facets are presented:
1. Had the default judgment withstood the test of law, a hearing on damages to be awarded Aberle against Ringhau-sen was vital and was set below by the trial court. Due to this appeal, it never took place.
2. Aberle was an over-the-road truck driver. He suffered a severe injury to his back while unloading cargo in South Dakota on July 16, 1990.
3. Orchestrated by Ringhausen, a contract was entered into by two Minnesota corporations and one South Dakota corporation. Ringhausen was president and signed on behalf of both Minnesota corporations.
4. Since his injury date, Aberle has not worked; he has been virtually penniless since his injury and his wife and children have gained sustenance through food stamps.
5. Ringhausen’s sister, at his askance, was established as president of South Dakota Express, Inc.
6. At the bottom of this litigation, Aberle finds himself without worker’s compensation, a possible fraudulent transfer of the two Minnesota corporations into the South Dakota corporation, and Ringhausen claiming South Dakota has no personal jurisdiction over him. Furthermore, the two Minnesota corporations filed for bankruptcy.
To say the least, it is a civil quagmire within a legal jungle. Boggy ground complicated by reluctancy to produce.
Notwithstanding the technical aspect above, this case involves real live people. Today, in the law practice we see onerous interrogatories, produced by computers, often reflected in hundreds of interrogatories with subparagraphs and corresponding questions, dazzling the overworked attorney into a state of bewilderment and frustration. An attorney is turned into a detective to ferret out information to impale his own case. It can be costly effort and paralyze a single practitioner. Sometimes the attorney has the information, sometimes not. But like the tromp, tromp, tromp of the troops on a forced march, the discovery rules, SDCL 15-6-33(a) and SDCL 15-6-34(b) proceed ever onward. These rules express counsel . shall serve a written response ...” and “shall serve ... answers and objections within thirty days after the service of the request.” Here, however, there were only 28 interrogatories and a request to produce 13 pieces of evidence. At first blush, these certainly seem reasonable in nature. Notwithstanding, Ringhau-sen was reticent and resistant to produce.
Interrogatories are often abused in the practice of law. I fully appreciate that objections may be made to same. This requires a great deal of valuable time and expense for the recipient of immaterial interrogatories. Certain courts have refused to establish sanctions against an opponent who has not answered the interrogatories. One of the first cases I could find was Hodge v. Alabama Water Co., 205 Ala. 472, 88 So. 585 (1921). There, the unanswered interrogatories shed no light on any material issue in the case and the trial court, it was held, had not erred in refusing to enter judgment against the defendant for failure to answer. Accord: Anderson v. Stanwood, 178 Or. 306, 167 P.2d 315 (1946). It has been ruled, in California, see Laguna Auto Body v. Farmers Ins. Exchange, 231 Cal.App.3d 481, 282 Cal.Rptr. 530 (4th Dist.1991) that in providing punishment for actions described [in discovery rules] the Legislature has imposed a duty on parties to be forthright and honest in their attempts to reach the merits of their action. It appears that the courts are unwilling to impose sanctions on parties where the information, which one party *185compels the other to discover or find, is not discoverable information. This was so held in In re Marriage of Economou, 224 Cal.App.3d 1466, 274 Cal.Rptr. 473 (3rd Dist.1990). It was likewise held in Economou that discovery sanctions cannot be imposed to punish the offending party or to bestow an “unwarranted windfall” on the adversary. The Economou court cited to Deyo v. Kilbourne, 84 Cal.App.3d 771, 149 Cal.Rptr. 499 (2nd Dist.1978). In Deyo, it was held that the materiality of questions propounded to a particular claim or a defense should be considered as a factor in assessing the propriety of entering a dismissal or a default judgment for failure to answer. In other words, a good trial judge should look at what is being asked and its materiality before a default judgment is entered. Simply because, says this writer, a party does not answer the interrogatories, should not entitle a propounder to an automatic default judgment. An opposing parties’ right to demand information should be subject to a number of restrictions. As an example, a party could legitimately invoke the privilege against self-incrimination. Another restriction is simply that the information requested is not information which is available. You simply cannot disclose something of which you have not. Another restriction is that the requested information is so extensive that it cannot be assembled within the time allowed. There are many horror stories in the State of South Dakota concerning interrogatories which are told, oft over, by practicing lawyers and trial judges in this state. Interrogatories can subvert justice, rather than serve it.
In sum, interrogatories can be a great avenue towards bringing a case to settlement but they can also be abused to a point where a small law office can be brought to its knees by the use of computers. A trial judge should be wary of these 15 to 25 member law firms who exert unbearable pressure upon a one or two man law firm, asking the one or two man law firm to be a detective or a magician in answering questions which do not bear upon the guts of the lawsuit.
Judge Dobberpuhl is a seasoned trial judge and would have no part of Ringhau-sen’s civil disobedience. As the majority points out, there were lesser sanctions (other than striking the answer and defaulting Ringhausen on liability). It is very difficult for me to posit that Judge Dobberpuhl has clearly abused his discretion, especially in light of our holdings in Matter of Estate of Donahue, 464 N.W.2d 393 (S.D.1990) and Davis v. Kressly, 78 S.D. 637, 107 N.W.2d 5 (1961): A claimed abuse oí discretion is measured by the “objective reasonableness standard,” i.e., not if an appellate court would have made an original like ruling, but rather if a judicial mind, in view of the law and the circumstances of a particular case, could reasonably have reached such a conclusion. A turning point in my mind was the failure to set a specific date for compliance. However, Ringhausen, faced with sanctions, just one day before a hearing on sanctions did tender some response to (a) interrogatories and (b) motion to produce. Therebefore, he had produced nothing. It is generally recognized that a defendant should “... not be defaulted for failing to answer interrogatories or other discovery questions within the time allowed by law if answers [have] been filed at some point in the proceedings, even though the response [is] tardy.” John E. Theuman, Annotation, Judgment in Favor of Plaintiff in State Court Action for Defendant’s Failure to Obey Request or Order to Answer Interrogatories or Other Discovery Questions, 30 A.L.R.4th 9, 51 (1984). I notice that Judge Dobberpuhl ordered Ringhausen to pay $300.00 in terms on December 3, 1991. As of January, 1992, Ringhausen had not paid the $300.00. In the horse world, a horse is “ringy" if he won’t behave.

=== CASE 2218787 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:54.76437+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 212 (1992)
231 Ill. App. 3d 339
172 Ill. Dec. 933
G.M. SIGNS, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
KIRN SIGNS, INC., Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-91-1227.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
July 10, 1992.
Lewis Rice Fingersh, Cordell P. Schulten, Clayton, Mo., for Kirn Signs, Inc.
Greenblatt & Greenblatt, Michael A. Greenblatt, Waukegan, for G.M. Signs, Inc.
Justice DOYLE delivered the opinion of the court:
In this breach of contract action, defendant, Kirn Signs, Inc., appeals the trial court's entry of judgment by default for plaintiff, G.M. Signs, Inc. Defendant's sole argument on appeal is that the Illinois court lacked personal jurisdiction over defendant, a Missouri corporation. We hold that the trial court properly concluded that defendant was amenable to process under the Illinois "long-arm" statute (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 2-209).
Plaintiff, an Illinois corporation with its sole place of business in Round Lake, manufactures signs and sells them wholesale. Defendant, whose business facilities are located entirely outside of Illinois, manufactures, erects and installs signage.
On December 7, 1990, plaintiff filed its complaint in the circuit court of Lake County. According to the complaint, plaintiff had manufactured certain merchandise at defendant's special instance and request. Defendant received but did not pay for the goods.
Defendant entered a special appearance (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-301) to contest personal jurisdiction. Defendant argued that its mere purchase of goods from the Illinois plaintiff did not establish sufficient contacts between defendant and the forum State where defendant was not *213 incorporated or licensed to do business in Illinois, had no physical presence in Illinois, negotiated the contracts at issue by telephone and mail, and received and paid for the goods outside of Illinois.
James A. Hobbs, defendant's president, submitted an affidavit stating the following. Defendant did not have and never has had any office, bank account, mailing address, telephone listing or other business facility in Illinois. Defendant owned no property in Illinois and had no affiliated entities engaged in business in Illinois. Defendant first ordered merchandise from plaintiff in 1986. Defendant made most of its purchase orders via telephone, with occasional mail orders. Plaintiff delivered all the goods to defendant in Missouri, per the parties' agreement. Defendant tendered all of its payments upon delivery in Missouri or by mail from Missouri. Hobbs visited plaintiff's place of business once in the last five years but did not enter into any agreements or place any orders while there. Defendant had no other contacts with Illinois that were related to plaintiff's suit.
In response, plaintiff submitted the affidavit of its president, George Matiasek, stating the following. Plaintiff did not solicit business through salesmen or advertising but depended solely on word of mouth to obtain new customers. Late in 1986, James Hobbs telephoned Matiasek and expressed a desire for a meeting to discuss a future business relationship between the parties. Early in 1987, Hobbs visited plaintiff's place of business in Round Lake. In this day-long visit, Hobbs observed plaintiff's manufacturing facilities, received plaintiff's catalog, and "discussed all possible aspects of the two companies doing business." Toward the end of the visit, Hobbs told Matiasek something to the effect that defendant would be doing "a lot of work" with plaintiff.
Matiasek stated further that the parties subsequently did much business. Defendant initiated each transaction by phone call or written purchase order. At defendant's specific requests, plaintiff manufactured signs and delivered them to defendant "f.o.b. Round Lake, Illinois."
The trial court denied defendant's motion to dismiss and later entered a default judgment for plaintiff. Defendant appeals, raising only the issue of personal jurisdiction.
A plaintiff has the burden of establishing a valid basis for jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant. (Poplar Grove State Bank v. Powers (1991), 218 Ill.App.3d 509, 517, 161 Ill. Dec. 230, 578 N.E.2d 588.) Plaintiff asserts that personal jurisdiction over defendant exists under section 2-209(a)(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, which states as follows:
"(a) Any person, whether or not a citizen or resident of this State, who in person or through an agent does any of the acts hereinafter enumerated, thereby submits such person, and, if an individual, his or her personal representative, to the jurisdiction of the courts of this State as to any cause of action arising from the doing of any of such acts:
(1) The transaction of any business within this State." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-209(a)(1).
Subsection (c) of this section, effective September 7, 1989, enables an Illinois circuit court to exercise in personam jurisdiction on "any other basis now or hereafter permitted by the Illinois Constitution and the Constitution of the United States." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-209(c).) Although the transaction in question is alleged to have occurred before the effective date of this procedural amendment, defendant does not deny that the amendment applies to this litigation, which was initiated after that date. See Ogdon v. Gianakos (1953), 415 Ill. 591, 597, 114 N.E.2d 686; Ores v. Kennedy (1991), 218 Ill.App.3d 866, 870-72, 161 Ill. Dec. 493, 578 N.E.2d 1139.
As the language of subsection (c) states (and as defendant appears to concede), an Illinois court may exercise personal jurisdiction over any nonresident as long as the exercise of such jurisdiction offends neither Federal nor State guarantees of due process. (People ex rel. Hartigan v. *214 Kennedy (1991), 215 Ill.App.3d 880, 887-90, 159 Ill. Dec. 438, 576 N.E.2d 107.) Federal due process requires that the defendant have such "minimum contacts" with the forum State that the exercise of jurisdiction is consistent with traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. (International Shoe Co. v. Washington (1945), 326 U.S. 310, 316, 66 S. Ct. 154, 158, 90 L. Ed. 95, 102.) Our supreme court has held that while the standards of Federal due process may delineate "`the outer limits beyond which a State may not go to acquire jurisdiction over nonresidents'" (Rollins v. Ellwood (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 244, 271, 152 Ill. Dec. 384, 565 N.E.2d 1302, quoting Cook Associates, Inc. v. Lexington United Corp. (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 190, 197, 57 Ill. Dec. 730, 429 N.E.2d 847), Illinois courts must ultimately look to the meaning of the long-arm statute and to the due process guarantee of the Illinois Constitution. (Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 2.) (Rollins, 141 Ill.2d at 271-75, 152 Ill. Dec. 384, 565 N.E.2d 1302.) Our statute and State constitution may restrict the power of Illinois courts to bring nonresidents before them to a greater extent than do the Federal due process clause and the "minimum contacts" test recognized by the Federal courts. (Rollins, 141 Ill.2d at 271-72, 152 Ill. Dec. 384, 565 N.E.2d 1302.) Under State due process guarantees, it must be fair, just and reasonable to require a nonresident to defend an action in Illinois, considering the quality and nature of the defendant's acts which occur in Illinois or which affect interests located in Illinois. Rollins, 141 Ill.2d at 275, 152 Ill. Dec. 384, 565 N.E.2d 1302.
Defendant argues that mere purchases from an Illinois plaintiff will not support jurisdiction over a nonresident and that its other contacts with Illinois were merely fortuitous and incidental; therefore, plaintiff has not established that defendant had the requisite "minimum contacts" with Illinois.
Plaintiff responds that defendant's contacts with Illinois were not merely incidental but extensive and systematic. Moreover, plaintiff notes, defendant initiated these contacts and thus purposefully created an ongoing business relationship with an Illinois corporation. Thus, according to plaintiff, it is fair to bring defendant into an Illinois court to enforce the obligations defendant knowingly undertook. We agree.
In Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz (1985), 471 U.S. 462, 105 S. Ct. 2174, 85 L. Ed. 2d 528, the plaintiff, a Florida corporation, brought suit in a Florida court against a Michigan resident-franchisee. In applying Federal due process standards to allow the Florida court to exert jurisdiction over a nonresident who had never physically entered the forum State, the Court held that the defendant's contacts with Florida were sufficient to make it foreseeable that the defendant might reasonably be haled into court there.
Acknowledging that an individual's contract with an out-of-State party alone does not automatically establish the requisite minimum contacts, the Court stressed that more was present there. By taking the initiative to negotiate a long-term franchise agreement with the plaintiff, the defendant reached out beyond his home State and purposefully availed himself of the benefits of a substantial and ongoing relationship with the Florida plaintiff. Hence his ties to the forum State were hardly "random," "fortuitous," or "attenuated." Burger King, 471 U.S. at 478-80, 105 S. Ct. at 2185-86, 85 L.Ed.2d at 544-46.
The Court acknowledged that the defendant had little or no physical presence in Florida but minimized the significance of this fact in view of modern commercial practice under which much business is transacted across State lines by wire or mail. The fact that the defendant had no physical presence in Florida was unimportant as long as he purposefully directed his efforts toward residents of the forum State. Burger King, 471 U.S. at 476, 105 S. Ct. at 2184, 85 L.Ed.2d at 543.
In Chalek v. Klein (1990), 193 Ill.App.3d 767, 140 Ill. Dec. 760, 550 N.E.2d 645, which was decided prior to Rollins, we applied Burger King to clarify when Illinois courts may exercise personal jurisdiction over nonresidents who purchase goods from Illinois *215 residents. We adopted the approach of several other jurisdictions in distinguishing between "passive purchasers," who merely place orders at the seller's price as stated in advertising or other forms of solicitation, and "active purchasers," who dictate or vigorously negotiate contract terms or inspect production facilities. This approach, we emphasized, has the virtue of protecting both the due process rights of the ordinary mail order purchaser and the legitimate interests of "sellers who manufacture custom-built products according to a nonresident buyer's specifications." (Chalek, 193 Ill.App.3d at 773, 140 Ill. Dec. 760, 550 N.E.2d 645.) Although our decision in Chalek must now be considered in conjunction with Rollins, which shifts the focus to our State due process requirements, we believe that it continues to provide a useful approach in determining whether personal jurisdiction exists over nonresident purchasers.
Among the cases cited favorably in Chalek is Yankee Metal Products Co. v. District Court (Okla.1974), 528 P.2d 311. There, the nonresident defendant initiated negotiations with the forum State plaintiff. These negotiations culminated in contracts for the sale of merchandise that the plaintiff custom-built for the nonresident defendant. The Oklahoma Supreme Court held that the nonresident defendant was an "active purchaser" who had no just cause for complaint when the plaintiff sued in an Oklahoma court. See also Heritage House Restaurants, Inc. v. Continental Funding Group, Inc. (7th Cir.1990), 906 F.2d 276, 283-84 (defendant's lack of physical presence in forum State unimportant where defendant solicited and obtained ongoing business relationship with forum State plaintiff); Leonardo's, Inc. v. Greathall, Ltd. (N.D.Ill.1989), 714 F. Supp. 949, 953-54 (nonresident company that actively and successfully solicited forum State residents to work at out-of-State fair was subject to jurisdiction of forum State court); Schartner v. Northwest International Equipment Co. (E.D.Wisc. 1988), 694 F. Supp. 1364 (nonresident seller who solicited and negotiated sales contract with resident plaintiff was amenable to process under forum State's long-arm statute).
In the present case, the affidavits and pleadings establish that defendant actively initiated and negotiated an ongoing commercial relationship with plaintiff, an Illinois seller. Plaintiff did not advertise or solicit defendant's business. Defendant made the initial contact and, after traveling to Illinois to inspect plaintiff's manufacturing facilities, discussed a future business relationship. Thereafter, the parties undertook a commercial arrangement which endured several years and involved numerous orders requiring plaintiff to custom-produce the products to defendant's detailed specifications. Defendant placed the order for the products which are the subject of the particular transaction in controversy.
We do not consider defendant to be in the category of an ordinary mail order consumer who merely orders a stock item of merchandise from another State. On the contrary, defendant was an "active purchaser" who deliberately reached out beyond its home State to avail itself of the benefits of commercial ties with an Illinois company. Its contacts with the forum State cannot reasonably be characterized as random, fortuitous, or attenuated. Defendant's actions should have enabled it to predict that it might be subject to the jurisdiction of this State. Plaintiff has a legitimate interest in using Illinois courts to enforce the obligations that defendant actively and knowingly undertook.
Applying the requirements of the long-arm statute and the restrictions of the State due process clause, we conclude that the exercise of jurisdiction here was fair, just and reasonable under the relevant circumstances. We further hold that plaintiff met its burden of showing that defendant had sufficient contacts with Illinois to satisfy Federal due process requirements.
The judgment of the circuit court of Lake County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
INGLIS, P.J., and DUNN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:06.56888+00 ===

Jansen, P.J.
Defendant, James Nathan Parr, was convicted of carrying a concealed weapon, MCL 750.227; MSA 28.424, following a bench trial in Detroit Recorder’s Court. He was sentenced to a *43term of 2lA to 5 years’ imprisonment. Defendant appeals as of right, and we affirm.
Defendant first contends that the police officers did not have probable cause or reasonable suspicion of criminal activity to justify chasing and apprehending him. It is defendant’s position that at the time the officers decided to pursue him, they had insufficient information to satisfy a reasonable person that he had committed or was about to commit a crime. We disagree with defendant.
In order to justify an investigative stop, the police must have a particularized suspicion, based on objective observations, that the person stopped has been, is, or is about to engage in some type of criminal activity. People v Armendarez, 188 Mich App 61, 66-67; 468 NW2d 893 (1991); People v Lambert, 174 Mich App 610, 614; 436 NW2d 699 (1989). We must evaluate the police officers’ conduct in light of the totality of the circumstances. Armendarez, p 67; Lambert, p 616.
Flight at the approach of police does not, by itself, support a reasonable suspicion to warrant an investigative stop; however, it is a factor to be considered in determining whether there were grounds to conclude that criminal activity was afoot. Armendarez, p 68; Lambert, p 616. There must be other circumstances that make the import of the defendant’s flight less ambiguous. Id.
On March 22, 1989, at approximately 11:40 p.m., Officer Lovier, while on duty with two partners, observed defendant and two other individuals near 14630 Hartwell. When defendant noticed the officers in their police car he "just like got a wide expression on his face and then started to turn and reached into his left waistband.” Defendant removed something from his left waistband with his right hand. He handled the item like a gun.
As the police car approached defendant, Officer *44Lovier could see a shiny object in defendant’s hand that the officer believed to be a gun. As the police car drew near, defendant ran to the side door, where he stopped and kicked and pulled at the door. A light by the door was turned on. Defendant still had the object in his hand at this time, and from the police car, which was parked at the end of the driveway, Officer Lovier clearly saw that the object was a gun. Defendant then ran through the yard, and the police officers got out of their car and pursued him. As Officer Lovier chased defendant, he saw defendant throw the gun over a fence. Defendant was subsequently apprehended, and a Smith & Wesson .38 caliber nickel-plated revolver, which was loaded with six live rounds, was retrieved.
We are of the opinion that the police officers had a reasonable, particularized suspicion that defendant was engaged in some type of criminal activity. Defendant’s actions, including his facial expression and the movement toward his waistband, and the police officer’s observation of the shiny object make the import of defendant’s flight less ambiguous. Lambert, supra. Those facts gave the officers reasonable suspicion sufficient to justify further investigation. Upon closer observation, it became apparent to Officer Lovier that the shiny object was in fact a gun. Defendant’s possession of a gun and his actions gave the officers sufficient probable cause to arrest him. The gun was then properly seized, because it was within the plain view of the officer. People v Cooke, 194 Mich App 534; 487 NW2d 497 (1992). We conclude that the police officers possessed a reasonable belief that criminal activity was afoot, they were justified in pursuing and arresting defendant, and the testimony regarding the finding of the gun was properly admitted.
*45Defendant next claims that the prosecution did not prove an essential element of the crime, that the gun found was legally a pistol. Defendant contends that, because the gun was not offered into evidence, the prosecution failed to prove that the pistol was operable. We find no merit in defendant’s argument.
This Court has recently held that a pistol, as defined under the concealed weapons statute, must be operable. People v Gardner, 194 Mich App 652; 487 NW2d 515 (1992). That is, the pistol must be capable of propelling the requisite-sized dangerous projectile or of being altered to do so within a reasonably short time. Id., p 654; People v Huizenga, 176 Mich App 800, 806; 439 NW2d 922 (1989). An affirmative defense to a charge of carrying a concealed pistol can be made by the presentation of proof that the pistol would not fire and could not readily be made to fire. Gardner, supra.
In this case, as in Gardner, defendant produced no evidence that the gun was inoperable. Defendant did not even raise the issue of operability and, in fact, testified that the gun was not his and that he did not possess a gun at any time. Under these circumstances, the trier of fact was entitled to conclude that the pistol was operable. Gardner, supra. This is particularly so in light of the fact that the gun found by the officer was loaded with six live rounds of ammunition.
Defendant also contends that the trial court’s departure from the recommended guidelines range of zero to six months was not justified. Again, we disagree with defendant.
A sentencing court may depart from the recommended minimum sentence under the guidelines when departure is necessitated by the special characteristics of the offense or the offender, or when the court believes that the recommended mini*46mum sentence is inappropriate. People v Hudson, 187 Mich App 31, 33; 466 NW2d 313 (1991). Departure is appropriate where the guidelines do not adequately account for important factors legitimately considered at sentencing. Id., p 34; People v Milbourn, 435 Mich 630, 657; 461 NW2d 1 (1990). A sentencing court may consider the facts underlying uncharged offenses, pending charges, and acquittals. People v Newcomb, 190 Mich App 424, 427; 476 NW2d 749 (1991).
After reviewing the record made at the time of sentencing, we conclude that the trial court’s departure from the guidelines’ recommended range was justified. The trial court was very thorough at sentencing, and provided sufficient justification in support of the departure both on the record and on the sentencing information report. We find no error in this regard.
Affirmed.
Michael J. Kelly, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9739118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:06.57314+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
(concurring). I concur in the majority opinion, but write separately to question the analysis in People v Gardner, 194 Mich App 652; 487 NW2d 515 (1992). Gardner adopts People v Huizenga, 176 Mich App 800; 439 NW2d 922 (1989), concluding that inoperability can be an affirmative defense to a charge of carrying a concealed pistol in a vehicle, MCL 750.227(2); MSA 28.424(2). In ostensibly resolving a longstanding split of authority, however, Gardner failed to acknowledge or discuss People v Thompson, 189 Mich App 85; 472 NW2d 11 (1991), which rejected Huizenga. Notably, Judge Fitzgerald dissented in Thompson on grounds that he would have followed *47Huizenga. 189 Mich App 88. See Administrative Order No. 1990-6, 436 Mich lxxxiv.
The two opinions can be distinguished because Thompson relates to MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2), possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, while Gardner applies to MCL 750.227(2); MSA 28.424(2), carrying a concealed pistol in a vehicle. However, the Supreme Court expects uniform statutory interpretation of concealed weapon and felony-firearm offenses. In People v Hill, 433 Mich 464; 446 NW2d 140 (1989), a majority of our Supreme Court, over Justice Levin’s dissent, observed that "[t]he concealed weapon statute and the felony-firearm statute necessitate the same statutory construction.” 433 Mich 475. Moreover, in its analysis of MCL 750.224b; MSA 28.421(2), prohibiting possession of a short-barreled shotgun, Hill cited favorably those Court of Appeals cases that rejected the view that operability is an element of felony-firearm and concealed weapon offenses.
The law now provides that proof that a weapon is operable is not an element of a felony-firearm charge, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2), Thompson, supra. Under MCL 750.227(2); MSA 28.424(2), if operability is properly challenged, the prosecutor must prove the weapon is operable. Gardner, supra. In construing related statutes, our Court has inconsistently interpreted the same statutory definitions, contrary to Hill's directive. This is a serious and recurring matter of public importance because of the prominence of weapons offenses in our criminal courts.
In an appropriate case, the Supreme Court should resolve these inconsistent interpretations of related statutory provisions.

=== CASE 2218801 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:55.082841+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 740 (1992)
231 Ill. App. 3d 646
173 Ill. Dec. 116
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Jonathan WEST, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-91-1842.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
June 30, 1992.
James A. Graham, Chicago, for defendant-appellant.
Jack O'Malley, State's Atty., Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, William D. Carroll and Christine Cook, Asst. State's Attys., of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice LINN delivered the opinion of the court:
After a bench trial defendant Jonathan West was found guilty but mentally ill on charges of attempted aggravated criminal sexual assault, attempted criminal sexual assault, aggravated kidnapping and aggravated battery and was sentenced to 12 years in prison. Defendant contends that the trial court's finding that he was guilty but mentally ill was against the manifest weight of the evidence, and the trial court utilized an improper standard in finding him guilty but mentally ill.
The victim testified that at 9 p.m. on May 12, 1990, she was walking home from a drugstore in her neighborhood when she noticed defendant following her. Defendant approached her and asked her if she knew the time. Defendant then came from behind her, placed his arms around her neck and pulled her into a parking lot. Defendant told her that he was going to kill her. She testified that she fell and defendant then dragged her, head first, into some bushes. She attempted to resist him, but he pulled her farther into the bushes. Defendant appeared to be carrying a weapon and threatened to kill her a second time. A struggle ensued with defendant unsuccessfully attempting to remove the victim's clothes. During the altercation, the victim heard passersby and, after pulling defendant's hand from her mouth, was able to call for help. Defendant immediately fled. Two men who had heard the victim's call for help pursued defendant. The victim ran home where she telephoned the police. When the police arrived, she saw defendant lying in the street and identified him as her assailant.
*741 Juan James testified that he and several friends were walking past the location of the incident when he heard someone calling for help. Looking in the direction of the voice, he saw defendant on top of the victim in an empty lot. He observed defendant and the victim struggle, and defendant appeared to be trying to choke her. James ran toward the defendant who fled, and then assisted the victim. After determining that she was in good condition, he pursued defendant, caught him and held him for police. Defendant resisted him and shouted at him that he was sorry.
Chicago police officer William Galvan testified that he arrived at the scene of the incident shortly after it occurred. After taking statements from the witnesses, he gave defendant Miranda warnings. Defendant stated that he understood his rights, did not appear to have any difficulty understanding the officer, and the officer found him to be coherent. The police transported defendant to a hospital because defendant indicated that he was injured.
Dr. Gerson Kaplan, a psychiatrist, testified that he examined defendant on August 1, 1990 and determined that he was schizophrenic and unfit to stand trial. During his initial examination defendant was hyper, alert, suspicious and displayed severe thought disorder. When defendant spoke he made no sense. The doctor testified that defendant was a candidate for involuntary admission to a State mental hospital. He explained that a person suffering from a schizophrenic paranoid disorder may be lucid, able to understand what is happening in his environment, and able to answer simple questions regarding age and address. He noted that it was possible for such an individual to realize that he was committing an offense. The doctor examined defendant again on February 21, 1991, and determined he was legally insane at the time of the incident. He based his diagnosis on defendant's medical history of three hospitalizations for mental illness prior to the incident, the last of which occurred only several weeks prior to his arrest, and the nature of the arrest incident. On cross-examination, Dr. Kaplan testified that he interviewed defendant for the first time three months after the incident. He further stated that defendant's medical history indicated that he was first diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder which would not have rendered defendant either mentally ill or insane. He stated that it was logical to assume that defendant's apology after the incident was an effort of a normal person to tell someone he was sorry for the act committed.
Dr. Albert Stipes, a psychiatrist, testified that he evaluated defendant on November 21, 1990 and found that with medication, he was fit to stand trial. He diagnosed defendant as a paranoid schizophrenic, meaning that defendant was confused, illogical, believed others were trying to harm him and had a thought disorder. Dr. Stipes evaluated defendant again on January 2, 1991 and found defendant was legally insane at the time the incident occurred. His diagnosis was based on defendant's previous examinations and police reports, as well as the examinations conducted by Dr. Kaplan and himself. He also testified that a person suffering from this illness can commit an offense and immediately express remorse, and may be able to know his name and address. On cross-examination, Dr. Stipes stated that a paranoid schizophrenic is able to commit a crime and know he is committing a crime without being legally insane. He also testified that he made his evaluation without interviewing any witnesses to the incident or without talking with any other psychiatrists who had treated defendant. He testified that some paranoid schizophrenics may live a normal life without medication. He also stated that the disorder could be triggered by stress, such as committing a crime and being caught. The doctor testified that a normal person apprehended after committing a crime would demonstrate his knowledge of his wrongdoing by apologizing. Finally, he stated that it was highly likely that defendant who had a high potential for violence, would repeat the type of behavior.
Police officer William Marley testified that at 10:30 p.m. on May 12, 1990, he went to Roseland Hospital to interview defendant. *742 He advised defendant of his Miranda rights and defendant indicated that he understood his rights. Defendant told the officer that he had been involved in a fight with a girl on the street, they had fallen to the ground during the fight and he did not know how her bra and pants had become opened. Defendant also told him that he was not aware of how he came to be on top of the victim. Defendant said that he had a dispute with her former boyfriend in 1986 and this was his act of revenge.
In finding defendant guilty but mentally ill, the trial court stated:
"The Court is aware of the testimony of the two doctors, however, the Court finds particularly seeing the testimony of the lay witnesses which indicate that the Defendant followed the complainant, that he concealed their presence by pulling her into bushes, that he was responsive to a statement made by the complainant, that he attempted to avoid detection by the citizens who arrived on the scene, that he fought back. The Court notes the citizens' opinion that there was nothing unusual about the Defendant. The Court also notes that the Defendant was remorseful after his arrest as a response to warnings and to personal questions that were presented to him, he appeared to be lucid after his arrest and there was no evidence of bizarre conduct.
Based on all these factors the Court finds that he had substantial capability to appreciate the criminality of his conduct and to conform his behavior to the requirements of the law."
Defendant contends that the trial court's finding of guilty but mentally ill was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Initially the State contends that defendant waived this issue on appeal by failing to raise it either at trial or in a post-trial motion. However, in Illinois a defendant is not required to have objected at trial or filed a post-trial motion if he is challenging the sufficiency of the evidence. People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 190, 119 Ill. Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.
Section 6-2(a) of the Criminal Code states that
"[a] person is not criminally responsible for conduct if at the time of such conduct, as a result of mental disease or mental defect, he lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law." (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 6-2(a).)
Where a defendant raises the affirmative defense of insanity, he bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence his insanity at the time of the offense. (People v. Williams (1990), 201 Ill.App.3d 207, 216, 146 Ill. Dec. 924, 558 N.E.2d 1258.) "Unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, the fact finder's resolution of the issue of defendant's sanity at the time of the offense will not be disturbed upon appeal." (People v. Beehn (1990), 205 Ill.App.3d 533, 539, 151 Ill. Dec. 101, 105, 563 N.E.2d 1207, 1211.) "The weight to be given an expert's opinion on sanity is measured by the reasons given for the conclusion and the factual details supporting it." (People v. Wilhoite (1st Dist. 1991) 228 Ill.App.3d 12, 20-21, 169 Ill. Dec. 561, 566, 592 N.E.2d 48, 53.) A trier of fact may reject all expert testimony and conclude a defendant was sane based solely on lay testimony. (People v. Williams, 201 Ill.App.3d at 219, 146 Ill. Dec. 924, 558 N.E.2d 1258.) Lay observations are particularly relevant if they are based on observations made shortly before or after the crime was committed; other relevant factors include the existence of a plan for crime, and methods to prevent detection. 201 Ill.App.3d at 219, 146 Ill. Dec. 924, 558 N.E.2d 1258.
In the case at bar, the expert testimony showed that although Drs. Kaplan and Stipes believed defendant was insane at the time the offense occurred, neither of them examined him until several months after the attack. Dr. Stipes testified that it was possible for a paranoid schizophrenic to commit a crime, understand he committed a crime and be legally sane. He further stated that defendant's disorder could be triggered by stress, such as committing a crime and being caught. The lay witnesses *743 who observed defendant before, during and immediately after the attack all testified that defendant appeared normal, coherent and remorseful. Further, the evidence indicated that defendant had planned to attack the victim and then took her to a secluded area to prevent detection.
Accordingly, we find that the evidence supported the trial court's conclusion that defendant was sufficiently lucid at the time of the incident to know that he was committing a crime and to have the capability of conforming his behavior to the requirements of the law.
Defendant next contends that the trial court erred in requiring him to prove his insanity beyond a reasonable doubt. At trial the trial court stated:
"The court has resolved the conflict of the evidence, and the credibility issues that have been presented. It's clear that the State proved all offenses charged beyond a reasonable doubt. And from all the circumstances find beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant was not insane at the time of the incident."
However, contrary to defendant's assertion we find the trial court's comments pertain to the State's having met its burden of proof and do not refer to any burden of proof that was required of defendant. We find no evidence in the record to support defendant's contention that the trial court required him to prove his insanity beyond a reasonable doubt.
For these reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
JIGANTI, P.J., and McMORROW, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:08.425142+00 ===

OPINION
SHORT, Judge.
This civil case arises out of the arrest and subsequent incarceration of Robert Reed Carradine. Carradine sued state trooper Patrick Chase (officer) and the State of Minnesota claiming unreasonable search and seizure, deprivation of personal freedom and liberty without due process of law, assault, battery, false imprisonment, excessive use of force, negligent infliction of emotional distress, defamation, malicious prosecution, negligence, trespass to personal property, conversion, and vicarious liability. The officer and the state moved for summary judgment on the basis of official, absolute, sovereign, and qualified immunity. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the officer and the state on all of Carradine’s claims, except negligent infliction of emotional distress, defamation and vicarious liability. On appeal, all parties argue the trial court erred as a matter of law. We affirm.
FACTS
The officer arrested Carradine on July 9, 1987, while he was driving to Minneapolis/St. Paul International Airport to catch an early morning airplane flight. The officer prepared an arrest report describing Carradine’s conduct to include speeding, reckless driving, fleeing an officer, and impersonating an officer. Carra-dine and his travel companion dispute the officer’s version of the events.
Following his arrest, the officer transported Carradine to the Hennepin County Adult Detention Center where Carradine was booked, fingerprinted and strip-searched. The officer was not involved in the booking process or in the strip-search. After approximately ten hours in custody, Carradine was released on his own recognizance. When contacted by a local reporter, the officer orally recounted the events described in the arrest report. Based on the officer’s statements to the reporter, accounts of Carradine’s arrest appeared in numerous national newspaper articles and wire reports, and one account was reported on a television show.
Carradine was charged with: (a) fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.487, subd. 3 (1986), a gross misdemeanor; (b) reckless driving, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 169.13, subd. 1 (1986), a misdemeanor; and (c) careless driving, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 169.13, subd. 2 (1986), a misdemeanor. Pursuant to a plea agreement, Carradine admitted driving over the posted speed limit and pleaded guilty to a petty misdemeanor charge of speeding. At the conclusion of the criminal proceedings, Carradine began this civil lawsuit against the officer and the state. Carradine alleges the officer made defamatory statements about his conduct in the arrest report, to law enforcement officials, to prosecuting authorities and to the news media.
*80ISSUES
I. Is the doctrine of official immunity-applicable either to an officer’s writing of an arrest report or to a subsequent oral account of the arrest?
II. Does the doctrine of sovereign immunity bar Carradine’s vicarious liability claim based on defamation and negligent infliction of emotional distress?
III. Is the officer’s stop, arrest and search of Carradine protected by qualified immunity?
ANALYSIS
On appeal from a grant of summary judgment, we must determine whether any genuine issues of material fact exist and whether the trial court erred in applying the law. Hubred v. Control Data Corp., 442 N.W.2d 308, 310 (Minn.1989). We need not defer to a trial court’s decision on legal issues. Frost-Benco Elec. Ass’n v. Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn.1984).
Whether the doctrines of official immunity and sovereign immunity apply to the facts requires us to focus on the nature of the officer’s particular acts in question. Johnson v. Morris, 453 N.W.2d 31, 42 (Minn.1990); see Nusbaum v. County of Blue Earth, 422 N.W.2d 713, 719 (Minn.1988) (“each case must be judged in a fashion which focuses on whether the legislature intended to immunize the particular government activity”). The determination of whether an officer’s actions were malicious or willful is generally a fact question to be decided by a jury, but may be resolved by summary judgment. See Elwood v. County of Rice, 423 N.W.2d 671, 679 (Minn.1988) (recognizing application of the doctrines may involve a fact question for the jury, but not finding such a question in the case before it). Whether the officer’s actions were discretionary or ministerial is a question of law. Engle v. Hennepin County, 412 N.W.2d 364, 366 (Minn.App.1987), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Nov. 18, 1987).
A determination of whether an official’s conduct falls within the scope of immunity outlined by the objective qualified immunity test generally is a question of law which may be resolved by summary judgment. Anderson v. City of Hopkins, 400 N.W.2d 350, 354 (Minn.App.1987). An appellate court reviewing a claim of qualified immunity “need not consider the correctness of the plaintiff’s version of the facts, nor even determine whether the plaintiff’s allegations actually state a claim.” Id. (quoting Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 528, 105 S.Ct. 2806, 2816, 86 L.Ed.2d 411 (1985)). “All [the reviewing court] need determine is a question of law: whether the legal norms allegedly violated by [the officer] were clearly established at the time of the challenged actions or, in cases where the district court has denied summary judgment for the [officer] * * * whether the law clearly proscribed the actions the [officer] claims he took.” Id. (quoting Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 528, 105 S.Ct. at 2816).
I.
Minnesota’s official immunity doctrine protects from personal liability a public official charged by law with duties calling for the exercise of judgment or discretion, unless the official is guilty of a willful or malicious wrong. Elwood, 423 N.W.2d at 677. The purpose behind the official immunity doctrine is “to insure that the threat of potential liability does not unduly inhibit the exercise of discretion required of public officers in the discharge of their duties.” Rico v. State, 472 N.W.2d 100, 107 (Minn.1991) (quoting Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 233 n. 1 (Minn.1988)). Official immunity, however, does not protect an officer who willfully violates a known right. Id. Generally, police officers exercising their official duties are classified as “discretionary” rather than “ministerial” officers and thus are afforded official immunity in executing those duties. Johnson, 453 N.W.2d at 42; Elwood, 423 N.W.2d at 678. In this case, the officer seeks immunity for his decision to detail the events surrounding Carradine’s arrest *81in an arrest report and in oral communications to detention officers and a reporter.
The state and the officer argue the doctrine of official immunity protects the officer from Carradine’s claims. We disagree. It is undisputed a law enforcement officer has an absolute duty to report accurately the circumstances underlying an arrest. See Minn.R.Crim.P. 4.02, subd. 3 (officer shall notify prosecuting attorney of the arrest); State Patrol Gen. Order No. PR 83-90-007 (July 1, 1983) (establishing a uniform incident reporting system). Carra-dine alleges the officer: (a) fabricated the circumstances leading to the arrest; (b) intentionally misrepresented the events surrounding the arrest in the police report; and (c) embellished the events in talking with a reporter. The testimony of Carra-dine, his traveling companion and a reconstruction expert support Carradine’s allegations and create a genuine issue for trial on whether the officer is guilty of a willful wrong. Under these circumstances, the officer is not entitled to summary judgment on the basis of official immunity.
The state and officer also argue the officer is absolutely privileged to publish the arrest report, regardless of its content, because the report is a public document under MinmStat. § 13.82, subds. 2(c), 3, 4(f), 16 (1986) and the Minnesota Supreme Court’s holding in Johnson v. Dirkswager, 315 N.W.2d 215, 223 (1982). We disagree. First, the court’s finding of an absolute privilege in Dirkswager was predicated on Dirkswager’s status as a top-level cabinet-equivalent official of the executive branch. Id. at 220-23. The arresting officer here was not a cabinet-level policy-making official; he was an entry-level state trooper. Dirkswager’s rationale does not extend to low-level law enforcement officers. Second, we are not convinced extending an absolute privilege to low-level law enforcement officers would promote the public good because such an extension would: (a) undercut Dirkswager’s limited exception to Minnesota’s official immunity doctrine; and (b) eliminate an incentive to be accurate. See id. at 220 (purpose of the absolute privilege is not to protect public officials, but to promote the public good). And third, the Government Data Practices Act does not specifically protect government employees from liability for making defamatory statements in reports required by law. See Minn.Stat. ch. 13 (1986) (Minnesota Government Data Practices Act), §§ 645.16, .17(5) (1986) (the object of all interpretation and construction of laws is to ascertain and effectuate the intention of the legislature; legislature intends to favor the public interest as against any private interest). Under these circumstances, the officer is not entitled to an absolute privilege to publish the arrest report’s contents.
Recovery for negligent infliction of emotional distress is allowed where there is a direct invasion of a person’s rights, such as defamation, malicious prosecution, or other willful or malicious conduct. Langeland v. Farmers State Bank of Trimont, 319 N.W.2d 26, 31 (Minn.1982). Because the officer is not entitled to summary judgment on the basis of official immunity as to Carradine’s defamation claim, the trial court properly denied summary judgment on Carradine’s claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress.
II.
The state is liable for the torts of its employees acting within the scope of their employment if a private person would be liable under the same circumstances. Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 1 (1986). A narrow exception to this general rule precludes government liability for a loss caused by a state employee’s performance of or failure to perform a discretionary duty, whether or not the discretion is abused. Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 3(b) (1986). The underlying purpose of this discretionary act exception is to prevent the use of tort actions to promote judicial interference with policy-making activities that are legislative or executive in nature. Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 231; Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 718.
Whether the officer’s acts fall within the discretionary act exception involves an inquiry into whether the officer’s deci*82sions to complete an arrest report and to make statements to detention officers and a reporter are protected planning-level decisions or unprotected operational-level decisions. See Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 719 (the Supreme Court has drawn a distinction between conduct at a planning level, which is protected, and conduct at an operational level, which is unprotected). Planning-level decisions involve the evaluation of factors such as the financial, political, economic, and social effects of a plan or policy. Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 232. By contrast, operational-level decisions involve decisions relating to the government’s ordinary day-to-day operations. Id. The focus of the inquiry, then, is on whether the challenged conduct involved
a balancing of policy with political, economic, and social considerations or, alternatively, whether it involved merely a professional or scientific judgment.
Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 720. Another significant consideration is the extent to which the threat of liability would impair the effective performance of governmental functions. Cairl v. State, 323 N.W.2d 20, 23 n. 3 (Minn.1982).
It is undisputed the officer was acting within the scope of his employment in arresting Carradine, preparing the arrest report, and communicating with other law enforcement officials. Since a private person would be liable to Carradine in these circumstances if he proved his allegations, the state has waived its immunity here, unless Carradine’s loss was caused by the performance of a discretionary duty. Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subds. 1, 3(b). We conclude the decision to complete an arrest report and communicate with others about the arrest report’s contents does not involve a balancing of policy objectives, nor does it constitute the type of decision that should be protected from judicial second-guessing. The officer’s actions at issue in this case were ministerial, “involving merely the execution of a specific duty arising from fixed and designated facts.” See Larson v. Independent Sch. Dist. No. 314, Braham, 289 N.W.2d 112, 119-20 (Minn.1979) (quoting Cook v. Trovatten, 200 Minn. 221, 224, 274 N.W. 165, 167 (1937)). Under these circumstances, the state is not entitled to summary judgment on Carra-dine’s claim for vicarious liability.
III.
Government officials performing discretionary functions have qualified immunity shielding them from civil liability as long as their actions reasonably could have been thought to be consistent with the rights they are alleged to have violated. Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 638, 107 S.Ct. 3034, 3038, 97 L.Ed.2d 523 (1987). Whether an officer protected by qualified immunity may be held personally liable for his or her allegedly unlawful official action “turns on the ‘objective legal reasonableness’ of the action * * * assessed in light of the legal rules that were ‘clearly established’ at the time it was taken.” Id. at 639, 107 S.Ct. at 3038 (quoting Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818-19, 102 S.Ct. 2727, 2738-39, 73 L.Ed.2d 396)). The scope of the qualified immunity doctrine is broad. McIntire v. State, 419 N.W.2d 799, 802 (Minn.App.1988), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Apr. 20, 1988). If the allegedly violated law is a clearly established one, however, the immunity defense ordinarily will fail, since a reasonably competent public official should know the law governing his or her conduct. Harlow, 457 U.S. at 818-19, 102 S.Ct. at 2738. Carradine argues the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for the officer on Carradine’s federal law claims because reasonable officers would have known that the stop, arrest, and search violated Carradine’s constitutional rights.
A. The initial stop was not a clear violation of Carradine’s constitutional rights.
Carradine argues the officer had no lawful basis to stop him and a reasonable officer would have known the stop was unlawful. We disagree. The undisputed facts demonstrate the officer was monitoring traffic when he observed a speeding car. The officer had reasonable, acticulable suspicion to stop that car. Even if Carradine were not violating the *83traffic laws, the officer could have made a brief investigatory stop, so long as he had an articulable suspicion of a violation. State v. Johnson, 257 N.W.2d 308, 309 (Minn.1977). Because the officer had a particularized and objective basis for suspecting a traffic violation, a reasonable officer could have concluded that the stop was valid under the federal and state constitutions. See United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S.Ct. 690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981) (the officer must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped of criminal activity, based upon all the circumstances); Appelgate v. Commissioner of Pub. Safety, 402 N.W.2d 106, 108 (Minn.1987) (a limited investigative stop is lawful if the officer can articulate a particularized and objective basis for suspecting criminal activity).
B. A reasonable officer could have concluded there was probable cause for the arrest.
Carradine also argues a reasonable officer would have concluded there was insufficient cause to arrest Carradine. We disagree. Minn.R.Crim.P. 6.01, subd. l(l)(a) provides in part:
Law enforcement officers acting without a warrant * * * shall issue citations to persons subject to lawful arrest for misdemeanors, unless it reasonably appears to the officer that arrest or detention is necessary [because] * * * there is a substantial likelihood that the accused will fail to respond to a citation.
While there are disputed facts relating to the charge of fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle, there are undisputed facts supporting a custodial arrest under Minn. R.Crim.P. 6.01, subd. l(l)(a). The record demonstrates: (a) Carradine was traveling to the airport; (b) Carradine and his traveling companion were not Minnesota residents; (c) Carradine presented a California drivers’ license; (d) California and Minnesota do not have a reciprocal agreement regarding traffic citations; and (e) Carradine was traveling at a high rate of speed. Under these facts, a reasonably competent law enforcement officer could believe there was a substantial likelihood Carradine would fail to respond to a citation.
Even if the officer erred in concluding probable cause existed to make a custodial arrest, he still would be entitled to qualified immunity because his decision, even if mistaken, nonetheless was reasonable. The accuracy of the information upon which the officer acts is not material if the officer “reasonably but mistakenly conclude[s] probable cause is present” in light of clearly established law and information the officer possessed. Hunter v. Bryant, — U.S. —, —, 112 S.Ct. 534, 536, 116 L.Ed.2d 589 (1991) (quoting Anderson, 483 U.S. at 641, 107 S.Ct. at 3040).
C. The search was incident to the custodial arrest.
Carradine asserts that because he was arrested without probable cause, he was searched without probable cause in violation of his constitutional rights. We disagree. As noted above, the officer reasonably concluded he had probable cause to arrest Carradine. In the case of a lawful custodial arrest, a full search of the person incident to the arrest not only is an exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement, but also is a reasonable search under that amendment without a showing of probable cause that weapons or evidence would be found. United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218, 235, 94 S.Ct. 467, 477, 38 L.Ed.2d 427 (1973). The fact of the lawful arrest negates any constitutional requirement the officer be able to articulate any additional justification for a search of the person. Id.; see generally 2 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure: A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 5.3(c), at 497-98 (2d ed.1987) (inspections of and intrusions into the body). Carradine failed to show the search of his person was conducted with excessive force or violated any clearly established law. Moreover, the strip-search of Carradine at the detention center is distinguishable from a search incident to an arrest involving the taking of a blood sample or the making of some similar intrusion into the body. See, e.g., Schmer*84ber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 769-70, 86 S.Ct. 1826, 1835, 16 L.Ed.2d 908 (1966) (searches involving bodily intrusions require a stricter constitutional test). Under these circumstances, a reasonable officer would conclude the search of Carradine’s person did not violate his constitutional rights; thus, qualified immunity shields the officer from civil liability to Carradine for the search and the trial court correctly granted summary judgment in the officer’s favor.
DECISION
The trial court properly denied the motions for summary judgment made by the officer and the state on Carradine’s claims of defamation, emotional distress and vicarious liability because: (a) there are facts in dispute regarding the officer’s preparation of and communication about the arrest report; (b) the officer is not entitled to an absolute privilege to publish the arrest report’s contents; and (c) the officer’s decision to complete the arrest report and communicate its contents to others did not involve a balancing of policy objectives. In addition, the trial court correctly granted summary judgment in favor of the officer on Carradine’s federal claims because the stop, arrest and search did not violate Car-radine’s constitutional rights and a reasonable officer would have acted similarly under the circumstances.
Affirmed.
HUSPENI, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739207 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:35.762028+00 ===

OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
The stipulated dissolution decree of appellant Barbara Anne Scott and respondent Richard T. Auer provided for terminating Auer’s maintenance obligation if Scott cohabited with a male person. Auer ceased maintenance, alleging Scott triggered the cohabitation clause by cohabiting with a male person. Scott disagreed, arguing she derived no economic benefit even if she were in violation of the cohabitation clause. The trial court terminated Auer’s maintenance obligation. Scott now maintains the termination was inappropriate because she did not receive the economic benefit she maintains the cohabitation clause requires.
FACTS
The parties’ stipulated marital termination agreement awarded Scott maintenance which would terminate if she “cohabited” with an unrelated male person. As most of the agreement’s pages have handwritten deletions or alterations of the typed provisions, it was apparently negotiated up to and including the day it was signed. Paragraph seven addressed maintenance and included the cohabitation clause as a typed provision. The cohabitation clause was not altered by hand, but other aspects of paragraph seven were. Both parties signed the page containing paragraph seven.
The parties’ decree incorporated the agreement. After one month, Auer ceased maintenance alleging Scott had triggered the cohabitation clause by living with William M. Dickel.
The propriety of the maintenance termination was submitted to the same trial judge who originally received the stipulation and issued the decree. The evidence indicated Dickel was paying rent at a friend’s house for use of a bedroom. It also indicated Dickel had “moved in” with Scott before Auer was liable for maintenance, and that Dickel’s car, driver’s license, voter’s registration, and a credit card all used Scott’s address. He also used Scott’s address on a loan application.
Scott alleged she did not economically benefit from these circumstances. Auer did not strongly dispute this allegation. Scott alleged the cohabitation clause required her to derive economic benefit from living with someone before maintenance could be terminated. Auer, however, argued that sharing a residence triggered the clause.
In its order, the trial court found Dickel spent only one night a week at the address where he pays rent but that Scott had not economically benefitted from Dickel’s presence at her residence. The trial court also specifically found that while Auer was aware Scott was involved with Dickel during the stipulation’s negotiation, he was unaware of Dickel’s use of Scott’s address in official capacities. The trial court then terminated Auer’s maintenance obligation, concluding that Dickel “cohabited” with Scott. The trial court also required Scott to repay Auer for the one month’s maintenance already paid.
Scott and Dickel are now married. Thus, this appeal involves Auer’s maintenance obligation for the period between the decree’s issuance and the marriage. See Minn.Stat. *56§ 518.64, subd. 3 (Supp.1991) (remarriage terminates maintenance).
ISSUE
Did the trial court erroneously terminate Auer’s maintenance obligation?
ANALYSIS
Here, the parties’ stipulated decree states Auer’s maintenance obligation would terminate should Scott “cohabit with a male person not related within the first degree of consanguinity” but does not further define “cohabit” or “cohabitation.”
1. Termination of Maintenance on “Moral Grounds”
Scott argues the trial court improperly terminated maintenance on “moral grounds.” This argument misreads the trial court’s order. Seeing the issue as the “definition of ‘cohabit’ and the parties’ intention in negotiating” the agreement, the trial court observed that, if a cohabitation clause is court ordered, maintenance modification must be pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 518.64. The trial court then reasoned that, because the instant cohabitation clause was stipulated, the parties’ stipulation “would serve no purpose” if the analysis for court-ordered cohabitation clauses was applied here.
Therefore, the trial court concluded that Scott’s cohabitation with Dickel was sufficient to terminate Auer’s maintenance obligation. Termination of Auer’s maintenance obligation was based on the stipulation rather than “morality,” and Scott’s argument to the contrary is without merit.
2. Dual Standard
The supreme court has stated that the existence of a meretricious relationship does not constitute, simply by reason of the nature of the relationship, sufficient ground for the termination of alimony. Where, however, a former spouse’s need for support is reduced through such a relationship, modification is appropriate.
Abbott v. Abbott, 282 N.W.2d 561, 566 (Minn.1979). Cohabitation clauses are functionally read as allowing maintenance modification upon a substantial change in circumstances under Minn.Stat. § 518.64 subd. 2. See, e.g., Aaker v. Aaker, 447 N.W.2d 607 (Minn.App.1989), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 12, 1990).
The trial court’s conclusion that the quoted portion of Abbott was inapplicable to the instant stipulated cohabitation clause created two definitions for “cohabit” depending upon whether the source of a cohabitation clause is a stipulation or a court order. As a result, the trial court also implicitly created separate thresholds for triggering a clause depending on its source: “substantial change” for court-ordered cohabitation clauses and “shared residence” for the instant stipulated clause which does not otherwise define cohabit. Scott functionally challenges this dual standard.
Scott’s allegation that the trial court failed to explain the inapplicability of the Abbott analysis is addressed by the trial court’s statement that the parties’ cohabitation provision “would serve no purpose” if given an economic interpretation under Abbott. When examining stipulations:
A reviewing court is obliged to attempt to interpret the actual words used by the parties, and there is a presumption they meant what they said.
Vanderleest v. Vanderleest, 352 N.W.2d 54, 57 (Minn.App.1984); see also Chergosky v. Crosstown Bell, Inc., 463 N.W.2d 522, 526 (Minn.1990) (when interpreting contracts, courts presume parties intend language used to have effect and “will attempt to avoid an interpretation of the contract that would render a provision meaningless”).
Abbott and Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 2 were part of Minnesota’s case and statutory law at the time of the parties’ stipulation. Therefore, if the court imposed a cohabitation clause, or one was not in the decree, maintenance modification would have required a substantial change in circumstances. Here, however, the parties stipulated to a cohabitation clause. Because court ordered cohabitation clauses *57are interpreted as requiring the same modification threshold as if there were no cohabitation clause, to interpret a stipulated cohabitation clause as having the meaning normally given a court-imposed cohabitation clause would functionally mean the parties stipulated to application of the law which would have been applied if there had been no stipulation. Such an interpretation would render the stipulation meaningless. Therefore, the trial court concluded the clause must have had a non-Abbott meaning.
The trial court’s inference is not inconsistent with case law. In Abbott, the supreme court stated the policy reasons for concluding that meretricious relationships, standing alone, are insufficient to terminate alimony:
In the usual case, alimony is a substitute for the husband’s common-law obligation to support his wife. A former wife, however, owes her former husband no particular obligation; her sexual activities are not legally adulterous and her former husband has no legal standing to challenge conduct socially disapproved of on moral grounds. [Also,] [i]t is in the public interest that alimony be paid, since without such a post-divorce provision for support, there is a likelihood that a divorced spouse will become a public charge.
Id. at 563. The supreme court then examined these concerns relative to the maintenance stipulation in Abbott:
Here, the stipulation of the parties and the judgment of divorce provided for termination of alimony solely upon [the obli-gee’s] remarriage. At the time of the judgment of divorce, remarriage did not ipso facto cancel the support obligation, but it was considered strong evidence of changed circumstances justifying termination of alimony. [Subsequently,] the legislature enacted Minn. Stat. § 518.64, subd. 3, which terminates alimony upon remarriage as a matter of law unless an agreement or judgment provides otherwise. * * * In the absence of a governing statute, and bearing in mind the above principles, we believe that only if it could be said [the obligee] has remarried would the record support the legal conclusion that alimony must be terminated.
Id. at 565-66 (emphasis added). In Abbott, the parties stipulated to termination of maintenance upon the obligee’s remarriage, a condition which would not have otherwise terminated maintenance. The supreme court did not disapprove of this aspect of the stipulation. Thus, Abbott does not forbid stipulations which allow maintenance termination in circumstances other than those which would allow termination under a court-imposed cohabitation clause.
More directly, in Aaker, the trial court issued a decree which terminated maintenance upon the obligee’s cohabitation. Id. at 610. The majority opinion in Aaker made satisfaction of Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 2 a prerequisite to maintenance reduction. Aaker, 447 N.W.2d at 611. The dissent, however, cited Bateman v. Bateman, 382 N.W.2d 240, 251 (Minn.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. April 24, 1986), where this court removed a court ordered cohabitation clause. Aaker, 447 N.W.2d at 613 (Huspeni, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part). The dissent then stated that “the inclusion of any reference to cohabitation is inappropriate in a court ordered decree.” Id. at 613 (emphasis added). The accompanying footnote, however, states:
I recognize that at times parties stipulate to the inclusion of such a provision and that the stipulation is incorporated into the decree. While such incorporation may not be inappropriate, it may create post-decree evidentiary and proof problems.
Id. at 613 n. 1 (emphasis added).
Thus, even the Aaker dissent, which suggests all court-ordered cohabitation clauses are inappropriate, allows disparate treatment of stipulated and court-ordered cohabitation clauses. Therefore, we cannot say the trial court erred in distinguishing between court-ordered cohabitation clauses and the instant, stipulated cohabitation clause.
*583. Lack of Findings
Scott argues the trial court did not explicitly find the parties intended the term “cohabit” not to have an economic connotation. The appealed order is from the same trial judge who originally had the case, accepted the stipulation, and issued the decree. Generally, a trial court’s construction of its own decree is accorded great weight on appeal. Palmi v. Palmi, 273 Minn. 97, 104, 140 N.W.2d 77, 82 (1966); Head v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 449 N.W.2d 449, 453 (Minn.App.1989), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Feb. 21, 1990).
The trial court’s rejection of Scott’s allegation that the parties intended the term “cohabit” to have an economic facet is functionally a determination that her allegation was not credible. We must defer to trial court credibility determinations. See Sefkow v. Sefkow, 427 N.W.2d 203, 210 (Minn.1988); General v. General, 409 N.W.2d 511, 513 (Minn.App.1987).
Scott also alleges the trial court failed to make the specific findings necessary to limit a trial court’s ability to modify maintenance. See Minn.Stat. § 518.552, subd. 5 (1990). Because this argument functionally challenges the trial court’s adoption of the cohabitation provision, it is untimely. The decree was entered in 1991 and not appealed. See Minn.R.Civ.App.P. 104.01 (appeal from judgment may be taken within 90 days of its entry); Bongard v. Bongard, 342 N.W.2d 156, 158 (Minn.App.1983) (“Time limits on appeals are jurisdictional”).
Auer’s motion for attorney fees is denied.
DECISION
The trial court appropriately distinguished between a court-ordered cohabitation clause and the instant stipulated cohabitation clause.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739508 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:37.895423+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE WOMBACHER delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Susan A. Hunt, was charged with unlawful possession of cannabis with intent to deliver and unlawful possession of a controlled substance. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 56½, pars. 705(d), 1402(b).) Prior to trial, she filed a motion to suppress evidence. After conducting a hearing on the motion, the trial court denied it. The court subsequently convicted her of the charged offenses. She then filed a post-trial motion to suppress evidence and grant her a new trial. The court reconsidered its earlier ruling and granted her motion. The State appeals. We affirm. The issue on appeal is whether the evidence used against the defendant at her trial was obtained in violation of her freedom from unreasonable search and seizure as guaranteed by the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. IV). The relevant evidence showed that at approximately 9 p.m. on February 20, 1988, the defendant, Sidney Rutherford, and Ricky Keeton went to Tony’s liquor store in Peoria. They parked across the street in the parking lot of a closed Miracle Mart. Rutherford got out of the car and went into the liquor store. The defendant, who owned the car, then moved from the back seat to the driver's seat. Officer Greg Metz of the Peoria police department testified that he was on patrol that evening. During his patrol he stopped at the Miracle Mart parking lot. He often went to that vicinity to watch for minors purchasing liquor at Tony’s and people drinking in their cars. He noticed the defendant’s car and observed that two people were seated in the front seat. He saw no one exit or enter the vehicle and was unable to determine whether the individuals were minors or adults. From his original vantage point, Metz could not see any activity by the vehicle’s occupants. After watching the vehicle for two or three minutes, Metz drove up behind it with his headlights off. When he was about 10 feet from the car, he turned on his high-beam headlights and his spotlight. As he exited his patrol car, Metz noticed the individual in the passenger seat duck or make a quick movement of some kind. Metz walked up to the passenger window. Keeton rolled down the window, and Metz asked him if he was drinking in the car. Keeton responded that he was not. During this exchange, Metz was shining his flashlight into the car. He noticed clear plastic bags containing a green, leafy substance near Keeton’s right foot. Metz opened the car door and ordered Keeton out of the car. He then reached into the car and picked up one of the bags. Keeton was searched and handcuffed. Metz then continued his search of the vehicle. The defendant remained seated in the driver’s seat throughout this period. When other officers arrived, the defendant was ordered out of the car, searched, and handcuffed. The defendant testified that she never consented to having her car searched. The State and the defendant stipulated at trial to tests showing that both cannabis and cocaine were retrieved in the search of the defendant’s vehicle.  The fourth amendment applies to all seizures of persons, including brief investigatory stops of vehicles. (United States v. Cortez (1981), 449 U.S. 411, 66 L. Ed. 2d 621, 101 S. Ct. 690.) In determining whether the search and seizure was “unreasonable,” the court must first inquire whether the officer’s action was justified at its inception. (Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868.) Although an officer need not have probable cause to briefly detain a suspect, he is required to have a reasonable suspicion, based on objective facts, that the individual is involved in criminal activity. (Brown v. Texas (1979), 443 U.S. 47, 61 L. Ed. 2d 357, 99 S. Ct. 2637.) In justifying the particular intrusion, the police officer must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, when taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant the intrusion. (Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868.) In the absence of any basis for suspecting a person of misconduct, the balance between the public interest and the individual’s right to personal security and privacy tilts in favor of freedom from police interference. (Brown v. Texas (1979), 443 U.S. 47, 61 L. Ed. 2d 357, 99 S. Ct. 2637.) A reviewing court will not disturb a trial court’s finding on a motion to suppress unless that finding is manifestly erroneous. People v. Tisler (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 226, 469 N.E.2d 147.  In the instant case, the sole issue is whether Officer Metz’s investigatory stop was justified at its inception. Metz’s own testimony reveals that he could not point to any objective facts supporting a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was involved in criminal activity when he observed her sitting in her car. He simply saw two individuals seated in a car across the street from a liquor store. He saw no one enter or leave the vehicle. From his vantage point, he could not determine the ages of the people in the vehicle, or what, if any, activity they were engaged in. His observation of the vehicle lasted only two or three minutes. Accordingly, Metz’s subsequent investigatory stop was based entirely upon his knowledge of past criminal activity in the area. While past criminal activity in an area may be a relevant factor supporting an investigatory stop, it alone cannot justify the stop. The investigating officer must reasonably suspect the particular subjects of the investigation. Since here Officer Metz did not have a reasonable suspicion about the occupants of the defendant’s car, the trial court properly granted the motion to suppress the illegally seized evidence and granted the defendant a new trial. The judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is affirmed. Affirmed. STOUDER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739509 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:37.899544+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, dissenting: The trial court found the defendant, Susan A. Hunt, guilty of unlawful possession of cannabis with intent to deliver and unlawful possession of a controlled substance. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 56½, pars. 705(d), 1402(b).) The court subsequently granted the defendant’s post-trial motion to suppress illegally seized evidence and to grant her a new trial. Since Officer Greg Metz noticed the cannabis while he was lawfully positioned outside the defendant’s vehicle, the trial court erred in suppressing the evidence. Accordingly, I dissent. Officer Greg Metz testified that on the night in question he was watching the Miracle Mart parking lot. He stated that the parking lot was frequently used by underage drinkers who were purchasing alcohol at the liquor store across the street. After watching two people in the defendant’s car for approximately two minutes, he drove to within 10 feet of the car. He then illuminated the vehicle with his high-beam headlights and spotlight. As he got out of the car, he saw a passenger in the front seat make a quick movement. Officer Metz walked up to the passenger side of the vehicle and shined his flashlight into the car. The male passenger, Ricky Keeton, rolled down the window. Metz asked the occupants if they had been drinking, and Keeton said that they had not. From his position outside the car, Metz saw a green, leafy substance inside clear plastic bags at the passenger’s feet. Metz then opened the car door, had Keeton step out, and took one of the bags. Another officer searched the defendant and found in her pocket a brown paper bag containing a white powdery substance. Where a police officer converses with an individual but does not restrain the individual’s freedom to walk away, an investigative stop had not occurred, even if the conversation was investigative in nature. (People v. Kennedy (1978), 66 Ill. App. 3d 267, 383 N.E.2d 713.) A police officer, just as any citizen, has the right to be in a parking lot next to a business which is open to the public. (People v. Caserta (1984), 123 Ill. App. 3d 608, 463 N.E.2d 190.) There is no legitimate expectation of privacy shielding that portion of the interior of a car which may be viewed by inquisitive passerby, and the use of a flashlight to illuminate such an area does not trigger fourth amendment protection. Texas v. Brown (1983), 460 U.S. 730, 75 L. Ed. 2d 502, 103 S. Ct. 1535. Contrary to the majority’s holding, I find that Officer Metz did not subject the defendant to an investigative stop. Rather, Metz properly walked up to the car, which was in a parking lot next to a business open to the public. As already noted, this was a parking lot known to be frequented by underage drinkers who were purchasing alcohol at a liquor store across the street. His question to Keeton did not transform the encounter into an investigative stop. Neither Keeton nor the defendant was restrained from leaving at that time. Consequently, Officer Metz’s observation of the marijuana in plain view was proper. The officer’s subsequent actions were also proper because at that point, they were based on probable cause. For these reasons, the order suppressing the evidence should be reversed and I dissent.

=== CASE 9739120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:08.43329+00 ===

HUSPENI, Judge
(concurring specially).
The trial court determined that it need not decide the question of
whether Trooper Chase was absolutely privileged to make allegedly defamatory statements in his arrest report and to disclose the contents of that report to the newspaper reporter because there is evidence in the record that Trooper Chase’s statements to the reporter were not in all respects consistent with the contents of the arrest report.
While I concur in the decision of the majority to deny immunity on the claims of defamation and negligent infliction of emotional distress, I would limit the issues at trial to the narrow basis identified by the trial court.
Common law tort claims that find their genesis in challenged arrest reports fall more properly, I believe, within the purview of a malicious prosecution action. To maintain a claim of malicious prosecution, a plaintiff must establish both malice and want of probable cause. Mendota Heights Assocs. v. Friel, 414 N.W.2d 480, 484 (Minn.App.1987).
There is an additional element which a plaintiff in a malicious prosecution suit must prove: the criminal proceedings must have been concluded in favor of the accused. See Survis v. A. Y. McDonald Mfg. Co., 224 Minn. 479, 491, 28 N.W.2d 720, 727 (1947).
Carradine pleaded guilty to a charge of speeding in the criminal case out of which the present action arose. This plea may have greatly diminished his prospects of prevailing in a malicious prosecution suit. However, this fact neither weakens my belief that a malicious prosecution suit remains an appropriate method by which to challenge an allegedly incorrect arrest report nor dissuades me from urging that the defamation and negligent infliction of emotional distress issues here be litigated within the parameters set out by the trial court.

=== CASE 2218806 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:55.175311+00 ===

197 Mich. App. 316 (1992)
494 N.W.2d 840
FRANCK
v.
BEDENFIELD
Docket No. 124172.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1992, at 10:35 A.M.
Gockerman, Wilson, Broberg & Saylor, P.C. (by Richard M. Wilson, Jr.), for Robert E. Franck.
S. Olof Karlstrom, for Clark and Jessie Bedenfield.
Before: REILLY, P.J., and WEAVER and McDONALD, JJ.
*318 WEAVER, J.
We have before us yet another of the cases arising from the Diamond Mortgage Corporation/A.J. Obie & Associates, Inc., mortgage-backed securities fraud. For a history of this scam, see Stone v Mehlberg, 728 F Supp 1341 (WD Mich, 1989).
In this case, plaintiff, Robert Franck, purchased a mortgage that had been given to Diamond by Clark and Jessie Bedenfield (hereafter defendants). Miscreants at Diamond absconded with plaintiff's investment money after assigning him the note and mortgage but without disbursing the loan funds to the Bedenfields.
Plaintiff brought suit to foreclose the Bedenfields' mortgage. Following a bench trial, the court held the debt to be valid, plaintiff being a holder in due course, but the mortgage to be invalid, plaintiff not being a bona fide purchaser for value. Both sides appeal as of right. We amend in part and affirm.
The first issue raised is whether defendants were obligated, contractually or otherwise, by execution of the note or the mortgage. Defendants contend there was no contract and also that they timely exercised their right of rescission.
The federal Truth in Lending Act (TILA), 15 USC 1601 et seq., and Regulation z, 12 CFR 226.1 et seq., both provide for rescission until three days after the latest of (1) consummation of the transaction, (2) delivery of two copies for each borrower of the notice of right to cancel, or (3) delivery of all "material disclosures." Here, the question is whether consummation ever occurred.
This Court has previously held that when the funds of a credit transaction are never distributed to the consumer, he cannot be said to have been contractually obligated as a result of the credit transaction, and, thus, consummation cannot be *319 said to have occurred. Thomas v Leja, 187 Mich. App. 418; 468 NW2d 58 (1991). Thus, even though the affirmative defense of the TILA was not pleaded, the Bedenfields' right to rescind the transaction remains effective under the TILA. Thomas, supra. See also Kocsis v Pierce, 192 Mich. App. 92; 480 NW2d 598 (1991).
Defendants sent a letter to Diamond on January 30, 1989, expressing their intent to rescind the contract. However, in denying defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C) (10), the court ruled that the letter intended to effectuate a rescission was unenforceable because Diamond was in the midst of bankruptcy proceedings, and all transactions were required to cease during the stay imposed by such proceedings. We agree with the court's conclusion, and plaintiff's argument on appeal, that the bankruptcy stay precluded defendants' attempt to rescind the contract with regard to Diamond.
However, shortly after March 15, 1986, Diamond assigned the Bedenfields' mortgage to Franck.
Any consumer who has the right to rescind a transaction under 15 USC 1635 may rescind the transaction with regard to any assignee of the obligation, 15 USC 1641(c). Thus, the Bedenfields could properly exercise their right to rescind by informing Franck of their intent to do so. See Stone, supra at 1347. We find that defendants' motion for summary disposition alleging that they were allowed to rescind the contract under the TILA effectively rescinded the transaction. See Thomas, supra at 423.
Franck asserts that because he is a holder in due course, the TILA rescission remedy is not effective against him. However, this Court has previously ruled to the contrary regarding this issue. Id. at 423, and see Stone, supra at 1348.
*320 After rescinding the loan transaction, the Bedenfields were not obligated to pay the note, and Franck was required to discharge the mortgage. 15 USC 1635(b); Stone, supra at 1347.
This resolution renders all other issues raised by the parties moot.
We amend the judgment of November 28, 1989, to strike that portion of the judgment granting Franck judgment against the Bedenfields.
Amended in part and affirmed.

=== CASE 2218808 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:55.223066+00 ===

494 N.W.2d 544 (1993)
242 Neb. 276
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Nancy S. FILKIN, Appellant.
No. S-91-408.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 29, 1993.
*546 Gerard A. Piccolo, Hall County Public Defender, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Kimberly A. Klein, Lincoln, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Pursuant to verdict, the defendant-appellant, Nancy S. Filkin, was adjudged by the district court to be guilty of possessing a controlled substance, methamphetamine, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 28-405(c)(3) [Schedule II] and 28-416 (Reissue 1989). Filkin appealed, claiming the district court erred in (1) receiving evidence obtained following her arrest as the result of a search of the contents of her purse and (2) refusing to direct a verdict in her favor. The Nebraska Court of Appeals reversed the judgment of the district court, and the plaintiff-appellee, State of Nebraska, successfully petitioned for further review. We reverse the judgment of the Nebraska Court of Appeals and remand the cause with the direction that the Nebraska Court of Appeals affirm the judgment of the district court.
Pursuant to a "no-knock" search warrant, officers entered a house where they found four individuals, including Filkin, who did not reside there. Filkin and the other three individuals were arrested and removed from the premises. Sgt. Ronald Ochsner testified that when he placed her under arrest, Filkin was not carrying a purse. However, Deputy Richard McKinny, who transported Filkin to the Hall County jail, testified that Filkin had her purse with her when he transported her to the jail.
Upon arrival at the Hall County jail, McKinny took Filkin to the female booking area, removed her handcuffs, and remained present during the booking process.
McKinny testified that the Hall County booking process involved "a lot of record-keeping questions, health questions, as well as a search of the property brought in by the prisoner." According to McKinny, the standard operating procedure at the Hall County jail was to inventory property "[t]o see that there are no contraband objects, and, also, for an accurate record for when that prisoner is released, so that the prisoner gets everything back that they brought in with them." He also said that the primary purpose of the search was to assure the safety of the officers.
Corrections officer Cynthia Gorman testified that Hall County has a standard operating procedure for booking individuals, including the inventorying of any personal *547 items that the individual might have. The standard operating procedure with regard to a purse, according to Gorman, is to remove all items to ensure that no money or valuables were contained therein. Moreover, if a corrections officer discovers what is or is believed to be an illegal substance, such substance is to be turned over to the arresting officer.
Filkin's closed purse was opened and inventoried by Gorman under the watchful eye of McKinny. In the process, the officers discovered a black film canister, which they opened. The canister was found to contain, among other things, a small self-seal bag holding .05 grams of a white or off-white powder, later determined to be methamphetamine.
Filkin filed a motion which, insofar as is relevant to our review, sought to suppress the fruits of the search of the film canister, contending that the search violated U.S. Const. amend. IV and Neb.Const. art. I, § 7. The district court overruled Filkin's suppression motion, finding that the search of Filkin's purse was pursuant to standard booking policy and was proper. Defense counsel properly renewed his objection to the search at trial.
By finding that the search of the purse was conducted pursuant to standard booking policy, the district court necessarily found by implication that the search was not one conducted incident to the arrest quite understandably so, given Ochsner's testimony that Filkin did not have the purse in her possession when she was arrested and the sketchy facts of record as to how the purse came to be in Filkin's possession while she was being transported to the Hall County jail.
The concern, of course, is that the officers, by bringing the purse with them, could convert a search incident to arrest into an inventory search, thus availing themselves of the somewhat broader search standard applicable to that situation than applies under the search-incident-to-arrest setting. See 2 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure, a Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 5.5(b) (2d ed. 1987).
Nonetheless, it was quite reasonable for law enforcement officials to have retrieved Filkin's purse, for the purse and its contents would assist them in positively identifying Filkin. See, e.g., Illinois v. Lafayette, 462 U.S. 640, 103 S. Ct. 2605, 77 L. Ed. 2d 65 (1983) (one of the governmental interests served by inventory searches is identification); State v. Dixon, 237 Neb. 630, 467 N.W.2d 397 (1991).
Moreover, the officers had a duty to protect any valuables that might have been contained in the purse. Indeed, repercussions may have resulted had an officer not retrieved Filkin's purse. See, e.g., State v. Quinn, 565 S.W.2d 665, 672 (Mo.App.1978) (if officer had not retrieved bag left on step of porch, "he may well have been subject to criticism or at worst legal action. To wait on the street and `stand over' the bag until a search warrant could be obtained would be impractical").
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Nebraska's constitutional provision with respect to searches and seizures is virtually identical. Neb.Const. art. I, § 7; State v. Dixon, supra.
We have consistently held that inventory searches are permissible after an arrest. State v. Coleman, 239 Neb. 800, 478 N.W.2d 349 (1992); State v. Hill, 214 Neb. 865, 336 N.W.2d 325 (1983). But under the Fourth Amendment, the propriety of inventory searches is judged by a standard of reasonableness. Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 107 S. Ct. 738, 93 L. Ed. 2d 739 (1987); Illinois v. Lafayette, supra; U.S. v. Woolbright, 831 F.2d 1390 (8th Cir.1987); State v. Dixon, supra. However, such searches must be performed in accordance with standard operating procedures.
*548 The first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court implicitly relied upon a police regulation was South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364, 96 S. Ct. 3092, 49 L. Ed. 2d 1000 (1976). In Opperman, the defendant's automobile was towed to a city impound lot after it received two parking tickets while parked in the same location for approximately 7 hours. A police officer inventoried the contents of the vehicle, discovering marijuana in the unlocked glove compartment. The Opperman Court, finding the search to be constitutional, held that such intrusions were consistently upheld "where the process is aimed at securing or protecting the car and its contents." 428 U.S. at 373, 96 S.Ct. at 3099. Noteworthy is that the search in Opperman "was limited to an inventory of the unoccupied automobile and was conducted strictly in accord with the regulations of the Vermillion Police Department." 428 U.S. at 380, 96 S.Ct. at 3102 (Powell, J., concurrence). However, the Opperman Court did not discuss whether the regulations were written or oral, nor did it mention whether the regulations were of a formal or informal nature.
Six years later, in Illinois v. Lafayette, 462 U.S. 640, 103 S. Ct. 2605, 77 L. Ed. 2d 65 (1983), on facts mirroring those in the present case, the U.S. Supreme Court held it to be reasonable for the police to search the personal effects of a person under lawful arrest as part of the routine procedure incident to booking and jailing the suspect. In Lafayette, the defendant was arrested for disturbing the peace and was taken to the police station. The defendant carried a purse-type shoulder bag on the trip to the station house. Amphetamine pills were subsequently discovered in the bag as police inventoried the contents therein.
The Lafayette Court explained the function of the inventory search:
At the station house, it is entirely proper for police to remove and list or inventory property found on the person or in the possession of an arrested person who is to be jailed. A range of governmental interests supports an inventory process. It is not unheard of for persons employed in police activities to steal property taken from arrested persons; similarly, arrested persons have been known to make false claims regarding what was taken from their possession at the station house. A standardized procedure for making a list or inventory as soon as reasonable after reaching the station house not only deters false claims but also inhibits theft or careless handling of articles taken from the arrested person. Arrested persons have also been known to injure themselvesor others with belts, knives, drugs, or other items on their person while being detained. Dangerous instrumentalitiessuch as razor blades, bombs, or weaponscan be concealed in innocent-looking articles taken from the arrestee's possession.... Examining all the items removed from the arrestee's person or possession and listing or inventorying them is an entirely reasonable administrative procedure. It is immaterial whether the police actually fear any particular package or container; the need to protect against such risks arises independently of a particular officer's subjective concerns.... Finally, inspection of an arrestee's personal property may assist the police in ascertaining or verifying his identity.
(Emphasis supplied.) 462 U.S. at 646, 103 S.Ct. at 2609-10. Accord, State v. Dixon, 237 Neb. 630, 467 N.W.2d 397 (1991); State v. Wallen, 185 Neb. 44, 173 N.W.2d 372 (1970), cert. denied 399 U.S. 912, 90 S. Ct. 2211, 26 L. Ed. 2d 568.
The Lafayette Court emphasized that an officer had testified that "it was standard procedure to inventory `everything' in the possession of an arrested person," thus satisfying the standardized procedure requirement. 462 U.S. at 642, 103 S.Ct. at 2607.
The next U.S. Supreme Court case concerning an inventory search was Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 107 S. Ct. 738, 93 L. Ed. 2d 739 (1987). There, the defendant was arrested for driving while under the influence of alcohol. After being taken into custody but prior to the arrival of the tow truck, an officer inventoried the contents *549 of the defendant's vehicle. During the inventory, the officer opened a closed backpack in which he discovered controlled substances, cocaine paraphernalia, and a large amount of cash.
In holding the search to be constitutionally sound, the Bertine Court noted that "[i]n the present case, as in Opperman and Lafayette, there was no showing that the police, who were following standardized procedures, acted in bad faith or for the sole purpose of investigation." (Emphasis supplied.) 479 U.S. at 372, 107 S.Ct. at 741. The Court concluded that "here, as in Lafayette, reasonable police regulations relating to inventory procedures administered in good faith satisfy the Fourth Amendment, even though courts might as a matter of hindsight be able to devise equally reasonable rules requiring a different procedure." 479 U.S. at 374, 107 S.Ct. at 742. Moreover, in a footnote, the Court reiterated that its decisions "have always adhered to the requirement that inventories be conducted according to standardized criteria." 479 U.S. at 374 n. 6, 107 S. Ct. at 742 n. 6. Thus, Colorado v. Bertine suggests that the applicable regulations must leave police with little discretion as to whether a closed container is to be inventoried.
Finally, in Florida v. Wells, 495 U.S. 1, 110 S. Ct. 1632, 109 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1990), the state highway patrol obtained the defendant's permission to open the trunk of his automobile following his arrest for driving while under the influence of alcohol. The automobile was impounded, and an inventory search revealed two marijuana cigarette butts in the ashtray and a locked suitcase in the trunk. Impoundment facility employees, at the direction of a state trooper, forced open the suitcase and discovered a garbage bag containing a large quantity of marijuana.
The Wells Court upheld the lower court's finding that the trial court erred in failing to suppress the evidence of marijuana found in the suitcase.
Our view that standardized criteria [citing Bertine] or established routine [citing Lafayette] must regulate the opening of containers found during inventory searches is based on the principle that an inventory search must not be a ruse for a general rummaging in order to discover incriminating evidence. The policy or practice governing inventory searches should be designed to produce an inventory. The individual police officer must not be allowed so much latitude that inventory searches are turned into "a purposeful and general means of discovering evidence of crime, [citing Bertine]."
495 U.S. at 4, 110 S. Ct. at 1635.
Because the state Supreme Court found that the state highway patrol had no policy whatsoever with respect to the opening of closed containers encountered during an inventory search, the search did not comport with the demands of the Fourth Amendment. However, the Wells Court also stated that inventory searches need not be conducted in a totally mechanical manner.
Some police discretion remains, however. Dictum in Wells states that police "may be allowed sufficient latitude to determine whether a particular container should or should not be opened in light of the nature of the search and characteristics of the container itself." 495 U.S. at 4, 110 S. Ct. at 1635.
In summary, the holdings of Opperman, Lafayette, Bertine, and Wells make clear that an inventory search must be conducted pursuant to standardized policies or established routine. The questions which remain ask what qualifies as "standardized" criteria or "established" routines and how the State must show their existence. But see State v. Stalder, 231 Neb. 896, 438 N.W.2d 498 (1989), which in dicta improvidently focuses on the reasonableness of the search of an impounded vehicle rather than on the existence of standardized inventory procedures.
While a written policy is obviously the best means by which to establish the existence of a standardized policy, see Wayne R. LaFave, Controlling Discretion by Administrative Regulations: The Use, Misuse, *550 and Nonuse of Police Rules and Policies in Fourth Amendment Adjudication, 89 Mich.L.Rev. 442 (1990), and at least one state has held that such procedures must be in writing to pass muster under the state Constitution, Commonwealth v. Bishop, 402 Mass. 449, 523 N.E.2d 779 (1988), such written policy is not an indispensable requirement.
For example, in U.S. v. Frank, 864 F.2d 992 (3d Cir.1988), cert. denied 490 U.S. 1095, 109 S. Ct. 2442, 104 L. Ed. 2d 998 (1989), the fact that an officer testified to the existence of standard police procedures and a detective testified that he followed them was held to be sufficient to render an inventory search valid. Noting that "[n]o Supreme Court case has ever held an inventory search invalid because of the absence of formalized pre-existing standards," the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit proclaimed that "no standard for the scope of the inventory other than the listing of every item of property would satisfy the relevant governmental interests." 864 F.2d at 1003-04. The court continued, stating that
[c]ertainly the [Supreme] Court did not intend to lay down a constitutional requirement that the police have a written standard for conducting an inventory that merely states the obvious. Such a requirement would add nothing to the protection of privacy interests, for no standard ever would be laid down except that of completeness. Inventory searches by their nature afford the police the opportunity to eliminate expectations of privacy in personal property lawfully in police custody. It seems likely, therefore, that all that Bertine requires is a standard as to when inventories should be made.
(Emphasis supplied.) 864 F.2d at 1004. See, also, U.S. v. Kornegay, 885 F.2d 713 (10th Cir.1989), cert. denied 495 U.S. 935, 110 S. Ct. 2179, 109 L. Ed. 2d 508 (1990) (officer testimony of customary and standardized procedure held sufficient in absence of written guidelines); Madison v. United States, 512 A.2d 279 (D.C.App.1986) (although capitol police did not have written guidelines, fact that officer testified he had been trained by his supervisors and conducted search in accordance with such training held sufficient); State v. Weide, 155 Wis. 2d 537, 549, 455 N.W.2d 899, 905 (1990) ("[a]lthough it may be preferable, there is no rule of law that the policy or procedure governing the inventory search must be in writing"). Cf. People v. Bayles, 76 Ill.App.3d 843, 846-47, 32 Ill. Dec. 433, 436, 395 N.E.2d 663, 666 (1979), aff'd 82 Ill. 2d 128, 44 Ill. Dec. 880, 411 N.E.2d 1346 (1980), cert. denied 453 U.S. 923, 101 S. Ct. 3160, 69 L. Ed. 2d 1005 (1981) (officer testified that he had "`nothing on paper'" concerning his inventory policy, replied that he "`really couldn't tell you whether I have or not, it's a possibility'" to whether he instructed his deputies to open closed containers, and that it was his practice to open and inventory a closed container "`if it's not locked'").
Thus, there is no constitutional requirement that inventory policies be established in writing.
However, the State bears the burden of proving that a law enforcement agency's search was made pursuant to a standardized criteria or established routine required by the Fourth Amendment. U.S. v. Judge, 846 F.2d 274 (5th Cir.1988). A failure of proof on the State's behalf requires a finding that the search suffered from constitutional infirmities. See, also, People v. Dandrea, 736 P.2d 1211 (Colo. 1987); Matter of B.K.C., 413 A.2d 894 (D.C.App.1980).
While the evidence as to the standards used by the Hall County officials is sparse, the record does, through the testimony of McKinny and Gorman, establish the existence of a standard procedure and that the search was conducted in accordance with that procedure. Although not expressly stated, the clear inference from that testimony is that the film canister was opened in accordance with that standardized procedure.
Arguably, Gorman may have been derelict in her duties had she not searched the purse and its contents. As appellate *551 review is by its nature done in hindsight, it is appropriate to remind ourselves that
[w]e are hardly in a position to second-guess police departments as to what practical administrative method will best deter theft by and false claims against its employees and preserve the security of the station house. It is evident that a station-house search of every item carried on or by a person who has lawfully been taken into custody by the police will amply serve the important and legitimate governmental interests involved.
Illinois v. Lafayette, 462 U.S. 640, 648, 103 S. Ct. 2605, 2610, 77 L. Ed. 2d 65 (1983).
The foregoing determination that the items found upon the search of the purse were properly received in evidence dooms to failure Filkin's claim that the district court erred in not directing a verdict in her favor pursuant to her motion at the close of all the evidence. The applicable rule is that in a criminal case a court can direct a verdict only where there is a complete failure of evidence to establish an essential element of the crime charged, or the evidence is so doubtful in character, lacking in probative value, that a guilty finding cannot be supported by the evidence. State v. Hernandez, 242 Neb. 78, 493 N.W.2d 181 (1992); State v. Valdez, 236 Neb. 627, 463 N.W.2d 326 (1990).
Section 28-416(3) prohibits the knowing or intentional possession of methamphetamine unless obtained for a lawful purpose as described therein. The evidence, if believed by the jury, establishes that Filkin did indeed possess methamphetamine, and the circumstances warrant an inference that she did so knowingly or intentionally. The record is devoid of any suggestion that she possessed it for any lawful purpose. Thus, the district court properly overruled Filkin's motion for a directed verdict.
Accordingly, as noted in the first paragraph of this opinion, the judgment of the Nebraska Court of Appeals is reversed and the cause remanded with the direction that the Nebraska Court of Appeals affirm the judgment of the district court.
REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTION.