=== CASE 9741511 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:59.866967+00 ===

*409Lynch, J.
(concurring). I write separately only to note my disagreement with the court’s suggestion (ante at 406) that a social host can deter a guest from becoming intoxicated and that a host is in the same position as a bartender in a commercial establishment who must refuse to serve an intoxicated person or incur civil and criminal penalties. I doubt that there are many among those that entertain in their homes who would, in a family setting, have the temerity to suggest that a parent or perhaps a mother-in-law should immediately cease the consumption of spirituous drink because, in the host’s opinion, that family member was at risk of becoming intoxicated. Even greater folly might be required for a host to attempt to “shut off” a guest, as a bartender might, when that guest was not only a family member, but a former Marine Corps drill instructor, “Green Beret,” or linebacker for the New England Patriots. As I said in McGuiggan v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 398 Mass. 152, 164 (1986) (Lynch, J., concurring), “social activities themselves usually impose constraints on extreme behavior.” If they do not, there is little a civilized host can do except pare down the guest list.

=== CASE 9741512 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:05.889416+00 ===

AFTER REMAND
Per Curiam.
The plaintiff accepted a job with the defendant and moved to Michigan from New Jersey. He was laid off about a year later. He sued, alleging that the company had misrepresented its financial health and that he would not have accepted the position if he had known the actual situation. There was a jury trial resulting in a verdict in the plaintiffs favor. Following a remand from this Court, the Court of Appeals affirmed.
We conclude that the plaintiff presented insufficient evidence to establish fraud, and that the defendant was entitled to a directed verdict. We therefore *401reverse the judgments of the Court of Appeals and the circuit court.
i
The plaintiff has an extensive background in high-performance parallel computing. In 1992, he was working for General Electric in its Aerospace Division. On learning of his employer’s plans to reorganize its operations and sell off that division, the plaintiff began to look for a new job. He became acquainted with an employee of defendant Environmental Research Institute of Michigan (erim) through a professional society, and inquired about the possibility of going to work for erim. He was eventually contacted by Ciaron Swonger, manager of erim’s image processing systems division, and met Mr. Swonger for an interview in September or October of 1992.
According to the plaintiff, Mr. Swonger spoke at length about erim, describing its organization, history, and commitment to research. The conversation included the possibility of establishing a high-performance computer program that would involve the plaintiff. Mr. Swonger gave the plaintiff considerable printed material, including brochures about equipment, technical papers, organizational charts, and an operating summary that contained financial data through the fiscal year that ended September 30, 1991.
In early January 1993, Mr. Swonger offered the plaintiff a position with erim, which the plaintiff accepted. He sold his New Jersey home, moved to *402Ann Arbor, and began his employment with erim in March 1993.
Apparently for economic reasons, erim reduced plaintiffs duties and compensation by twenty percent effective January 1, 1994, and eventually gave him a lay-off notice in July 1994. He chose, instead, to resign in exchange for a consulting contract.
In July 1995, the plaintiff filed this action, alleging that erim had misled him regarding its financial soundness and its ability and willingness to provide long-term funding for the research and development projects on which he would work. The circuit court denied erim’s motion for a directed verdict and the case was submitted to the jury on both a standard fraud claim involving fraudulent misrepresentation and a “silent fraud” theory. The jury returned a verdict in the plaintiffs favor in the amount of $175,000. The verdict did not specify the theory on which the award was based.
Erim appealed, and the Court of Appeals initially affirmed in a two-to-one decision. 228 Mich App 638; 579 NW2d 133 (1998). Erim filed an application for leave to appeal to this Court, and on March 23, 1999, we entered an order remanding to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration in light of M&D, Inc v McConkey, 231 Mich App 22; 585 NW2d 33 (1998).1
On remand, the Court of Appeals issued another two-to-one decision, again affirming the circuit court judgment. 237 Mich App 95; 601 NW2d 892 (1999).
Defendant erim has filed an application for leave to appeal to this Court. For the reasons that follow, we *403reverse the judgments of the circuit court and the Court of Appeals.
n
The focus of the plaintiffs fraud claim is the “operating summary” that he was given along with other materials about erm. The operating summary, which covered the fiscal year that ended September 30, 1991, was a sixteen-page brochure that contained photographs and narrative about ERM. It described the company’s history, listed its seven locations, and presented a letter from erm’s president about current and future projects. The brochure also contained financial statements, graphs, and notes about company benefits, bonds, leases, etc. The graphs showed steady growth in revenue and equity from 1987 to 1991.
It is the plaintiff’s contention that by the time he was interviewed in late 1992 and hired in early 1993, erm knew that its financial situation was not so favorable. Although an operating summary had not been prepared for fiscal year 1992, company executives had received a financial statement from its auditors that showed a revenue decrease of $5 million and a twenty-five percent reduction in fee income. Also, there were seventy-three layoffs in 1992.2
*404m
In its initial decision, the Court of Appeals began by noting the six elements that must be proven to sustain a claim of fraudulent misrepresentation:
1. The defendant made a material representation.
2. The representation was false.
3. When the defendant made the representation, it knew that it was false, or the defendant made the representation recklessly, without any knowledge of its truth, and as a positive assertion.
4. The defendant made the representation with the intention that it should be acted on by the plaintiff.
5. The plaintiff acted in reliance on the representation.
6. The plaintiff suffered injury due to his reliance on the representation. See 228 Mich App 642.
The majority then explained why it believed the plaintiff had made out a case of fraud:
Defendant’s contention that it made no affirmative misrepresentations ignores the fact that the jury could have found that defendant’s presentation of its 1991 operating summary to plaintiff in September 1992 was a misrepresentation. Defendant repeatedly argues that the 1991 operating summary was clearly labeled “For the Fiscal Year Ending September 30, 1991,” and, therefore, that it could not have constituted a misrepresentation regarding defendant’s financial position in 1992, and that plaintiff could not have been misled by it. The flaw in this argument is exposed by simply asking: Why did defendant give plaintiff a copy of its 1991 operating summary? Clearly, the act of giving plaintiff the operating summary constituted an endorsement of its contents and a representation that the summary was somehow a reflection of defendant’s current financial strength.2 This was obviously a material representation, and the act of giving the operating summary to plaintiff during a job inter*405view allowed the jury to infer that defendant intended that plaintiff act on it. In addition, there was evidence that, at the time defendant gave plaintiff the 1991 operating summary, it had more current financial information that suggested that it was in a much weaker financial position than it was in September 1991. From this evidence, the jury could have concluded that the representation regarding defendant’s financial strength was false and that defendant knew that it was false when made. Finally, plaintiff testified that he relied on this representation in making his decision to accept defendant’s offer of employment, and there was evidence that plaintiff suffered injury. Consequently, we find no error in the trial court’s decision to deny defendant’s motions for a directed verdict and for jnov regarding plaintiff’s fraudulent misrepresentation claim.
[228 Mich App 642-643.]
Our remand order directed the Court of Appeals to reconsider its decision in light of M&D, Inc v McConkey, supra, which principally dealt with the question of silent fraud. The Court of Appeals majority reiterated its view that there was sufficient evidence of fraudulent, misrepresentation in the case, and then also concluded that the evidence supported the silent fraud theory. It explained:
Having nonetheless reviewed this matter in light of our Supreme Court’s remand, we find that the evidence here also supported plaintiff’s silent fraud theory. As this Court stated in M&D, Inc, supra at 29, quoting and adopting *406Judge Young’s opinion in the previous M&D, Inc v McConkey, 226 Mich App 801 (1997), defendant “also has a duty to disclose ‘ “subsequently acquired information which he recognizes as rendering untrue, or misleading previous representations which, when made, were true or believed to be true.” ’ ” 231 Mich App 29 (1997). (Citations and emphasis omitted.)
We remain convinced that the jury in this case could fairly infer that defendant showed plaintiff the 1991 operating summary with the intention that plaintiff would rely on the information it contained. 228 Mich App 642-643. Therefore, in addition to finding that the evidence here supports a claim of simple fraud, we also find that defendant had a duty in this case to disclose the subsequently acquired information of defendant’s financial position in 1992, which clearly rendered untrue any implications from the 1991 figures. [237 Mich App 97.]
Judge Hoekstra dissented from both the initial decision and that on remand. In his latter opinion, he emphasized that there was no claim that the 1991 operating summary contained false or misleading information regarding the company’s financial status during the time covered by the report. Rather, plaintiff’s claim was that he inferred from the 1991 figures that the situation remained unchanged through 1992. However, Judge Hoekstra interpreted McConkey to establish that where the plaintiff’s inference is unwarranted, it cannot serve as a basis for a fraud claim. He explained:
There is no evidence that defendant intended the 1991 operating summary to demonstrate the company’s financial condition at the time it hired plaintiff. To the contrary, the document is clearly a report from fiscal year 1991, and any other inferences plaintiff may have made lack a discernible, or objective basis. In addition, I see no basis for the conclusion that plaintiff had a right to rely on the 1991 summary *407as an accurate picture of the company’s performance in fiscal year 1992, without some additional inquiry or affirmative representation by defendant. Both of these conclusions, that the 1991 figures were intended to represent financial performance in 1992 and that defendant had a duty to provide additional financial information, are essential to the majority’s finding of fraud. Unfortunately, no evidence, beyond pure speculation, supports such conclusions. [237 Mich App 98-99.]
Judge Hoekstra emphasized that the plaintiff never requested more recent information during the hiring process. Given that the report was clearly labeled as covering fiscal year 1991, Judge Hoekstra found no duty to provide additional information. He noted that while later figures were available, they had yet to be compiled in a report like the one defendant gave the plaintiff.
Judge Hoekstra concluded that the majority’s decision placed an unreasonable burden on a party in the position of the defendant:
The most disconcerting aspect of the majority’s opinion is that it expects that defendant will anticipate plaintiff’s inference and then requires defendant to take appropriate remedial action. Because defendant failed to anticipate how plaintiff would interpret its 1991 operating summary, the majority finds that defendant has committed fraud. This result is most troubling. To elevate an inference made by another party’s interpretation of a document that, on its face, is clear and unambiguous, puts every supplier of information in jeopardy for the unforeseen misinterpretation of that information. In a case like this one, where the data were clearly labeled as pertaining to the company’s 1991 fiscal year, plaintiff should not be permitted to argue that he thought the figures also represented the company’s performance in 1992. Plaintiff had a simple, straightforward avenue to discover defendant’s current financial condition. He simply had to ask. Now he expects the courts to bail *408him out because his assumption about defendant’s financial condition was incorrect. I find it noteworthy that McConkey holds that fraud requires some evidence of a false representation and that knowledge, coupled with failure to disclose, does not give rise to fraud unless the party is duty-bound to disclose and intentionally suppresses the information, thereby creating a false impression. McConkey, [231 Mich App] 25. There is no evidence of such a duty in this case, nor do I find evidence that defendant intentionally suppressed relevant information. [237 Mich App 99-100.]
IV
In M&D, Inc v McConkey, supra, plaintiff M&D purchased commercial property on an “as is” basis from defendant Relenco Partnership. Defendant McConkey Real Estate handled the sale. M&D leased the property to another party for operation of a store. Two months after the store opened, it was flooded after a heavy rainfall. Evidence showed that the property had experienced flooding for many years and a principal of McConkey Real Estate testified that he had witnessed such flooding. There was no evidence that plaintiff M&D had asked whether the property experienced any flooding, however, and the defendants never made any representation on that subject. Further, the seller (Relenco) refused to prepare a seller’s disclosure statement and made this refusal an explicit part of the purchase agreement. The following was included on the disclosure statement form:
Owner has never occupied this property. No representations or warranties implied as to condition. Property being sold in “as is” condition. [Id. at 26.]
*409The plaintiffs sued on various theories, including fraud. The circuit court granted summary disposition for the defendants on the fraud claim.
On appeal, the Court of Appeals reinstated the claim in McConkey on the authority of Shimmons v Mortgage Corp of America, 206 Mich App 27; 520 NW2d 670 (1994). However, it indicated that it disagreed with Shimmons and reversed only because it was bound by that decision.3
As a result, the Court of Appeals convened a conflict resolution panel in McConkey, which affirmed the circuit court’s summary disposition on the fraud claim. 231 Mich App 22. It focused principally on the silent fraud theory, adopting in large part the opinion of Judge Young in the original panel’s decision.4 That opinion had summarized the case law dealing with silent fraud and found that it did not support the conclusion in Shimmons, supra, that such a claim can be maintained where the purchaser proves only that the vendor knew about a defective condition and did not disclose it. Judge YOUNG had concluded:
Our review of Michigan Supreme Court precedent regarding this issue reveals that, in every case, the fraud by nondisclosure was based upon statements by the vendor that were made in response to a specific inquiry by the purchaser, which statements were in some way incomplete or misleading. See, e.g., Nowicki v Podgorski, 359 Mich 18; 101 NW2d 371 (1960); Sullivan v Ulrich, 326 Mich 218; 40 NW2d 126 (1949); Wolfe [v A E Kusterer, 269 Mich 424; 257 NW 729 (1934)]. [226 Mich App 809.]
*410v
In reviewing a trial court’s denial of a motion for a directed verdict, we examine the evidence and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from it in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Kubczak v Chemical Bank & Trust Co, 456 Mich 653, 663; 575 NW2d 745 (1998). Accordingly, the threshold for obtaining a directed verdict is high. Nevertheless, contrary to the possible implication of the dissent, it is not meant to be insurmountable. Indeed, this Court has often held that a party is entitled to a grant of a directed verdict. See, e.g., id. at 663-664 (concluding that a directed verdict should have been granted after “making all reasonable inferences in plaintiff’s favor” [emphasis added]); Locke v Pachtman, 446 Mich 216, 222-223; 521 NW2d 786 (1994) (affirming a directed verdict where no prima facie showing of liability was made).
We agree with dissenting Judge Hoekstra in the instant case that the plaintiff failed to present evidence to establish either fraudulent misrepresentation or silent fraud. There is no claim whatsoever that the financial statement covering the fiscal year ending in 1991 was in any way false or misleading. The plaintiff says he inferred from it that erim’s current financial condition was consistent with that statement. However, the statement itself is not a representation to that effect. Thus, the claim of fraudulent misrepresentation must fail because erim did not make any false statement.
In support of its position that there was sufficient evidence to support the jury’s verdict, the dissent cites testimony from plaintiff that he “took” the 1991 *411operating summary for erim as a representation of the financial status of the organization. However, that simply is not a reasonable interpretation of information that on its face presented data for a period that ended well before plaintiffs job interview in 1992. Fraudulent misrepresentation, of course, requires a false representation by the defendant. A plaintiffs subjective misunderstanding of information that is not objectively false or misleading cannot mean that a defendant has committed the tort of fraudulent misrepresentation.
The dissent indicates that there is no plausible explanation for Mr. Swonger giving plaintiff the most recent “financial report” for ERIM if his intent was not to suggest that the report showed erim’s current financial status. However, this overlooks that the 1991 operating summary at issue was not merely a financial report, but rather was a sixteen-page brochure that included information about the history and nature of erim’s business activities as well as financial data. It is plain that providing general background information about a company to a job applicant or potential employee is a perfectly legitimate business practice that may be of value to an individual in deciding whether to accept or continue seeking employment at that business. From all appearances, the 1991 operating summary provided to plaintiff was the most recent operating summary available for erim at the time of his job interview. Thus, the provision of this summary cannot reasonably be understood as some type of fraudulent misrepresentation. Indeed, there is no reasonable way that plaintiff could have expected that defendant’s financial performance would simply have remained constant after the period *412of time covered by the operating summary. Moreover, evidence that Mr. Swonger knew that erim faced some financial problems in 1992 does not show that he regarded this as being more indicative of the company’s likely future performance than the 1991 operating summary that he provided to plaintiff.5
Turning to the question of silent fraud, we agree with the analysis of the conflict resolution panel in McConkey that mere nondisclosure is insufficient. There must be circumstances that establish a legal duty to make a disclosure. See United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co v Black, 412 Mich 99, 125; 313 NW2d 77 (1981):
It is generally recognized that “[fjraud may be consummated by suppression of facts and of the truth, as well as by open false assertions,” Fred Macey Co v Macey, 143 Mich 138, 153; 106 NW 722 (1906), since “a suppression of the truth may amount to a suggestion of falsehood.” Stewart v Wyoming Cattle Ranche Co, 128 US 383, 388; 9 S Ct 101; 32 L Ed 439 (1888). In order for the suppression of information to constitute silent fraud there must be a legal or equitable duty of disclosure. See 37 Am Jur 2d, Fraud and Deceit, § 146.
As the cases cited in McConkey indicate, a legal duty to make a disclosure will arise most commonly in a situation where inquiries are made by the plaintiff, to which the defendant makes incomplete replies that are truthful in themselves but omit material information. See, e.g., Groening v Opsata, 323 Mich 73, 83-84; *41334 NW2d 560 (1948) (buyer’s inquiry regarding erosion of bluff on which house was situated); Sullivan v Ulrich, supra at 227-230 (buyer’s inquiry regarding termites). In the instant case, the 1991 operating summary was the most recent document available in that format. It clearly identified the times for which the financial information was provided. There was no evidence that the plaintiff made any inquiry about the financial condition of the company in general or requested updated financial data in particular.6 The information was provided with a number of other basic documents about the defendant, and was not in response to any request for information by the plaintiff.
Because the plaintiff failed to present evidence sufficient to establish either fraudulent misrepresentation or silent fraud, we reverse the judgments of the Court of Appeals and the circuit court.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred.
459 Mich 960.
Erim’s position has been that its financial picture in 1992 was not worrisome, despite some reductions in revenue. For the purpose of reviewing the denial of the motion for a directed verdict, an appellate court considers the evidence and all legitimate inferences that may be drawn in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Kubczak v Chemical Bank & Trust Co, 456 Mich 653, 663; 575 NW2d 745 (1998). Using that standard, the plaintiff had presented sufficient evidence that erim’s financial condition had worsened after the time covered by the operating summary that he was given.
Defendant would have us construe its action as no more than a statement of its financial condition as of September 31, 1991. Such a construction defies common sense. When defendant gave plaintiff the operating summary in September or October 1992, it was clearly offering it as some indication of its current financial strength. Thus, the representation was not “Here is our 1991 operating summary, which is irrelevant in regard to our current financial strength.” Rather, it was effectively “Here is our 1991 operating summary which reflects, at least to some degree, our current financial situation.”
See former Administrative Order No. 1994-4.
See 226 Mich App 801.
Notably, the dissent refers to erim having “lurejdj” plaintiff from a job in New Jersey to work for erim in Michigan. Post, p 418. While we certainly condemn actual fraud in connection with employment recruiting, there is no sound reason for this Court to adopt an unduly broad definition of “fraud” that might deter companies from appropriate recruiting of talented individuals such as plaintiff to work in Michigan.
The plaintiff also mentions the testimony that he inquired of defendant about its policy regarding funding of research, and was told of a particular project that had been supported for ten years before it became profitable. The plaintiff does not claim that that anecdotal reference was in any way inaccurate, and it thus cannot constitute a misrepresentation. Insofar as the plaintiff inferred from that statement that the project on which he worked would be similarly funded, such a conclusion was unwarranted from the response to his inquiry.

=== CASE 9741513 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:05.894767+00 ===

Kelly, J.
I dissent from the majority because I find that plaintiff offered sufficient proofs at trial to establish his case for fraudulent misrepresentation and concealment. The majority has substituted its judgment for that of the jury, the trial judge, and a Court of Appeals panel that rejected defendant’s claims on *414two separate occasions. As the trial judge and the appellate panel recognized, the jury was the proper arbiter of the facts and of the witnesses’ credibility. Hence, I would leave the Court of Appeals decision and the jury verdict intact by denying leave to appeal.
i
The standard of review governing appellate oversight of decisions on directed verdict motions is well settled. More than a century ago, Chief Justice Thomas M. Cooley articulated the high threshold for granting a directed verdict, using words that ring as true today as then.
In determining this question [regarding the propriety of a directed verdict], we must look at the case as it appears from the plaintiff’s own testimony, unqualified by any which was offered on the part of the defendants, and must concede to him any thing which he could fairly claim upon that evidence. He had a right to ask the jury to believe the case as he presented it; and, however improbable some portions of his testimony may appear to us, we can not say that the jury might not have given it full credence. It is for them, and not for the court to compare and weigh the evidence.[1]
Indeed, parties have a right to a jury verdict, free of interference from the bench. In Hughes v John Hancock Mut Life Ins Co,2 we observed this obvious bedrock principle:
“[J]udges are pronouncing no mere rigmarole when, in law cases, they charge jurors that they are the sole and exclusive judges of the credibility of the witnesses, and the weight to be given to their testimony. They are setting forth *415the very substance of a jury trial as guaranteed by the Seventh Amendment to the Constitution. Its purpose and aim ‘is not to preserve mere matters of form and procedure, but substance of right. This requires that questions of fact in common-law actions shall be settled by a jury, and that the court shall not assume, directly or indirectly, to take from the jury or to itself such prerogative.’ ”[3]
In this case, jurors faced a credibility contest. Either they believed plaintiffs allegations of fraud or they believed defendant’s explanations.
The elements that plaintiff had to prove to support his case for fraudulent misrepresentation were: (1) defendant made a material representation, (2) the representation was false, (3) defendant knew that it was false when made or made it recklessly, as a positive assertion, without knowledge of its truth, (4) defendant intended plaintiff to act upon the representation, (5) plaintiff acted in reliance on it, and (6) plaintiff suffered injury as a result. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co v Black, 412 Mich 99, 120-121; 313 NW2d 77 (1981).
n
Central to this case was defendant erim’s operating summary for fiscal year 1991 that Ciaron Swonger, an erim manager, provided to plaintiff during a job interview. The summary contained financial data, projections, profits margins and an overall reflection of the state of affairs at ERIM. There was sharp disagreement *416over Swonger’s intent in handing the summary to Hord.
The question of fact for the jury was whether Swonger’s use of the 1991 report at the 1992 interview constituted a material misrepresentation about the current financial viability of ERIM. At trial, Hord testified:
I took it as representative of the financial status of the organization, that if there had been any reason to caveat some of the indications in here, I would have heard them. I did not.
Swonger admitted that he had offered the 1991 report as evidence of erim’s “financial record.” The jury heard the following testimony:
Q. What was your purpose in giving Mr. Hord the annual report for 1991?
A. I wanted him to be able to read what the management philosophy of ERIM was as stated in that kind of a document and the material that was there, and to show him what the record had been of the company.
Q. And when you talk about “record,” you’re talking about the financial record?
A. Certainly including that. [Emphasis added.]
At the time of the interview, Swonger knew that erim had suffered an economic downturn since the summary was prepared. That knowledge, coupled with the testimony from Hord and Swonger, justified a jury determination that Swonger made an affirmative misrepresentation. Another interpretation of these facts strains credibility. The majority offers no plausible explanation why Swonger would give Hord the most recent financial report without comment, if *417his intentions were not to suggest it showed the company’s current financial status.
Suppose, for example, that the 1991 report had contained a financial picture worse than erim’s 1992 financial status. Would Swonger have given it to Hord without qualifications?
Common sense dictates that Swonger would not have provided Hord with a 1991 report under those circumstances. Such a negative report, conveyed so close to the time of publication, would clearly have given the impression that things remained the same in 1992. No company does business in a vacuum. To suggest that 1991 figures convey absolutely nothing about the period that immediately follows is unconvincing. Thus, I disagree with the premise adopted by the majority. The jury was entitled to conclude that Swonger gave Hord the report as a way of demonstrating financial strength that erim no longer possessed.
The jury heard Swonger testify that he knew about financial problems at ERIM when he met with plaintiff.
Q. Okay. So basically, certainly by December 17th when you met with Mr. Hord at erim you had the information that’s reflected in the 1992 report, didn’t you, about the diminution of revenues, the losses, or the decreases in contract income? You had that information, didn’t you?
A. I received it at least orally, yes.
Q. Okay. And you had been receiving that information all along during the year 1992 in the monthly and quarterly reports you got?
A. Monthly for my division.
Q. Okay.
A. Yes.
*418Indeed, Swonger, like all upper-level managers at erim, knew about plans already underway for a massive layoff. By the end of 1992, seventy-two employees had received layoff notices from erim management, and the company’s profits had dropped more than $4 million from those reflected in the 1991 report.
Defense witnesses offered explanations for the decrease in profits. However, the jury was entitled to choose which version of the facts to believe. As Chief Justice Cooley observed: Plaintiff “had a right to ask the jury to believe the case as he presented it . . . .” Detroit & Milwaukee R Co, supra at 117. “It is for them, and not for the court to compare and weigh the evidence.” Id.
The most troubling aspect of the view adopted by the majority is that the per curiam analysis glosses over the context surrounding Swonger’s decision to share the report with Hord. Instead, the majority strains to resolve the dispute within the four comers of the 1991 report. Taken as a whole, the facts suggest that Hord was on the receiving end of an old-fashioned sales pitch, and Swonger was pulling out all the stops to persuade him.
Erim was attempting to lure Hord, a nationally recognized expert in high-performance computing, from a job in New Jersey to a position in Michigan. Hord made efforts to gauge the offer in terms of job security and erim’s ability to provide a steady stream of work. He sought justification for his decision to relocate from New Jersey to Michigan. He testified that, had he known of erim’s financial downturn, he would not have accepted the position with erim.
*419Meanwhile, Swonger, in an apparent effort to assuage Hord’s concerns, sought to provide evidence of job stability. In so doing, he deliberately painted a misleading picture of the present viability of ERIM, hoping to obscure the truth: government cutbacks in the defense industry, a sketchy financial forecast, and inevitable layoffs.
m
Because a reasonable jury could have viewed these facts as sufficient to meet the elements of plaintiff’s fraud claim,4 I would deny defendant’s application for leave to appeal. The United States Supreme Court in Walker cautioned courts against usurping the well-settled role of jurors as the ultimate arbiters of factual and credibility issues. I cannot join the majority’s disregard for that caution.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Detroit & M R Co v Van Steinburg, 17 Mich 99, 117 (1868).
351 Mich 302, 309; 88 NW2d 557 (1958).
Hughes, supra at 309, quoting Reid v Maryland Casualty Co, 63 F2d 10, 11 (CA 5, 1933); Walker v New Mexico & S P R Co, 165 US 593, 596; 17 S Ct 421; 41 L Ed 837 (1897).
Contrary to the per curiam’s conclusion, plaintiff also made out his case for fraudulent concealment or “silent fraud.” One who remains silent when fair dealing requires him to speak may be guilty of fraudulent concealment. Nowicki v Podgorski, 359 Mich 18, 32; 101 NW2d 371 (1960). A party has a duty to disclose subsequently acquired information that he recognizes as rendering untrue or misleading previous representations which, when made, were true or believed to be true. M&D, Inc v McConkey, 231 Mich App 22, 29; 585 NW2d 33 (1998).
Even assuming that ekim officials learned of the company’s grim financial outlook only after the interview with Hord, defendants had an affirmative duty to bring those facts to Hord’s attention. More than enough exists here for a jury to consider a claim of silent fraud.

=== CASE 9741516 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:12.758021+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, P.H., a minor, was arrested and charged with two counts of attempted first degree murder, two counts of aggravated battery, two counts of aggravated battery with a firearm and one count of armed violence. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, pars. 8—4(a), 12—4(b)(1), 12—4.2(a), 33A—2.) Pursuant to the “gang-transfer” provision (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—4(3.1)) of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 (the Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—1 et seq.), the State filed a motion to permit prosecution of defendant under the criminal laws. The circuit court of Cook County denied the State’s motion and, finding that the “gang-transfer” provision contradicted the “discretionary-transfer” provision of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, pars. 805—4(3)(a), (3)(b)), held the provision unconstitutional as violative of separation of powers. The State moved to stay the court’s order (134 Ill. 2d R. 609(c)), pending this direct appeal to this court (134 Ill. 2d R. 603). The State Appellate Defender and the Illinois Attorneys for Criminal Justice filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of defendant. 134 Ill. 2d R. 345(a). The singular issue presented for review is whether the trial court erred in finding the “gang-transfer” provision unconstitutional. We answer , the inquiry in the affirmative and, therefore, we reverse. Section 5 — 4(3.1), the “gang-transfer” provision of the Juvenile Court Act, provides: “If a petition alleges commission by a minor 15 years of age or older of an act which constitutes a forcible felony under the laws of this State, and if a motion by the State’s Attorney to prosecute such minor under the criminal laws of Illinois for such alleged forcible felony alleges that: a) such minor has previously been adjudicated delinquent for commission of an act which constitutes a felony under the laws of this State or any other state; and b) the act which constitutes the offense was committed in furtherance of criminal activity by an organized gang, the Juvenile Judge, designated to hear and determine such motions shall, upon determining that both allegations are true, enter an order permitting prosecution under the criminal laws of Illinois.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805-4(3.1).) Defendant asserts that the “gang-transfer” provision is unconstitutional as violative of the separation of powers clause of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1), and the double jeopardy, due process and equal protection clauses of the Illinois and Federal Constitutions (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §§10, 2; U.S. Const., amends. V, XIV). As an additional challenge, amici urge that the definition of “organized gang,” as provided in the statute, is unconstitutionally vague and, further, that the “gang-transfer” provision is violative of procedural due process. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §2; U.S. Const., amend. XIV. RIPENESS The State asserts that this court’s review should be limited to whether the statute violates separation of powers. It maintains that since there has been no transfer, no trial and no sentence imposed, our consideration of defendant’s other alleged constitutional infirmities is premature. We disagree. A controversy is ripe when it has reached the point where the facts permit an intelligent and useful decision to be made. (People v. Ziltz (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 38.) In Ziltz, the defendant was charged with violating the Illinois Vehicle Code. The defendant filed a motion to dismiss one of the counts against her on the basis that the Code was unconstitutional. The trial court granted the defendant’s motion and the State appealed. On direct appeal to this court, the State argued that the challenge to the statute was premature and that damages were too speculative to adjudicate at that time. We noted there that the defendant had been arrested and charged with an offense; the facts had been presented to this court; and there was no need to speculate as to the harm the defendant would suffer if convicted. We therefore concluded that the case was ripe for judicial determination. Likewise, we conclude that the issues raised by defendant here are ripe for our determination. STANDING Intertwined with the State’s ripeness argument is the issue of whether defendant has standing to raise issues of double jeopardy, equal protection and due process. The State correctly asserts, relying on People v. Rogers (1989), 133 Ill. 2d 1, that a court will limit its inquiry into the constitutionality of a statute to the extent required by the case before it, and will not formulate a rule broader than that necessitated by the precise situation in question. The State points out that the trial court declared the “gang-transfer” provision unconstitutional based, upon separation of powers. Therefore, the State admonishes, for this court to consider defendant’s other constitutional challenges requires us to act in contravention of established principles of constitutional law. We disagree. A party may question the constitutional validity of a statutory provision if he or she has sustained or is in immediate danger of sustaining some direct injury as a’ result of enforcement of the statute. (People v. Esposito (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 491, 512; see also Cramp v. Board of Public Instruction (1961), 368 U.S. 278, 7 L. Ed. 2d 285, 82 S. Ct. 275.) Unquestionably, defendant is in immediate danger of sustaining harm by enforcement of the allegedly unconstitutional provision. Application of the “gang-transfer” provision to him could result in criminal prosecution with all of its inherent stigmas. Therefore, even absent a transfer, trial, or sentencing, we conclude that defendant has standing. See People v. Watson (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 62, 65-66; People v. Mayberry (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 1, 8. Finally, the State points out that the trial court did not rule that the statute was violative of the double jeopardy clause, equal protection or due process. Therefore, it maintains that those issues are not properly before us. Again, we must disagree. The reasons assigned by the trial court for its judgment are immaterial if the decision is correct. Therefore, although the scope of review for an appellant is limited by his assignment of errors, an appellee is not so restricted. An appellee may raise any argument or basis supported by the record to show the correctness of the judgment, even though he had not previously advanced such an argument. In re Estate of Leichtenberg (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 545, 549; Hoffman v. Nustra (1986), 143 Ill. App. 3d 259, 265; see also People ex rel. Jendrick v. Allman (1947), 396 Ill. 35, 37. STANDARD OF REVIEW There is a basic presumption that all statutes are constitutional (People v. Bales (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 182, 188), and the party challenging a statute bears the burden of establishing its invalidity (People v. Felella (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 525, 539). Our duty, if it can reasonably be done, is to construe enactments so as to sustain their constitutionality and validity. (People v. Davis (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 155, 161.) Where their meaning is doubtful, that doubt will be decided in favor of the validity of the law challenged. (Davis, 93 Ill. 2d at 161.) However, it is equally our duty to declare invalid an unconstitutional statute, no matter how desirable or beneficial the attempted legislation may be. JUVENILE COURT JURISDICTION The State argues, at length, that the legislature has the power to determine the age limit for juvenile court jurisdiction (People v. M.A. (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 135; People v. J.S. (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 395). Defendant, noting that the “gang-transfer” provision affects minors already within the court’s jurisdiction, concedes this issue. Accordingly, we give the issue no consideration. SEPARATION OF POWERS Defendant first contends that the statute violates the separation of powers provision because it is an infringement on the court’s power to “adjudge, determine and render a judgment.” (Agran v. Checker Taxi Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 145, 150.) He maintains that the court, after “hearing the evidence and making extensive findings of fact,” must relinquish jurisdiction over the minor. This, defendant maintains, deprives the court of the jurisdiction vested in it by the Illinois Constitution. Preliminarily, we note that the Illinois Constitution provides that all circuit courts have original jurisdiction over all justiciable matters except where the supreme court is specified to have original and exclusive jurisdiction. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §9.) We have previously held that the juvenile court is merely a division of a single unified circuit court. (People v. DeJesus (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 486, 498; In re Greene (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 204, 213; People v. Jiles (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 145, 147; see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—3(5); see also Lindsay v. Lindsay (1913), 257 Ill. 329, 333-34.) It is the circuit court, as a whole, which is vested with jurisdiction. People v. Nichols (1978), 60 Ill. App. 3d 919, 922; People v. Shaw (1972), 3 Ill. App. 3d 1096, 1100. Whether a person is tried in juvenile or criminal court is a matter of procedure rather than jurisdiction. (DeJesus, 127 Ill. 2d at 498, citing People v. Green (1982), 104 Ill. App. 3d 278, 281.) We note that a petition for adjudication of wardship is filed in the juvenile court division of the circuit court. The “gang-transfer” provision merely, therefore, removes a case from the judge sitting in the juvenile division of the circuit court to a judge sitting in the criminal division. There is no divestiture of jurisdiction. The circuit court retains jurisdiction over the minor. We further note, parenthetically, that statutory provisions governing procedure are not uncommon. See Strukoff v. Strukoff(1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53, 61. Having determined that the provision does not present jurisdictional problems, we must next consider whether it creates an undue infringement on the powers of the judiciary. The Illinois Constitution provides that the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government are separate and that “[n]o branch shall exercise powers properly belonging to another.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1.) Though judicial power is vested in the courts (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §1), the separation of powers provision does not create rigid boundaries prohibiting every exercise of functions by one branch of government which ordinarily are exercised by another (City of Waukegan v. Pollution Control Board (1974), 57 Ill. 2d 170, 174-75; accord People v. Walker (1988), 119 Ill. 2d 465, 473-74; People v. Farr (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 209, 213). Thus, we have consistently recognized that the legislature, which is vested with the power to enact laws, may also enact legislation which governs judicial practices, as long as it does not unduly infringe upon the powers of the court. People v. Bainter (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 292, 303; Walker, 119 Ill. 2d at 474; People v. Taylor (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 201, 207; People v. Youngbey (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 556, 560. We do not believe that the “gang-transfer” provision is an infringement upon the inherent powers of the judiciary. In so concluding, we are mindful that juveniles have neither a common law nor a constitutional right to adjudication under the Juvenile Court Act. (People v. M.A. (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 135.) The Act is a purely statutory creature whose parameters and application are defined solely by the legislature. Contrary to defendant’s contention, the “gang-transfer” provision does not abrogate the court’s duty to adjudicate the case before it. Instead, it requires the court to determine whether the protections of the Act shall apply. The circuit court, albeit a different division, retains the power to adjudicate, apply the law and render a final determination. By enacting the provision, the legislature has merely redefined the parameters for applicability of the Act. See People v. J.S. (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 395; People ex rel. Carey v. Chrastka (1980), 83 Ill. 2d 67. Our conclusion that there is no infringement is bolstered by this court’s decision in Strukoff v. Strukoff (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53. In Strukoff the validity of section 403(e) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 40, par. 403(e)), which mandated a bifurcated hearing procedure, was challenged as violative of separation of powers. This court held that there was no trespass upon judicial authority because divorce proceedings are wholly statutory in origin, and the provision was designed to define and implement a statutorily created remedy. Strukoff, 76 Ill. 2d at 60-62. See also Walker, 119 Ill. 2d at 478-79. Likewise, the procedures under the Juvenile Court Act are purely statutory in origin. The “gang-transfer” provision was designed by the legislature to further define that procedure. DOUBLE JEOPARDY Defendant next contends that the “gang-transfer” provision violates the double jeopardy provisions of the United States and Illinois Constitutions. He maintains that since the transfer hearing is concerned with the truth of the “charges,” it is similar to an adjudicatory hearing. He concludes, with reliance on Breed v. Jones (1975), 421 U.S. 519, 44 L. Ed. 2d 346, 95 S. Ct. 1779, that the “gang-transfer” provision violates double jeopardy. Defendant’s argument is based on a faulty premise. We begin our analysis with a statement of established principles regarding double jeopardy. Criminal defendants are protected against being twice put in jeopardy of life or limb for the same offense. (U.S. Const., amend. V; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §10.) “[Protections against double jeopardy are triggered only after an individual has been subjected to the hazards of trial and possible conviction.” (People v. Shields (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 543, 546.) As we have stated in the past, “[t]he concept of ‘jeopardy’ *** requires that the accused be on trial for the offense charged; that is, that he be present at a judicial proceeding aimed at reaching a final determination of his guilt or innocence of the offense charged.” People v. Chatman (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 265, 270; see also People v. Laws (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 221, 224. The linchpin of defendant’s argument is that the “gang-transfer” hearing is tantamount to an adjudicatory hearing. Defendant first points out that the juvenile court in Breed found that the allegations in the delinquency petition were true and that the standard of proof to sustain the allegations was beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, defendant reasons that since the “gang-transfer” provision requires that the juvenile court judge determine that the allegations in the motion are “true,” the standard of proof for transfer is also beyond a reasonable doubt. We find no authority to support such a conclusion and reject the assertion as being supported by Breed. The reasonable doubt standard in Breed applied to proof of the allegations of delinquency in the petition, not to the decision for transfer. As further support for his reasonable doubt theory, defendant maintains that since the Act expressly allows the use of hearsay evidence at “discretionary transfer” and dispositional hearings, but is silent as to the caliber of evidence admissible at “gang-transfer” hearings, only “trial-admissible” evidence may be used. We are not persuaded that the standard of proof at this stage of the proceedings is reasonable doubt. The legislature has not yet spoken on what standard of proof is required for transfer under the “gang-transfer” provision. However, contrary to defendant’s belief, we do not interpret the absence of an express standard of proof as requiring a reasonable doubt standard. We believe it to be a more reasonable inference that the standard of proof required by the “gang-transfer” provision parallel that in other transfer proceedings. Even accepting that the standard is reasonable doubt, such proof of the requirements for transfer under the “gang-transfer” provision does not convert the proceeding into an adjudication. The purpose of an adjudicatory proceeding is to determine whether a minor has committed acts which violate criminal law. As defined by the Act, the proceeding is a hearing to determine whether the allegations of a petition that a minor is a delinquent are proved beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—3(1).) Under the “gang-transfer” provision, unlike an adjudicatory hearing, there is no requirement that the State present evidence of the minor’s delinquency. Moreover, even if by necessity the “gang-transfer” provision requires some quantum of proof that the minor charged committed the offense, protections against double jeopardy are not necessarily triggered. In so concluding, we take cognizance of the fact that the Supreme Court, in Breed, stated that by its holding the States were not precluded from requiring, as a prerequisite to the transfer of a juvenile, substantial evidence that the minor committed the offense charged, so long as the showing required is not made in an adjudicatory proceeding. Breed, 421 U.S. at 538 n.18, 44 L. Ed. 2d at 360 n.18, 95 S. Ct. at 1790 n.18. Defendant next erroneously concludes that since gang transfer “involves proof beyond a reasonable doubt of all the facts necessary for a finding of delinquency,” it is more like an adjudicatory than a dispositional hearing.' Initially we note that defendant misstates the requirements of the “gang-transfer” provision. There is no requirement of proof of facts necessary for a finding of delinquency. The Act defines a delinquent minor as one who “prior to his 17th birthday has violated or attempted to violate, *** any federal or state law or municipal ordinance.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—3.) Proof of violation of the law requires proof of the elements of the charged offense. Contrarily, proof that a minor qualifies for transfer pursuant to the “gang-transfer” provision merely requires establishment of the two noninculpatory statutory factors. As further support for his contention defendant invites our attention to People v. Taylor (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 289. In Taylor the defendant argued that the transfer statute denied him due process because it failed to prescribe a standard of proof. The defendant urged this court to require the State to prove by “clear and convincing evidence” that his transfer would be in the best interest of the minor and the public. In Taylor this court rejected the defendant’s argument. In its analysis the Taylor court stated that the greater the evidence of guilt required to be submitted by the State, the greater the likelihood of double jeopardy problems with the subsequent trial. (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 304.) Further, the court stated that the “end result of excluding hearsay and placing a burden of clear and convincing evidence on the State would be to make the proceedings more formal and adversarial, thus increasing the expense, delay, strain and embarrassment that are the warning signs of double jeopardy problems.” Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 307. Defendant’s apparent reliance on this language in Taylor is misplaced. In reaching its holding the court in Taylor also stated that the “salient feature of the transfer hearing [was] that it [was] not adjudicatory.” (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 302.) Therefore, the court held that the transfer hearing should not be governed by the rules of procedure and evidence applicable at either a criminal trial or at a juvenile court delinquency hearing. The court noted that the Uniform Juvenile Court Act suggests only a probable cause standard of proof. (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 302-04.) As stated in Taylor, “[r]egardless of the importance of such a [transfer] hearing to the juvenile, it does not determine guilt or innocence.” Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 302. Finally, based on the premise that the “gang-transfer” hearing is adjudicatory, defendant argues that the transfer provision violates double jeopardy under Breed. In Breed, the minor was adjudicated a delinquent for having committed acts, which if committed by an adult, would constitute the crime of robbery. Upon a subsequent finding that the minor was unfit for treatment as a juvenile, the juvenile court ordered that he be prosecuted for the same conduct under the criminal laws. The Supreme Court concluded that the minor was put in jeopardy at the adjudicatory hearing. The holding of Breed, distilled to its simplest form, is that transfer hearings must be held prior to an adjudication of delinquency. In Breed, the minor was first adjudicated delinquent, then transferred for purposes of criminal prosecution. Here, the transfer proceedings precede adjudication. Our conclusion that the “gang-transfer” hearing is not an adjudication of guilt or innocence renders Breed inapposite. We agree with the State that the transfer hearing most resembles a preliminary hearing. The scope and purpose of preliminary proceedings are in general to ascertain whether a crime charged has been committed and, if so, whether there is probable cause to believe that the crime was committed by the' accused. (People v. Bonner (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 553, 557.) “Proceedings preliminary to trial do not constitute jeopardy.” People v. Shields (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 543, 547; see People v. DePoy (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 433; People v. Wilson (1972), 7 Ill. App. 3d 158. In sum, we conclude that the “gang-transfer” provision is not an adjudicatory hearing. Pursuant to the “gang-transfer” provision, the juvenile court judge must determine the truth of two allegations: (1) whether the minor has had prior delinquency adjudications, and (2) whether the charged offense was committed in furtherance of criminal gang activity. A finding as to the truthfulness of these allegations is not dispositive of the minor’s innocence or guilt of the charged offense. Contrary to the State’s burden at adjudication or trial, at the transfer hearing, the State is not required to prove culpability and the court is not required to enter judgment. The transfer provision seeks only a determination of the appropriate law to be applied. Since the transfer proceeding does not seek to adjudicate guilt or innocence for the charged offense, there is no threat to defendant of being twice placed in jeopardy. EQUAL PROTECTION Determination of whether a legislative classification is violative of equal protection requires that we employ a two-step analysis. (People v. Esposito (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 491, 499.) Initially, we must determine the proper level of scrutiny to be applied to the challenged classification. Where, as here, the classification does not affect a fundamental right (see People v. J.S. (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 395, 402-04 (rational basis test applied to provision creating exception to juvenile court jurisdiction); People v. M.A. (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 135, 141-44 (denial of treatment under the Juvenile Court Act analyzed under rational basis test)), or discriminate against a suspect class (People v. M.A. (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 135, 140), the standard for judging the statute is the relatively relaxed rational basis standard. Harris v. Manor Healthcare Corp. (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 350, 371. The rational basis standard requires only that the classification reasonably further a legitimate governmental interest. Under that standard, a challenged classification may be invalidated only if it is arbitrary or bears no reasonable relationship to the pursuit of a legitimate State goal. Harris, 111 Ill. 2d at 371. Defendant advances a singular argument to support his claim that the “gang-transfer” provision violates the equal protection guarantee. He asserts that the provision arbitrarily and capriciously punishes some more harshly than others who are guilty of the same or more serious offense. Specifically, defendant argues that when a minor is excluded from the juvenile court under the “automatic exclusion” provisions (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, pars. 805—4(6)(a), (7)(a)), but is later convicted only of an offense not covered by the exclusion provision, the court must proceed with disposition under the Juvenile Court Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, pars. 805—4(6)(c), (7)(c)). However, the “gang-transfer” provision contains no similar “transfer back” provision. A minor transferred pursuant to the “gang-transfer” provision, if convicted of a lesser offense, is nevertheless sentenced under the criminal code. As a result, when two minors of the same age, with the same criminal background, are convicted of the same forcible felony “in furtherance of criminal activity by an organized gang,” one “must” receive disposition under the Act while the other “must” be sentenced in criminal court. Defendant, citing People v. DeJesus (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 486, claims this result, even if the defendant was previously found delinquent for a felony and was proved to have committed the charged offense “in furtherance of criminal activity by an organized gang.” This, he maintains, is disparate treatment of similarly situated people. Defendant’s argument is fatally flawed. Initially, we note that the DeJesus opinion does not contain facts that the defendant had a prior delinquency conviction or that she had gang affiliations. Thus, we fail to see the relevance of DeJesus to defendant’s argument. Even assuming that defendant here is privy to facts about the defendant DeJesus which place DeJesus squarely within the facts of the present case, DeJesus is nevertheless unavailing. The defendant DeJesus was charged pursuant to the Act as it existed in 1987. The “gang-transfer” provision, which became effective January 1, 1990 (Pub. Act 86—863, eff. Jan. 1, 1990 (amending Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—4)), was obviously not available to prosecutors at that time. Further, the “gang-transfer” provision applies to minors with a prior adjudication of delinquency for the commission of a felony and who are subsequently charged with the commission of a felony which was committed in furtherance of gang activity. Contrarily, the “automatic-transfer” section makes no provision for repeat offenders with gang affiliations. The two provisions provide different procedures for qualitatively different types of offenders. Equal protection is not offended when dissimilar groups are treated differently. Esposito, 121 Ill. 2d at 500-01. However, even broadly concluding that the two groups of offenders, because of their tender age, are alike, we find no equal protection violation. As we have stated, equal protection does not preclude different treatment for like persons where there is a rational basis for so doing. (People v. Tosch (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 474, 481.) We believe that that standard is met here. It is not, nor could it reasonably be, contended that the State does not have a legitimate interest in curtailing crime and in promoting the safety and welfare of its citizenry. One need only to pick up a local daily newspaper or tune into the televised news broadcasts to learn of the appalling increase in the rate of violent crime in our society. All too often, at the root of tragedy and victimization is the minor gang member. The “gang-transfer” provision is the legislature’s response to this growing epidemic. Clearly, the provision, by increasing the likelihood of criminal prosecution and sentencing, is aimed at decreasing the level of gang violence in our society. Thus we find that the provision is reasonably related to a legitimate governmental interest. Having so determined, we note further that uneven effects upon a particular group within the class are ordinarily of no constitutional concern. Thus, even though, unlike minors subject to the “gang-transfer” provision, some minors who are tried pursuant to the criminal laws may ultimately receive dispositions under the Act, there is no equal protection violation. “[A] classification which has some reasonable basis is not unconstitutional because it is not made with mathematical nicety or because in practice it results in some inequality.” City of Chicago v. Voices (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 475, 480; Thillens, Inc. v. Morey (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 579, 594, quoting Lindsley v. Natural Carbonic Gas Co. (1910), 220 U.S. 61, 55 L. Ed. 369, 31 S. Ct. 337. Additionally, we point out that the minor defendant, upon transfer pursuant to the provision in question, who is found culpable for a lesser offense has already had a prior felony adjudication, and quite possibly already has once been afforded disposition under the Act. The legislature might well have determined that repeat felony offenders who commit crimes in furtherance of gang activity are not further amenable to the rehabilitative opportunities afforded under the Act. It may then also reasonably have concluded that to have disposition applied to this minor pursuant to procedures set forth in the Act would not serve the purposes of the Act. We find no violation of equal protection. SUBSTANTIVE DUE PROCESS Defendant next contends that the “gang-transfer” provision violates substantive due process. He summarily concludes that the provision is not reasonably designed to deal with the problem of gang-related criminal activity by juveniles. “Under substantive due process [citations], a statute is unconstitutional if it impermissibly restricts a person’s life, liberty or property interest.” (People v. R.G. (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 328, 342, citing Kelley v. Johnson (1976), 425 U.S. 238, 244, 47 L. Ed. 2d 708, 713, 96 S. Ct. 1440, 1444.) Since a transfer from juvenile to criminal court creates the possibility that the minor will be deprived of liberty for a longer period of time and under more punitive conditions, transfer must comport with due process. People v. M.A. (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 135, 144, citing In re Gault (1967), 387 U.S. 1, 18 L. Ed. 2d 527, 87 S. Ct. 1428. Under the State’s police power, the legislature has discretion to prescribe penalties for defined offenses. (People v. Bradley (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 410, 417.) However, that power is tempered by constitutional limitations which prohibit deprivation of liberty without due process of law. (Bradley, 79 Ill. 2d at 417.) The proper test in determining whether the legislature has properly exercised its power is whether the statute is reasonably designed to alleviate the evils which the legislature has determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare. M.A., 124 Ill. 2d at 144-45; Heimgaertner v. Benjamin Electric Manufacturing Co. (1955), 6 Ill. 2d 152, 159. Defendant advances no arguments in support of his due process contention; thus he has failed to meet his burden. That notwithstanding, we believe that the provision is reasonably designed to curtail gang activity. The legislature apparently determined that by removing prior-convicted youthful felons with gang affiliations from the shelter of the juvenile court system, it could deter the commission of gang-related felonies. Whether it is the most effective means is not relevant; the provision appears to us to have validity and we decline any invitation to second-guess the legislature. VAGUENESS Amici assert that the definition of “organized gang,” as it relates to the “gang-transfer” provision (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—4(3.2)), is unconstitutionally vague. We note that neither the State, nor defendant, whose position amici support, has raised this issue. An amicus curiae is not a party to the action but is, instead, a “friend” of the court. As such, the sole function of an amicus is to advise or to make suggestions to the court. Zurich Insurance Co. v. Raymark Industries, Inc. (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 23, 59. An amicus takes the case as he finds it, with the issues framed by the parties. (3A C.J.S. Amicus Curiae §7; Dunkelbarger Construction Co. v. Watts (Ind. App. 1986), 488 N.E.2d 355, 360; City of Minneapolis v. Church Universal & Triumphant (Minn. 1983), 339 N.W.2d 880, 882 n.3.) He is not a party to the action (Zurich, 118 Ill. 2d at 59-60), and arguments made by him, but not espoused by the parties, have no binding effect on the parties (Gardner v. City of San Jose (1967), 248 Cal. App. 2d 798, 807, 57 Cal. Rptr. 176, 182). Therefore, we need not pass on grounds of invalidity urged solely by an amicus. (Coburn v. Seda (1984), 101 Wash. 2d 270, 279, 677 P.2d 173, 178.) Based upon these principles, we decline to consider the issue of vagueness. PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS Finally, amici argue that the “gang-transfer” provision is violative of procedural due process. They maintain that since the provision here requires no consideration of any of the factors as set out in Kent v. United States (1966), 383 U.S. 541, 16 L. Ed. 2d 84, 86 S. Ct. 1045, and codified in section 5—4(3)(b) of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—4(3)(b)), the statute violates procedural due process. Neither of the parties makes this contention and we, therefore, need not address it. However, given the trial court’s determination that the “gang-transfer” provision contradicted the “discretionary-transfer” provision and its recitation of the factors to be considered under the discretionary provision, we perceive a question concerning procedural due process. Thus, we will consider it. Procedural due process concerns the specific procedures employed in the statute. (Kelley v. Johnson (1976), 425 U.S. 238, 244, 47 L. Ed. 2d 708, 713, 96 S. Ct. 1440, 1444; People v. R.G. (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 328, 342.) Its fundamental requirement is the opportunity to be heard at “ ‘a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.’ ” (R.G., 131 Ill. 2d at 353-54, quoting Mathews v. Eldridge (1976), 424 U.S. 319, 333, 47 L. Ed. 2d 18, 32, 96 S. Ct. 893, 902.) The concept of due process is “flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the particular situation demands.” Mathews, 424 U.S. at 334, 47 L. Ed. 2d at 33, 96 S. Ct. at 902. In Kent, the Supreme Court determined that since the District of Columbia juvenile court transfer statute failed to set out specific standards to govern the juvenile court’s determination to transfer a minor to the criminal court, there could be a variety of factors which might be considered, and disparity in the weight accorded those factors. As a result, there could likely be a disparity of treatment of minors. Therefore, the Court concluded, procedural due process would require that a juvenile be accorded a hearing before waiver could be determined. (Kent, 383 U.S. at 561, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 97, 86 S. Ct. at 1057.) Further, the Supreme Court formulated certain criteria to aid the juvenile court in its decisionmaking process. Kent, 383 U.S. at 566-67, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 100-01, 86 S. Ct. at 1060. The apparent concern in Kent was potential disparity of treatment due to an absence of criteria to guide the court in the exercise of its discretion. Here, the potential for disparate treatment under the “gang-transfer” provision is absent. The criteria for transfer are expressly stated and allow a minor defendant the opportunity to be heard. Once the statutory criteria are satisfied, the juvenile court is without discretion; it must transfer the minor. All 15-year-olds who fall within the purview of the “gang-transfer” provision are to be prosecuted under the criminal laws. We conclude, therefore, that Kent is not dispositive. See People v. J.S. (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 395. Further, we do not believe that the “gang-transfer” provision creates any conflict with the “discretionary-transfer” provision. The “gang-transfer” provision is merely another basis upon which a youthful offender can be excluded from the protections afforded under the juvenile court system. We perceive no risk of an erroneous deprivation of defendant’s interest in avoiding prosecution as an adult through the use of this procedure. (Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335, 47 L. Ed. 2d at 33, 96 S. Ct. at 903.) Therefore, we hold that the “gang-transfer” provision does not offend procedural due process. CONCLUSION The Juvenile Court Act seeks to protect the minor offender from the negative spiraling-down effects of criminal conduct, thereby benefiting the child and society. It was not designed to protect the minor who, secure in the knowledge of possible avoidance of criminal prosecution, contents himself to engage in a lifestyle of deviant behavior. Rather, the Act was intended to protect that child, who without thought of consequence for his conduct, violates the law. Those goals are not compromised by enactment of the “gang-transfer” provision. For the reasons stated, we conclude that defendant has failed to satisfy his burden of establishing the invalidity of the “gang-transfer” provision. Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed, and the cause remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9741517 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:12.763658+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER, specially concurring: I concur in the result reached by the court in this appeal, but write separately because the majority opinion leaves open the question of what standard of proof applies in transfer determinations under the “gang-transfer” statute. Unlike the majority, I would decide the question at this time and determine that probable cause is the correct standard. The question should be decided now for two reasons. First, as the majority notes (145 Ill. 2d at 235), Kent v. United States (1966), 838 U.S. 541, holds that standards in juvenile transfer statutes must be clear in order to comport with the requirements of due process. While Kent is mainly concerned with the factual criteria for transfer and the “gang-transfer” criteria are already clear, it would obviously aid in the consistent application of those criteria for this court to specify what standard of proof applies in such proceedings. Second, it would be helpful to provide guidance to the juvenile courts and would avoid further questions on the issue in the future. The majority opinion does not clearly indicate what standard of proof applies in “gang-transfer” proceedings. Nevertheless, the majority properly rejects the defendant’s assertion that a reasonable doubt standard applies. (145 Ill. 2d at 225.) The opinion further states that it is “a more reasonable inference that the standard of proof required by the ‘gang-transfer’ provision parallel[s] that in other transfer proceedings.” (145 Ill. 2d at 225.) I agree. The same purposes and procedures that apply to a discretionary transfer proceeding apply to a “gang-transfer” proceeding. The only difference is the criteria applied. I see no language in the “gang-transfer” statute to indicate a different standard of proof and thus I see no reason why the same standard of proof should not apply to both proceedings. In People v. Taylor (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 289, this court examined the constitutionality of the discretionary transfer statute. The court held there that “the State need only present evidence sufficient to persuade the trial court, in the sound exercise of its discretion, that in light of the statutorily prescribed criteria transfer is warranted.” (76 Ill. 2d at 303-04. See also People v. D.B. (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 194, 201; People v. Cater (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 983, 987; People v. Stocks (1981), 93 Ill. App. 3d 439, 445 (clear and convincing standard does not apply).) While Taylor does not explicitly hold that probable cause is the applicable standard of proof in discretionary transfer proceedings, Taylor does imply that probable cause is the correct standard. In Taylor the court rejected a clear and convincing standard (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 302), and stated that “the greater the evidence of guilt required to be submitted by the State, the greater the likelihood of double jeopardy problems with the subsequent trial.” (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 304.) More importantly, as the majority notes (145 Ill. 2d at 227), the court in Taylor also observed that the Uniform Juvenile Court Act “suggests only a probable cause standard.” (Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d at 304.) Taken together, I believe Taylor and the majority opinion imply that probable cause is the correct standard for both discretionary transfer and “gang-transfer” proceedings. Two other reasons support my conclusion that probable cause is the proper standard. First, one of the criteria for transfer under the discretionary transfer statute is “whether there is sufficient evidence upon which a grand jury may be expected to return an indictment.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 805—4(3)(b)(l).) Because the standard of proof in grand jury proceedings is probable cause (see Phillips v. Graham (1981), 86 Ill. 2d 274, 284), the statute suggests that the General Assembly contemplated a probable cause standard in discretionary transfer proceedings. Second, the majority concludes that transfer proceedings are not adjudicatory, but instead are highly analogous to preliminary hearings where the probable cause standard is applied. (145 Ill. 2d at 228, citing People v. Bonner (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 553, 557.) I agree with that analogy. Transfer proceedings and preliminary hearings are both pretrial proceedings which have as their purpose the determination of whether the State may proceed with criminal charges. I believe it appropriate to apply the same standard of proof in both cases. In order to clarify the procedures to be used in “gang-transfer” proceedings, I believe that we should decide here that probable cause is the applicable standard of proof in these proceedings. The majority opinion is not inconsistent with this conclusion. JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9741518 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:14.871537+00 ===

Per Curiam.
This case involves a constitutional challenge to the procedures by which the plaintiffs obtained a tax-sale title to property formerly owned by the defendant association. Each party asked the circuit court to quiet title. The court granted summary disposition for the plaintiffs. However, the Court of Appeals reversed, ruling that the association was not given constitutionally adequate notice of the tax sale and related redemption periods.
The case returns to this Court after a remand for additional findings. We conclude that mailing of tax delinquency and redemption notices to a corporation at its tax address of record in the manner required by the General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq.; MSA *4227.1 et seq., is sufficient to provide constitutionally adequate notice. We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstate the circuit court’s judgment in favor of the plaintiffs.
i
During the 1960s a developer named C. James Davis constructed an apartment complex in Washte-naw County’s Ypsilanti Township. None of the apartment buildings were constructed on the adjacent parcel that is the subject of this case. The record does not reveal whether the disputed parcel was included within the original description of the land on which the apartment complex was built. Davis later transferred ownership to a partnership called “Bay Properties.” There were two partners, Keith A. Metcalf and John McKee. In 1972, Bay Properties converted the existing apartments to condominium ownership.
On May 26, 1972, Davis, Metcalf, and McKee created the defendant nonprofit corporation to be the managing entity for the condominiums. The original articles of incorporation show Metcalf as the association’s resident agent and his mailing address as 770 South Adams, Suite 110, Birmingham, Michigan, 48011. Other contemporaneous documents show that same address for Bay Properties.
On June 7, 1972, Bay Properties conveyed the land beneath the condominium improvements to the association. The disputed parcel was not included in the deed’s land description.
On October 10, 1973, by a separate quitclaim deed, Bay Properties conveyed the disputed parcel to the *423association, stating its address as 770 South Adams, Suite 202, Birmingham, Michigan, 48011.
The record contains no further information about what became of Bay Properties, Davis, Metcalf, or McKee. Nor does it show whether anyone affiliated with the association continued to occupy the Birmingham address after 1973.
The disputed parcel is “green space” adjacent to the condominium complex. The association says that it and the owners of the individual condominium units have always assumed that the disputed parcel was included within the description and tax bills for the entire complex. The circuit court’s order on remand, based on a stipulation by the parties, found that for unknown reasons the township did not place the disputed parcel on its tax rolls until 1976. Before then, on October 3, 1975, the association had filed with the Corporation and Securities Bureau a notice that both its resident agent and mailing address had changed. It identified the Ann Arbor Trust Company as the new resident agent, stating the new address as P.O. Box 12, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48107.1 Nothing required the association to send a copy of this notice to the township, and the association apparently did not do so.
Even after the proceedings on remand, the parties and the circuit court have been unable to establish the details of many of the events relevant to the sending of notices and proceedings regarding the delinquent taxes, tax sale, redemption periods, and trans*424fer of title. Much of this results from the lapse of time and the inadequacy of the available records.
While the inadequacy of the record leaves uncertainties, they are not critical for the disposition of this case. So far as can be determined, all notices relating to taxes on and the tax sale of the disputed parcel were sent to the Birmingham address. The association does not contend that the township, county, or state failed to give any of the required notices in the maimer specified in the statutes. Rather, the association’s claim is that the sending of notices to its former address in Birmingham was inadequate. The only information in the record indicating that the township, county, or state had reason to believe that the Birmingham address was not correct is in the state’s affidavit regarding the notice of hearing under MCL 211.131e; MSA 7.190(3), which says that the notice was returned by the post office as “Not Deliverable As Addressed.”
The township first issued a tax bill for the parcel in 1976, mailing it to the association at its by-then obsolete Birmingham address. The township has no record showing either that the taxes were paid or were not paid. The township’s records show that in 1977, the tax bill was sent to the Birmingham address, and that the taxes were not paid.
After a tax bill has gone unpaid for three years, the property may be sold to satisfy the delinquent tax bill plus interest and penalties. MCL 211.60; MSA 7.104. Here, the tax sale was in 1980 to satisfy the delinquent 1977 tax bill.2 No private party purchased the *425property, and it was bid in to the state as provided in MCL 211.67; MSA 7.112.
In the fall of 1987, after the expiration of the applicable redemption periods, the state issued a deed to the plaintiffs under MCL 211.131; MSA 7.188. The deed was recorded on November 13, 1987. Tax bills for 1987 and all subsequent years have been sent to the plaintiffs and paid by them.
In late 1990 or early 1991, the association learned that the plaintiffs claimed to own the disputed parcel and on February 27, 1991, recorded an affidavit that served to cloud the plaintiffs’ title. After efforts to settle the dispute failed, plaintiffs filed this action on March 5, 1996, asking the circuit court to quiet their title. The association filed a counterclaim seeking the same relief. The circuit court granted summary disposition for the plaintiffs.
n
Following the circuit court’s decision, the association appealed, and the Court of Appeals reversed. 226 Mich App 245; 573 NW2d 296 (1997). For its due process analysis, the Court of Appeals relied heavily on our decision in Dow v Michigan, 396 Mich 192; 240 NW2d 450 (1976). It focused on the language of Dow that the state must employ “such means ‘as one desirous of actually informing [the property owner] might reasonably adopt’ to notify [the owner] of the pen-dency of the proceedings.” 396 Mich 210.
In the present case, the Court of Appeals faulted the state for failing to make any additional effort to ascertain the association’s current address when the notice of hearing under MCL 211.131e; MSA 7.190(3) *426sent by certified mail was returned as undeliverable. The Court of Appeals said:
In the present case, defendant did not receive notice sufficient to satisfy due process concerns. Plaintiffs do not contend that defendant received actual notice, but assert that the attempts to notify defendant of the pending proceedings were sufficient. However, it would be reasonable to expect a county, upon the return of a tax bill as undeliverable, to take some meaningful effort to obtain the correct address of the property owner. Consolidated Rail Corp v Michigan, 976 F Supp 1085, 1087 (WD Mich, 1996), citing City of Grand Rapids v Green, 187 Mich App 131, 136-137; 466 NW2d 388 (1991). Here, no attempt whatsoever was made to ascertain the current address of defendant upon the return of the notice of hearing. Obviously, such inaction is not characteristic of “one desirous of actually informing another.” Dow, supra at 211. Further, this inaction is rendered more indefensible by the fact that defendant is a corporation required to maintain its current address with the Coiporation and Securities Bureau.
Therefore, because defendant did not receive adequate notice of the pending proceeding, the order granting summary disposition in favor of plaintiffs with respect to the complaint must be set aside. In addition, in light of the above, we conclude that summary disposition in favor of defendant was warranted .... [226 Mich App 251-252.]
In light of that holding, the Court of Appeals said that it was unnecessary to consider the association’s additional arguments about errors in some of the recorded legal descriptions.3
After the Court of Appeals denied rehearing, the plaintiffs filed an application for leave to appeal to this Court.
*427in
As noted, the Court of Appeals focused on the language from Dow that the state must employ, “such means ‘as one desirous of actually informing [the property owner] might reasonably adopt’ to notify [the owner] of the pendency of the proceedings.” However, we must keep in mind the context in which that statement was made. In Dow the question was whether notice by publication was sufficient.4 After finding that notice by publication did not meet the constitutional standards, we went on to describe the kind of notice that would satisfy due process requirements:
Personal service is not required. Notice by mail is adequate. Mailed notice must be directed to an address reasonably calculated to reach the person entitled to notice. Mailing should be by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, both because of the greater care in delivery and because of the record of mailing and receipt or non-receipt provided. Such would be the efforts one desirous of actually informing another might reasonably employ. If the state exerts reasonable efforts, then failure to effectuate actual notice would not preclude foreclosure of the statutory lien and indefeasible vesting of title on expiration of the redemption period. [396 Mich 211.]
*428Following our Dow decision, the Legislature enacted 1976 PA 292, adding additional notice provisions. See MCL 211.61b; MSA 7.106(1), MCL 211.73c; MSA 7.119(2), MCL 211.131c(l); MSA 7.190(1)(1); and MCL 211.131e(l); MSA 7.190(3)(1). With those changes, the General Property Tax Act now includes an extensive set of procedures for notice of the steps in the tax sale process.5 These procedures meet the *429requirements set forth in Dow and thus provide a constitutionally sound procedure for sale of property because of nonpayment of taxes.
The statute generally provides that mailed notice to the owner is to be at the owner’s last known address.6 In this case there is nothing to indicate that the township, county, or state had been informed of a new address for the association. Thus, it was appropriate for notices to be sent to the Birmingham address stated in the deed conveying the disputed parcel to the association. The fact that one of the mailings was returned by the post office as undeliverable does not impose on the state the obligation to undertake an investigation to see if a new address for the association could be located. We reject the contrary conclusion of Consolidated Rail Corp v Michigan, supra.7
*430The Legislature has provided a notice procedure that meets constitutional standards. The Court of Appeals decision in this case constitutes an improper intrusion into the Legislature’s authority to regulate tax sale proceedings. The courts lack the authority to create new notice requirements. The fact that another statutory scheme might appear to have been wiser or would produce fairer results is irrelevant. Arguments based on such policy considerations must be addressed to the Legislature. E.g., People v McIntire, 461 Mich 147, 159; 599 NW2d 102 (1999); Oakland Co Bd of Rd Comm’rs v Michigan Property & Casualty Guaranty Ass’n, 456 Mich 590, 612-613; 575 NW2d 751 (1998); People v Kirby, 440 Mich 485, 493-494; 487 NW2d 404 (1992). Similarly, the fact that the township' might have sought out defendant’s legal residence in a more thorough or conscientious manner is not relevant to our analysis, in light of the language of the statute.
*431Not only does the Court of Appeals decision infringe the authority of the Legislature, but it would also undermine the tax sale process. The principle underlying the Court of Appeals decision is that in some circumstances it is not enough to comply with the requirements of the General Property Tax Act, but that more must be done. However, exactly what that is will be different in every case. No matter what efforts are made to give notice, the owner who has not, in fact, been provided notice will always contend that something more could have been done. This will make the process of tax sales completely unpredictable, destroying the government’s ability to recoup unpaid taxes by foreclosing and reselling. For due process purposes, the focus must be on the constitutional adequacy of the statutory procedure and not on whether some additional effort in a particular case would have in fact led to a more certain means of notice.
rv
The Court of Appeals improperly imposed notice requirements beyond those required by the Legislature. We thus reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals. Because of its conclusion regarding the notice question, the Court of Appeals did not discuss other claims raised by the association. We therefore remand the case to the Court of Appeals for consideration of those issues.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred.
On two later occasions, August 1979, and January 1985, the association notified the Corporation and Securities Bureau of additional changes of its resident agent and mailing address.
The tax bills for 1978 and 1979 were also returned after being unpaid. There was no separate tax sale with respect to them, however.
The state’s affidavit regarding the notice of hearing and the deed from the state to the plaintiffs each include an error (though different ones) in their descriptions of the parcel.
The statute in effect at that time also provided for notice by mail. However, as we explained:
While the statute provides for mailed notice, there is no record of notice having been mailed or received in this case. The state does not contend that we should assume that notices were duly mailed; the statute’s express statement that no consequence shall attach to non-mailing precludes any such contention. [396 Mich 207.]
After the township has notified the county treasurer that the taxes are unpaid, the county treasurer is required to send two mailings regarding the delinquent taxes. One is within 120 days after receiving the statement of delinquency from the township. MCL 211.57(2); MSA 7.101(2). The other is to be within 120 days after March 1 in the year following failure to pay the taxes. MCL 211.57(3); MSA 7.101(3).
Three years after failure to pay the taxes, the property may be sold. The sale is to occur on the first Tuesday in May in the third year following nonpayment. MCL 211.60; MSA 7.104. The state treasurer files a petition in circuit court seeking what amounts to a show cause order. MCL 211.61; MSA 7.105. Notices are to be sent to those with interest in the property 30 days before the sale. MCL 211.61a; MSA 7.106. In addition, notice of the tax sale is subject to a newspaper publication requirement. MCL 211.62, 211.63; MSA 7.107, 7.108. Where the property has a street address, and a notice required by § 61a has not been sent to that address, or a notice was sent but was forwarded or returned as undeliverable, the statute provides for a mailing to “occupant.” MCL 211.61b; MSA 7.106(1).
Following a tax sale, there are a series of redemption deadlines. One is a year after the tax sale. MCL 211.74; MSA 7.120. A notice is to be sent to persons holding an interest in the property at least 120 days before that date. MCL 211.73c(l); MSA 7.119(2)(1). Under certain circumstances, a mailing to “occupant” is also required. MCL 211.73c(2); MSA 7.119(2)(2). Title vests in the state one year after the tax sale if the property is not redeemed. MCL 211.67; MSA 7.112.
Another redemption period is the first Tuesday in November after title vests in the state. MCL 211.131c(l); MSA 7.190(1)(1). During that extended redemption period, a Department of Natural Resources agent is to make a personal visit to the property to ascertain whether or not it is occupied. If occupied, the dnr must attempt to personally serve the person occupying the land with a copy of a redemption notice. If the property is occupied and personal service cannot be accomplished a notice must be posted on the premises in a conspicuous manner. MCL 211.131c(5); MSA 7.190(1)(5). The parties to this case do not discuss this redemption deadline or the related notice requirement.
MCL 211.131e(l), (3); MSA 7.190(3)(1), (3) provides for the giving of a notice to all owners of significant interests in the property that a hear*429ing will be conducted at which they may show cause why the tax sale should be canceled. That section provides an additional 30 days after the hearing to redeem. In this case, an affidavit’recorded by the state indicates that the date of the hearing was December 28, 1981.
E.g., MCL 211.44; MSA 7.87; MCL 211.61a(2); MSA 7.106(2).
Courts in other jurisdictions have addressed similar questions about the obligation of taxing authorities to go beyond record information in an attempt to ascertain current addresses, finding no constitutional obligation to go beyond statutory requirements. In Keiser v Young, 181 AD2d 170; 585 NYS2d 880 (1992), the property owner contended that mailings were not sent to her correct address and that because certain notices were returned as “unclaimed,” the county was required to take additional steps to achieve notice. The court rejected the claim, explaining:
Pursuant to [Real Property Tax Law] 1002(4), notice of an impending tax sale is to be given to an owner of real property by first class mail at the address “shown on the assessment roll.” Similar requirements apply to follow-up redemption notices (see, RPTL 1014[3]). Here, the uncontradicted proof in the record establishes that the mailing address for defendant shown on the relevant assessment roll and used by the County was the same as that contained in both defendant’s deed to the property and the real property transfer report.... Thus, as in Matter of Girrbach v Levine, 132 AD2d 41; 522 NYS2d 276 [(1987)], the County was entitled to *430rely on the record information. In so doing, the County satisfied the mandates of due process by providing “notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise [defendant] of the pendency of the [tax sale proceedings] and afford [her] an opportunity to present [her] objections” (Mullane v Central Hanover Trust Co, 339 US 306, 314; 70 S Ct 652, 657; 94 L Ed 865 [(1950)]; see, Mennonite Bd of Missions v Adams, 462 US 791; 103 S Ct 2706; 77 L Ed 2d 180 [(1983)] . . .). [181 AD2d 173.]
Similarly, in Dahn v Trownsell, 576 NW2d 535 (SD, 1998), the court recognized that mailings to an owner’s last known address cannot guarantee that the property owner receives actual notice in every case. However, it held that such a mailing, as provided by the South Dakota statute, was “ ‘notice reasonably calculated, under all circumstances, to apprise interested] parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections,’ ” quoting Mullane v Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co, supra at 314.
See also Atlantic City v Block C-11, Lot 11, 74 NJ 34; 376 A2d 926 (1977).

=== CASE 9741519 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:14.876325+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I cannot join the majority in its opinion. In reversing the Court of Appeals deci*432sion, the majority elevates form over substance and achieves an unjust result. I would grant leave to consider whether the notice requirements contained in Michigan’s General Property Tax Act1 satisfy the due process requirements imposed by the state and federal constitutions.
This case presents an important constitutional question that deserves a full hearing. A per curiam opinion is an inadequate vehicle to address it.
The facts presented by this case are troubling. Apparently, the Treasury Department complied with the letter of the notice statute when it mailed tax statements to the address for defendant that appeared on the tax rolls. From a technical standpoint, the General Property Tax Act required nothing more of the department. Yet, its failure, upon getting back undeliverable mailings to defendant, to obtain defendant’s current address from its sister department, the Corporations and Securities Bureau, may well have been unreasonable under the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution.
The mere fact that a statute prescribes detailed steps aimed at ensuring “reasonable notice” does not mean that conforming notice inevitably will be reasonable. The Legislature could not contemplate every conceivable circumstance. To survive constitutional scrutiny, the notice attempted must be “reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of [state] action [against them] and afford them an opportunity to present their objections.” Mullane v Central Hanover *433Bank & Trust Co, 339 US 306, 314; 70 S Ct 652; 94 L Ed 865 (1950).
In this case, the department’s actions, while in technical compliance with the statute, did not give defendant notice and may have failed the reasonableness test imposed by Mullane. From the perspective of the corporate defendant, the majority’s decision renders an unjust result. The defendant corporation, like the department, performed every act required of it by law. When it changed its corporate address and agent, it informed the appropriate state office.
The majority resolves the case in a way that deprives defendant of its property without it ever receiving actual notice that it owed taxes or of a tax foreclosure sale. Defendant had reason to believe it had paid all taxes due. It is difficult to reconcile such a result with the spirit of the statute, which strives to ensure reasonable notice and protect the constitutional rights of property owners.
In my view, the notice statute, inasmuch as it seeks to achieve reasonableness, may have required more from the state in this instance. When the department receives notice that its tax bills directed to a corporation are undeliverable at a certain address, reasonableness may require one more step: an inquiry to the Corporations and Securities Bureau to check for a current address. See, e.g., Patrick v Rice, 112 NM 285, 288; 814 P2d 463 (1991) (“Determining that the division complied with applicable notice statutes resolves only half the question on appeal. . . . [T]he notice of such [sale] must comply with minimum due process standards”); O'Brien v Port Lawrence Title & Trust Co, 87 Ohio Misc 2d 10, 16; 688 NE2d 1136 (1997) (holding that, although the applicable statute was sat*434isfied, due process was not); Tracy v Chester Co, Tax Claim Bureau, 507 Pa 288, 296-297; 489 A2d 1334 (1985).
The feasability of requiring this step should be explored during this appeal. It may be revealed that requiring it would not turn the department into a sleuthing operation, nor have a devastating ripple effect on the title insurance industry. A full exploration of it might show that it would ensure reasonable notice under the narrow circumstances presented by this case.
The Court should follow the lead of the Court of Appeals and consider interpreting the statute to require this simple, common-sense step where a corporate change of address is involved. The department’s inaction in this case may have failed to give the constitutionally required reasonable notice despite being in compliance with the statute. Therefore, the Court should grant leave to consider this important constitutional rights and property rights issue.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
MCL 211.1 et seq.; MSA 7.1 et seq.

=== CASE 9741520 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:16.560539+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
The two cases before us today on petitions to transfer have been consolidated because both require us to construe a portion of the Indiana Tort Claims Act, Ind. Code Ann. § 34-4-16.5-3(7) (West Supp. 1990), and decide whether law enforcement officials and their employers are immune from liability in connection with the treatment of pre-trial detainees. We now grant transfer to re-evaluate some of our earlier statements in Seymour Nat’l. Bank v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1223, mod. on reh’g. 428 N.E.2d 203, and conclude that the immunity granted by Section 3(7) of the Tort Claims Act does not encompass the treatment of pre-trial detainees and is limited to circumstances surrounding the apprehension of suspects.
FACTS
In the first case, Jacqueline R. Tittle, individually and as personal representative of the estate of Terry N. Tittle, and Glen Alvin Cochran, by his next friend Beth Ann Cochran, (collectively, “Tittle”) (Plaintiffs-Appellants below) seek transfer after the Court of Appeals affirmed the entry of summary judgment in favor of Michael Ma-han, David Meyers, David Gladieux, Glen Harpel, Oscar Equia, Daniel L. Figen (collectively “jail defendants”), Rosemary Mosley and the City of Fort Wayne (collectively “police defendants”) (Defendants-Appellees below). Tittle v. Mahan (1991), Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 1064.
The facts pertinent to this appeal follow. On April 14, 1987, Terry Tittle was arrested and charged with criminal deviate conduct, robbery and burglary. He was transported to the Allen County jail and custody *798was transferred from the police defendants to the jail defendants. He was interviewed that day and the next day by Mosley, a Fort Wayne police officer. During these interviews, Terry told Mosley that he was depressed. Mosley was also informed by Terry’s mother that he had previously attempted suicide. Apparently, this information was not passed along from the police defendants to the jail defendants or anyone at the Allen County jail. On April 16, 1987, Terry was transferred to a cell at the Allen County jail. An observation order was issued by the jail nurse and “suicide precautions” was checked as- the purpose of the order. On April 18, 1987, in his jail cell, Terry committed suicide by self-strangulation.
His personal representative brought suit against both the police defendants and the jail defendants alleging negligence and a deprivation of constitutional rights under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. All defendants filed motions for summary judgment on the grounds that (1) the Indiana Tort Claims Act rendered them immune from liability for negligence because they had been involved in the enforcement of a law at the time of their dealing with Terry; and (2) that Tittle had not established the requisite standard of “deliberate indifference” in the Section 1983 action. The trial court granted all motions for summary judgment and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
In the other case, Betty Jean Sauders, as the personal representative of the estate of Mark S. Sowles (Plaintiff-Appellant below), seeks transfer after the Court of Appeals affirmed the entry of summary judgment in favor of Steuben County, State of Indiana, Lawnie McClelland, Steuben County Board of Commissioners, Gregory Aid-rich and Mark Klink (collectively “jail defendants”) (Defendants-Appellees below). Sauders v. County of Steuben (1991), Ind.App., 564 N.E.2d 948.
The facts relevant to this appeal follow. On April 28, 1986, an automobile driven by Sowles collided with the rear of a police patrol vehicle driven by an Angola city police officer. An Indiana state trooper investigated the accident and arrested Sowles. Tests showed his blood alcohol level to be .15 per cent. Because Ind.Code Ann. § 35-33-1-6 (West 1986) required Sowles to be incarcerated for at least four hours, he was transported to the Steuben County jail at approximately midnight, where he was processed by Aldrich, an employee of the Sheriffs Department, and placed alone in a two-person cell at 12:35 a.m. At 1:17 a.m., Sowles was found unconscious with a noose of blanket strips knotted around his neck. Despite resuscitation attempts and subsequent medical treatment, Sowles never regained consciousness. He remained in a permanent vegetative state until he died on July 13, 1988. Sauders filed suit alleging that the jail defendants had been negligent in their care and custody of the decedent. All defendants filed motions for summary judgment on the grounds that they were immune under the Indiana Tort Claims Act because they had been enforcing the law with respect to their treatment of Sowles. Those motions were granted by the trial court and affirmed by the Court of Appeals.
Indiana Tort Claims Act
Governmental immunity is controlled by the Indiana Tort Claims Act, Ind.Code Ann. § 34-4-16.5-1, et seq. (West 1983 and Supp.1990). In general, governmental entities and their employees are subject to liability for torts committed by them, unless the activity giving rise to the tort falls within the exceptions enumerated in the Tort Claims Act. Peavler v. Monroe County Bd. of Comm’rs. (1988), Ind., 528 N.E.2d 40, 42. The exception at issue here is found at Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3, which provides:
A governmental entity or employee acting within the scope of his employment is not liable if a loss results from:
[[Image here]]
(7) the adoption and enforcement of or failure to adopt or enforce a law (including rules and regulations), unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest or false imprisonment.
*799Answering the question of whether the act of placing and maintaining a pre-trial detainee in a jail cell is “enforcement of a law” determines whether the law enforcement defendants are entitled to immunity by virtue of the Tort Claims Act. Tittle and Sauders assert that once a person is placed in a cell, treatment of that person by law enforcement personnel is not “enforcing a law” within the meaning of the Tort Claims Act and, therefore, no immunity exists. The jail defendants, on the other hand, argue that, because the activity of placing and maintaining a pre-trial detainee in jail is one of the legal duties imposed on a law enforcement officer and is within the scope of the officer’s employment, it is among the activities included within the term “enforcement of a law.”
Status of Common Law When Tort Claims Act Enacted
At the time the Tort Claims Act was enacted, the courts of this State had determined that the king not only could do much wrong, but also could be held accountable for such wrongs. The doctrine of sovereign immunity for breaches of a private duty had been virtually abolished by judicial decisions. In Brinkman v. City of Indpls. (1967), 141 Ind.App. 662, 231 N.E.2d 169, the appellate court abandoned the governmental/proprietary rule and abolished sovereign immunity from tort liability for municipalities, even in their governmental capacity. A year later, the appellate court in Klepinger v. Bd. of Comm’rs. (1968), 143 Ind.App. 178, 239 N.E.2d 160, applied the Brinkman rule to the counties of Indiana. The following year, this Court held that the State was exposed to liability for proprietary functions and reserved decision on whether immunity would still exist for the State for its governmental actions and functions. Perkins v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 549, 251 N.E.2d 30. Finally, in Campbell v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 55, 284 N.E.2d 733, this Court abolished the governmental/proprietary rule and held that sovereign immunity was no longer applicable to the State. In so holding, however, this Court recognized that the State would only be responsible in damages for a breach of duty owed to a private individual. To illustrate the retention of immunity against suits for breach of a public duty, this Court in Campbell cited Simpson Food Fair v. City of Evansville (1971), 149 Ind.App. 387, 272 N.E.2d 871, in which the Court of Appeals had held that the City of Evansville was immune from liability for breach of its public duty to provide adequate police protection. Thus, at the time of the enactment of the Indiana Tort Claims Act, the common law was that governmental entities were not immune from tort claims resulting from a governmental entity employee’s breach of a private duty owed to an individual, but governmental entities were immune from claims resulting from a breach of its public duties owed to all.
Cases Following the Indiana Tort Claims Act
The Indiana General Assembly reacted to the above-cited judicial decisions by enacting the Indiana Tort Claims Act. The Act established limitations on the judicially-decreed rights to sue and recover from governmental entities and their employees. The Act did not create a right to sue a governmental entity or its employees, but, instead, regulated the common law right to bring such actions by enacting notice requirements, limitations on recovery, and immunity provisions. By enacting the immunity provisions, the Indiana General Assembly granted immunity for, among other things, the “adoption and enforcement of or failure to adopt or enforce a law.”
It was not until 1981 that this Court first was presented with the question of what constitutes “enforcement of a law” as used in Section 3(7). In Seymour National Bank v. State, 422 N.E.2d 1223, we concluded that the State was immune from liability for the alleged negligence of a state trooper in operating his police car during a high speed chase of a criminal suspect. Rather than focusing, as the common law would have required, on what, if any, duty had been violated, the basis for the ruling was, simply, that “an officer engaged in effecting an arrest is in fact *800enforcing a law.” 422 N.E.2d at 1226. We continue to agree that, given the facts presented in Seymour, the result reached in that case was correct. However, the opinion on rehearing also contains dicta which suggests that any act within the scope of a law enforcement official’s employment is immune. 428 N.E.2d at 204. We do not believe this reflects the legislature’s intention.
These two present consolidated cases, along with case of City of Wakarusa (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 802, which we also decide today, present this Court with an opportunity to revisit Seymour and determine the extent of police conduct which remains immune under the umbrella of the Tort Claims Act “law enforcement immunity.” The dicta contained in Seymour appears to have been the basis for a variety of cases decided by the Court of Appeals extending “law enforcement immunity” to protect such acts as damaging a plaintiff’s home by firing cannisters of tear gas into it in order to apprehend a fleeing murder suspect, Indiana State Police v. May (1984), Ind.App., 469 N.E.2d 1183, assisting another officer in the investigation of a personal injury accident, Weber v. City of Fort Wayne (1987), Ind.App., 511 N.E.2d 1074, failing to guard a prisoner who escaped and shot a bystander, City of Gary v. Cox (1987), Ind.App., 512 N.E.2d 452, and giving flares at the scene of an accident to a truck driver who was struck by a car while setting out the flares, McFarlin v. State (1988), Ind.App., 524 N.E.2d 807. In fact, the observation of Judge Sullivan in his concurring opinion in McFarlin, to the effect that any action taken by a law enforcement official within the scope of his employment is immune under the holdings of the Court of Appeals’ decisions which followed Seymour, appears to be an accurate assessment of the direction taken by Indiana courts. We do not agree that this extension of the Seymour holding is warranted.
In Seymour, we concluded that the term “enforcement of the law” was not ambiguous because an officer engaged in effecting an arrest was, in fact, enforcing the law. 422 N.E.2d at 1226. We continue to agree that effecting an arrest is enforcing the law and that the actions taken by a police officer in effecting an arrest cannot give rise to a claim because of the immunity provisions of Section 3(7). However, to extend the immunity granted by Section 3(7) to police activities beyond those actions surrounding the effecting of an arrest is tantamount to refusing to strictly construe the Tort Claims Act in abrogation of our rules of statutory construction.
In fact, these consolidated cases make evident this point. Here, defendants essentially argue that placing and maintaining pre-trial detainees in a jail cell is intimately connected with the notion of “law enforcement” because the law requires the jail defendants to place and maintain a pre-trial detainee in jail. Under this analysis, arguably all acts of a law enforcement official would constitute enforcement of a law, because most acts of law enforcement officials are in response to a statutory mandate. Such a broad construction of Section 3(7) is not warranted.
Two rules of statutory construction lead us to this conclusion. First, a statute (such as the Tort Claims Act) which is in derogation of the common law must be strictly construed against limitations on a claimant’s right to bring suit. Collier v. Prater (1989), Ind., 544 N.E.2d 497, 498. Secondly, when the legislature enacts a statute in derogation of the common law, this Court presumes that the legislature is aware of the common law, and does not intend to make any change therein beyond what it declares either in express terms or by unmistakable implication. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Structo Div., King Seeley Thermos Co. (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 597, 598.
Simply stated, at the time the Tort Claims Act was enacted, the common law was such that private citizens injured by the negligent acts of law enforcement officials were free to seek relief from those at fault. Simpson Food Fair, supra. Thus, the question becomes to what extent the Legislature intended to alter this state of the common law.
*801In Seymour we concluded that the plain meaning of “enforcement of a law” included activities of a law enforcement officer in the course of apprehending a suspect, which activity required split second timing and decision-making. Here, we conclude that the plain meaning of “enforcement of a law” does not include activities associated with the administration of pre-trial detainees at a county jail. We view a sheriffs compliance with the legal obligations established by statute, Ind.Code Ann. § 36-2-13-5(a)(7) (West, 1983), and case law, see e.g. Health and Hosp. Corp. v. Marion County (1984), Ind.App., 470 N.E.2d 1348, as constituting compliance with the law rather than enforcement of it. Many of the job functions of law enforcement officials involving operation of jails and maintenance of prisoners are administrative and custodial in nature, and cannot fairly be characterized as “law enforcement” within the meaning of the Tort Claims Act.
We perceive the activities included within the term “enforcement of a law” to be limited to those activities attendant to effecting the arrest of those who may have broken the law. In these two cases, we hold that immunity does not extend past the arrest.
Application of Law to Facts of These Cases
The gist of Tittle’s negligence complaint is that the police defendants failed to forward information pertinent to the decedent’s alleged suicidal tendencies, and that the jail defendants failed to appropriately monitor him in the jail cell, or otherwise failed to respond to his medical needs. At the time these acts took place, Tittle was in the custody of the jail defendants who were not “enforcing a law” within the meaning of the Tort Claims Act and, therefore, were not immune from tort liability. Because genuine issues of material fact exist about whether the jail defendants, in fact, breached any private duty owed by them to Tittle, summary judgment is not appropriate. With regard to the police defendants, the facts are undisputed that they were not engaged in providing custodial confinement of the deceased, but instead were engaged in the performance of their public duty of investigating the circumstances surrounding the decedent’s alleged commission of the crime of rape. Their conduct in carrying out that investigation by interviewing the decedent and his mother did not violate any private duty owed to the decedent. Thus, the entry of summary judgment in their favor was appropriate.
The gist of Sauders’ negligence action is that the jail defendants failed to (1) monitor the decedent adequately and (2) recognize his tendency toward self-destructive behavior. These alleged failures occurred while the decedent was confined to a jail cell. Accordingly, the Tort Claims Act does not provide immunity to these defendants. Because there remain genuine issues of material fact about whether the jail defendants breached any private duty owed by them to Sowles, summary judgment is inappropriate.
# U.S.C. § 1983
Tittle’s complaint also included a claim against various defendants pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983. First, we note that Section 1983 does not provide a remedy for a negligent act of an official which caused unintended loss or injury to life, liberty, or property. Daniels v. Williams (1986), 474 U.S. 327, 106 S.Ct. 662, 88 L.Ed.2d 662; Davidson v. Cannon (1986), 474 U.S. 344, 106 S.Ct. 668, 88 L.Ed.2d 677. Additionally, our review of the record does not reveal that any of the jail defendants were actually aware of the decedent’s suicidal state and were deliberately indifferent to such state. We, therefore, conclude that summary judgment was appropriately entered against Tittle on the 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim. See, Freedman v. City of Allentown (3d Cir.1988), 853 F.2d 1111.
CONCLUSION
Accordingly, we grant transfer, vacate the opinions of the Courts of Appeal to the extent that they relate to the application of Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3(7), affirm the trial court’s entry of summary judgment in fa*802vor of Mosley and the City of Ft. Wayne in its entirety, affirm the trial court’s entry of summary judgment in favor of Mahan, Meyers, Gladieux, Harpel, Equia, and Figel on the 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim, but reverse the trial court’s entry of summary judgment in favor of these defendants on the negligence claim, and reverse the trial court’s entry of summary judgment in favor of the County of Steuben, Lawnie M. McClelland, as Sheriff of Steuben County, Steuben County Board of Commissioners, Gregory W. Aldrich, and Mark Klink.
DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs in result but does not join in the Court’s interpretation of Ind.Code § 34-4r-16.5-3(7).
GIVAN, J., dissents and concurs, with separate opinion.
ON CIVIL PETITIONS TO TRANSFER

=== CASE 9741522 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:17.38433+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
The City of Wakarusa and Ken Miller (Defendants-Appellants below) seek transfer after the Court of Appeals affirmed the denial of summary judgment in their favor and against Monte Holdeman (Plaintiff-Appellee below). City of Wakarusa v. Holdeman (1990), Ind.App., 560 N.E.2d 109.
The question in this case is whether immunity under the Indiana Tort Claims Act is conferred when a deputy marshal, while on patrol for license plate violations, hits another vehicle. We hold that the deputy was not “enforcing a law” within the meaning of Ind.Code Ann. § 34-4-16.5-3(7) (West Supp.1991) and, therefore, immunity does not attach.
The relevant facts are as follows. Ken Miller was a deputy marshal for the City of Wakarusa. On February 26, 1987, Miller was on duty and driving northbound on State Road 19. While driving at approximately 30-35 m.p.h., Miller was also engaged in observing the license plates of southbound traffic by looking into his rear view mirror and over his left shoulder. Miller had previously stopped several recreational vehicles in that area for failure to have the required license plate and registration, and he was looking for more. At one point, while looking in the rear view mirror, Miller failed to see that the traffic ahead of him had stopped. When he did notice it, he applied the brakes and skidded 40 feet, but was unable to avoid colliding with the rear of Holdeman’s vehicle.
Holdeman sued Miller and the City of Wakarusa seeking a recovery for property damage and personal injury. The defendants sought summary judgment on the grounds they were immune under the Indiana Tort Claims Act, which provides in pertinent part: “A governmental entity or an employee acting within the scope of his employment is not liable if a loss results from: the ... enforcement of or failure to ... enforce a law (including rules and regulations), unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest or false imprison-ment_” Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3(7).
The trial court denied summary judgment, but granted defendant’s request for an interlocutory appeal. The majority of the Court of Appeals affirmed the denial of summary judgment on the grounds that Miller’s conduct had been the type of “outrageous” or “wilful and wanton” law enforcement behavior which was not immune under Section 3(7) pursuant to Seymour Nat’l. Bank v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1223, mod. on reh’g. 428 N.E.2d 203, 204.
In view of our recent reinterpretation of Section 3(7) in Tittle v. Mahan (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 796, we now grant transfer. In Tittle, we specifically rejected the notion that the immunity provided by Section 3(7) is co-extensive with the statutory obligations placed on law enforcement officials, such as the ones imposed on Miller pursuant to Ind.Code Ann. § 36-8-3-10 (West 1983). We also rejected the dicta in Seymour to the extent it suggested otherwise. We held that activity included within the term “enforcement of a law” was limited to activity attendant to effecting the arrest of those who may have broken the law, and was not as broad as a law enforcement officer’s employment obligations or requirements made on him by statute. Thus, unless the injuries for which a plaintiff seeks recovery arose out of the actual attempts to effect an arrest of one who may have broken the law, there is no immunity to be found in Section 3(7). The dissent relies on the so-called “legislative history” of the Tort Claims Act as indicia of the legislature’s intent to include activities like Miller’s within the class of activities immunized by Section 3(7). Our reading of those earlier versions does not make the legislature’s intention any more or less *804apparent in the instant case. We are constrained to interpret and apply a statute as it was enacted by the legislature without speculating about what might have been the intent of proposed versions of a statute which did not become law.
Absent immunity, the controlling question becomes whether defendants owed plaintiff a private duty for the breach of which the law permits a recovery. It is undisputed that a person operating a motor vehicle on a public roadway has a duty to operate such vehicle with reasonable care. A question of fact exists as to whether or not the defendant, Miller, exercised such care under the circumstances of this ease. Summary judgment, therefore, was not appropriate and the trial court correctly denied the defendants’ motion requesting summary judgment.
Accordingly, we grant transfer, vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, and remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings.
DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., concurs in result.
SHEPARD, C.J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9741523 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:17.388018+00 ===

SHEPARD, Chief Justice,
dissenting.
While I have concurred in result in today’s cases concerning immunity for jail operations, I dissent in this case because I think it is fairly plain that a police officer patrolling the highways in search of unlawfully licensed recreational vehicles is “enforcing a law” and thus immune under the Indiana Tort Claims Act.
The legislative history of the Act suggests that officer Miller and the City of Wakarusa were entitled to immunity under Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3(7). The earliest version of the ITCA would have established a system whereby the State reinstituted the doctrine of sovereign immunity after Campbell v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 55, 284 N.E.2d 733, and waived immunity only in specific instances. See Judicial Study Commission minutes (September 7, 1972); 1973 Ind. Senate J. 203-10 (Committee Report, Senate Bill 130, February 13, 1973).
The early version of the ITCA, ultimately not passed into law, dictated that
[ijmmunity of all governmental entities from suit is waived for any injury resulting from the negligent operation or use of any motor vehicle or other motorized equipment by any employee while in the scope of his employment. This section shall not apply to the operation of an emergency vehicle as defined by law while being operated or used in response to an emergency call or an emergency situation.
1973 Ind. Senate J. at 205. This provision suggests that originally the legislature considered waiving immunity for accidents, like the one at bar, not occurring in an emergency situation. But see Note, Seymour National Bank v. State Interprets the Indiana Tort Claims Act: Can the Enforcers Do No Wrong?, 16 Ind.L.Rev. 705, 711-12 (1983) (suggesting that even this earliest version of ITCA would have protected emergency vehicles in non-emergency actions). That the legislature instead chose to reinstate general immunity for “the adoption and enforcement of or failure to adopt or enforce a law (including rules' and regulations), unless the act of enforcement constitutes false arrest or false imprisonment,” Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3(7), suggests that the General Assembly did not wish to waive immunity in cases like the one before us.

=== CASE 9741527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:18.381388+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice.
A jury trial resulted in the conviction of appellant of Burglary, a Class A felony, for which he was sentenced to twenty (20) years imprisonment.
The facts are: Biff Brent Hornaday was an assistant band director at Pike High School in Indianapolis, Indiana. On Sunday, May 3, 1987, he drove to the school to prepare for a noon meeting with some colleagues from out of town to discuss judging marching band competitions. While walking down the hallway near the industrial arts area of the school building, Hor-*367naday noticed light coming from an open classroom door. Stopping to say hello to the instructor he expected to find there, Hornaday instead saw appellant sitting on a table.
When Hornaday asked “What are you doing here?” appellant replied, “Don’t move, don’t move,” and, reaching behind him, produced a pistol, aimed it at Horna-day and repeatedly pulled the trigger. The handgun misfired, however, and Hornaday assured appellant, “I don’t know who you are, these doors are open, why don’t you leave.” Backing out of the classroom, Hor-naday started to trot down the hallway when appellant jumped out of the doorway, yelled “hey” and fired a shot at Hornaday’s face, penetrating his chin. Hornaday was stunned but soon recovered and continued running down the corridor. Appellant caught up with him and endeavored to hit him with a claw hammer. After a brief struggle, appellant demanded that Horna-day lie down. To placate his assailant, Hornaday complied and was rendered unconscious by a hammer blow to the back of his head. Upon regaining consciousness, Hornaday made his way over to a telephone booth located near the entrance to the school cafeteria and called 911. After authorities arrived, Hornaday was transported by ambulance to St. Vincent Hospital where he was admitted for treatment of the gunshot wound to his face as well as the depression wounds and lacerations to his head from the hammer’s head and claw.
Police investigators discovered several rooms in the school had been ransacked, and an old metal safe had been moved from an administrative office to the shop where Hornaday had initially encountered appellant. Holes had been drilled into the safe and the dial had been damaged. Five days after the incident, Hornaday assisted detectives in developing a composite picture of the perpetrator, which was presented to Pike High School officials who were able to generate a list of past and present students who fit the profile to some degree. From the list, detectives conducted interviews of twelve juveniles, including appellant, who waived his rights, gave an exculpatory statement, and was fingerprinted. Latent fingerprints found on the safe turned out to match appellant’s, and the instant prosecution ensued.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in granting the State’s motion to waive him from juvenile court to stand trial as an adult. He argues he was denied due process of law because the court’s order waiving jurisdiction was not sufficiently specific to comply with the provisions of Ind.Code § 31-6-2-4(e), which permits waiver to adult criminal court jurisdiction once a showing is made that the child is charged with the equivalent of a Class A or B felony, that probable cause exists to believe the child committed the act charged, and the child was at least sixteen years of age when the charged act was committed, “unless it would be in the best interests of the child and of the safety and welfare of the community for the child to remain within the juvenile justice system.”
Appellant cites authority, including Kent v. United States (1966), 383 U.S. 541, 86 S.Ct. 1045, 16 L.Ed.2d 84 and Gerrick v. State (1983), Ind., 451 N.E.2d 327, for the propositions that due process requires a statement of reasons, including relevant facts, underlying a waiver from juvenile jurisdiction and that such statement must not merely recite statutory language. According to Clemons v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 50, 317 N.E.2d 859, cert. denied, 423 U.S. 859, 96 S.Ct. 113, 46 L.Ed.2d 86, in making the waiver determination, the juvenile court must necessarily consider the nature of the offense, whether it is part of a repetitive pattern, whether the child is beyond juvenile justice rehabilitation, and whether waiver is,necessary to protect the public security. The Clemons court went on to hold that specifying these considerations in the record would permit meaningful review so as to keep the standard away from the verge of unconstitutional vagueness.
As the State points out, however, a juvenile court’s decision to waive jurisdiction is reviewed only for an abuse of discretion, citing Trotter v. State (1981), Ind., 429 N.E.2d 637. We noted in that case that the *368Supreme Court’s opinion in Kent, supra was an interpretation of the District of Columbia juvenile code and thus not of constitutional dimension. And in Trotter, as in the present case, the court’s statement reflected its inability to find it would be in the best interests of the child and of the safety and welfare of the community for the child to remain in the juvenile system, without reciting specific facts in support.
Here, however, as in Trotter, the record reflects sufficient facts for the court to determine waiver was appropriate; as we noted in Gerrick, supra, such supporting facts must appear either in the order or in the record of the waiver hearing. The court here had before it the viciousness of appellant’s attack, the lack of any justification for it, the seriousness of its results, and the relatively mature age, 17, of the juvenile involved. These facts are ample to support a finding that it would not be in the best interests of the community to retain appellant in the juvenile system.
The trial court did not err in ordering appellant waived into criminal court.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress and in admitting, over his timely objection, evidence pertaining to his fingerprints and palmprints. He argues his prints were taken in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights to be free from unreasonable search and seizure in that his consent to be fingerprinted was vitiated by the investigating officer’s assertion that in any event, a warrant would be issued allowing him to take the prints.
Appellant cites Ind.Code § 31-6-8-1.5(c) which states that a juvenile’s fingerprints may be taken if the officer has probable cause to believe that latent prints found during an investigation belong to that juvenile. He also cites federal authority to the effect that probable cause must precede non-consensual fingerprinting, e.g., Hayes v. Florida (1985), 470 U.S. 811, 105 S.Ct. 1643, 84 L.Ed.2d 705. Noting the absence of proof in the court below of probable cause to arrest appellant prior to the comparison of fingerprints, he accordingly concludes the absence of both consent and probable cause renders the fingerprint evidence inadmissible.
Appellant further notes the trial court, in ruling on the motion to suppress, expressed concern that the officer had told appellant and his parents that he “could go get a court order” if they failed to consent, yet went on to deny the motion, finding “we don’t feel that the defendants have made the sufficient case, at this particular time.” Appellant maintains this reflects trial court error in allocating to him the burden of proof regarding consent, which properly rests entirely with the State. See Gregory v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 585. In context, however, it appears the court was referring to appellant’s burden to support his motion to dismiss rather than any burden to prove involuntariness of his consent. This interpretation is rein-' forced by the lack of any contemporaneous objection to the trial court’s remark, which also means this allegation of error has been waived. Wood v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 1094.
Both appellant and the State acknowledge that whether an advisement that a search warrant will be obtained, as opposed to sought, constitutes coercion so as to vitiate subsequent consent to a search, is a question of first impression in Indiana. The State notes the split of federal authority on this point and suggests this Court should resolve any such question of volun-tariness as a question of fact to be determined by the trial court, reviewable only by examining the evidence most favorable to the trial court’s decision together with any uncontradicted adverse evidence, citing Maynard v. State (1987), Ind.App., 508 N.E.2d 1346.
Appellant, however, asserts it clearly is the majority position that such an advisement renders choice illusory and consent involuntary where a warrant in fact could not lawfully issue, citing, e.g., United States v. Anderson (E.D.N.Y.1990), 752 F.Supp. 565; United States v. Cruz (S.D.N.Y.1988), 701 F.Supp. 440.
*369Detective Beasley informed appellant and his parents “that eventually I would have to probably get a search warrant for his fingerprints some way, someplace down the road, if [they] objected, which would be fine with me, one way or the other, but it would save me a lot of paperwork.” Appellant’s mother testified Detective Beasley, when he initially requested her by telephone to bring appellant to the police station to be interviewed, told her that “I can get his fingerprints if you don't cooperate. I can get his fingerprints,” and that subsequently at the station, when she asked Detective Beasley how many parents of the children he had sought to fingerprint had cooperated, “he said most of them did, but it didn’t make any difference anyway, he could get a court order.” She testified that following this advisement, she, her husband, and appellant discussed whether to waive his rights and sign the permission to search form for appellant’s fingerprints, and reasoning if they refused the officer would only get a court order. Feeling they had no choice but to sign the consent form, they did so.
The question of voluntariness is a matter of trial court discretion; on review, this Court will not reweigh the evidence, and if it is conflicting, we will consider only that evidence which supports the trial court’s ruling. Jones v. State (1989), Ind., 536 N.E.2d 267. This same standard applies to review of the reasonableness of search and seizure. Holt v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 1324, cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1031, 107 S.Ct. 1960, 95 L.Ed.2d 532. Focusing on the officer’s testimony in the case at bar, there was evidence to enable the trial court to find appellant’s consent to be fingerprinted was voluntary and valid. Having found Detective Beasley’s advisement regarding a warrant to obtain fingerprints to be that one would be sought, rather than routinely obtained, it thus is of no moment that no probable cause existed at the time of the advisement to support issuing such a warrant.
The admission of evidence relating to appellant’s fingerprints was not error.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in entering judgment on his conviction of burglary as a Class A felony, arguing the evidence was insufficient to support the Class A enhancement factor of having resulted in serious bodily injury. Appellant notes he initially was charged in a three-count information with attempted murder and with criminal confinement as a Class A felony, along with the burglary count. Noting in addition that the two strongest items of proof against him were his palm-print found on the school safe and Homa-day’s eyewitness identification of him as the perpetrator, he reasons the jury’s acquittal on the attempted murder and confinement charges, each of which incorporated a serious bodily injury element, means they did not believe the victim’s identification testimony and found appellant was guilty of only the burglary.
He cites Townsend v. State (1986), Ind., 498 N.E.2d 1198 for the proposition that this Court will look at findings and verdicts to determine if they are inconsistent, and argues that his Class A burglary conviction in this case is fatally inconsistent with his acquittals of attempted murder and Class A criminal confinement.
Nevertheless, as the State points out, Townsend holds that “perfect logical consistency should not be demanded, and only extremely contradictory and irreconcilable verdicts warrant corrective action by this Court.” Id. at 1200. Here, the jury might have based its acquittal upon the absence of proof of any of the elements of the charges not resulting in convictions — most notably, specific intent — and not merely the element of serious bodily injury. It is for this reason, too, that we need not presume the jury found Hornaday’s identification of appellant as his assailant incredible and concluded that while appellant left his palmprint on the safe, the assault on Hor-naday was perpetrated by someone else. We remain unconvinced by appellant’s reasoning and find no fatal inconsistency in the verdicts.
It was not error to enter judgment on appellant’s conviction of burglary as a Class A felony.
*370Appellant contends the trial court erred in incorrectly instructing the jury as to the elements of the offense of burglary as a Class A felony. While reading its preliminary instructions, the trial court stated, “If the State does prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the burglary resulted in serious bodily injury to the other person, you should find the defendant guilty of Burglary, a Class A Felony.” Appellant objected at trial and now maintains that this statement allowed a reasonable juror to conclude that appellant could be convicted of burglary even if he did not actually commit the burglary, so long as a person was injured.
We disagree. As the trial court noted in overruling appellant’s objection,' jury instructions are to be considered as a whole and in reference to each other. Jennings v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 836. Error in a particular instruction will not require reversal unless the entire charge misleads the jury as to the law in the case. Id. A few lines before the contested portion of the instruction at hand, it states that “[t]o convict the defendant, the State must prove each of the following elements: The defendant, Bobby Del Daniels, Jr., (1) did break and enter; (2) the building and structure of Pike High School ...; (3) with the intent to commit the felony of Theft therein....” The record leaves no doubt that the jury was properly instructed that appellant must have committed the burglary in order to be convicted therefor. We see no error here.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in instructing the jury on the “breaking” element of burglary. Final Instruction No. 15 reads as follows: “In order to constitute a ‘breaking,’ it is not necessary to show forcible entry. It is necessary only to show that some physical act was used to gain entry.” Appellant argues this instruction is erroneous “because it indicates that the physical act of walking through an open door is sufficient to constitute the element of ‘breaking.’ ”
Again, we disagree. The instruction set out here, which appears to have been taken word for word from the standard enunciated in McCormick v. State (1978), 178 Ind.App. 206, 382 N.E.2d 172, merely employed different words to state that even the slightest force, when used to accomplish some movement of a structural impediment, is all that is necessary to constitute the element of “breaking.” See, e.g., Trice v. State (1986), Ind., 490 N.E.2d 757; Strode v. State (1985), Ind.App., 486 N.E.2d 642. It was not error to give the jury Final Instruction No. 15.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting over his hearsay objection Detective Beasley’s testimony regarding results of tests run on hair samples taken from a shirt belonging to Steve Hall, an acquaintance of appellant. Hall and appellant had been playing basketball at Pike High School the night before the crime, and because Hall’s appearance and yellow golf shirt fit Hornaday’s description of his assailant, a search warrant was obtained and police recovered the shirt. On cross-examination of Detective Beasley, appellant elicited that one of the hairs found on the shirt belonging to Hall, who is black, was of Caucasian origin.
During the State’s redirect examination of Detective Beasley, he was allowed to state, over appellant’s hearsay objection, that lab testing revealed the hairs found on Hall’s shirt “were not Biff Hornaday’s.” Appellant maintains this unequivocal statement was improperly admitted under the rule of Patterson v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 55, 324 N.E.2d 482 because the declarant had not yet testified, citing Lewis v. State (1982), Ind., 440 N.E.2d 1125, cert. denied, 461 U.S. 915, 103 S.Ct. 1895, 77 L.Ed.2d 284, and because he was prejudiced by thus having to call as a witness the declarant, John Mann, who performed the hair comparison testing and testified he could not state positively that the hairs found on Hall’s shirt were not Hornaday’s, but that their microscopic characteristics did not match.
We are unable to follow appellant’s reasoning to its conclusion of reversible error. In the first place, it seems that any hearsay violation, along with any accrued error, would be cured by appellant’s *371opportunity to cross-examine Mann, which in fact he did. In the second place, it was appellant who opened the door to hair comparison results, entitling the State to introduce the rest of the results by that witness. See Ryans v. State (1988), Ind.App., 518 N.E.2d 494. .
The admission of Detective Beasley’s testimony regarding hair sample comparison results was not reversible error.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in improperly excusing prospective juror Farrell for cause upon its own motion. After Ms. Farrell, who had visited a young friend who was incarcerated in a penal institution, expressed misgivings about her ability to have anyone “locked up,” the trial court sought her assurances that she still would be able to decide guilt or innocence impartially. Her response was, “to be honest with you, I really don’t know if I could say he’s guilty, and I know in the back of my mind that he may be locked up. I don’t know.”
.Appellant maintains such a reason is not among those listed in the statute, Ind.Code § 35-37-1-5, as grounds for a challenge for cause. He also argues that juror Farrell’s opinions were not so strong and unyielding as to merit excusing her from the panel. The trial court is afforded discretion in excusing prospective jurors for cause, Martin v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 493; on review, an abuse of that discretion resulting in prejudice must be demonstrated. Id.; Johnson v. State (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1065. Thus while Ms. Farrell’s opinions perhaps were not so unyielding as those found unacceptable in Campbell v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 843, the same degree of juror prejudice shown there on review need not be demonstrated before the trial court to justify her removal.
No error has been shown in the trial court’s excusal of prospective juror Farrell.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting evidence of Hornaday’s identification of him as the perpetrator, which, he argues, was tainted by unduly suggestive pretrial identification procedures. He points outthat Hornaday, when first questioned, stated that his assailant was not a Pike student, then saw him depicted on television as a suspect in the crime and described as a Pike High School student prior to picking him out of a photographic lineup; that he previously had participated in rendering a composite drawing of the suspect which deviated from appellant’s own appearance; and then, after initially estimating he was 95 percent sure that appellant was the perpetrator, he revised his estimate upward to 100 percent and then to 150 percent as time went on.
A determination as to improper suggestiveness of pretrial identification procedures is made by consideration of the totality of the circumstances. Alexander v. State (1983), Ind., 449 N.E.2d 1068. Appellant argues that although Hornaday was shown two six-picture arrays, of which only one included his photograph, the procedure was impermissibly suggestive because the witness had seen. him depicted on television, had heard he was a Pike student, and likely recognized him from school. However, nothing suggestive accompanied the photograph identification array; there is no evidence of verbal communication nor of graphic characteristics emphasizing or distinguishing appellant’s photograph so as to render the procedure unduly suggestive. See Lane v. State (1983), Ind., 445 N.E.2d 965.
It also is notable that of the two occasions appellant was depicted on television, on one his face was not shown and the other used a yearbook photo. Moreover, any resultant suggestion implanted in the witness’s mind, Norris v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 508, 356 N.E.2d 204, as well as discrepancies between appellant’s appearance and the composite, and between the televised depiction and Hornaday’s recollection, go only to the weight of his identification testimony rather than to its admissibility. Lane, supra.
Admission of evidence of Hornaday’s pretrial and in-court identification of appellant was not error.
*372Appellant contends the trial court erred in allowing Detective Beasley to testify, over his objection, as to the law regarding permissible interrogation of juvenile suspects. On redirect examination by the State, the witness was asked to explain why he never had interviewed appellant’s acquaintance, Steve Hall, but instead had spoken only to adult family members (including a police detective uncle). Detective Beasley went on to explain that parental permission, validated by a preceding advisement as to Miranda rights, is required before interviewing a juvenile absent probable cause, and that such consent was not forthcoming from Steve Hall’s parents.
Appellant contends allowing this testimony was error because the witness was not qualified as an expert in the area of juvenile rights law, and in Indiana, questions of law are not properly the subject of witness opinion, citing Brown v. State (1983), Ind., 448 N.E.2d 10. A trial court will be reversed on the admission of opinion evidence only for an abuse of discretion. Hedrick v. State (1982), Ind., 430 N.E.2d 1150. Because appellant has shown no prejudice whatsoever from the detective’s “expert” testimony, any error here would be harmless.
Moreover, as the State points out, appellant on cross-examination had elicited from the witness the fact that he had not interviewed Hall, thus opening the door on redirect to an explanation of the reason therefor. When the trial court overruled appellant’s objection, citing this opened door as its basis, defense counsel replied, “I agree,” thus in effect withdrawing his objection and leaving nothing for our review. We find no reversible error in the admission of Detective Beasley’s explanation.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in allowing the State to exercise its peremptory challenges improperly to excuse two veniremen on racial grounds. During jury selection, the prosecutor used peremptory strikes to excuse prospective jurors Blain and Watson who, like appellant, are black. Appellant objected, alleging a denial of equal protection under Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 106 S.Ct. 1712, 90 L.Ed.2d 69.
Appellant maintains the State’s reasons given at trial did not suffice to demonstrate a race-neutral basis for striking prospective jurors Blain and Watson. The prosecutor explained she struck Blain because appellant looked familiar to her and she “was trying to figure out where I know him from.” This explanation is undeniably race-neutral and, while perhaps not quite grounds for a challenge for cause, the prosecutor’s desire to avoid the risk that Blain might, at some point during the trial, remember from where she knew appellant, is a sufficient non-pretextual basis to support a peremptory challenge. The State’s asserted reason need not rise to the level of justification required of a challenge for cause. Batson, supra.
Regarding prospective juror Watson, the prosecution stated she struck him because he said he was a social worker and was acquainted with members of appellant’s family who were seated in the courtroom. While appellant argues it is irrelevant, we can see why the State might project onto a social worker a predisposition to be pro-defense. Appellant also sees Watson’s acquaintance with his family members as no reason for the State to strike him, in view of their failure to strike prospective juror Lollar, who had stated she frequented the restaurant owned by the victim's parents. Again, it seems natural that the prosecution would be more concerned over a juror’s acquaintance with the defendant’s family than with the victim’s. We find the State’s asserted reasons were sufficient to rebut appellant’s prima facie Batson claim.
No error resulted from the State’s use of its peremptory challenges.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in instructing the jury as to their proper function in a criminal trial. He argues that telling the jury over his objection that they “must determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant” and that their “sole responsibility is to determine innocence or guilt herein” deprived him of due *373process of law by denying him his presumption of innocence and relieving the State of its burden of proof by shifting it to him. Standing alone, his argument that the quoted instructions might lead a reasonable juror to conclude that if appellant were not proven innocent, he must then be found guilty, has some intuitive appeal.
Instructions, however, are never construed standing alone; they are to be read together and considered as a whole. Jennings, supra. The jury in the case at bar also was instructed as follows:
“Under the law of this state, you are the sole judges of both the law and the evidence, and you must presume that the defendant is innocent. You must continue to believe he is innocent throughout the trial, unless the State proves that the defendant is guilty, beyond a reasonable doubt, of every essential element of the offense charged. The burden of proof herein is on the State alone, and never shifts to the defendant. Since the defendant is presumed to be innocent, he is not required to present any evidence to prove his innocence, nor to prove, do or explain anything. If at the conclusion of the trial there remains in your mind a reasonable doubt concerning the defendant’s guilt, you must find him not guilty.”
We find little danger that a reasonable juror, after hearing the foregoing, would be led astray by the earlier references to appellant’s “innocence.” It further is worth noting that virtually the same instruction was held not to invade the jury’s province in Abercrombie v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 1236. While, as appellant points out, this semantically is not the same due process complaint as lodged here, its import is identical.
There was no reversible error in instructing the jury that they were to decide appellant’s guilt or innocence.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and KRAHULIK, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:18.386446+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting:
I respectfully dissent. In particular I cannot agree that it was not error to instruct the jury that its duty is to determine the “guilt or innocence” of the defendant. The entire instruction containing this command reads as follows:
You must determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant, and if you have a reasonable doubt as to guilt of the crime charged, or any offense included thereunder, then you must find the defendant not guilty.
However, if you find that the state has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the material allegations of the charge against the defendant, or any offense included thereunder, then you must find the defendant guilty. Proper verdict forms will be furnished for your use: Furthermore your sole responsibility is to determine innocence or guilt herein, and should there be a finding of guilty, sentencing responsibility is that of the trial judge alone.
In Taylor v. State (1981), Ind., 420 N.E.2d 1231, this Court concluded that in a trial on habitual offender allegations the wording of a court’s instruction which called for a finding of “innocence or guilt” was improper, but such wording did not constitute fundamental error requiring reversal in absence of an objection to such instruction at trial. The majority opinion interprets the case of Abercrombie v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 1236, as holding that Taylor had approved such instruction, whereas the loose language in that opinion is correctly interpreted to mean that Taylor upheld the instruction over a claim that it was “fundamental error,” thus again refusing as in Taylor to judge in the absence of an objection at trial whether the instruction was simple error. Here, defense counsel made proper and timely objections to the instruction that the trial judge fully considered and rejected.
At the present time, an Indiana jury in a criminal case has no duty to determine the innocence of the accused, and it is improper to so instruct a jury. Taylor, 420 N.E.2d 1231. State v. Brouillette, 286 N.W.2d 702 *374(Minn.1979). Such improper instructions are diametrically opposed to the instruction that the jury must presume innocence until they are persuaded of guilt.
Here, the instruction, unlike the instructions considered in Taylor and Abercrom-bie employs the improper language not once but twice. The jury was first instructed that they “must determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant” and then against that they were instructed that their “sole responsibility is to determine innocence or guilt herein.” This instruction appears toward the end of all instructions and may therefore have been deemed to be in further explanation of that which was included in all prior instructions. For these reasons, the impropriety in it is even more forcefully presented. I would hold that this instruction was error because a reasonable juror could have interpreted it as modifying the previous instruction on presumption of innocence by calling for the jury to abandon that presumption in arriving at its conclusion, and to instead compare the relative merits of inferences of guilt and innocence arising from the evidence at trial. See Cage v. Louisiana, — U.S. -, 111 S.Ct. 328, 112 L.Ed.2d 339 (1990).
Erroneous instructions, do not mandate reversal. Here, however, the major body of evidence of appellant’s guilt is not without weakness. The victim of this brutal attack was seriously injured about the head, in intensive care for two days, and consequently would have had some difficulty in recalling his attacker. Appellant’s fingerprints were taken from a safe that had been moved from a secretary’s office within the school, an item to which appellant, as a student in that school, may have had previous access. I cannot say that the giving of this erroneous instruction was harmless error. I would therefore reverse for a new trial.
DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741529 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:18.955179+00 ===

Zahra, J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court’s order granting summary disposition for defendant pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(4) (lack of subject-matter jurisdiction) and dismissing plaintiff’s third-party no-fault claim. We affirm.
The essential facts are not in dispute. In the early morning of September 22, 1995, the parties were driving separate vehicles when they were involved in a collision in the parking lot of a Ford Motor Company plant. Plaintiff and defendant were employees of *308Ford, both having finished their shifts at the plant just before the collision. Plaintiff brought suit, alleging defendant’s negligence in operating his vehicle caused her serious impairment of body function. See MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1).1 Defendant brought his first motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), arguing any injury is compensable only under the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca), MCL 418.101 et seq.; MSA 17.237(101) et seq., because the parties were employees present on their employer’s premises when the collision occurred. As such, defendant argued, plaintiff’s suit is barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca, MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131). Plaintiff argued, in response, that defendant had failed to assert the affirmative defense of “immunity granted by law” under MCR 2.111(F)(3)(a) or (b) in his first responsive pleading and, thus, pursuant to MCR 2.111(F)(2), waived any defense based on the exclusive remedy provision of the WDCA. The trial court initially agreed that defendant’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision constituted an affirmative defense and ruled that defendant waived the defense when he failed to raise it in his answer to plaintiff’s complaint or through amendment. The trial court also denied defendant’s request to amend his answer to include a wdca defense given the late stage of the proceedings. Thereafter, defendant brought a motion for reconsideration and a second motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(G)(4), arguing the trial court *309lacks subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiffs claim. Defendant asserted that the suit should be characterized as a workplace injury claim that falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation. Plaintiff argued, in response, that the case involves a personal injury claim arising from an automobile accident over which the trial court has subject-matter jurisdiction. The trial court reversed its prior ruling and granted summary disposition for defendant, ruling that the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation has exclusive subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiff’s claim.
On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in concluding that the exclusive remedy provision of the WDCA, when asserted as a defense to a third-party no-fault claim brought in the circuit court, constitutes a challenge to the court’s subject-matter jurisdiction over the claim. Plaintiff claims that defendant’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision is more properly characterized as a waivable affirmative defense based on immunity granted by law. We review a trial court’s decision on a motion for summary disposition based on MCR 2.116(C)(4) de novo to determine if the moving party was entitled to judgment as a matter of law, or if affidavits or other proofs demonstrate there is an issue of material fact. MCR 2.116(I)(1); Herbolsheimer v SMS Holding Co, Inc, 239 Mich App 236, 240; 608 NW2d 487 (2000). Further, whether a trial court had subject-matter jurisdiction over a claim is a question of law that is reviewed de novo. Specht v Citizens Ins Co of America, 234 Mich App 292, 294; 593 NW2d 670 (1999).
The exclusive remedy provision of the wdca includes, in pertinent part:
*310(1) The right to the recovery of benefits as provided in this act shall be the employee’s exclusive remedy against the employer for a personal injury or occupational disease. The only exception to this exclusive remedy is an intentional tort. [MCL 418.131(1); MSA 17.237(131)(1).]
The underlying rationale for limiting an employee’s remedies is as follows:
Under the wdca, employers provide compensation to employees for injuries suffered in the course of employment, regardless of fault. “In return for this almost automatic liability, employees are limited in the amount of compensation they may collect from their employer, and, except in limited circumstances, may not bring a tort action against the employer.” [Herbolsheimer, supra at 240 (citations omitted).]
The exclusive remedy provision limits an employee’s recovery when the employee “receives a personal injury arising out of and in the course of employment by an employer who is subject to this act at the time of the injury.” MCL 418.301(1); MSA 17.237(301)(1).2 It is well settled that the exclusive remedy provision applies when an employee is injured by the negligent acts of his employer or by the negligent acts of a coemployee. Berger v Mead, 127 Mich App 209, 213-214; 338 NW2d 919 (1983), citing Holody v Detroit, 117 Mich App 76, 80-82; 323 NW2d 599 (1982), and Dixon v Sype, 92 Mich App 144, 148; 284 NW2d 514 (1979); see Farrell v Dearborn Mfg Co, 416 Mich 267, 275-278; 330 NW2d 397 (1982).
*311In the present case, plaintiff contends defendant waived the defense that plaintiffs automobile negligence claim is barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca because he failed to raise it as an affirmative defense. MCR 2.111(F) provides, in part:
(F) Defenses; Requirement That Defense Be Pleaded.
* * *
(2) Defenses Must Be Pleaded; Exceptions. A party against whom a cause of action has been asserted by complaint, cross-claim, counterclaim, or third-party claim must assert in a responsive pleading the defenses the party has against the claim. A defense not asserted in the responsive pleading or by motion as provided by these rules is waived, except for the defenses of lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter of the action, and failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted.
* * *
(3) Affirmative Defenses. Affirmative defenses must be stated in a party’s responsive pleading, either as originally filed or as amended in accordance with MCR 2.118. Under a separate and distinct heading, a party must state the facts constituting
(a) an affirmative defense, such as contributory negligence; the existence of an agreement to arbitrate; assumption of risk; payment; release; satisfaction; discharge; license; fraud; duress; estoppel; statute of frauds; statute of limitations; immunity granted by law; want or failure of consideration; or that an instrument or transaction is void, voidable, or cannot be recovered on by reason of statute or nondelivery;
(b) a defense that by reason of other affirmative matter seeks to avoid the legal effect of or defeat the claim of the opposing party, in whole or in part;
(c) a ground of defense that, if not raised in the pleading, would be likely to take the adverse party by surprise.
*312A party that fails to raise an affirmative defense as required by MCR 2.111(F) waives the defense. Travelers Ins Co v Detroit Edison Co, 237 Mich App 485, 494-495; 603 NW2d 317 (1999).
Michigan courts have failed to address specifically the issue whether a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca constitutes a challenge to a court’s power to decide a claim in light of the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation exclusive subject-matter jurisdiction over worker’s compensation claims or whether the defense is more properly characterized as a grant of immunity or other type of waivable affirmative defense. We conclude that defendant did not waive any defense based on the exclusive remedy provision when he did not raise it in his responsive pleading. We hold that a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca is a direct challenge to the trial court’s subject-matter jurisdiction, not within the scope of the waiver rule in MCR 2.111(F).
As previously stated, the exclusive remedy provision limits an employee’s right to recover against his employer or a coemployee for a personal injury arising out of the course of his employment to the benefits available under the wdca. MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131), MCL 418.301; MSA 17.237(301). Significantly, MCL 418.841(1); MSA 17.237(841)(1) confers exclusive jurisdiction of claims under the wdca on the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation.3 Because the *313Bureau of Worker’s Compensation is granted exclusive jurisdiction over the only remedy available as a result of the exclusive remedy provision, we hold that a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision as a defense to a claim necessarily constitutes a challenge to the trial court’s subject-matter jurisdiction over the claim. There are numerous opinions that analyze whether a trial court had subject-matter jurisdiction over a claim in light of a defendant’s assertion of a defense based on the exclusive remedy provision. See Adams v Nat’l Bank of Detroit, 444 Mich 329, 370, 383; 508 NW2d 464 (1993) (Brickley, J.); Herbolsheimer, supra; James v Commercial Carriers, Inc, 230 Mich App 533, 536; 583 NW2d 913 (1998); Winters v Dalton, 207 Mich App 76, 78-79; 523 NW2d 636 (1994) ; Schefsky v Evening News Ass’n, 169 Mich App 223, 225-226, 228; 425 NW2d 768 (1988). Indeed, this Court has stated, “We review questions regarding the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(4) to determine whether the circuit court lacked subject-matter jurisdiction because the plaintiff’s claim was barred by the provision.” Herbolsheimer, supra at 240, citing James, supra, and Bitar v Wakim, 211 Mich App 617, 619; 536 NW2d 583 (1995) , rev’d on other grounds 456 Mich 428; 572 NW2d 191 (1998); see Winters, supra.
We are mindful of prior cases that have made reference to the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca as an “affirmative defense” or “immunity.” See Kidder v Miller-Davis Co, 455 Mich 25, 54-55; 564 NW2d 872 (1997) (Kelly, J., dissenting); Benson v Dep’t of Mgt & *314Budget, 168 Mich App 302, 304; 424 NW2d 40 (1988); Berger, supra at 217; Drewes v Grand Valley State Colleges, 106 Mich App 776, 784; 308 NW2d 642 (1981). However, those cases are inapposite to the present issue. Those cases did not squarely determine whether a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca constitutes a challenge to the trial court’s subject-matter jurisdiction over a claim or constitutes an affirmative defense to the claim. We do not find the loose references within those cases to the terms “affirmative defense” and “immunity” controlling of the present issue.
Furthermore, we do not deny that the exclusive remedy provision, by generally barring any recovery other than that which is provided under the WDCA, may be viewed as providing “immunity” from suit. The term “immunity” is generally defined to mean “exception from obligation, service, duty, liability, or prosecution.” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997). A party could elect to assert the provision as an “affirmative defense” in its responsive pleading. An affirmative defense being a defense that does not challenge the factual merits of a plaintiff’s prima facie case, but which otherwise denies relief. Stanke v State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co, 200 Mich App 307, 312; 503 NW2d 758 (1993). Therefore, we recognize that, if timely asserted under MCR 2.111(F), the exclusive remedy provision may serve as a valid affirmative defense to a claim in conjunction with a motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7). However, because a defense based on the exclusive remedy provision most specifically challenges whether a circuit court has the power to resolve a claim, we conclude that the defense is juris*315dictional and need not be asserted in a responsive pleading to avoid waiver. MCR 2.111(F)(2).
In reaching that conclusion, we draw guidance from the interpretation of worker’s compensation laws from other jurisdictions. Most jurisdictions have not squarely addressed the issue. However, the majority of those that have treat a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision as a challenge to a trial court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. In Walters v Modern Aluminum, 699 NE2d 671, 673 (Ind App, 1998), the court held, “to assert the exclusive remedies provision as a defense is to attack the trial court’s subject matter jurisdiction.” See also Wine-Settergren v Lamey, 716 NE2d 381, 385 (Ind, 1999); Wilson v Unistrut Service Co of St Louis, Inc, 858 SW2d 729, 730 (Mo App, 1993); Bonner v Minico, Inc, 159 Ariz 246, 249; 766 P2d 598 (1988); Messner v Briggs & Stratton Corp, 120 Wis 2d 127, 139; 353 NW2d 363 (1984); but see Gordon v NKC Hosps, Inc, 887 SW2d 360, 363 (Ky, 1994); Ammons v Hood, 288 SC 278, 281; 341 SE2d 816 (1986); Turner Constr Co v Hebner, 276 Pa Super 341, 345-348; 419 A2d 488 (1980). Moreover, in Lanpont v Sawas Cab Corp, Inc, 244 AD2d 208, 211; 664 NYS2d 285 (1997), quoting Murray v New York, 43 NY2d 400, 407; 401 NYS2d 773; 372 NE2d 560 (1977), the court held that a defense based on the exclusive remedy provision of the worker’s compensation act is not waived unless a defendant ignores the issue “to the point of final disposition itself.” See also Lunsford v Schaffner, 184 AD2d 625, 625-626; 584 NYS2d 909 (1992); McGowan v Warwick Corp, 691 So 2d 265, 266 (La App, 1997); Total Oilfield Services, Inc v Garcia, 711 SW2d 237, 238 (Tex, 1986).
*316We note that defendant failed to raise his defense based on the exclusive remedy provision of the WDCA until more than IV2 years after the filing of plaintiffs complaint. We consider such an assertion of the defense dilatory under the circumstances. We also note, however, that Michigan has long recognized that actions for injuries incurred as a result of a coemployee’s negligence and arising out of the scope of employment are barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the WDCA. Berger, supra at 213-214; Dixon, supra. Moreover, a defense of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction may be raised at any time. MCR 2.116(D)(3); Winters, supra; see MCR 2.111(F)(2). Subject-matter jurisdiction cannot be granted by implied or express stipulation of the litigants. Winters, supra at 79. Likewise, a defense of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction cannot be waived by a litigant. Id. Consequently, defendant did not waive his defense based on “the exclusive remedy provision when he failed to include it in his answer to plaintiff’s complaint or by way of amendment.
Given our decision that the assertion of the exclusive remedy provision constitutes a defense of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, we turn to the question whether the trial court properly dismissed plaintiff’s claim under the no-fault act, MCL 500.3101 et seq.) MSA 24.13101 et seq., for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. Plaintiff contends that his no-fault claim should be viewed as a personal injury claim, over which the circuit court has jurisdiction.4
*317A trial court is not automatically divested of jurisdiction over a no-fault claim under the exclusive remedy provision by virtue of the fact that a plaintiff was injured during the course of his employment. See Great American Ins Co v Queen, 410 Mich 73, 89-91; 300 NW2d 895 (1980); Mathis v Interstate Motor Freight System, 408 Mich 164, 179, 183; 289 NW2d 708 (1980); Specht, supra at 295. This Court has held that, when an employee is injured in a motor vehicle accident during the course of his employment, entitlement to compensation for injuries is governed by the no-fault act and the wdca. Id. In Specht, supra, this Court recognized that the no-fault act and the WDCA exist independently of one another:
“The Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca) [MCL 418.101 et seq.; MSA 17.237(101) et seq.] and the no-fault insurance act [MCL 500.3101 et seq.; MSA 24.13101 et seq.] are complete and self-contained legislative schemes addressing discrete problems. Neither act refers expressly to the other.” Mathis v Interstate Motor Freight System, 408 Mich 164, 179; 289 NW2d 708 (1980). “The WDCA provides a substitute for common-law tort liability founded upon an employer’s negligence . ...” Id. On the other hand, “[t]he no-fault act provides a substitute for common-law tort liability based upon the ownership or operation of a motor vehicle.” Id. [Specht, supra at 294-295.]
See Herbolsheimer, supra at 240, quoting Mathis, supra at 179, and citing Clark v United Technologies Automotive, Inc, 459 Mich 681, 686; 594 NW2d 447 *318(1999). Mathis consolidated four cases, each of which involved claims for no-fault benefits against employers’ no-fault insurers5 for injuries that arose out of the course of the employees’ employment. Mathis, supra at 176-178. In that case, our Supreme Court held that an employee injured in the course of his employment while occupying a motor vehicle owned by his employer is entitled to collect no-fault benefits from his employer’s no-fault insurer and is not limited to worker’s compensation benefits as his sole remedy. Id. at 183. In Great American, supra, the Supreme Court allowed an employee who was injured by a third party who was not his employer or coemployee to recover no-fault benefits from his employer’s no-fault insurer, with a setoff for worker’s compensation benefits received by the employee. Great American, *319supra at 89-91. Specht involved a plaintiff employee’s suit for no-fault benefits against his own no-fault insurer. Specht, supra at 294.
Significantly however, no case has allowed a plaintiff employee to recover no-fault benefits against a coemployee or an employer not acting as a no-fault self-insurer6 for personal injury suffered during the course of employment. In fact, the Supreme Court qualified its holding in Great American, supra, to exclude such circumstances, stating, “An employee’s common-law right to proceed in tort against persons other than his employer or co-workers was not altered by the worker’s compensation act.” Id. at 89 (emphasis added). The dissent’s reliance on Great American, supra, Mathis, supra, and Specht, supra, is misplaced. There is a clear distinction between cases involving claims against coemployees or an employer, which are expressly barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca, and cases against non-coemployee third parties or insurers. As noted in the dissent, subject-matter jurisdiction is a court’s right to exercise judicial power over a class of cases. See Bowie v Arder, 441 Mich 23, 39; 490 NW2d 568. (1992), quoting Joy v Two-Bit Corp, 287 Mich 244, 253-254; 283 NW 45 (1938). Subject-matter jurisdiction concerns a court’s abstract power to try a case of the kind or character of the one pending and is not dependent on the particular facts of a case. Id. It is fundamental that the classes of cases over which the circuit courts have subject-matter jurisdiction are defined by this state’s constitution and Legislature. *320See MCL 600.605; MSA 27A.605. By enacting the exclusive remedy provision of the WDCA, the Legislature clearly and unambiguously limited an employee’s right to recover against his employer for injury arising out of the course of his employment to the benefits available under the wdca. MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131).7 The Legislature also clearly provided that the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation has exclusive jurisdiction over claims under the wdca. MCL 418.841(1); MSA 17.237(841)(1). Therefore, by legislative mandate, circuit courts do not have power to decide cases involving a plaintiff employee suing a coemployee or his employer for injury arising out of the course of his employment. Our conclusion that a party’s assertion of the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca as a defense to a third-party no-fault claim constitutes a challenge to the circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction is properly based on the legislatively defined class of litigants, not the particular facts of this case.8
*321Plaintiff’s present claim against her coemployee defendant is squarely within the category of claims excluded under the plain language of the WDCA.9 It is undisputed that plaintiff and defendant were both employees of Ford Motor Company and that the colli*322sion giving rise to plaintiffs claim occurred on Ford premises, minutes after the parties finished their shifts. MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301)(3) provides, in part: “An employee going to or from his or her work, while on the premises where the employee’s work is to be performed, and within a reasonable time before and after his or her working hours, is presumed to be in the course of his or her employment.” See Simkins v General Motors Corp (After Remand), 453 Mich 703, 712; 556 NW2d 839 (1996). Given that plaintiff’s alleged injuries were caused by a coemployee and given that there is no issue of fact with respect to whether she suffered the injuries in the course of her employment, the exclusive remedy provision plainly limits plaintiff’s recoveiy to benefits under the wdca. See Ladner v Vander Band, 376 Mich 321, 323-325; 136 NW2d 916 (1965). In the absence of language within the no-fault act or the wdca specifically stating that a no-fault claim is not excluded under the circumstances present in this case, we interpret the Legislature’s plain use of the term “exclusive” in defining the remedy available where an employee is injured in the course of his employment by an employer or coemployee as barring plaintiff’s no-fault claim.
Under the undisputed facts, plaintiff’s claim is barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca. Accordingly, the trial court properly dismissed the claim for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction.10
Affirmed.
Whitbeck, J., concurred.
That section provides: “A person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss caused by his or her ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of body function, or permanent serious disfigurement.”
While we recognize that the wdca is generally viewed as a substitute for common-law tort actions and this case may be distinguished because it involves a statutory cause of action under Michigan’s no-fault laws, we note that the wdca merely refers to personal ir\juries arising out of and in the course of employment, not common-law causes of action.
MCL 418.841(1); MSA 17.237(841)(1) provides:
Any dispute or controversy concerning compensation or other benefits shall be submitted to the bureau and all questions arising under this act shall be determined by the bureau or a worker’s compensation magistrate, as applicable. The director may be an *313interested party in all worker’s compensation cases in questions of law.
Generally, circuit courts have jurisdiction over all civil claims. MCL 600.605; MSA 27A.605 provides:
*317Circuit courts have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil claims and remedies, except where exclusive jurisdiction is given in the constitution or by statute to some other court or where the circuit courts are denied jurisdiction by the constitution or statutes of this state. [See also Const 1963, art 6, § 13.]
It is relevant to note that, although plaintiff Mathis actually brought suit against his employer, the suit was filed against the employer in its capacity as a self-insurer under the no-fault act Mathis, supra at 176, 183. Our Legislature created the category of self-insurers, MCL 257.531; MSA 9.2231, presumably with the foresight that a self-insurer may also be an employer. Mathis makes clear that, in cases where an employer that is also a self-insurer under the no-fault act asserts a defense based on the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca, that party is to be considered an insurer for purposes of analyzing the plaintiff’s claim. In that case, the Court clearly relied on the defendant employer’s status as a self-insurer in reasoning that the plaintiff’s no-fault claim was not barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca. The Court stated that “[a]ny liability to pay no-fault benefits is based on the status of being an insurer under the no-fault act” and concluded: “No conditions of liability under the wdca exist affecting the employer as a self-insurer under the no-fault act. Accordingly, we find no reason to apply the exclusive remedy provisions of the wdca to bar the employee’s cause of action.” Id. at 184; see also Herbolsheimer, supra at 243-246 (discussing the judicially created “dual-persona doctrine” exception to the wdca, which provides the basis for a plaintiff employee to bring a tort suit in addition to a claim for worker’s compensation benefits when “the employer has a second identity which is completely distinct and removed from his status as employer.” Id. at 245, citing Howard v White, 447 Mich 395, 399-400; 523 NW2d 220 [1994], and Wells v Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 421 Mich 641, 653; 364 NW2d 670 [1984]).
See n 5, supra (discussing Mathis, supra, in which the plaintiff sued his employer in the employer’s capacity as a self-insurer under the no-fault act).
As already discussed, it is well settled that the exclusive remedy provision applies equally to recovery against coemployees. Berger, supra.
We note that our holding in this case is perfectly consistent with Great American, supra, Mathis, supra, and Specht, supra, and the subrogation provision of the wdca, MCL 418.827(5); MSA 17.237(827)(5). Great American, Mathis, and Specht did not involve employees suing coemployees or any employer not acting as a self-insurer under the no-fault act, see n 6, supra, and, thus, did not implicate the exclusive remedy provision. Neither plaintiff nor the dissent has cited any case in which a circuit court has been allowed jurisdiction over a no-fault suit between a plaintiff employee and a coemployee or his employer not acting as a self-insurer under the no-fault act, see n 6, supra, on the basis of an injury that arises out of the course of the plaintiff-employee’s employment. Moreover, an injured party’s coemployees and employer are specifically excluded from the definition of the third parties from which a worker’s compensation carrier may seek subrogation. See MCL 418.827(1) and (5); MSA 17.237(827)(1) and (5). Such an exclusion is consistent with the exclusive remedy provision’s bar of suits against those parties.
We recognize the line of cases that hold that a trial court may have jurisdiction over a claim despite the application of the wdca where the employer and employee relationship is “unrelated to the cause of action,” see Jones v General Motors Corp, 136 Mich App 251, 254-255; 355 NW2d 646 (1984) (considering whether the plaintiffs husband’s death was caused by strenuous manual labor in connection with Iris employment and, thus, was subject to the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca), or merely “incidentally involved” in the cause of action, see Specht, supra at 298 (holding the circuit court had jurisdiction to determine whether the defendant insurer was liable to the plaintiff who was injured while driving her own automobile during the course of her employment where the plaintiffs “employment relationship was, at best, only tangentially involved”); Fletcher v Harafajee, 100 Mich App 440, 443; 299 NW2d 53 (1980) (holding that the plaintiff city of Flint police officer who received treatment from city of Flint medical personnel after being injured while on duty could sue the personnel despite the parties’ status as coemployees because the parties’ employment relationship was only incidentally related to the plaintiffs medical malpractice claim); Peoples v Chrysler Corp, 98 Mich App 277, 281-284; 296 NW2d 237 (1980) (holding that the plaintiff employee’s tort action against the defendant employer was barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca because the employee/employer relationship was not entirely unrelated or only incidentally involved in the plaintiffs claim for injuries he suffered while operating the defendant’s machine); Neal v Roura Iron Workers, Inc, 66 Mich App 273, 277-278; 238 NW2d 837 (1975) (holding that the plaintiff employee’s tort action against the defendant employer was barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the wdca because the accident that resulted in the plaintiff’s injuries could not have happened but for his employment with the defendant and, thus, the suit was not entirely unrelated or only incidentally related to the parties’ employee/employer relationship); Panagos v North Detroit General Hosp, 35 Mich App 554, 558-559; 192 NW2d 542 (1971) (holding that the plaintiff hospital employee who suffered an injury to her mouth while eating in the defendant hospital’s cafeteria could bring a common-law negligence claim because the employee/employer relationship was unrelated to the cause of action). Here, we cannot say the parties’ relationship as coemployees is unrelated to plaintiffs cause of action or merely incidentally involved. Plaintiff alleges she suffered injury during the course of her employment as a result of the acts of a coemployee, which places her claim plainly within the purview of the wdca.
Our holding does not bar plaintiff from seeking worker’s compensation benefits from her employer.

=== CASE 9741530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:18.961268+00 ===

*323Smolensk, P.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. ! disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision, when asserted, as a defense to a third-party no-fault claim brought in the circuit court, constitutes a defense challenging the circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. In this specific context, I conclude that the exclusive remedy provision is properly understood as an affirmative defense. Because defendant failed to raise the issue as an affirmative defense in his responsive pleading, the defense has been waived. Accordingly, I would reverse the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of defendant.
i
In this case, we are asked to decide whether the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision should be considered as an affirmative defense or as an attack on the circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction.1 The majority concludes that the exclusive remedy provision automatically divests the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiff’s third-party no-fault claim because the provision grants the Bureau of Worker’s Compensation exclusive jurisdiction over a plaintiff’s claims for personal injuries arising out of and in the course of employment. Yet, it is clear from decisions of our Supreme Court that circuit courts have jurisdiction over a *324plaintiff’s no-fault claims, even when the plaintiff simultaneously pursues a claim for worker’s compensation benefits for injuries arising out of the same motor vehicle accident. Therefore, it cannot logically be said that the exclusive remedy provision always divests the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction in this type of case.
In Mathis v Interstate Motor Freight System, 408 Mich 164, 174-175, 183; 289 NW2d 708 (1980), our Supreme Court held that an employee injured in a motor vehicle accident in the course of his employment is not limited to worker’s compensation benefits as his sole remedy, but may also collect no-fault insurance benefits. The Court rejected the defendants’ argument that the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision barred the plaintiffs from pursuing actions for damages under the no-fault act, because “ [t]he Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca) and the no-fault insurance act are complete and self-contained legislative schemes addressing discrete problems.” Id. at 179. Following Mathis, our Supreme Court decided Great American Ins Co v Queen, 410 Mich 73, 86; 300 NW2d 895 (1980), which likewise held that a plaintiff injured in a motor vehicle accident in the course of his employment may, in certain circumstances, bring both a personal injury claim in the circuit court and a claim for worker’s compensation benefits under the wdca:
When an employee is injured in a motor vehicle accident in the course of his employment, his entitlement to compensation for his injuries, from all sources, is governed by the worker’s compensation act and the no-fault act. His rights and entitlements under each act are affected by his *325being injured under circumstances which make him subject to the provisions of the other. [Emphasis in original.]
Logically, the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision can only divest the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over a plaintiff’s claim if the provision uniformly does so in all cases of the same nature. If the provision merely defeats a plaintiff’s claim in particular factual circumstances, then it should be viewed as an affirmative defense, rather than a defense attacking the circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. Our Supreme Court has defined subject-matter jurisdiction as
“the right of the court to exercise judicial power over that class of cases; not the particular case before it, but rather the abstract power to try a case of the kind or character of the one pending; and not whether the particular case is one that presents a cause of action, or under the particular facts is triable before the court in which it is pending, because of some inherent facts which exist and may be developed during the trial.” [Bowie v Arder, 441 Mich 23, 39; 490 NW2d 568 (1992), quoting Joy v Two-Bit Corp, 287 Mich 244, 253-254; 283 NW 45 (1938).]
See also Campbell v St John Hosp, 434 Mich 608, 613-614; 455 NW2d 695 (1990).
Admittedly, if the exclusive remedy provision had been properly raised as a defense in this case, it would bar plaintiff’s claim because defendant was plaintiff’s coemployee at the time of the accident. “An action against a coemployee for personal injuries is barred if both employees were acting in the course of their employment at the time the injury occurred.” Schwartz v Golden, 126 Mich App 790, 793; 338 NW2d 218 (1983). However, characterization of the exclusive remedy provision as an affirmative defense or as *326a jurisdictional matter cannot depend on the facts of any one particular case. The proper inquiry is whether the circuit court has the abstract power to entertain third-party no-fault claims brought by a plaintiff injured in a motor vehicle accident in the course of his employment. Given the decisions in Mathis and Great American, which provide that a plaintiff may simultaneously bring both a circuit court action for damages under the no-fault act and a claim for worker’s compensation benefits, the exclusive remedy provision does not divest the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over these types of claims.2
Additionally, a published opinion of this Court recently rejected the argument that the exclusive remedy provision deprives the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over personal injury claims brought under the no-fault act. Specht v Citizens Ins Co of America, 234 Mich App 292; 593 NW2d 670 (1999). In Specht, the plaintiff suffered injuries while driving her personal automobile in the course of her employment. In addition to filing a worker’s compensation claim, the plaintiff also filed a lawsuit in the circuit court against her no-fault insurer. The defendant’s sole argument on appeal was that the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to decide the plaintiff’s tort claim. This Court rejected that argument, holding that *327the plaintiff’s no-fault claim “was clearly an issue over which the circuit court had jurisdiction.” Id. at 298. Under MCR 7.215(H)(1), we are bound to follow the rule established in Specht and should therefore reject the instant defendant’s argument that the circuit court lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiff’s no-fault claim.
The majority attempts to distinguish Mathis, Great American, and Specht from the instant case on the basis of the type of defendant named in those suits. The majority argues that those cases are inapposite because they involved defendants other than the plaintiff’s employer or a coemployee. I respectfully disagree. It is true that none of the cited cases involved a defendant who was also the plaintiff’s coemployee.3 However, I disagree that the identity of the defendant sued determines whether the circuit court has subject-matter jurisdiction over the plaintiff’s claim. In my opinion, the majority’s focus on the “class of litigants” involved in this case, i.e., the fact that plaintiff sued a coemployee, reflects a determination that defendant enjoyed the benefit of a valid defense that, if properly raised, would have completely barred plaintiff’s claim. However, a circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction is not determined by “whether the particular case is one that presents a cause of action, or under the particular facts is triable before the court.” Bowie, supra at 39.
*328Finally, the majority’s holding that the circuit court lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiff’s third-party no-fault claim makes little sense in light of the subrogation provision of the WDCA, MCL 418.827(5); MSA 17.237(827)(5). That statutory section provides a worker’s compensation carrier the right to assert a lien against any recovery attained by the injured worker in an action for personal injuries brought against a third party. In re Worker’s Compensation Lien, 231 Mich App 556, 558-559; 591 NW2d 221 (1998).4 This subrogation provision has been applied in tort actions brought under the no-fault act. McCain v Auto-Owners Ins Co (On Rehearing), 223 Mich App 327, 332; 566 NW2d 629 (1997). If the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision deprives the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over injured workers’ no-fault claims, then injured workers would be unable to recover no-fault benefits in circuit court actions, and worker’s compensation carriers would never need to seek a lien against amounts recovered in such suits.
In this case, we are not called to decide whether a plaintiff should be able to sue his coemployee in tort for personal injuries arising out of and in the course of employment. Rather, we are asked to decide *329whether the defense sought to be advanced by defendant is properly characterized as an affirmative defense or as an attack on the circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. For the reasons set forth above, I conclude that the exclusive remedy provision does not deprive the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction over an injured employee’s no-fault claim.
n
An affirmative defense is a defense that does not controvert the establishment of the plaintiff’s prima facie case, but otherwise denies relief to the plaintiff. Chmielewski v Xermac, Inc, 457 Mich 593, 617; 580 NW2d 817 (1998), quoting Stanke v State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co, 200 Mich App 307, 312; 503 NW2d 758 (1993). “[A]n affirmative defense includes any defense that seeks to foreclose a plaintiff from continuing a civil action for reasons unrelated to the plaintiffs prima facie case.” Kelly-Nevils v Detroit Receiving Hosp, 207 Mich App 410, 420; 526 NW2d 15 (1994). In this case, the exclusive remedy provision, if applied, would bar plaintiff’s third-party no-fault claim for reasons completely unrelated to plaintiff’s prima facie case against defendant. Therefore, it should be properly understood as an affirmative defense to plaintiff’s claim.
MCR 2.111(F) requires a party against whom a cause of action has been asserted to state affirmative defenses in the responsive pleading. That rule provides, in pertinent part:
(3) Affirmative Defenses. Affirmative defenses must be stated in a party’s responsive pleading, either as originally filed or as amended in accordance with MCR 2.118. Under a *330separate and distinct heading, a party must state the facts constituting
(a) an affirmative defense, such as contributory negligence; the existence of an agreement to arbitrate; assumption of risk; payment; release; satisfaction; discharge; license; fraud; duress; estoppel; statute of frauds; statute of limitations; immunity granted by law; want or failure of consideration; or that an instrument or transaction is void, voidable, or cannot be recovered on by reason of statute or nondelivery;
(b) a defense that by reason of other affirmative matter seeks to avoid the legal effect of or defeat the claim of the opposing party, in whole or in part;
(c) a ground of defense that, if not raised in the pleading, would be likely to take the adverse party by surprise.
Although the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision is not specifically listed within MCR 2.111(F)(3)(a), that does not preclude it from being considered an affirmative defense. The affirmative defenses enumerated in MCR 2.111(F)(3)(a) “were not intended to form a closed class, but were included by way of illustration only.” Campbell, supra at 615. A party that fails to raise an affirmative defense as required by MCR 2.111(F) waives that defense. Id.) Kelly-Nevils, supra at 420. Because defendant failed to raise the worker’s compensation exclusive remedy provision as an affirmative defense in his responsive pleading, the defense has been waived.
I would reverse the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of defendant and would remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings.
The majority correctly notes that numerous prior cases have characterized the exclusive remedy provision variously as an affirmative defense, as a type of immunity, and as a question of subject-matter jurisdiction. Because those cases simply assumed the character of the exclusive remedy defense, and did not squarely address the issue presently before us, they are not controlling.
Although the majority concedes that “[a] trial court is not automatically divested of jurisdiction over a no-fault claim under the exclusive remedy provision by virtue of the fact that a plaintiff was injured during the course of luis employment,” ante at 317, the majority nevertheless concludes that the provision did strip the circuit court of subject-matter jurisdiction in this case. I respectfully submit that the circuit court either does or does not have subject-matter jurisdiction over injured employees’ third-party no-fault claims. The circuit court’s subject-matter jurisdiction cannot depend on the facts presented in individual cases.
In Mathis, three plaintiffs sued their employers’ no-fault insurers and one plaintiff sued his employer, which was a self-insured entity under the no-fault act. Mathis, supra at 176-178. In Great American, the plaintiff recovered benefits from his employer’s no-fault insurer. Great American, supra at 88. In Specht, the plaintiff sued her private no-fault insurance carrier. Specht, supra at 294.
The majority correctly notes that an injured party’s coemployees and employer are specifically excluded from the definition of the third parties from which a worker’s compensation carrier may seek subrogation. MCL 418.827(1); MSA 17.237(827)(1). However, this exclusion does not affect the general observation that the Legislature intended both the wdca and the no-fault act to apply in cases where a plaintiff suffers personal injuries in an automobile accident while in the course of employment. Mathis, supra; Great American, supra. As set forth above, the fact that a plaintiff may not have a viable cause- of action in a specific factual setting cannot determine whether the circuit court has subject-matter jurisdiction over a general class of cases.

=== CASE 2227661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:42.051773+00 ===

812 N.E.2d 1051 (2004)
Marvin TAYLOR, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 49A04-0310-CR-528.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
July 20, 2004.
Publication Ordered August 4, 2004.
Transfer Granted October 19, 2004.
*1052 Marshelle Dawkins Broadwell, Marion County Public Defender Agency, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Andrew A. Kobe, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Appellant, Marvin Taylor, brings this interlocutory appeal from the trial court's denial of his motion to suppress evidence discovered during an inventory search of his automobile.
We affirm.
The record reveals that shortly after midnight on August 7, 2001, Officer Patrick McPherson of the Indianapolis Police Department was on duty on the east side of Indianapolis when he observed an automobile turn from East 38th Street north into the Parkwood Apartments.[1] The driver of the automobile, later identified as Taylor, failed to use his turn signal, which caused Officer McPherson to initiate a traffic stop. Taylor made a couple of quick turns, eventually parking the car diagonally to the curb of a parking lot in the apartment complex. After stopping Taylor, Officer McPherson learned through the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that Taylor was driving with a suspended license. Officer McPherson decided to tow Taylor's vehicle because he was "illegally parked[,] he was driving while suspended[, and] [h]e did not reside in the apartment complex...." Transcript at 13. Another policeman, Officer Stevenson, did an inventory search of the vehicle and discovered under the driver's seat two baggies containing what was later determined to be cocaine.
On August 8, 2001, the State charged Taylor with one count of possession of cocaine in an amount greater than three *1053 grams, a Class C felony.[2] On April 1, 2003, the State filed an amended information adding a count of dealing in cocaine in an amount greater than three grams, a Class A felony.[3] On June 11, 2003, Taylor filed a motion seeking to suppress the evidence seized from his vehicle, claiming that the inventory search was improper. The trial court held a hearing on this motion on July 25, 2003. Officer McPherson was the only witness at the hearing. On August 22, 2003, the trial court entered a ruling denying Taylor's motion to suppress, which reads in relevant part:
"The Court FINDS that the towing of the vehicle was proper. The driver could not legally drive the vehicle away. It was parked on private property in a manner the [sic] reduce[d] the number of parking spots available to visitors to the apartment complex. The defendant was not a resident of the apartment complex. The officer also worked security for the apartment complex. The towing of the car was a reasonable act by the officer under the totality of the circumstances. Since the towing of the car was proper, the inventory was proper." Appendix at 101.
On September 12, 2003, Taylor filed a petition for the trial court to certify its ruling for interlocutory appeal, which the trial court granted on September 17, 2003. (A-102, 104). On October 31, 2003, this court accepted jurisdiction of the interlocutory appeal pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 14(B).
Upon appeal from a trial court's ruling upon a motion to suppress, our review is somewhat similar to that used upon review of a claim of insufficient evidence; we do not reweigh the evidence, and we consider conflicting evidence most favorable to the trial court's ruling. Crabtree v. State, 762 N.E.2d 241, 244 (Ind.Ct.App. 2002). However, we must also consider the uncontested evidence most favorable to the defendant. Id.
Upon appeal, Taylor claims that the search of his car violated both the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution. Taylor does cite and discuss the differences between search and seizure jurisprudence in Indiana and federal law, concluding that "it would seem without question [that] the Indiana Constitution provides an even higher standard of protection...." Appellant's Br. at 8. Whether Taylor's conclusion is correct or not,[4] the State claims that Taylor has waived any claim under the State Constitution in that he has failed to argue that the analysis or result would be different than that reached by the Federal Constitution. We also note that Taylor made no mention of the Indiana Constitution in his motion to suppress. Whether Taylor has preserved any claim under the Indiana *1054 Constitution is beside the point, because in the context of inventory searches, the ultimate standard dictated by the Fourth Amendment and Article 1, Section 11 is the reasonableness of the police conduct. Peete v. State, 678 N.E.2d 415, 419 (Ind.Ct. App.1997), trans. denied.
Both the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution protect against unreasonable searches and seizures and, as a general rule, require a judicially issued search warrant as a condition precedent to a lawful search. Gibson v. State, 733 N.E.2d 945, 951 (Ind.Ct.App. 2000). When a warrantless search has been conducted, the State has the burden of proving that an exception to the warrant requirement existed at the time of the search. Woodford v. State, 752 N.E.2d 1278, 1281 (Ind.2001), cert. denied, 535 U.S. 999, 122 S.Ct. 1564, 152 L.Ed.2d 486 (2002).
One well-recognized exception to the warrant requirement is an inventory search of a vehicle. Id. The threshold question in determining whether an inventory search was proper is whether the impoundment of the vehicle itself was proper; then it must be determined if the scope of the inventory search was proper. Id. at 1281-82. Impoundment is warranted when part of routine administrative caretaking functions of the police or when it is authorized by state statute. Id. at 1281. Here, there is no allegation by the State that the impoundment was authorized by state statute. Thus, the search must be justified under the "community caretaking" functions of the police. To prove a valid inventory search under the caretaking function, the State must demonstrate: (1) that the belief that the vehicle posed some threat or harm to the community or was itself imperiled was consistent with objective standards of sound policing, and (2) that the decision to combat that threat by impoundment was in keeping with established departmental routine or regulation. Id.
Two primary factors should be considered in determining whether the conclusion that vehicles constitute a hazard is reasonable in light of objective standards of sound policing. Fair v. State, 627 N.E.2d 427, 434 (Ind.1993). The first is the degree to which the property upon which the vehicle is situated was under the defendant's control.[5]Id. Second, the length of time the impounding officer perceived the car would be unattended is important because this helps assess the reasonableness of the officer's conclusion that the vehicle, if left alone, would be exposed to an unacceptable risk of theft or vandalism. Id. Courts should be mindful that the Fourth Amendment does not necessarily require police to utilize the least intrusive means to secure and protect an automobile. Id. at 433. Thus, the question is not whether there was an absolute need to dispose of the vehicle, but whether the decision to do so was reasonable in light of the applicable standard. Id.
The needs of the community have been held to be implicated where: (1) the arrest of the driver has left his car unattended on a highway, (2) the owner of the vehicle cannot be located, or (3) the vehicle is on private property and the owner of the private property has requested removal. See id.; Gibson, 733 N.E.2d at 957.
In the case at bar, Taylor focuses his attack on the propriety of the impoundment *1055 itself, claiming that the reasons given by Officer McPherson did not justify impounding his vehicle.[6] At the suppression hearing, Officer McPherson testified that one of the reasons he impounded Taylor's car was that Taylor was driving while suspended. Depending upon the surrounding circumstances and the driver's status, driving while suspended can be a Class A infraction, a Class A misdemeanor, or a Class D felony. See Ind.Code § 9-24-19-1 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003) (Class A infraction); Ind.Code § 9-24-19-2 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003) (Class A misdemeanor); Ind.Code § 9-24-19-3 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003) (Class A misdemeanor); Ind.Code § 9-30-10-16 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003) (Class D felony). Here, it is not apparent from the record under which section Taylor was cited. The charging instruments make no mention of a charge for driving while suspended. Officer McPherson testified at the suppression hearing that he "learned through the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, IPD via communication that [Taylor] was driving while suspended infraction on the learner's permit." Tr. at 13. From this, it is unclear whether the infraction referred to occurred at a prior time or whether it referred to the instant situation. In his brief, when referring to the driving while suspended charge, Taylor cites to I.C. § 9-24-19-2, which defines a Class A misdemeanor. Regardless, the fact remains that when he was pulled over, Taylor did not have a valid driver's license.
Taylor claims that, based on the minor nature of the offense of driving while suspended, that it was "very likely" that he would have been released on his own recognizance or given a minimal bond and able to reclaim his car. Taylor claims that his situation was similar to that in Gibson, supra, where the sole basis for the defendant Gibson's arrest was his failure to appear for a charge of fishing without a license, a Class C infraction. 733 N.E.2d at 957. Thus, the court observed that there was a likelihood that Gibson would have been released on his own recognizance or on a nominal bond within a brief time after his arrest and could have reclaimed his car. Id. at 957-58. The court noted that Gibson's vehicle was parked in the parking lot of a convenience store and that he was not given an opportunity to telephone a relative or a friend to retrieve the vehicle. Id. at 957. The court further observed that Gibson's lawful possession of the van was not in question and that there was no unqualified driver, such as one without a valid driver's license, in whose possession the van would have been left if the police did not impound the vehicle. Id. The court concluded that there was no evidence to establish that Gibson's vehicle constituted a potential hazard from which the police felt justified in impounding the vehicle. Id. at 958.
Similarly, in Fair, supra, the vehicle in question was undamaged and parked in a relatively secure private parking facility and there had been no complaint from the owners of the property. 627 N.E.2d at 433. The Fair Court also noted that there was no unqualified driver in whose possession the car would have been left had the police not impounded it and that the defendant's lawful possession of the car was not in question. Id. The defendant was charged with public intoxication and too would likely have been released on his own recognizance or on a nominal bond within a brief time and been able to reclaim the car. Id. at 435. The Court held that *1056 there was little evidence of record to establish that the vehicle constituted a potential hazard. Id. However, the Court clarified its holding thusly:
"we do not mean to be understood as saying that it would never be reasonable to tow an arrestee's neatly parked vehicle from private property in the absence of a complaint from the owner. Rather, it is the case that on facts such as these, the State's burden is not met solely by the introduction of an officer's generalized assertion that he has a duty to safeguard the vehicles of those with whom he comes into contact. We would probably indulge the reasonableness of this impoundment but for the indicia of pretext which litter the record of this `inventorying' and the absence of evidence about any departmental procedures against which we might evaluate their significance." Id. (footnote omitted).
The case before us, although similar in some ways to the facts present in Gibson and Fair, is distinguishable from these cases in several respects. First, despite the comments in Gibson regarding the police not affording the defendant the opportunity to arrange for someone else to claim the car, such is not required. See Fair, 627 N.E.2d at 433 (no requirement to use least intrusive means to secure and protect automobile; the question is not whether there was absolute need to impound vehicle but whether the decision to do so was reasonable); Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 374, 107 S.Ct. 738, 93 L.Ed.2d 739 (1987) ("reasonable police regulations relating to inventory procedures administered in good faith satisfy the Fourth Amendment, even though courts might as a matter of hindsight be able to devise equally reasonable rules requiring a different procedure."). More importantly, unlike in either Gibson or Fair, here Taylor was an unqualified driver; his driving permit was suspended. Although it is unclear whether Taylor was arrested or simply given a citation for driving while suspended before his car was towed, the fact remains that in either case he would not have been able to lawfully reenter his car and drive away. Too, despite Taylor's assertions to the contrary, the written policy of the Indianapolis Police Department clearly authorizes the towing of a vehicle "in which the driver or a passenger does not have a valid driver's license."[7] App. at 96. There is no indication that anyone but Taylor was in the vehicle.
In short, Officer McPherson was faced with a driver who was not lawfully permitted to drive. Whether he was arrested or merely cited, Taylor could have quickly returned to drive his vehicle and again been in violation of the law. Even though Taylor could have been given the chance to make arrangements to properly take care of the vehicle, given the circumstances we are unable to say that the decision to impound the car was unreasonable.[8]See *1057 United States v. Stephens, 350 F.3d 778 (8th Cir.2003) (search of automobile was reasonable under Fourth Amendment as inventory search where defendant was arrested for driving without valid license so that he could not continue to operate vehicle, making it appropriate for police to take immediate possession of and secure vehicle).
Because we have determined that one of the reasons given by Officer McPherson did warrant impoundment, we need not address the other reasons given by McPherson.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
VAIDIK, J., and MAY, J., concur.
ORDER
On July 20, 2004, the Court handed down its opinion in this appeal marked Memorandum Decision, Not for Publication. The Appellee, by counsel, has filed a Verified Motion for Publication of Memorandum Decision. The Appellee states the decision clarifies existing law and therefore meets the criteria for publication as set out in Appellate Rule 65(A). The Appellee asks the Court to publish the decision handed down on July 20, 2004.
Having considered the matter, the Court FINDS AND ORDERS AS FOLLOWS:
1. The Appellee's Verified Motion for Publication of Memorandum Decision is GRANTED and this court's opinion heretofore handed down in this cause on July 20, 2004, marked Memorandum Decision, Not for Publication in now ORDERED PUBLISHED.
NOTES
[1]  Officer McPherson also worked as a security officer for the apartment complex.
[2]  See Ind.Code § 35-48-4-6(b)(1) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003).
[3]  See Ind.Code § 35-48-4-1(b)(1) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003).
[4]  Compare Randall T. Shepard, Second Wind for the Indiana Bill of Rights, 22 IND. L.REV. 575 (1989) (stating that the rights afforded to individuals pursuant to the Indiana Constitution stand separate and distinct from those conferred by the U.S. Constitution and the former has been held to provide greater protections against unreasonable search and seizures than its federal counterpart) with Jon Laramore, Indiana Constitutional Developments: The Wind Shifts, 36 IND. L.REV. 961 (2003) (concluding that the Indiana Constitution has not been the source of significant protections of individual rights, and although the Indiana Supreme Court has developed some different modes of analysis, individual rights under the Indiana Constitution are only marginally different than under the Federal Constitution).
[5]  As stated by the Fair Court, clearly there is a difference between a vehicle left in the driveway of a defendant's parent's home and one left in a small lot intended for unloading air cargo.
[6]  An impoundment may be effected by police at the scene and does not depend upon having the vehicle towed or otherwise physically moved from its location. See Fair, 627 N.E.2d 427; Gibson, 733 N.E.2d 945.
[7]  See footnote 6, supra. Nevertheless, Taylor concedes that this case does not involve a review of the "soundness of the standard operating procedures of the Indianapolis Police Department regarding towing vehicles...." Appellant's Br. at 15 n. 5.
[8]  As one commentator has noted, a federal court has held that "if the driver is only ticketed but cannot himself operate the car because of an expired license, impoundment of the vehicle is improper unless the driver is `unable to provide for its custody and removal.'" 3 WAYNE R. LAFAVE, SEARCH & SEIZURE § 7.3(c) (3rd ed.1996) (quoting United States v. Ibarra, 955 F.2d 1405, 1408 (10th Cir. 1992)). However, two of the reasons given in Ibarra to support upholding the District Court's decision to suppress the evidence seized as a result of the search in that case were that the defendant was never given an opportunity to provide for custody and control of his car and that the state statute did not authorize towing in such circumstances. Ibarra, 955 F.2d at 1409-10. Similar reasoning was rejected by the United States Supreme Court in Bertine, wherein the Court held that "reasonable police regulations relating to inventory procedures administered in good faith satisfy the Fourth Amendment, even though courts might as a matter of hindsight be able to devise equally reasonable rules requiring a different procedure." 479 U.S. at 374, 107 S.Ct. 738. The Indiana Supreme Court in Fair not only declined to require the least intrusive means to secure and protect the vehicle, but also held that an impoundment will not be invalidated solely because such was not specifically authorized by state statute. 627 N.E.2d at 432.

=== CASE 2227663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:42.097116+00 ===

812 N.E.2d 728 (2004)
349 Ill.App.3d 706
285 Ill.Dec. 908
RBC MORTGAGE COMPANY, f/k/a Prism Mortgage Company, and First City Financial Corporation, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
NATIONAL UNION FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY OF PITTSBURGH, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-03-0776.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
June 30, 2004.
*729 Wildman, Harrold, Allen & Dixon, Chicago (David J. Fischer and Samuel S. Cohen, of counsel), for Appellants.
Clausen Miller, P.C., Chicago (Randall I. Marmor, Melinda S. Kollross and Agelo L. Reppas, of counsel), for Appellee.
Justice HARTMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs, RBC Mortgage Company (RBC) (formerly Prism Mortgage Company) *730 and First City Financial Corporation (First City) appeal from the circuit court's section 2-615 dismissal of their action for indemnity under a financial institution bond issued by defendant, National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh (National Union). On review, RBC and First City (sometimes collectively RBC) contend that the court erred in finding that the bond does not afford coverage to RBC for payments made to a third party under a settlement agreement.
First City is a wholly owned subsidiary of RBC, a mortgage banking company. From March 1, 1999 to December 3, 1999, First City employed Brandon Earl as a loan officer in its Utah branch. There, Earl prepared loan packages for potential home mortgage borrowers, which consisted of various financial documents used to evaluate creditworthiness. Earl originated a fraudulent loan package for himself in the amount of $450,000 and put in the name of his wife, Andrea Earl. In an effort to conceal his own loan, Earl compiled fraudulent packages for other borrowers. The packages contained fabricated documents necessary to close the loan, including counterfeit credit reports, falsified appraisals and forged income verifications. To facilitate the scheme, Earl paid off the various providers of the tainted documents. Earl collectively submitted the packages for sale from First City, as a broker, to Evergreen Moneysource Mortgage Company (EMMC), which funded the loans and ultimately sold them to third party investors.
Under the brokerage agreement between EMMC and First City, EMMC retained sole discretion to approve and fund the loans, relying on the packages submitted by First City. Once the loans were funded and closed they became the property of EMMC, which paid First City a brokerage fee in return. EMMC assumed the risk of any losses associated with interest rate fluctuations, loan servicing, and change in the market value of the property. A warranty provision in the brokerage agreement guaranteed that the loan packages submitted by First City would not contain any untrue statements and, if breached, First City was obligated to indemnify EMMC for any resultant losses.
In early December of 1999, First City's Utah branch manager, Sue Bitterman, uncovered Earl's self-funded loan. Bitterman then initiated an audit of all loan packages originated by Earl. By the end of January of 2000, First City confirmed the fraud, however, Earl's loan for $450,000 already had been funded and sold to third party investors. First City immediately notified EMMC of the fraud and, on January 13, 2000, EMMC requested that First City confirm its obligation to bear the risk of the warranted, but fraudulent loans. Days later, First City informed National Union that it would seek coverage under the bond, should it incur losses as a result of the fraud.
The insuring agreement between First City and National Union was in the form of a financial institution bond or fidelity bond, in effect from March 1, 1999 to March 1, 2002.[1] Under "Insuring Agreement A" entitled "Fidelity," National Union promised to indemnify RBC for:
"(A) Loss resulting directly from dishonest or fraudulent acts committed by an [e]mployee acting alone or in collusion with others.
Such dishonest conduct or fraudulent acts must be committed by the [e]mployee with the manifest intent:
*731 (a) to cause the Insured to sustain such loss; and
(b) to obtain financial benefit for the [e]mployee or another person or entity."[2]
The policy does not provide a definition for "loss resulting directly from," and excludes from coverage generally "indirect or consequential loss of any nature." The agreement permitted National Union to "elect" whether to provide a defense for RBC in the event of a claim against it.
On March 17, 2000, EMMC commenced an action against First City,[3] requesting (1) damages for losses incurred in reliance on the fraudulent loan packages, and (2) that First City buy back the defective loan packages. On April 14, 2000, First City notified National Union of the suit; however, National Union declined to provide a defense or commit to coverage.
Over 14 months later, on June 20, 2001, RBC sent a proof of loss to National Union on behalf of First City and RBC, as First City's guarantor. The parties reached an "agreement in principle" to settle the suit. On October 10, 2001, EMMC and First City finalized a settlement agreement, wherein RBC agreed to pay to EMMC $175,000 for losses already incurred, and to indemnify EMMC for any future losses traceable to the fraud. RBC also promised to compensate directly one of EMMC's investors, Conseco Finance Corporation, for related losses not yet incurred. RBC provided National Union with drafts of the settlement agreement, supplementing its proof of loss previously tendered. In a letter to RBC dated November 28, 2001, National Union denied the claim, asserting that RBC's losses did not result "directly" from the fraud.
On May 31, 2002, RBC filed a four-count complaint against National Union, alleging claims for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, attorney's fees and costs, and prejudgment interest. On August 23, 2001, National Union moved to dismiss RBC's claims pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2000) (section 2-615). On October 21, 2002, following oral argument, the circuit court granted the motion with prejudice, finding that (1) "[t]he language of the bond is not ambiguous," (2) "[n]either Insuring Agreement A nor E affords coverage because the loss was not a loss resulting directly from the covered risk," and (3) "`[d]irect loss,' as used in the bond, is not properly construed by analogy to proximate cause." The court commented that "courts throughout the land take surprisingly, a very, very narrow approach to fidelity bonds with regard to this issue of direct loss. * * * [T]o suffer a direct loss[,] it's got to be a situation where the employee puts his hand in the employer's *732 pocket. And if it turns out that the loss occurred as a consequence of the involvement of a third party[,] that's not what fidelity bonds insure against."
On November 27, 2002, RBC moved the circuit court to reconsider and vacate its ruling, which the court denied on February 4, 2003. RBC timely appeals.
I
On appeal, RBC maintains that National Union denied coverage for the very risk it contemplated in purchasing the bond. RBC contends: (A) the circuit court erred in finding "direct loss" to be unambiguous, and the language must be construed strictly against National Union as drafter of the policy; and (B) the question of whether the loss is direct or not should be examined under the "proximate cause" standard, which would give rise necessarily to unresolved questions of fact. RBC requests that the matter be remanded for further proceedings.
The question presented by a section 2-615 motion to dismiss is whether sufficient facts have been pled in the complaint which, if proved, would entitle plaintiff to relief. Thornton v. Shah, 333 Ill.App.3d 1011, 1020, 267 Ill.Dec. 593, 777 N.E.2d 396 (2002). All well-pleaded facts in the complaint are taken as true and are construed in the light most favorable to plaintiff. Indeck North American Power Fund v. Norweb, plc, 316 Ill.App.3d 416, 430, 249 Ill.Dec. 45, 735 N.E.2d 649 (2000). A complaint is susceptible to dismissal under section 2-615 only when it clearly appears that no set of facts could be proved under the pleadings that would entitle plaintiff to relief (Casualty Insurance Co. v. Hill Mechanical Group, 323 Ill.App.3d 1028, 1033, 257 Ill.Dec. 175, 753 N.E.2d 370 (2001)), and where the circuit court can determine the relative rights of the parties solely from the pleadings. Thornton, 333 Ill.App.3d at 1020, 267 Ill.Dec. 593, 777 N.E.2d 396. To state a cause of action adequately, the claim must be both legally and factually sufficient, setting forth a legally recognized claim as its basis, as well as pleading facts which are cognizable legally. Casualty Insurance Co., 323 Ill. App.3d at 1033, 257 Ill.Dec. 175, 753 N.E.2d 370. A complaint dismissed under section 2-615 requires the reviewing court to apply a de novo standard of review. Indeck, 316 Ill.App.3d at 431, 249 Ill.Dec. 45, 735 N.E.2d 649.
A
RBC argues that it incurred "direct" losses from the dishonest and fraudulent conduct of its employee, Earl. These losses, it urges, emanate from the settlement agreement with EMMC, and manifest themselves in the form of a reduced market value of the fraudulent loans it re-purchased from EMMC, and the compensatory payments made to EMMC for losses already incurred. RBC construes these losses as "flow[ing] `directly' from the dishonesty of [its] employee." RBC insists that as the insured, the bond's language should be construed broadly in its favor, and strictly against National Union.
National Union counters that RBC is "attempting to manipulate a first party fidelity bond to deflect third party liability to their insurer." It argues RBC suffered no losses where EMMC, not First City, actually funded the loans, and that RBC could not have lost the loans' market value since EMMC never paid market value to RBC; instead, it paid only a brokerage fee. Even if Earl's fraud caused RBC to lose money, National Union maintains, the "losses are entirely derivative, based solely on [RBC's] contractual liability to a third party," EMMC. For losses to be "direct," they must be immediate, definite, and ascertainable, such as in cases of theft or *733 embezzlement. National Union points out that RBC did not file its proof of loss upon discovery of the fraud in December of 1999, or when it was sued by EMMC in March of 2000, but waited instead until June of 2001, once the settlement was reached.
Fidelity insurance is a form of insurance in which the insurer undertakes to guaranty the fidelity of an officer, agent, or employee of the insured, or to indemnify the latter for losses caused by dishonesty or a want of fidelity on the part of such a person. State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 181 Ill.App.3d 1081, 1087, 132 Ill.Dec. 216, 539 N.E.2d 779 (1989) (Lund, J., specially concurring); Continental Corp. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 892 F.2d 540, 543 (7th Cir.1989); 11 Couch on Insurance § 160:1 (3d ed.1998). Although there is no Illinois case addressing "direct loss" in the context of fidelity insurance, the law, as extrapolated from other jurisdictions, is resoundingly uniform on this issue.
Language in a fidelity bond, to the effect that the insured is covered for "losses directly resulting from," signifies a "direct loss" or the actual depletion of bank funds caused by the employee's dishonest acts. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. v. United Pacific Insurance Co., 20 F.3d 1070, 1080 (10th Cir.1994); Oriental Financial Group v. Federal Insurance Co., 309 F.Supp.2d 216, 222 (D.P.R.2004). If an employee's dishonesty causes losses to a third party, which then leads to litigation concluding in a judgment or settlement, the insured has not incurred a "direct loss" under a fidelity bond; the insured's loss is "indirect" and the third party's loss is "direct." Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Kidder, Peabody & Co., 246 A.D.2d 202, 210, 676 N.Y.S.2d 559 (N.Y.App.Div.1998); Auto Lenders Acceptance Corp., v. Gentilini Ford, Inc., 358 N.J.Super. 28, 816 A.2d 1068, 1074 (App.Div.2003) (Auto Lenders); City of Burlington v. Western Surety Co., 599 N.W.2d 469, 472 (Iowa 1999); Commercial Bank of Bluefield v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., 175 W.Va. 588, 336 S.E.2d 552, 556 (1985). To find coverage in these circumstances would convert a direct loss policy into a third party indemnity policy or liability policy, under which the liability insurer indemnifies its insured for the insured's "indirect" loss, but payment, in practical effect, runs directly to the third-party claimant. Auto Lenders, 816 A.2d at 1073-74; Central National Insurance Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America, 522 N.W.2d 39, 42 (Iowa 1994). In the absence of a third-party-claims clause, an insured's fidelity bond, unlike a liability policy, does not provide indemnity for vicarious liability for losses suffered by others arising from its employee's tortious conduct. The Vons Cos., Inc., v. Federal Insurance Co., 212 F.3d 489, 490-92 (9th Cir.2000); Lynch Properties Inc., v. Potomac Insurance Co. of Illinois, 140 F.3d 622, 629 (5th Cir.1998); Foster v. National Union Fire Insurance Co., 902 F.2d 1316, 1318 (8th Cir.1990).
In Tri City National Bank v. Federal Insurance Co., 268 Wis.2d 785, 674 N.W.2d 617 (2003) (Tri City), a case strikingly similar to the instant case, the Court of Appeals of Wisconsin addressed the precise question presented in the case at bar. There, employees of a branch of the Tri City National Bank (Tri City) participated in a scheme with an outsider to obtain fraudulent mortgage loans for insufficiently funded borrowers, who otherwise would not have qualified for the loans. The outsider would recruit a buyer for property owned by him or one of his businesses, and then have the buyer apply for a mortgage *734 loan with one of two mortgage companies. The conspiring Tri City employees then would send to the mortgage company a fraudulent verification, indicating that the buyer had a bank account at Tri City containing funds sufficient to cover the down payment on the property. Once the mortgage was approved, a conspiring Tri City employee would issue a cashier's check for the recruited buyer to use at the closing, thereby creating the impression that buyer was providing the down payment from his own funds. After the loan funded, the outsider would take the loan proceeds to the bank, where he would pay for the cashier's check, and pay off the conspiring Tri City employees. Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 619.
After defaults in the fraudulent loans, the scheme was discovered, and the mortgage companies sued Tri City to recover their losses. Tri City promptly notified its insurer, Federal Insurance Company (Federal), requesting confirmation that the fidelity bond in place covered Tri City for either judgments or settlements paid to the mortgage companies resulting from the fraud. Federal denied coverage on the ground that the bond covered only those losses "resulting directly from dishonest or fraudulent acts" of Tri City employees. Tri City settled the claims brought by the mortgage companies and then sought indemnity from Federal for the settlement amounts, but Federal continued to deny coverage. Tri City instituted a declaratory judgment action against Federal, which moved to dismiss the complaint. The circuit court granted the motion, reasoning that although Tri City experienced losses because of its employees' dishonest and fraudulent conduct, the claims asserted by the mortgage companies and ensuing settlement did not give rise to a loss directly resulting from dishonest or fraudulent acts of the employees. Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 619-20.
On appeal, Tri City initially argued, as does RBC here, that the bond's language was ambiguous and should be construed in favor of Federal as drafter of the policy. The Court of Appeals of Wisconsin stated, "should there be any ambiguity, the wording of fidelity bonds is not construed strictly against the drafter because the justification behind the rule  unequal bargaining power  has been eliminated." Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 622. The court also determined the operative language to be unambiguous, stating that "the bond clearly restricts indemnification to those loses occur as a direct result of an employee's dishonest acts. This language is not susceptible to more than one meaning." Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 623. The court noted that it was only after the mortgage defaults occurred, about three years after the fraudulent conduct, that Tri City's liability to the mortgage companies came into being. Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 623.
In the case sub judice, it must be noted initially that the phrase "resulting directly from" is clear and unambiguous, and must be afforded its plain and ordinary meaning. See Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill.2d 90, 109, 180 Ill.Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992) (Outboard Marine). Despite RBC's insistence that the "policy language may be construed in more than one way," an ambiguity is not created simply because the parties disagree about the meaning of the policy language. Installco Inc. v. Whiting Corp., 336 Ill.App.3d 776, 783, 271 Ill.Dec. 94, 784 N.E.2d 312 (2002). Courts will not strain to find ambiguity in a policy where none exists (McKinney v. Allstate Insurance Co., 188 Ill.2d 493, 497, 243 Ill.Dec. 56, 722 N.E.2d 1125 (1999)) and, here, the language of the bond makes clear that indemnification is restricted to only those losses occurring as "direct" result *735 of the employee's fraudulent acts. Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 623. Although RBC observes correctly that the phrase is not defined in the policy, as are other terms, the mere absence of a definition does not itself render a policy term ambiguous. Milwaukee Guardian Insurance, Inc. v. Taraska, 236 Ill.App.3d 973, 974, 176 Ill. Dec. 763, 602 N.E.2d 70 (1992).
Because the phrase is unambiguous, the rules of construction need not be applied in interpreting the subject language of the fidelity bond. Western Casualty & Surety Co. v. Brochu, 105 Ill.2d 486, 495, 86 Ill.Dec. 493, 475 N.E.2d 872 (1985). Nevertheless, First City is engaged in the business of mortgage brokering, and RBC, its parent company, is a corporate entity responsible for both mortgage brokering loans, as well as mortgage banking. In this capacity, RBC's bargaining power is not disparate from that of National Union, and is undeserving of the usual rules of construction. See Sharp v. Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corp., 858 F.2d 1042, 1046 (5th Cir.1988). The history of Standard Form No. 24, the form at issue here, further compels this conclusion. See Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 621-22. Therefore, despite RBC's protestations that it had a reasonable expectation of coverage for this type of loss, and that it would not have "purchased such useless protection" had it been aware that National Union "intended to limit coverage it afforded RBC to the `paradigmatic cases of theft and embezzlement'" (see Auto Lenders, 816 A.2d at 1072), the policy will be applied as written. Courts will generally avoid interpretations that render contract terms surplusage (Dowd & Dowd, Ltd. v. Gleason, 181 Ill.2d 460, 479, 230 Ill.Dec. 229, 693 N.E.2d 358 (1998)), and must strive to give each term in the policy meaning unless to do so would render the clause or policy inconsistent or inherently contradictory. Outboard Marine, 154 Ill.2d at 123, 180 Ill.Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204.
Under this framework, RBC's losses were derived, not directly from the conduct of Earl, but from RBC's breach of the warranty contained in the brokerage agreement with EMMC. Had there been no contractual liability on the part of RBC for the fraudulent loan packages, RBC would not have incurred monetary losses. EMMC, however, in electing to sue and, ultimately seek a settlement from RBC, provided a distinct intervening cause displacing Earl's fraud as the direct cause of the losses. Earl's actions merely set into motion the chain of events that would later result in RBC's liability to EMMC.
Further, as in Tri City, RBC suffered no losses at the time of the fraud. Its losses did not come into being until after the settlement agreement, one and one-half years after the fraudulent conduct. "This fact, in itself, illustrates the `conditional nature' of the loss, taking it out of the policy." The Vons Cos. v. Federal Insurance Co., 57 F.Supp.2d 933, 944 (C.D.Cal.1998), aff'd, 212 F.3d 489 (9th Cir.2000). Since RBC is unable to plead facts that would entitle it to relief under the law, the circuit court's dismissal of its complaint was proper under section 2-615.
B
RBC maintains that proximate cause is the proper standard to apply in determining whether a loss is direct or indirect. Of the various cases cited by RBC in support of a proximate cause analysis, only Scirex Corp. v. Federal Insurance Co., 313 F.3d 841, 850 (3rd Cir.2002) (Scirex), and Resolution Trust Corp. v. Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Maryland, 205 F.3d 615, 655 (3rd Cir.2000) (Resolution *736 Trust) address "direct loss" in a similar context.[4]
In Resolution Trust, the United States Court of Appeals, applying New Jersey tort law to a fidelity bond coverage dispute, employed the proximate cause standard stating, "a proximate cause need not be the sole cause of harm. It suffices if it is a substantial contributing factor to the harm suffered." Resolution Trust, 205 F.3d at 656. In utilizing that standard, the Resolution Trust court relied on Jefferson Bank v. Progressive Casualty Insurance Co., 965 F.2d 1274, 1281 (3rd Cir.1992) (Jefferson), where the court acknowledged that the phrase "resulting directly from" suggests a stricter standard of causation than mere proximate cause, and requires more than a substantial cause, since the words imply that the loss must flow "immediately," either in time or space, from the fraud. Despite this recognition, the Jefferson court applied Pennsylvania law, and held that conventional proximate cause is the correct standard, and an "immediacy" requirement to be inappropriate. Jefferson, 965 F.2d at 1281. The standard embraced in Resolution Trust, however, has been overruled effectively by the New Jersey Superior (appellate) Court in Auto Lenders, 816 A.2d at 1073, where the court rejected the notion that "any" proximate cause was sufficiently direct to warrant coverage, and explicitly "declin[ed] to adopt the proximate cause analysis."
Also, in Scirex, the Court of Appeals applied the proximate cause standard, relying on Jefferson. The court stated, "Pennsylvania law equates `direct cause' with `proximate cause,'" and "[w]e believe that [Jefferson's] proximate cause approach is proper here." Scirex, 313 F.3d at 850. In Scirex, employees for the insured, Scirex (a pharmaceutical-testing company), through their failure to follow protocol and deceptive record keeping, rendered worthless certain drug studies. As a result, Scirex was unable to procure and produce results for its contracted sponsor. Scirex was forced to replicate the studies for $1.2 million of its own funds. Scirex sought indemnity from its insurer, Federal, under a blanket employee dishonesty policy. Federal denied the claim, prompting Scirex to sue Federal for the losses. The court held that "Scirex's losses were directly tied to these studies[] and[,] by rendering those studies worthless, the [employees'] behavior proximately[] and[,] therefore directly, caused Scirex's losses." Scirex, 313 F.3d at 843-45, 850.
In Tri City, the insured similarly argued that the "proximate cause" standard should govern the analysis of direct loss. The court, however, found the standard to be inapplicable in the context of employee dishonesty policies. The court noted that in the fidelity bond cases applying the proximate cause standard, causation was at issue only in the context of losses of the insured's own property, or that for which it was legally responsible, and the question to be resolved was whether some intervening event broke the causal connection between the dishonest conduct of an employee and the insured's loss. Tri City, 674 N.W.2d at 624-25.
In the present case, adopting the reasoning from the majority of other jurisdictions, the proximate cause analysis simply is too broad to capture accurately the intent behind the phrase "loss resulting directly from." A "direct loss" must be *737 afforded its plain and ordinary meaning (Auto Lenders, 816 A.2d at 1073); "direct" means "direct." Vons, 212 F.3d at 492. To equate "loss resulting directly from" with "loss proximately caused by" requires a strained reading of "direct loss," which is a much narrower concept than "proximately caused loss." This is because a proximate cause "need not be the sole cause nor the last or nearest cause. It is sufficient if it concurs with some other cause acting at the same time, which, in combination with it, causes the injury." James v. Checker Taxi Co., 22 Ill.App.2d 22, 24-25, 159 N.E.2d 12 (1959). Accordingly, the proximate cause analysis will not be applied to the case at bar.
For the reasons set forth above, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
QUINN, P.J., and GREIMAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The fidelity bond has a $4 million aggregate liability limit, a $2 million single loss limit, and a $25,000 single loss deductible.
[2]  Before the circuit court, RBC sought coverage under the bond's "Insuring Agreement A" entitled "Fidelity," as well as "Insuring Agreement E" entitled "Securities." The latter agreement covers "[l]oss resulting directly from the Insured having, in good faith for its own account or for the account of others, (1) acquired, sold or delivered, or given value, extended credit or assumed liability, on the faith of, any original * * * (c) deed, mortgage or other instrument conveying title to, or creating or discharging a lien upon, real property." On appeal, RBC offers no argument in support of gaining coverage by way of "Insuring Agreement E." Under Supreme Court Rule 341(a)(7), "points not argued are waived." Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 21 (October 17, 2001), R. 341, eff. October 1, 2001. "A point not argued * * * fails to satisfy the requirements of Rule 341(e)(7)." Dillon v. Evanston Hospital, 199 Ill.2d 483, 493, 264 Ill.Dec. 653, 771 N.E.2d 357 (2002). Accordingly, the issue of whether coverage exists under "Insuring Agreement E" is not the subject of this appeal.
[3]  On May 24, 2001, EMMC amended its complaint to name as an additional defendant, RBC, which notified National Union on June 21, 2001.
[4]  Whereas the other cases cited by RBC involve casualty insurance, Resolution Trust Corp. v. Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Maryland, 205 F.3d 615 (3rd Cir.2000) involved coverage under a fidelity bond, and Scirex Corp. v. Federal Insurance Co., 313 F.3d 841 (3rd Cir.2002) concerned insurance policies providing coverage for blanket employee dishonesty.

=== CASE 2227664 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:42.163437+00 ===

812 N.E.2d 604 (2004)
351 Ill.App.3d 47
285 Ill.Dec. 784
Marie BILL, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
The BOARD OF EDUCATION OF CICERO SCHOOL DISTRICT 99, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-03-2079.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
June 28, 2004.
*606 Stephen B. Horwitz, Sugarman & Horwitz, Chicago, for Appellant.
John B. Murphey, John F. Donahue, Gail Jones Klopfer, Rosenthal, Murphey & Coblentz, Chicago, for Appellee.
Justice GORDON delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, the Board of Education of Cicero School District 99 (District 99 or district), appeals the trial court's order granting plaintiff, Marie Bill's motion for summary judgment on the grounds that District 99 failed to give Bill statutory notice that she would not be rehired for the 2000-01 school year. As a result of the judgment, Bill was awarded damages equal to what would have been her salary for the contested school year, prejudgment interest, costs and attorney fees. District 99 contends that Bill's action was barred by the doctrine of laches or, in the alternative, that she received sufficient notice she would not be rehired. The district further contends that Bill was not entitled to attorney fees under the Attorney's Fees in Wage Actions Act (705 ILCS 225/0.01 et seq. West 2002). Because we find there are issues of fact yet to be determined, we reverse and remand for trial.
BACKGROUND
On November 4, 1998, after the school year had begun, plaintiff, Marie Bill, was hired as a full-time probationary[1] English-as-a-second-language (ESL) teacher by District 99 for the remainder of the 1998-99 school year. Bill's employment contract for the 1998-99 school year was dated February 11, 1998, and provided "[t]his contract is null and void in June of 1999." The following school year (1999-2000), Bill was again hired to fill an ESL position after the school year began. She began teaching on October 18, 1999, and her employment contract, dated November 4, 1999, again stated, "[t]his contract is null and void in June of 2000." At the end of the 1999-2000 school year, Bill had not received an assignment for the 2000-01 school year.
Bill stated during her deposition that because she had not yet received a job assignment for the 2000-01 school year in July or August of 2000, she began looking for a teaching job. She retrieved her teacher's certificate from District 99 and *607 on August 8, 2000, she sent a letter to Cindy Mosca, the ESL coordinator for District 99. The letter expressed an interest in obtaining an ESL teaching position in District 99 for the approaching school year. Subsequently, on August 31, 2000, Bill faxed a letter to Dr. Edward Aksamit, assistant superintendent for District 99, expressing her interest in working for the district and informing him that she had received no response to her August 8 letter to Mosca. Bill reportedly also interviewed for a teaching job at Downers Grove North High School during the summer.
On September 5, 2000, Bill telephoned Tom Smith, a representative for Local No. 571 of the Illinois Federation of Teachers (the union). Bill told Smith about the letter she faxed to Aksamit and stated that she never received notice of her termination the year before. Smith advised Bill that the district was required, under section 24-11 of the School Code (105 ILCS 5/24-11 (West 2002)), to provide her with written notice 45 days prior to the end of the 1999-2000 school year, advising her whether she would be reemployed for the 2000-01 year. Because she had not received such notice, the Code provided Bill with the right to a teaching position in District 99 for the 2000-01 school year. Bill testified in her deposition that she was surprised to get this information, as she was unaware of her rights under the School Code. That same month, Bill telephoned Aksamit and informed him that she never received any notice regarding whether she would be rehired for the 2000-01 school year. She stated that, thereafter, she relied on Smith to contact the district on her behalf.
In the fall of 2000, Smith spoke with Dr. Anthony Scariano, superintendent of District 99, and Aksamit, who told Smith that the terms of Bill's 1999-2000 contract, which provided that the contract would be null and void as of June 2000, sufficiently notified Bill that she would not be employed as a teacher in District 99 in the 2000-01 school year. Although Smith argued to Scariano that the contract's "null and void" language did not satisfy the School Code's notification requirement and requested that Bill be given a teaching position immediately, Scariano refused.
On March 14, 2001, Smith wrote a letter to Scariano stating the union's position and urging the district to reemploy Bill. The district refused in writing in April. The union's attorney then sent a legal opinion to the district on August 17, 2001, and the district's attorney responded with its legal opinion on November 6, 2001. The opinions addressed the issue of notice under section 24-11 of the School Code (105 ILCS 5/24-11 (West 2002)).
On November 16, 2001, Bill filed a complaint against the district. Count I alleged that District 99 failed to provide her with the required statutory notice under section 24-11 of the School Code regarding whether she would be employed for the 2000-01 school year. She argued that as a result of this failure, the district was required to reemploy her. She therefore requested her salary as if she had been reemployed for the 2000-01 term and argued she should be reemployed for the remainder of the 2001-02 term. Under this count, Bill further requested recovery for the costs of the litigation and reasonable attorney fees pursuant to the Attorneys Fees in Wage Actions Act (705 ILCS 225/0.01 et seq. (West 2002)). In count II, Bill requested reenrollment in the district's health insurance program.
In response, District 99 filed a motion to dismiss count I of Bill's complaint for failure to state a cause of action (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2002)). The district argued that Bill's complaint was barred by the *608 doctrine of laches because it was filed almost 19 months after she was allegedly notified of her rights by her union representative. It further argued that Bill received proper notification she would not be reemployed for the 2000-01 school year due to the terms of her one-year employment contract. The trial court granted the motion only as to any claims beyond the 2000-01 school year, including reinstatement. The court denied the motion in all other respects, including a rejection of the laches doctrine. District 99 thereafter filed a motion for partial summary judgment as to the attorney fees requested pursuant to the Attorneys Fees in Wage Actions Act in count I of Bill's complaint. The district asserted that a proper written demand for such fees was not made pursuant to the Act. This motion was also denied.
Bill subsequently filed a motion for summary judgment as to the undismissed allegations in count I of her complaint, arguing that she was denied statutory notice under section 24-11 as a matter of law. She argued that Aksamit's deposition contradicted the district's contention that the "null and void" language in Bill's contract provided her with sufficient notice that she would not be reemployed for the 2000-01 school year. In this regard, Aksamit testified at his deposition that the section 24-11 letters, notifying teachers whether they would be retained for the following school term, were generally sent to all probationary teachers. He stated that to his knowledge, all of the other probationary ESL teachers, aside from Bill, received written notice not later than 45 days before the end of the 1999-2000 school year whether they would be rehired for the next school year. He stated that although only teachers who were hired after the school year began received contracts with the "null and void" language, such teachers normally would still receive notice before the end of the school year that they were going to be rehired where their performance had been acceptable. Moreover, teachers whose performance was not acceptable, would get "an evaluation that says they did not meet the standards and they're not going to be rehired." Aksamit stated that Bill did not receive any notice whatsoever. In addition, Aksamit specifically testified to the following:
"Q. When Ms. Bill signed the contract in October of '99 for the '99-2000 school year * * * would she have known if she was going to be re-employed or not re-employed * * * at that time?
A. At that time?
Q. Yes.
A. No.
Q. Okay. Nor did you, correct?
A. Correct.
* * *
Q. * * * [A]t the end of the '99-2000 school year, there would have been a Board meeting which took up questions of which teachers would or would not be re-employed?
A. It's in March.
Q. Okay. In March. Okay. And would that have beenthe March meeting, the March 2000 meeting, would that have been the meeting that the issue of Ms. Bill would have been brought up whether or not she would be re-employed or not?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you attend the Board meetings?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recall specifically that the issue of Miss Bill being brought up?
A. No.
Q. Now, but that would have been the meeting where the determination *609 would have been made that she would not be re-hired, correct?
A. That would have been the meeting to determine whether or not she would have not been rehired, correct.
* * *
Q. Now, the letter that teachers receive, a probationary teacher would receive telling them that they would not be rehired or they were going to be rehired, is that a letter[is] that type of notice signed by the president of the Board of Education?
* * *
A. * * * [I]t's usually signed by the Board president.
* * *
Q. Okay. It has to be Board action?
A. Yes.
* * *
Q. * * * [W]ould a similar letter go out to teachers who are not going to be retained for the next school year?
A. Similar.
* * *
Q. And typically it's the March meeting of a school year where decisions are made to hire or not or to retain or not retain a given probationary teacher?
A. That's correct."
In response to Bill's motion for summary judgment, District 99 first contended that section 24-11 did not require notice independent of that provided by the "null and void" language in Bill's contract; second, it reasserted the affirmative defense of laches.
On June 30, 2003, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Bill on count I. The court found that Bill was not provided with proper notice that she would not be reemployed for the following school year, pursuant to section 24-11 of the School Code. It further determined that the doctrine of laches did not bar Bill's complaint for being untimely as Smith had been attempting to negotiate with the district and convince the district to reemploy Bill. The court awarded Bill $27,164, the salary she would have earned had she been reemployed for the 2000-01 year. She was further awarded 5% per year prejudgment interest pursuant to section 2 of the Illinois Interest Act (815 ILCS 205/2 (West 2002)), totaling $3,732.20, and costs in the amount of $804.70. On June 17, 2003, the trial court further awarded Bill attorney fees pursuant to the Attorneys Fees in Wage Actions Act (705 ILCS 225/0.01 et seq. (West 2002)), amounting to $16,517.50. Bill voluntarily dismissed count II of her complaint.
On appeal, District 99 contends that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment in Bill's favor, as the doctrine of laches barred her complaint and the "null and void" language in her employment contract properly notified her that she would not be reemployed for the 2000-01 school year. The district further contends that the trial court erred in granting Bill's petition for attorney fees. We reverse and remand.
ANALYSIS
Summary judgment is properly granted where the pleadings, depositions, admissions and affidavits show there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 2002). In considering a motion for summary judgment, the motion and supporting documents must be viewed in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. *610 Pyne v. Witmer, 129 Ill.2d 351, 358, 135 Ill.Dec. 557, 543 N.E.2d 1304, 1308 (1989). Although the nonmovant need not prove his case at this stage, he must present facts which, if believed, would arguably entitle him to judgment. Robidoux v. Oliphant, 201 Ill.2d 324, 335, 266 Ill.Dec. 915, 775 N.E.2d 987, 994 (2002). The granting of a motion for summary judgment is reviewed de novo. Crum & Forster Managers Corp. v. Resolution Trust Corp., 156 Ill.2d 384, 390, 189 Ill.Dec. 756, 620 N.E.2d 1073, 1077 (1993).
The defendant district first argues that the court improperly granted Bill's motion for summary judgment because the doctrine of laches barred her cause of action. The laches doctrine is defined as "`the neglect or omission to assert a right which, taken in conjunction with a lapse of time and circumstances causing prejudice to the opposite party, will operate as a bar to a suit.'" Lee v. City of Decatur, 256 Ill.App.3d 192, 195, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d 1256, 1258 (1994), quoting People ex rel. Heavey v. Fitzgerald, 10 Ill.App.3d 24, 26, 293 N.E.2d 705, 707 (1973). A plaintiff must have knowledge of his right but fail to assert it in a timely manner for laches to apply. Sundance Homes, Inc. v. County of Du Page, 195 Ill.2d 257, 270, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d 254, 262 (2001). Laches is an affirmative defense, requiring a two-prong analysis, which addresses whether the employer was prejudiced by the delay, as stated above, and whether the plaintiff has demonstrated a reasonable excuse for the delay. Long v. Tazewell/Pekin Consolidated Communications Center, 236 Ill.App.3d 967, 970, 176 Ill.Dec. 910, 602 N.E.2d 856, 857-58 (1992).
In this case, defendant cites to Schultheis v. City of Chicago, 240 Ill. 167, 88 N.E. 563 (1909), for the employment of a per se six-month laches rule developed specifically for cases involving the termination of a public employee. In Schultheis, the plaintiff, a terminated policeman, brought a petition for mandamus against the City of Chicago, requesting that his name be restored to the police payroll. The supreme court determined that "a member of the Chicago police force claiming to have been wrongfully removed would be barred by laches from his right to have the record of the civil service commissioners reviewed by certiorari if he delayed more than six months in beginning his suit, unless the delay was satisfactorily explained by the petition for the writ." Schultheis, 240 Ill. at 170, 88 N.E. at 564.
This general proposition originated in City of Chicago v. Condell, 224 Ill. 595, 79 N.E. 954 (1906), where the Illinois Supreme Court determined that a public servant's delay in filing a petition for common law writ of certiorari is deemed unreasonable not merely due to the lapse of time, but where a detriment or inconvenience to the public results. Condell, 224 Ill. at 598, 79 N.E. at 956. Where a public servant delays in filing his action, a detriment to the public inherently results because the restoration of the plaintiff to his prior position confers upon him the right to require the payment of his salary up to that date. Condell, 224 Ill. at 599, 79 N.E. at 956. Therefore, "a party is required to act speedily in making his application and any unreasonable delay will warrant the refusal of the writ." Condell, 224 Ill. at 598-99, 79 N.E. at 956. The specific six-month rule later emerged in Clark v. City of Chicago, 233 Ill. 113, 84 N.E. 170 (1908). At the time Clark was decided, there existed a statutory method to review judgments of justices of the peace by writ of certiorari, which carried with it a six-month statute of limitations. Clark, 233 Ill. at 115, 84 N.E. at 171. The Clark court analogized such review to the review of an order of *611 removal of a police officer by the civil service commission; it thereby instituted the six-month laches rule for police officers, requiring presentation of a petition for writ of certiorari within six months of the entry of the order to be reviewed unless the officer provided a reasonable excuse for the delay. Clark, 233 Ill. at 115, 84 N.E. at 171.
Since Schultheis, Condell and Clark, the six-month rule has been employed in various other public employee cases, including Summers v. Village of Durand, 267 Ill.App.3d 767, 205 Ill.Dec. 321, 643 N.E.2d 272 (1994), Lee and Coleman v. O'Grady, 207 Ill.App.3d 43, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d 253 (1990). In Summers, the chief of police filed an action for breach of contract against the defendant, seeking back pay and lost benefits. The defendant filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, asserting, among other things, that the action was barred by the laches doctrine. The trial court dismissed the action. In reversing the dismissal, the reviewing court held:
"Courts have devised a rule to be used in applying the doctrine of laches to causes of action brought by discharged public sector employees seeking reinstatement and/or back pay. The rule is that a delay of longer than six months from the date of termination to the filing of suit is per se unreasonable and will justify dismissal on the ground of laches if: (a) the plaintiff can show no reasonable excuse for the delay; and (b) the employer would suffer prejudice by having to pay both a replacement worker's salary and a successful plaintiff's back wages during the period of delay." Summers, 267 Ill.App.3d at 771, 205 Ill.Dec. 321, 643 N.E.2d at 276.
Although the plaintiff in Summers waited longer than six months to file his action and offered no explanation for the delay, the court stated that there was no indication the defendant had hired a replacement worker. Therefore, there was no indication of prejudice from the face of the complaint, and the cause of action was improperly summarily dismissed based on laches. Summers, 267 Ill.App.3d at 771, 205 Ill.Dec. 321, 643 N.E.2d at 276.
In Lee and Coleman, a fire fighter and police officer, respectively, sued their former employers for reinstatement and back pay. In both cases, the courts determined that the suits were barred by the laches doctrine, as the plaintiffs waited more than six months after their dismissal to file their actions. The court further determined that the delays were prejudicial to the defendants because they had already hired replacement workers. Neither defendant offered a reasonable excuse for his delay. Lee, 256 Ill.App.3d at 198, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d at 1260; Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 46, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 254. Quoting Kadon v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, 45 Ill.App.2d 425, 430, 195 N.E.2d 751, 753-54 (1964), the Coleman court reiterated the reasoning behind the rule:
"`[I]n civil service cases, where prolonged delay may easily prejudice governmental bodies, impair orderly procedures and work to the disadvantage of third parties, time is an essential factor. The most stringent requirement timewise is in those cases brought by civil service employees to compel reinstatement and payment of back salaries after discharges alleged to be illegal. A rule has been established that if these cases are not brought within six months of the discharge they will be barred on the ground of laches, unless a reasonable explanation can be given for the delay.'" Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 47, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 255.
*612 Defendant contends the plaintiff's action here was barred by this six-month laches rule, as it was an action for wrongful termination and back wages by a public employee. Although plaintiff urges, for the reasons discussed below, that the six-month laches rule should not apply to cases such as this one involving the dismissal of a nontenured teacher under the School Code, we disagree and see no reason to differentiate teachers from policemen, firefighters and hospital workers, as the same reasoning discussed above applies to all civil servants.
Plaintiff first contends that the laches doctrine is not applicable in this case because it is an equitable doctrine, which cannot be used to bar an action for monetary damages. This argument has been previously rejected on a number of occasions. While we agree that traditionally, statutes of limitation were generally applied to legal actions and the laches doctrine was applied to those actions based in equity, such "mechanical" applications are no longer followed. See Sundance Homes, Inc., 195 Ill.2d at 270-71, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 262-63. Courts have applied laches to "equity-like" actions, such as mandamus, to quasi-equitable suits, to actions where equitable considerations are at the heart of a claim actually based in law, as well as to purely legal claims. 27A Am.Jur.2d Equity §§ 149, 194 (1996); see also Bays v. Matthews, 108 Ill.App.3d 1112, 1116, 64 Ill.Dec. 590, 440 N.E.2d 142, 145 (1982) (laches applies to sui generis procedures, such as mandamus, which are equity-like). For instance, in Schultheis, the supreme court specifically stated that the laches defense was applicable to pseudo-equitable proceedings at law, such as actions in certiorari and quo warranto. Schultheis, 240 Ill. at 170, 88 N.E. at 564. Subsequently, in Lee, and Coleman, the First and Fourth District Appellate Courts each explicitly stated that the laches doctrine is not limited solely to suits in equity and is applicable to cases at law in which a plaintiff seeks back pay for wrongful termination, in addition to reinstatement. Lee, 256 Ill.App.3d at 196, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d at 1258 (the plaintiff's action for reinstatement and back wages was barred by laches); Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 52, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 258 (same). This approach finds full fruition in Summers, where the court applied the six-month laches doctrine in an action where only monetary damages were sought. Summers, 267 Ill.App.3d at 771, 205 Ill.Dec. 321, 643 N.E.2d at 276. Along these lines, we note that this action began as one seeking reinstatement and back wages, however, the reinstatement action was ultimately dismissed by the trial court, resulting in the remaining claim solely for monetary damages. As a result, we disagree with plaintiff that the six-month laches rule cannot be applied to a public employee case seeking monetary damages in the form of back pay, particularly where the action was originally filed as one seeking reinstatement, as this one was.
Plaintiff next contends that the laches defense cannot be applied to a School Code case because the applicable statute of limitations supercedes the common law six-month laches rule. We disagree. Plaintiff asserts that, because the School Code does not provide its own statute of limitations, it is covered by section 13-205 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, which provides for a "catch-all" five-year statute of limitations. 735 ILCS 5/13-205 (West 2002); Sundance Homes, Inc., 195 Ill.2d at 280, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 268. Plaintiff argues that, where the limitations period is provided by statute, a judicially created rule, such as the six-month laches rule, cannot supplant the five-year legislated period. Instead, the Code of Civil Procedure should supersede the common law *613 rule. Again, this argument fails to distinguish cases arising under the School Code from others in which the laches doctrine barred a cause of action despite the existence of an applicable statute of limitations. As a result, we fail to see why the statute of limitations period in this case should be treated differently. See Lee, 256 Ill.App.3d at 196, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d at 1258 (dismissal of the plaintiff's action for back wages and reinstatement by the trial court on grounds of laches and the statute of limitations upheld on review solely on the basis of laches); see also People ex rel. Fox v. Dunham, 326 Ill.App. 562, 566, 63 N.E.2d 138, 140 (1945) (court held that the plaintiffs were barred from prosecuting their civil service action by the laches doctrine as well as the "catch-all" five-year statute of limitations for civil suits). We further note that in cases outside the realm of public employees, Illinois courts, or courts applying Illinois law, have often invoked the laches doctrine in contravention to the ordinary limitations period which would apply by statute. Maksym v. Loesch, 937 F.2d 1237, 1248 (7th Cir.1991), citing Slatin's Properties, Inc. v. Hassler, 53 Ill.2d 325, 330, 291 N.E.2d 641, 643 (1972); Aiardo v. Village of Libertyville, 184 Ill.App.3d 653, 659, 132 Ill.Dec. 939, 540 N.E.2d 861, 866 (1989); G'Sell v. N.P. Associates, Ltd., 153 Ill.App.3d 171, 175, 106 Ill.Dec. 268, 505 N.E.2d 1059, 1062 (1987); Beynon Building Corp. v. National Guardian Life Insurance Co., 118 Ill.App.3d 754, 764, 74 Ill.Dec. 216, 455 N.E.2d 246, 253 (1983). In Maksym, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals reasoned that such applications did not act in contravention to the statutory time limitations because laches, by requiring proof not only of unwarranted delay in bringing suit but also of harm to the defendant as a result of the delay, "is really a doctrine of estoppel rather than a substitute for a statute of limitations." Maksym v. Loesch, 937 F.2d at 1248, citing G'Sell, 153 Ill.App.3d at 175, 106 Ill.Dec. 268, 505 N.E.2d at 1061-62.
Accordingly, we need not presume that laches is in conflict with the otherwise applicable statute of limitations, as application of the laches doctrine is limited to instances where there is no reasonable excuse for the plaintiff's delay, resulting in prejudice to the defendant. In all other instances, the statutory limitations period applies. Therefore, laches is simply the permissible interposition of an equitable defense in an action at law. See Schultheis, 240 Ill. at 170, 88 N.E. at 564 (the laches defense may be asserted in proceedings at law); Di Santo v. City of Warrenville, 59 Ill.App.3d 931, 941, 17 Ill.Dec. 289, 376 N.E.2d 288, 295 (1978) (even though mandamus is an action at law and not an action in equity, laches is available as a defense).
Plaintiff nevertheless urges that the six-month per se laches defense should not be applied to a nontenured teacher's suit under section 24-11 of the School Code because none of the cases applying that defense involve suits brought by teachers. Plaintiff's argument must fail, as there is no sound rationale for distinguishing police officers, fire fighters and hospital personnel from public school teachers. The purpose of the per se rule is to protect the government, and as a result the taxpayers, from the dual expenses involved in paying two employees for the same job. In this regard, all of the factors discussed above in the context of Schultheis, Condell, Summers, Lee and Coleman, which deal with other public employees, apply equally to suits involving teachers, and any distinction between them would be arbitrary.
Plaintiff cites to Fumarolo v. Chicago Board of Education, 142 Ill.2d 54, 153 Ill.Dec. 177, 566 N.E.2d 1283 (1990), Walter v. Board of Education of Quincy *614 School District No. 172, 93 Ill.2d 101, 66 Ill.Dec. 309, 442 N.E.2d 870 (1982), and Bagley v. Board of Education of Seneca Community Consolidated School District No. 170, 83 Ill.App.3d 247, 38 Ill.Dec. 681, 403 N.E.2d 1285 (1980), cases in which teachers and principals filed actions under the School Code for reinstatement and/or back pay more than six months after their dismissal, which were not dismissed under the laches doctrine. However, as defendant points out, laches is an affirmative defense that must be raised by the opposing party. City of Chicago v. Alessia, 348 Ill.App.3d 218, 228-29, 283 Ill.Dec. 309, 807 N.E.2d 1150, 1159 (2004). Because there is no indication in any of the cases cited by plaintiff that laches was raised as an affirmative defense, those cases do not support plaintiff's argument that the doctrine should not be applied to School Code cases.
Plaintiff also cites to Sundance Homes and Meyers v. Kissner, 149 Ill.2d 1, 171 Ill.Dec. 484, 594 N.E.2d 336 (1992), for the proposition that the laches doctrine is no longer mechanically applied to actions titled as equity actions, "particularly where such an application would frustrate the intent of the legislature." Sundance Homes, 195 Ill.2d at 271, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 263. However, Sundance Homes and Meyers addressed very specific areas of the lawtax/revenue and real estateneither of which applies to the area we are concerned with hereactions by public sector employees for improper dismissal.
In Sundance Homes, the claimant attempted to use the laches doctrine to expand the period within which his action could be brought beyond the applicable five-year statute of limitations. The Illinois Supreme Court analyzed the area of tax litigation as one in which there was an expressed desire by the legislature to limit the time in which suits could be filed so as to avoid subjecting the government to the individual factual analyses required by equitable determinations. Sundance Homes, 195 Ill.2d at 271, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 263. Because of this clear legislative intent, the court concluded that the time bars for filing revenue and tax-related suits could not be expanded by cloaking an action as equitable and employing the laches doctrine. Sundance Homes, 195 Ill.2d at 282, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 269. In its analysis, the court quoted the United States Supreme Court's decision in United States v. Brockamp, 519 U.S. 347, 352-53, 117 S.Ct. 849, 852, 136 L.Ed.2d 818, 823-24 (1997), which stated:
"`Tax law, after all, is not normally characterized by case-specific exceptions reflecting individualized equities.
The nature of the underlying subject mattertax collectionunderscores the linguistic point. * * * To read an "equitable tolling" exception into § 6511 could create serious administrative problems by forcing the IRS to respond to, and perhaps litigate, large numbers of late claims, accompanied by requests for "equitable tolling" which, upon close inspection, might turn out to lack sufficient equitable justification. [Citation.] The nature and potential magnitude of the administrative problem suggest that Congress decided to pay the price of occasional unfairness in individual cases (penalizing a taxpayer whose claim is unavoidably delayed) in order to maintain a more workable tax enforcement system. At the least it tells us that Congress would likely have wanted to decide explicitly whether, or just where and when, to expand the statute's limitations periods, rather than delegate to the courts a generalized power to do so wherever a court concludes that equity so requires.'" Sundance Homes, 195 *615 Ill.2d at 272, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 263-64.
These concerns are not at the forefront here. First, we note that the laches doctrine is asserted in this case in order to shorten the length of time within which a suit may be filed, not to lengthen it, as in Sundance Homes. More overridingly, the same policy considerations articulated in the context of claims for recovery under the tax laws do not exist anywhere else, nor does the Sundance Homes case attempt to apply its holding outside the context of tax claims. Sundance Homes does not attempt to modify or change the line of decisions extending from Schultheis to Coleman, which have explicitly determined that in the particular case of a public employee suing his employer for wrongful discharge, a six-month laches defense applies. As previously discussed, this rule in no way frustrates an expressed intent of the legislature. The supreme court has consistently applied the laches doctrine in such cases over the past century, and the alternative would be to subject the government to dual salary payments where a plaintiff is successful in his wrongful termination action.
Meyers, on the other hand, is wholly inapposite to the instant cause. In Meyers, a downstream landowner filed suit against upstream landowners to recover damages caused by levees, as well as an injunction requiring their removal. The action was not one filed against the government, but against private landowners. In addition, the Meyers court itself provided that its decision specifically addressed real estate actions, finding that actions regarding title in real estate generally will not be barred in equity, prior to the expiration of the statute of limitations. Meyers, 149 Ill.2d at 12, 171 Ill.Dec. 484, 594 N.E.2d at 341. Accordingly, neither Sundance nor Meyers supports plaintiff's arguments.
Following this determination that the laches doctrine can be applied to an action brought under the School Code, we must determine whether the doctrine could not have barred plaintiff's cause of action as a matter of law, as determined by the trial court. As previously stated, laches serves to bar an action for back pay by a public sector employee where the action is filed more than six months after discharge (or six months after the plaintiff acquires knowledge of his right (see Sundance Homes, Inc., 195 Ill.2d at 270, 253 Ill.Dec. 806, 746 N.E.2d at 262)), the delay in filing causes prejudice to the defendant, and the plaintiff offers no reasonable excuse for the delay. In this case, plaintiff filed her cause of action 14 months after she acquired actual knowledge that she might have a cause of action under section 24-11 of the School Code. Specifically, plaintiff was told by Smith around September 5, 2000, that District 99 "owed" her a job under section 24-11, but she did not file her complaint until November 16, 2001. Clearly, her complaint was filed more than six months after she acquired knowledge of her right.
Despite plaintiff's tardy filing, the trial court found that plaintiff offered a reasonable excuse for her delay. She asserted that she was waiting for Smith to conclude negotiations with the district in order to avoid instituting legal action. We disagree with the trial court that this was a valid excuse.[2] Plaintiff was made aware of her legal right to notice under section 24-11 *616 around September 5, 2000. Between September 2000 and April 2001, Smith was reportedly attempting to convince the district to rehire plaintiff. However, Smith himself testified that defendant's position, beginning in the fall of 2000, was that plaintiff had been properly notified she would not be rehired for the 2000-01 school year through her one-year contract with defendant. He further stated that he informed plaintiff of this position in the fall. The district did not change its position, nor did it indicate in any way that it might change its position or consider reemploying plaintiff. The district did not induce plaintiff to wait to file her action and was in no way responsible for plaintiff's delay. See Condell, 224 Ill. at 598, 79 N.E. at 956 (excuse that the plaintiff was ignorant of the law and some of the facts was not reasonable where there was "no pretense that [defendant] was in any wise responsible for his ignorance in these respects or that it concealed or withheld from him any knowledge of either law or fact which it was its duty to disclose to him. Appellant was in no way responsible for the delay, and certainly the penalties of such delay should not be visited upon it"). Even assuming arguendo that it was reasonable for plaintiff to wait until the conclusion of Smith's discussions with the district, those negotiations ended, at the latest, in April 2001, when defendant informed plaintiff in writing of its position. This was seven months before plaintiff filed her complaint on November 16, 2001. Therefore, even accepting plaintiff's excuse, she still filed her action past the six-month deadline, and the trial court erred in determining her delay was sufficiently excused.
Nevertheless, this does not automatically lead to the conclusion that plaintiff's action should have been barred. For laches to apply, there must also be a showing of prejudice. In this regard, citing to Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d 43, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d 253, People ex rel. Casey v. Health & Hospitals Governing Comm'n of Illinois, 69 Ill.2d 108, 12 Ill.Dec. 695, 370 N.E.2d 499 (1977), and Lee, 256 Ill.App.3d 192, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d 1256, defendant argues that under the laches doctrine, public entities are presumed to be prejudiced where a public employee waits longer than six months to file a cause of action. Therefore, the employer need not assert specific facts to establish prejudice. Defendant asserts that the reasoning for this rule is that there is inherent prejudice to a public employer where the employee's delay leads to the payment of both a replacement worker's salary, as well as the plaintiff's back wages, were his action to succeed. Although we agree that case law has found an inherent prejudice to exist in such cases, we do not believe it has instituted an absolute presumption of prejudice without the establishment of certain facts.
The inherent prejudice to which defendant refers was articulated early in the twentieth century with the origination of the six-month laches rule in civil service cases. The courts reasoned the following:
"`It is manifestly unfair, where there is disagreement as to the propriety or legality of the discharge, that the relator should lie still, and allow another person to occupy the position from which he has been removed, and draw pay for his services therein, and, after more than four months has elapsed, that he should be allowed to have this remedy by mandamus to be reinstated in office, and recover compensation for services therein, which he has not performed, and which he has for a long time, without objection, permitted another person to perform, and be paid for.'" Kenneally v. City of Chicago, 220 Ill. 485, 504, 77 N.E. 155, 161-62 (1906), quoting People *617 ex rel. Young v. Collis, 6 A.D. 467, 39 N.Y.S. 698, 699 (1896).
Later courts agreed that prejudice to a public employer was inherent for this reason. See Casey, 69 Ill.2d at 115, 12 Ill.Dec. 695, 370 N.E.2d at 502; Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 48, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 255-56; Lee, 256 Ill.App.3d at 197, 194 Ill.Dec. 614, 627 N.E.2d at 1259-60. However, contrary to defendant's assertions, no court ever instituted a blanket presumption that such prejudice existed without evidence that a replacement worker had actually been hired and paid for the period identified in the plaintiff's suit.
For instance, in Casey, the court stated that it recognized the inherent risk of prejudice to an employer when a public employee delays in seeking reinstatement or back pay; however, it found that the specific facts of that case showed the plaintiffs' delay did not cause the employer prejudice. Casey, 69 Ill.2d at 115-16, 12 Ill.Dec. 695, 370 N.E.2d at 502-03. Therefore, prejudice was not presumed. In addition, in Summers, the court specifically recognized and accepted the six-month laches rule for public sector employees, but stated that it did not bar the plaintiff's action in that case as a matter of law because the defendant had not alleged that a replacement worker had been hired after the plaintiff's discharge. Summers, 267 Ill.App.3d at 771, 205 Ill.Dec. 321, 643 N.E.2d at 276. Again, although the prejudice might be inherent, it still turned on the question of whether a replacement worker had been hired. See also Long, 236 Ill.App.3d at 970, 176 Ill.Dec. 910, 602 N.E.2d at 858 (citing proof of hiring a replacement worker as sufficient to establish prejudice).
We further find that defendant misinterprets Coleman as instituting a presumption of prejudice in contravention to Casey and Summers. Citing to Kadon v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, 45 Ill.App.2d 425, 195 N.E.2d 751 (1964) (civil service cases will be barred by laches if not brought within six months of discharges unless a reasonable explanation can be given for the delay), People ex rel. Sullivan v. Smith, 133 Ill.App.2d 218, 272 N.E.2d 755 (1971), and Casey, the Coleman court agreed that "having to pay both a replacement worker's salary during a former employee's delay in challenging his termination and that employee's back wages, if his challenge ultimately succeeds," justifies application of the laches doctrine. Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 48, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 255. The Coleman court concluded that, for this reason, prejudice is inherent in public service cases such as this one only to the extent that the employer need not show that it hired a replacement worker in reliance on the plaintiff's delay. Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 51, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 257-58. The fact that a replacement worker was hired at all was alone sufficient to establish prejudice. Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 51, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 257-58. Therefore, in agreement with Casey and Summers, the Coleman court determined that although prejudice might be inherent, it is not definitively presumed without the establishment of certain facts, i.e., that a replacement worker was hired for the plaintiff's position. See Coleman, 207 Ill.App.3d at 51, 152 Ill.Dec. 11, 565 N.E.2d at 257; see also Long, 236 Ill.App.3d at 970, 176 Ill.Dec. 910, 602 N.E.2d at 858.
In this case, there is no indication from the record that the district hired an ESL teacher to replace plaintiff for the 2000-01 school year. Without such information, prejudice cannot be established and, therefore, whether laches should have barred plaintiff's cause of action was a question of *618 fact, which was improper for determination on summary judgment.
Defendant next contends that the terms of plaintiff's employment contract provided her with sufficient notice that she would not be reemployed for the 2000-01 school year to satisfy the requirements of section 24-11 of the School Code.
Section 24-11 of the School Code provides:
"Any full-time teacher who is not completing the last year of the probationary period described in the preceding paragraph, or any teacher employed on a full-time basis not later than January 1 of the school term, shall receive written notice from the employing board at least 45 days before the end of any school term whether or not he will be re-employed for the following school term. If the board fails to give such notice, the employee shall be deemed reemployed, and not later than the close of the then current school term the board shall issue a regular contract to the employee as though the board had reemployed him in the usual manner." 105 ILCS 5/24-11 (West 2000).
We agree with the trial court that the undisputed language in plaintiff's contract, as well as the undisputed deposition testimony, showed, as a matter of law, that the contract did not comply with the terms of section 24-11.
The plain language of section 24-11 requires the school board to provide written notice to a teacher regarding whether he or she will be rehired for the following school year within 45 days of the end of the current school year. See Bruso v. Alexian Brothers Hospital, 178 Ill.2d 445, 452, 227 Ill.Dec. 532, 687 N.E.2d 1014, 1016 (1997) ("[w]here the legislature's intent can be ascertained from the plain language of the statute, that intent must prevail and will be given effect without resort to other aids for construction"). Simply put, the notice must inform the teacher whether or not she will be reemployed at the school for the following term. Newborn v. Morrison, 440 F.Supp. 623, 628 (S.D.Ill.1977); Rockford Educational Ass'n v. Board of Education of School District No. 205, 11 Ill.App.3d 78, 80, 296 N.E.2d 100, 102 (1973). The language of the November 4, 1999, employment contract between the parties did not perform this function. The language that the contract would be null and void in June 2000 indicated simply that the contract would no longer be valid as of June. It said nothing of whether a new contract would be offered for the following term or of plaintiff's employment for the 2000-01 term at all.
In support of this conclusion, the trial court noted that Aksamit himself testified that when the district and Bill entered into the contract in November, neither party knew or could have known whether Bill would be rehired for the 2000-01 school year. The decision regarding which teachers to rehire was made at a board meeting in March 2000 and notices were thereafter sent out to the teachers about their employment for the next school year. Bill did not receive a notice regarding her future employment. Although defendant argues that Bill's actions over the summer of 2000, such as retrieving her certificate from the board and applying for other jobs, showed that she knew she would not be employed by District 99 in the 2000-01 year, we disagree. There is a distinction between not knowing whether she would be rehired and knowing, in fact, that she would not be rehired. Plaintiff's continuing contact with the district by mail, facsimile and telephone actually indicates that she was still unaware in August whether the district intended to rehire her, thereby *619 supporting the conclusion that the purpose of section 24-11 had not been fulfilled. Therefore, plaintiff's one-year contract did not provide the notification required by section 24-11.
Finally, defendant contends that the award of attorney fees to plaintiff pursuant to the Attorneys Fees in Wage Actions Act (Act) was improper. We agree. The Act provides in part:
"Whenever * * * [an] employee brings an action for wages earned and due and owing according to the terms of the employment, and establishes by the decision of the court or jury that the amount for which he or she has brought the action is justly due and owing, and that a demand was made in writing at least 3 days before the action was brought, for a sum not exceeding the amount so found due and owing, then the court shall allow to the plaintiff a reasonable attorney fee of not less than $10, in addition to the amount found due and owing for wages, to be taxed as costs of the action." 705 ILCS 225/1 (West 2002).
As defendant points out, there is no common law right in Illinois allowing the recovery of attorney fees. Scoby v. Civil Service Comm'n, 253 Ill.App.3d 416, 417, 191 Ill.Dec. 590, 624 N.E.2d 439, 440 (1993). As a result, the Act changed the common law "by permitting victorious employees to recover their attorney fees in cases where wages were `earned and due and owing,'" and must therefore be strictly construed. Scoby, 253 Ill.App.3d at 417, 191 Ill.Dec. 590, 624 N.E.2d at 440; Swanson v. Village of Lake in the Hills, 233 Ill.App.3d 58, 67, 174 Ill.Dec. 233, 598 N.E.2d 430, 436 (1992). The courts have unequivocally and without dissent construed this provision of the Act as not applicable to claims for back pay in wrongful discharge actions because, contrary to the requirements of the statute, such cases do not involve wages owed for work actually performed. Scoby, 253 Ill.App.3d at 418, 191 Ill.Dec. 590, 624 N.E.2d at 441, citing Schackleton v. Federal Signal Corp., 196 Ill.App.3d 437, 143 Ill.Dec. 309, 554 N.E.2d 244 (1989); Thaxton v. Walton, 122 Ill.App.3d 266, 77 Ill.Dec. 853, 461 N.E.2d 476 (1983); Great Northern Hotel Co. v. Leopold, 72 Ill.App. 108, 1897 WL 2688 (1897). In a wrongful discharge action, the plaintiff has earned nothing because she performed no work during the period of alleged wrongful termination. Scoby, 253 Ill.App.3d at 418, 191 Ill.Dec. 590, 624 N.E.2d at 441.
Plaintiff attempts to distinguish Scoby on the grounds that the action in that case was for wrongful discharge and was not brought pursuant to the School Code. We fail to see how this distinction makes a difference here. Regardless of the fact that plaintiff's action was brought under the School Code, like the action in Scoby, this action was for back wages for work not actually performed by plaintiff. It is undisputed that plaintiff did not work in District 99 during the 2000-01 school year, but she is seeking back wages for that year. Like the plaintiff in Scoby, then, the wages sought were not "earned and due and owing" by plaintiff as required under the Act. Because we see no valid reason not to apply this interpretation of the plain language of the statute as embraced in Scoby, Schackleton, Thaxton, and Great Northern Hotel, the award of attorney fees is reversed. Given our determination we need not address defendant's argument that the award of attorney fees was improper because plaintiff failed to make a written demand three days prior to bringing the action as required by the Act.
Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed and remanded for further *620 proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
O'MALLEY, P.J. and McNULTY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  A probationary teacher must work for four years and receive "acceptable" ratings in order to obtain tenure.
[2]  Plaintiff argues that once such factual considerations are taken into account by the trial court, the standard of review is an abuse of discretion. Even if this were so, we would find that the trial court abused its discretion in finding plaintiff's excuse sufficient to excuse her delay.

=== CASE 9741569 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:20.553532+00 ===

JUSTICE SLATER delivered the opinion of the court: The trial court granted the petitioner, Kathryn Radke, a plenary order of protection restraining the respondent, Ross Radke, from abusing, harassing, intimidating or interfering with the personal liberty of the parties’ daughter. Ross appeals, contending that: (1) the trial court abused its discretion in granting the order of protection because the evidence did not support a finding of harassment; and (2) any action to restrict his contact should have been taken under the existing dissolution action rather than by obtaining an order of protection. We reverse. FACTS Kathryn was granted residential custody of the parties’ 12-year-old daughter, Laine Radke, following the dissolution of their marriage. Ross was granted extensive visitation, including the first weekend of each month and every week from Tuesday through Thursday. Kathryn filed a petition for an order of protection on behalf of Laine on January 9, 2003. Kathryn sought, among other things, an order prohibiting Ross from abusing, harassing or intimidating Laine. The trial court issued an emergency order of protection ex parte. At the subsequent hearing on the petition, Laine testified that she went to her father’s house for visitation on January 7, 2003. She informed Ross that she did not enjoy spending time at his home, and she wanted to go back to Kathryn’s house. According to Laine. Ross told her that she was insane and he was going to take her to a hospital. Laine became afraid and tried to call Kathryn on the telephone. When she tried to make the phone call, Ross ripped the telephone off of the wall and told her that she was grounded. When questioned about her claim that the phone was “ripped” from the wall, Laine explained that there were three phones that “were all attached to one thing and he took the one thing all out.” Laine later tried to use the phone three additional times to call her mother or the police, and each time her father unplugged the phone she tried to use. Laine later left the house to walk back in her mother’s house. According to Laine, Ross followed her outside, neld her arms behind her back, pushed her in the door and pushed her into her room. Ross also tried to punch her twice, but she avoided contact by moving backward. Laine testified that she suffered a bruise on her arm as a result of this incdent. On cross-examination, Laine testified that she screamed and cursed during this incident. She believed that she had to curse and scream at Ross to communicate with him. She also kicked Ross in ihe groin, but claimed she did so in self-defense. Additionally, she testified that she had missed or cut short her visitation with Ross on several occasions in December 2002 and January 2003. The day after the incident, Laine went with her mother to the police station to make a complaint against her father. The police observed no bruises or marks on Laine. When asked why she wanted an order of protection, Laine responded that she did not want her father to touch her again and she wanted to be able to see him only when she wanted to see him. She felt that she had too much visitation with her father and she did not feel welcome at his home. Laine’s brother, Bryce Radke, testified that he observed a small bruise on Laine’s arm after she returned from visitation. Kathryn testified that she observed a bruise on Laine’s arm and swelling on her hand. Kathryn also testified that it was her idea to seek an order of protection, because Laine had begged her never to send her back to her father. Kathryn admitted that she used the order of protection to temporarily suspend visitation. Ross’s wife, Debbie Radke, testified that Laine screamed and cursed at Ross on January 7, 2003. Ross told Laine to go to her room and grounded her from using the telephone or the computer. Laine then tried to leave her room several times. At one point, Laine ran outside. Ross responded by escorting Laine back to her room by holding her arms. Laine kicked Ross while he was escorting her to her room. Debbie also testified that she and Ross had received several e-mails from Laine that contained profanity. Debbie’s son, Josh Williams, testified that he observed part of this incident. He testified that Laine kicked, hit and cursed at Ross. Ross unplugged the telephone and told Laine to go to her room, but he did not strike or kick Laine. Ross testified that prior to the incident, he had allowed Laine to miss some visits at her request. On January 7, he told Laine that he would call the police to enforce the visitation if she did not come over. Laine’s mother had done the same thing a year earlier when Laine had refused to go back to her mother’s house. Laine had a history of being on good terms with only one parent and then switching preferences. Ross further testified that after Laine arrived she became upset, cursed at him, and he told her to go to her room. She came back out of her room, told him that she was going home and continued to curse at him for several minutes. Ross refused to allow Laine to use the telephone to call Kathryn. Laine then kicked him in the groin and punched him in the face. Ross responded by placing his hand on Laine’s back and pushing her down the hallway to her room. Laine continued to leave her room to attempt to use the telephone. Ross unplugged the telephone and escorted her back to her room. Ross testified that he did not rip the telephone off of the wall or strike Laine. Ross also testified that he tape-recorded the incident. After he told Laine that he was recording, Laine admitted that he had not hurt her. The audiotape was played during the hearing, but was not reported in the report of proceedings or admitted into evidence. On rebuttal, Laine testified that Ross had previously slapped her because she did not give Debbie a present or call her on Mother’s Day. Laine testified that she suffered a “fat lip” as a result of this incident. During his testimony, Ross denied slapping Laine. In rendering its decision, the trial court stated that issues of visitation would not be addressed in the order of protection. The court specifically noted that it would not restrict Ross’s visitation, correctly recognizing that the purpose of an order of protection “is to protect, not to effectuate changes in visitation.” The court found that Laine was “basically a very believable witness,” but it did not make a specific finding of physical abuse. The court accepted Laine’s testimony that physical force was used to prevent her from returning to her mother’s house, but it also noted that “the statute says there can be reasonable directions of a child by a parent. I understand a parent has a right to punish a child.” The court concluded that “when there’s allegations of abuse, whether it be physical or emotional, the one thing that I don’t think you can do is deny them access to their other parent or to the police by phone. If you want to punish them and say you can’t call your friends on the phone, that’s one thing. But when you tell them that you’re denying them access to either their other parent or to the police, I think that’s harassment under the statute.” The court then entered a plenary order of protection requiring Ross to refrain from physical abuse, harassment, intimidation or interference with the personal liberty of Laine for two years from the date of the order. Analysis Ross contends that the trial court abused its discretion in granting the order of protection because the evidence did not establish that he had harassed Laine. We agree.  The Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 (Act) provides that protective orders may be entered against persons who have abused a child in their care. See 750 ILCS 60/214(a) (West 2002). “Abuse” is defined to include physical abuse, harassment, or intimidation of a child but does not include reasonable direction of a child by a parent. 750 ILCS 60/103(1) (West 2002). The Act defines “harassment” as knowing conduct which is not necessary to accomplish a purpose that is reasonable under the circumstances; would cause a reasonable person emotional distress; and does cause emotional distress to the person. 750 ILCS 60/103(7) (West 2002). The court has broad discretion to decide whether abuse, as defined in the Act, occurred. In re Marriage of Lichtenstein, 263 Ill. App. 3d 266, 637 N.E.2d 1258 (1994). The trial court’s decision will not be reversed on appeal absent an abuse of discretion. Peck v. Otten, 329 Ill. App. 3d 266, 768 N.E.2d 769 (2002); Whitten v. Whitten, 292 Ill. App. 3d 780, 686 N.E.2d 19 (1997).  In this case the trial court found that not allowing Laine to telephone her mother or the police constituted harassment. Under the Act, conduct is not harassment if it is necessary to accomplish a purpose that is reasonable under the circumstances. See 750 ILCS 60/ 103(7) (West 2002). Was it reasonable for Laine’s father not to allow her to call her mother after she made it clear that she did not want to be there and wanted to go back to her mother’s home? Laine only went to her father’s home after he threatened to call the police to enforce visitation. Whether this was wise is not at issue, but it clearly contributed to an atmosphere ripe for conflict. Under those circumstances, Ross could have reasonably believed that allowing Laine to call her mother, perhaps to request her to come and pick her up, would only exacerbate the situation. Certainly, after Laine screamed and cursed at her father and kicked him in the groin, denying her use of the phone was not unreasonable. It was also justifiable as “reasonable direction” of a child, a circumstance specifically excluded from the definition of abuse under the Act. 750 ILCS 60/103(1) (West 2002). In re Marriage of Blitstein, 212 Ill. App. 3d 124, 569 N.E.2d 1357 (1991), relied on by Kathryn, is clearly distinguishable. In Blitstein an order of protection based on harassment was upheld where the husband pulled three phone cords from the wall during the course of an argument to prevent his wife from calling the police. Conduct between spouses does not, of course, fall within the statutory exception for reasonable direction of a child. In addition, reasonable restrictions imposed by a parent on a child might be quite unreasonable in the context of an adult relationship. We emphasize that we are not disturbing the trial court’s factual findings; the court is in the best position to evaluate the credibility of the witnesses. People ex rel. Minteer v. Kozin, 297 Ill. App. 3d 1038, 697 N.E.2d 891 (1998). While the court found Laine to be “basically a very believable witness,” it did not indicate that it was accepting her testimony in its entirety. Indeed, in making no finding of physical abuse, it appears to have implicitly rejected some of it. In any event, our ruling is based on a rejection of the trial court’s legal conclusion that denying Laine the ability to use the phones, under the circumstances, constituted harassment. Ross also contends that the order of protection should be vacated because any action to restrict his visitation with Laine should have been taken under the existing dissolution action rather than by obtaining an order of protection. We agree. The primary purpose of the Domestic Violence Act is to aid victims of domestic violence and to prevent further violence. 750 ILCS 60/102 (West 2002); Wilson v. Jackson, 312 Ill. App. 3d 1156, 728 N.E.2d 832 (2000). Obtaining an order of protection is not the proper procedure for resolving child custody or visitation issues. Those issues should be resolved under the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (750 ILCS 5/101 et seq. (West 2002)). Wilson, 312 Ill. App. 3d 1156, 728 N.E.2d 832, citing Ire re Marriage of Gordon, 233 Ill. App. 3d 617, 599 N.E.2d 1151 (1992). In Wilson, this court found that the petitioner’s primary purpose in seeking an order of protection was to obtain visitation and custody of his child rather than to prevent abuse. We vacated the order of protection granted by the trial court due to the petitioner’s misuse of the Act, as well as insufficient evidence of abuse. Wilson, 312 Ill. App. 3d 1156, 728 N.E.2d 832. In this case, Kathryn admitted that she obtained the order of protection to temporarily suspend visitation. Laine also indicated that the order of protection was sought so that she could see her father only when she wanted to see him. The Domestic Violence Act is not the appropriate vehicle for resolving such issues. We note that the order of protection did not restrict Ross’s visitation or contact with Laine. The court narrowly drafted the order to prohibit physical abuse, harassment, interference with personal liberty or intimidation. Nevertheless, based on this record, we believe that Kathryn misused the Domestic Violence Act for the purpose of attempting to alter Ross’s visitation with Laine. For that reason, and because we find that no harassment occurred, we reverse the judgment of the circuit court and vacate the order of protection. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated above, the judgment of the circuit is reversed and the order of protection is vacated. Reversed; order vacated. HOLDRIDGE, EJ., concurs.

=== CASE 2227517 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:37.944866+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 76 (2000)
In re Petition to Transfer to Disability Status of Patricia JAMBOIS, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C5-00-1455.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 22, 2000.
ORDER
The Director of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility has filed a petition seeking to transfer Patricia Jambois to disability inactive status on the grounds that she has been found to be an incapacitated person in two judicial proceedings and may be immediately transferred to disability status pursuant to Rule 28(b), Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR).
Based upon an independent review of the documents attached to the petition,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that respondent is transferred to disability inactive status effective immediately. She may seek reinstatement pursuant to Rules 18 and 28(d), RLPR, upon proof that she is psychologically fit to resume the practice of law. All pending disciplinary investigations are stayed until respondent seeks reinstatement pursuant to Rules 18 and 28(d), RLPR.
BY THE COURT:
Alan C. Page
Associate Justice

=== CASE 9741531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:23.605287+00 ===

Kelly, P.J.
Plaintiff Joseph A. Morinelli appeals as of right the judgment entered following a jury trial in this action to enforce two disability insurance policies. Plaintiff Perfusion Associates of Michigan, Inc. (pam), appeals as of right the trial court’s order granting summary disposition in favor of defendant Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company. We reverse in part, affirm in part, and remand.
i
Plaintiff Morinelli is a perfusionist, which is the individual who operates the heart-lung machine, as well as other equipment, to keep a patient alive during open-heart surgery. In April 1990, Morinelli and his partners formed PAM. One year later, they purchased two policies of insurance from defendant: a disability income policy, which personally insured Morinelli in the event he suffered a loss resulting from injury or sickness, and a business buy-out expense disability policy, which insured PAM for any expenses attributable to a buy-sell agreement between the corporation and Morinelli if he ever became totally disabled.
Under the disability income policy, “total disability” is defined as follows:
Total Disability and totally disabled means that due to Injuries or Sickness, the Insured:
*2581. is not able to perform the substantial and material duties of his/her occupation; and
2. is receiving care by a Physician which is appropriate for the condition causing the disability. We will waive this requirement when continued care would be of no benefit to the Insured.
In July 1993, Dr. Eugene Calabrese examined Morinelli and diagnosed him as having diabetes. Dr. Calabrese prescribed Glucotrol, an oral medication designed to reduce blood sugar levels, a diet, and exercise. Over time, the Glucotrol was adjusted to the maximum recommended dosage, and, by September 1994, Morinelli needed insulin injections to control the diabetes. At the timé, Morinelli was experiencing fatigue, forgetfulness, and frequent urination, all of which compromised his ability to perform as a perfusionist.
On October 24, 1994, Morinelli filed a disability claim, which was supported by Dr. Calabrese’s opinion that he was totally disabled. Defendant began paying benefits under its disability income policy, but later terminated the payments, asserting (1) that Morinelli’s diabetes had first manifested itself before the issuance of the insurance policies, and (2) that diabetes did not appear to impair his ability to perform the material and substantial duties of his occupation in that the claim was based on an assumption that a diabetic incident would arise and did not allege that Morinelli was unable to perform his duties absent such an incident. The plaintiffs subsequently filed this action asserting breach of contract, as well as other claims not germane to this appeal.
The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition, which sought to rescind the buy-out *259expense disability policy because, contrary to representations in the application for insurance, no written agreement existed between PAM, or its principals, and Morinelli. The court found that PAM failed to meet a condition precedent for the payment of benefits under the terms of the policy in that there was no buy-sell agreement in place until after either of the plaintiffs had filed a claim.
At trial, defendant presented evidence concerning the quality of the treatment rendered by Dr. Calabrese. Standard of care testimony was admitted over Morinelli’s objection. As specified on the verdict form, the jury found that Morinelli “suffered from a sickness, to wit: diabetes, from June 23, 1995, to the present, that has prevented him from performing the substantial and material duties of his occupation as a perfusionist.” The jury did not find that Morinelli “received care by a physician that was appropriate for the condition of diabetes.”
The court denied Morinelli’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV) on the basis of its finding that the evidence was sufficient to support the verdict in that the definition of “total disability” included a finding of “appropriate care.” The court ruled that Morinelli could not claim surprise because defendant had raised the issue in its affirmative defenses,1 in its response to interrogatories,2 and in *260its opening statements.3 Moreover, Morinelli did not raise the issue of the meaning of the phrase “appropriate care” until after the verdict. The court also denied Morinelli’s motion for a new trial on the basis of its finding that the policy language was unambiguous. The meaning of the word “appropriate” as used in the policy’s medical care clause forms the crux of this appeal.
n
Morinelli (hereafter plaintiff) first argues that the defendant’s allegation that the care received by plaintiff was inappropriate in that it did not meet the standard of care was not a proper contractual defense to his claim for disability benefits. Plaintiff argues that the treatment he received for his diabetes was appropriate for the condition and, therefore, met the clear language of the policy. We agree.
We review a trial court’s decision with regard to a motion for jnov de novo. Meagher v Wayne State Univ, 222 Mich App 700, 721; 565 NW2d 401 (1997). In reviewing a decision regarding a motion for jnov, this Court must view the testimony and all legitimate inferences that may be drawn therefrom in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Forge v Smith, 458 Mich 198, 204; 580 NW2d 876 (1998). If reasonable jurors could have honestly reached difier*261ent conclusions, the jury verdict must stand. Severn v Sperry Corp, 212 Mich App 406, 412; 538 NW2d 50 (1995). The interpretation of contractual language is an issue of law that is also reviewed de novo on appeal. Morley v Automobile Club of Michigan, 458 Mich 459, 465; 581 NW2d 237 (1998).
In deciding a motion for a new trial, the trial court’s function is to determine whether the overwhelming weight of the evidence favors the losing party. Phinney v Perlmutter, 222 Mich App 513, 525; 564 NW2d 532 (1997). This Court must determine whether the trial court abused its discretion in ruling with regard to a motion for a new trial. Id. Substantial deference is given to the trial court’s conclusion that the verdict was not against the great weight of the evidence. Id.
The purpose underlying a policy’s medical care clause is that of enabling the insurer to guard against fraudulent claims and to establish the good faith of the claimant. 10 Couch, Insurance, 3d, § 146:25, p 146-53. The insurer’s review of the nature of the care concerns whether it is “necessary and causally related” to the alleged disability. Id., p 146-54. Although the medical clause in this policy is under the definition of “total disability,” it is actually a requirement or a condition of coverage, and compliance with the condition is an issue distinct from that of the elements of total disability. Crosby v Prudence Mut Casualty Co, 252 SC 294; 166 SE2d 201 (1969).
An insurance policy is much the same as another contract; it is an agreement between the parties. Auto-Owners Ins Co v Churchman, 440 Mich 560, 566; 489 NW2d 431 (1992); Moore v First Security Casualty Co, 224 Mich App 370, 375; 568 NW2d 841 (1997). Any ambiguities in insurance contracts are *262liberally construed in favor of the insured and against the insurer, who drafted the contract. State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co v Enterprise Leasing Co, 452 Mich 25, 38; 549 NW2d 345 (1996). This does not mean that the plain meaning of a word or phrase should be perverted, or that a word or phrase, the meaning of which is specific and well recognized, should be given some alien construction merely for the purpose of benefiting an insured. Upjohn Co v New Hampshire Ins Co, 438 Mich 197, 208, n 8; 476 NW2d 392 (1991). The fact that a policy does not define a relevant term does not render the policy ambiguous. Henderson v State Farm Fire & Casualty Co, 460 Mich 348, 354; 596 NW2d 190 (1999). This Court must interpret the terms of the contract in accordance with their commonly used meanings. Group Ins Co of Michigan v Czopek, 440 Mich 590, 596; 489 NW2d 444 (1992).
The policy at issue in this case does not define the word “appropriate,” and no Michigan case has interpreted language similar to that found in defendant’s disability policy. The court may refer to dictionary definitions when appropriate when ascertaining the precise meaning of a particular term. Popma v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 446 Mich 460, 470; 521 NW2d 831 (1994). The word “appropriate” is defined as “particularly suitable; fitting; compatible.” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (2d ed, 1997). Similarly, “appropriate” is defined as “[s]uitable for a particular person, condition, occasion, or place; proper; fitting.” The American Heritage Dictionary: Second College Edition (1985).
It is this Court’s opinion that the language found in the policy is not ambiguous and that “appropriate *263care” does not require a qualitative evaluation of the care provided. The policy does not state that to recover benefits under the policy, the insured must receive “appropriate care”; rather, the contract states that the care received must be “appropriate for the condition causing the disability.” Care “appropriate for the condition causing the disability” is care that is necessary and causally related to the condition forming the basis of the disability claim. It cannot be disputed that the insured in this case was receiving care from a licensed physician, acting within the scope of his license, that was appropriate to the treatment of diabetes (i.e., instruction on diet and exercise, periodic office visits, and the prescription of insulin). It was Dr. James LaFleur’s testimony and defense counsel's closing argument that cast specific doubt on the “appropriateness” of the care that Morinelii received. If this case involved a claim for medical malpractice, a determination of the standard of care and whether that standard was met would surely be in order. This case, however, involves an insured making a claim under his disability policy. As such, whether the level of treatment met the standard of care is not pertinent to a determination whether the care was appropriate.
Regardless of whether Morinelii had forewarning of defendant’s plan to argue standard of care issues, we deem the opinion testimony of Dr. LaFleur regarding the care rendered by Dr. Calabrese, as well as defendant’s arguments regarding the standard of care, to be beyond the scope of the issues to be decided in an action to enforce a disability insurance contract. Defendant’s expert witnesses testified that medication, diet control, and exercise are key elements in treating diabetes. Dr. George Grunberger stated in his *264deposition that he had no substantial complaint with how Dr. Calabrese treated Morinelli.4 Dr. Calabrese was treating Morinelli for his diabetes; the care was an appropriate regimen for the diabetic condition according to the parties and the experts.
Defendant is correct in its assertion that Morinelli had the burden of proving that he was disabled pursuant to the language of the policy. Forman v Prudential Ins Co of America, 310 Mich 145, 148; 16 NW2d 696 (1944). It is our opinion that Morinelli met that burden by showing not only that he was unable'to perform the substantial and material duties of a perfusionist, but also that he was receiving appropriate care for diabetes at the time the claim was filed. We hold that, in the context of this disability insurance dispute, the jury erred in concluding that the course of treatment Morinelli received was not appropriate care as contemplated by the policy.
III
Morinelli also argues that he was denied a fair trial by the admission, over his objection, of testimony concerning the quality of care rendered by Dr. Calabrese. We agree.
Dr. LaFleur was the last witness to testify. After reviewing Morinelli’s medical history and detailing fluctuations in his blood sugar levels and weight, defense counsel posed the following question to Dr. LaFleur:
*265Q: All right. Now, if you had a patient who had those levels of glycohemoglobin, and if there was a prescription for insulin on October 7, 1994, what would a — what would a — what would the appropriate course of treatment be over the course of time with regard to the glycohemoglobin, the insulin and diet?
Plaintiff objected on the ground that Dr. LaFleur’s expert testimony was inconsistent with that represented in defendant’s answer to Morinelli’s interrogatory regarding the scope of the opinions to be rendered by its experts. Specifically, plaintiff alleged that Dr. LaFleur’s testimony was given in violation of MCR 2.302(E)(l)(a)(ii), which states:
(E) Supplementation of Responses.
(1) Duty to Supplement. A party who has responded to a request for discovery with a response that was complete when made is under no duty to supplement the response to include information acquired later, except as follows:
(a) A party is under a duty seasonably to supplement the response with respect to a question directly addressed to
* * *
(ii) the identity of each person expected to be called as an expert witness at trial, the subject matter on which the expert is expected to testily, and the substance of the expert’s testimony.
It is within the trial court’s discretion to sanction a party for violating the discovery rules. MCR 2.302(E)(2). Likewise, .a trial court’s decision to admit evidence is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Dep’t of Transportation v VanElslander, 460 Mich 127, 129; 594 NW2d 841 (1999). We find that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing Dr. LaFleur to *266testify regarding the quality of care received by Morinelli.5
Morinelli argued that, on the basis of defendant’s answer to the interrogatory regarding expert testimony, he did not consider it necessary to depose Dr. LaFleur because he had no idea the doctor would testify regarding the standard of care. As an offer of proof, Morinelli stated that he was unprepared to address criticism of Dr. Calabrese because there was no indication during discovery that defendant would suggest that Dr. Calabrese had fallen short of some undefined standard of care in treating Morinelli’s diabetes. The trial court agreed.
Nevertheless, Dr. LaFleur was allowed to testify regarding what treatment would have been successful in controlling Morinelli’s diabetes, and that with all the various testing methods and new drugs, there was no reason why Morinelli could not return to normal workday functions. The trial court attempted to rectify any perceived discrepancies between defendant’s interrogatory answer and Dr. LaFleur’s actual testimony. Dr. LaFleur was of the opinion that, if Morinelli maintained his blood sugar levels through proper insulin therapy, maintained a steady low-calorie diet, and took short breaks during long surgeries, he would be able to perform the duties of a perfusionist.
Although the quality of care testimony could arguably be considered relevant to the first prong of the *267definition of “total disability,” defense counsel’s closing argument made clear that the testimony was offered to show that the treatment did not meet the standard of care for diabetic patients. During closing argument, defendant’s counsel claimed that contrary to the recognized procedure for treating a diabetic patient’s blood sugar levels there had been “[t]otai neglect in the care and treatment of Mr. Morinelli’s weight problem.” He also stated: “The doctor’s not giving the right treatment. There’s something seriously wrong.”
Defendant’s counsel continued:
They think it’s okay. Dr. Calabrese thinks it’s okay to bring him down to 11 or 12 from 16 and send the man on his way. And it’s absurd. He’s killing the man. It’s absurd. It’s the most inappropriate care I’ve ever seen. He just — he just says, well, he’s gaming weight, and his levels have come down a little bit, so that’s fine. Doesn’t send him out for a consult, doesn’t change anything. It’s absurd.
Defendant’s counsel added comments that the chosen treatment was “absolutely, totally inappropriate.” He emphasized that the fact that the treatment was not succeeding in reducing Morinelli’s weight was evidence that “everything [Dr. Calabrese] was doing [was] totally inappropriate.” Morinelli did not object or seek a curative instruction.
Defendant argues that this appeal is actually a challenge to the jury instructions not properly before the Court because of Morinelli’s failure to object to the instructions We disagree. The pertinent instruction was given to the jury as follows:
The terms of the disability insurance policy control absent any ambiguity. In considering the definitions of *268terms contained in the disability insurance policy, you are to consider these definitions as they would be -understood by the ordinary business person or by a reasonable person in the place of the insured.
As instructed by the trial court, the jury was to give the terms of the policy their plain meaning. Looking at this instruction, we believe that Morinelli had no basis to challenge the instruction. Taken in the context of this lawsuit, it is clear that the word “appropriate” can mean only that Morinelli was being treated in a manner consistent with the usual course of treatment for diabetic conditions.
In support of his motion for jnov, Morinelli’s counsel stated that he “never conceived that this policy language could be invoked by the Defendant as a quality of care, as a medical malpractice standard.” Under the circumstances of this case, where Dr. LaFleur’s testimony was admitted over Morinelli’s objection, we find that Morinelli’s failure to request a curative instruction is not fatal to his appeal.
The jury’s finding that the care rendered by Dr. Calabrese was not appropriate leads us to the inescapable conclusion that the jurors agreed with defendant’s theory of the case — as presented by Dr. LaFleur’s testimony and in closing argument — that “appropriate care” as used in the policy meant treatment that meets the standard of care for physicians treating patients with diabetes. No evidence supported this conclusion other than the improperly admitted opinion testimony of Dr. LaFleur.
We find that the admission of the quality of care evidence was erroneous and prejudicial, and it injected into the case an issue that was not properly before the jury. Our determination that the second *269prong of the “totally disabled” definition does not entail an inquiry into whether the treatment met the standard of care supports a conclusion that the care rendered by Dr. Calabrese was appropriate, that is, necessary and causally related to Morinelli’s diabetic condition. The admission of Dr. LaFleur’s quality of care testimony constituted an abuse of discretion. We believe that, absent the improperly admitted testimony and defense counsel’s heavy reliance on it during closing argument, reasonable jurors would be compelled to find the care rendered by Dr. Calabrese was appropriate for the condition of diabetes, and, consequently, the trial court’s order denying JNOV is reversed.
IV
Pam argues that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition in favor of defendant on the ground that pam’s failure to have in place a “buy-sell” agreement when notice of Morinelli’s claim was made precluded recovery under the terms of the business buy-out expense disability policy. We disagree.
Pam filed a claim under the business buy-out expense disability policy before defendant terminated payment of benefits to Morinelli under the disability income policy.6 Defendant denied the claim. The policy provided as follows:
*270We will pay benefits to the Loss-Payee for Business BuyOut Expense if: (a) the insured is an owner of the Business and is engaged in Active Full-Tune Work when the Period of Disability starts; and (b) money becomes payable in accordance with the Buy-Sell Agreement because of the Insured’s Total Disability.
The policy defined a buy-sell agreement as “a written agreement between the Business and/or its Principals and the Insured. It must provide for the purchase of the Insured’s ownership interest in the Business due to his/her Total Disability.”
At the time the business buy-out policy was issued, PAM had a shareholder agreement in effect. The agreement stated, in part, as follows:
Upon a Shareholder’s death or termination of employment, the corporation may purchase the shares of its stock held by that Shareholder. If the Corporation purchases less that [sic] all of that Shareholder’s shares, the other Shareholders may purchase the remaining shares. If all of the shares are not purchased, the Corporation shall be dissolved as soon as possible. [Emphasis added.]
According to the application for the buy-out policy, the following question was presented to Morinelli and PAM, which question was answered in the affirmative:
Is it understood that a requirement for the payment of policy benefits is that a written agreement must be in effect between the Business and/or its Principals and the Insured covering the purchase of the Insured’s ownership interest in the Business because of Total Disability of the Insured?
*271It was not until November 1995 that Morinelli and PAM entered into a stock redemption agreement whereby PAM agreed to buy back Morinelli’s stock because of his total disability.7 As such, PAM did not have a buy-sell agreement with regard to Morinelli becoming totally disabled in effect at the time the policy was enacted or when Morinelli filed his claim for disability. The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition because the buy-sell agreement was created well after either plaintiff had submitted a claim to defendant. Consequently, the trial court did not err in granting summary disposition in favor of defendant with regard to pam’s claim under the buy-out expense disability policy because PAM failed to meet a condition precedent of the insurance policy.
Reversed with regard to the trial court’s denial of Morinelli’s motion for jnov and affirmed with regard to the trial court’s order granting summary disposition of pam’s claim. Remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Collins, J., concurred.
As an affirmative defense, defendant stated “[t]hat plaintiff Morinelli is not under the care and treatment of a physician, which is appropriate for the conditions of his disability.”
In answer to Morinelli’s interrogatory question, “State each opinion to which the expert is expected to testify and a summary of the grounds for each opinion,” defendant stated as follows:
Dr. [James] Lafleur will testify consistent with his previous statement given to Provident, which is in the possession of the plaintiff, *260as well as his response to plaintiff’s previous lawyer, regarding Mr. Morinelli’s alleged disability. In short, Dr. LaFleur will testify that in his opinion, Mr. Morinelli, notwithstanding his diabetic condition, is perfectly capable of continuing with his profession as a perfusionist, and is therefore not disabled from performing that profession.
In his opening statement, defense counsel emphasized that the word “appropriate” was important, though he did not elaborate.
During the deposition of defense witness Dr. Grunberger, plaintiffs’ counsel asked whether he had any criticism of Dr. Calabrese. Dr. Grunberger answered “no,” although he expressed displeasure with Morinelli’s glycohemoglobin count.
Dr. Calabrese is board certified in the field of internal medicine and has received specialized training in the area of diabetes. Dr. LaFleur, on the other hand, is a family practitioner whose practice includes the treatment of diabetic patients. Had this been a medical malpractice action, Dr. LaFleur would not have been qualified to give standard of care testimony against Dr. Calabrese. MCL 600.2169(l)(a); MSA 27A.2169(l)(a).
As noted by the trial court in its opinion and order granting defendant’s motion for summary disposition:
A thorough review of the Court’s file fails to disclose the exact date that PAM submitted its claim for business buy-out expense benefits payable under the policy, although it appears Plaintiff Morinelli filed his notice of claim under his individual disability policy on October 24, 1994.
*270. . . Therefore, it can reasonably be inferred that pam submitted its claim to Defendant under the provisions of the policy prior to June 23, 1995.
The agreement called for pam to purchase Morinelli’s stock at $900 a share as opposed to the $1 a share price outlined in the shareholder agreement.

=== CASE 9741532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:23.610494+00 ===

Markey, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I respectfully dissent in respect to the majority’s decision to reverse the trial court’s order denying Joseph Morinelli’s (hereafter plaintiff) motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (jnov).
As the majority notes, ante at 260-261, in reviewing a decision regarding a motion for jnov, “ [i]f reasona*272ble jurors could have honestly reached different conclusions, the jury verdict must stand.” Further, this Court must view all the evidence in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party, i.e., defendant in the present case. Severn v Sperry Corp, 212 Mich App 406, 412; 538 NW2d 50 (1995). After applying these standards to this case, I cannot agree that the trial court erred in denying plaintiffs motion for JNOV. In order to reach its conclusion that the trial court should have granted plaintiffs motion for JNOV, the majority has to make several preliminary findings. Then, using these findings, the majority sets in action a “domino effect” resulting in its conclusion that the jury’s determination was unreasonable. First, the majority concludes that the testimony of Dr. James LaFleur was improperly admitted opinion testimony. To make this determination, this Court must find that the trial court abused its discretion in admitting the testimony. Dep’t of Transportation v VanElslander, 460 Mich 127, 129; 594 NW2d 841 (1999). For this Court to find an abuse of discretion, we must find that the trial court’s decision is “ ‘so palpably and grossly violative of fact and logic that it evidences not the exercise of will but perversity of will, not the exercise of judgment but defiance thereof, not the exercise of reason but rather of passion or bias.’ ” Dacon v Transue, 441 Mich 315, 329; 490 NW2d 369 (1992), quoting Spalding v Spalding, 355 Mich 382, 384-385; 94 NW2d 810 (1959).
Because the majority has decided that JNOV should have been granted on the basis of the improper admission of Dr. LaFleur’s testimony, I will first address that issue. Without question, the disability insurance contract required plaintiff to prove two *273requirements: first, that he was unable to perform the “substantial and material duties of his occupation” as a perfusionist, and, second, that he was “receiving care by a Physician which [was] appropriate for the condition causing the disability.” Here, because we have the benefit of a special jury verdict form, we know that the jury did, indeed, find that plaintiff was so ill that he was unable to perform the substantial and material duties of his occupation, thereby satisfying the first prong of the condition set forth by the insurance disability contract. On the other hand, we also know that the jury found that plaintiff was not receiving care “appropriate for the condition” causing his disability, i.e., diabetes. The jury had received a specific instruction setting forth these two prongs and properly allocating the burden of proof to plaintiff. I agree with defendant that plaintiff cannot on one hand agree that he had the burden of proving his disability as set forth in the policy and as the jury was instructed, but then on the other hand also argue that defendant could not attempt to demonstrate that plaintiff was not, in fact, receiving “appropriate care” for his'diabetic condition.
I also do not believe that the phrase “care by a Physician which is appropriate for the condition causing the disability” is in any way ambiguous. The majority agrees that this language is not ambiguous and that “appropriate care” means “care that is necessary and causally related to the condition forming the basis of the disability claim.” Ante at 263. Where I split with the majority’s analysis is that they also conclude that this does not mean that the treatment must comply with the appropriate and applicable standard of medical care. If, however, one accepts that the word *274“appropriate” is defined as “particularly suitable; fitting; compatible,” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (2d ed, 1997), and as “[s]uitable for a particular person, condition, occasion, or place; proper; fitting,” The American Heritage Dictionary: Second College Edition (1985), and compares it to the definition of standard of care; I believe one must conclude that “appropriate care” is care that is within the norm of proper, reasonable, and ordinary care. Although I do not and need not conclude here that the term “appropriate care” is completely synonymous with “standard of care” treatment, I do believe that there is correlation between the two.
The definition for standard of care in a medical malpractice case varies somewhat depending on whether the treatment at issue was provided by a general or specialized physician. MCL 600.2912a(l); MSA 27A.2912(1)(1). For example, in an action alleging medical malpractice against a specialist, the plaintiff must prove that in light of the state of art existing at the time of the alleged malpractice, the specialist “failed to provide the recognized standard of practice or care within that specialty as reasonably applied in light of the facilities available in the community or other facilities reasonably available under the circumstances . . . .” MCL 600.2912a(l)(b); MSA 27A.2912(l)(l)(b). Thus, for the majority to conclude, ante at 263, that “whether the level of treatment met the standard of care is not pertinent to a determination whether the care was appropriate” is simply contrary to both logic and the obvious wording of the contract at issue.
In respect to Dr. LaFleur’s testimony, I do not believe that the trial court abused its discretion in *275allowing his testimony. Again, I concur with defendant in that the only issue preserved here is whether Dr. LaFleur’s testimony should have been excluded as a sanction for failure to supplement answers to interrogatories. Plaintiff does, indeed, claim that he was surprised at trial because he did not expect Dr. LaFleur to testify regarding “quality of care.” In reviewing the answer to the interrogatory at issue, I understand how plaintiff may have been somewhat “sandbagged” by Dr. LaFleur’s testimony. Nonetheless, the interrogatory did highlight the fact that Dr. LaFleur was going to testify that Mr. Morinelli was not disabled. As already noted and agreed on by all the parties, the contract set forth two requirements that plaintiff must establish in order to be deemed disabled under the policy. Part of the definition is, of course, that at issue: whether plaintiff was receiving “appropriate care.” Specifically, Dr. LaFleur testified that had plaintiff been receiving appropriate care for his condition, he would have been able to return to work. In other words, under the unambiguous wording of the disability insurance contract, the jury appropriately found that because plaintiff was not receiving appropriate care, he did not meet the definition of total disability or totally disabled. Because plaintiff had the burden of proof regarding the entire definition of disability, he cannot complain now that the jury did not find that he met his burden of proof. Dr. LaFleur’s testimony was relevant to an important issue of the trial, and the substance of it was sufficiently identified in the answers to interrogatories so that an abuse of discretion, in my opinion, cannot be found. The jury’s finding was in no respect “unreasonable,” nor was the court’s initial decision to admit the *276testimony “ ‘so palpably and grossly violative of fact and logic that it evidences not the exercise of will but perversity of will, not the exercise of judgment but defiance thereof, not the exercise of reason but rather of passion or bias.’ ” Dacon, supra at 329, quoting Spalding, supra at 384-385.
I also note that in addition to Dr. LaFleur’s testimony questioning the appropriateness of plaintiff’s treatment for his diabetes, other physicians, specifically Dr. George Grunberger, an internist, also opined that he did not believe plaintiff’s diabetes was well controlled and that he believed a failure in his treatment would likely disable him from his occupation. So, again, the appropriateness of plaintiff’s care for his diabetic condition obviously interrelates with whether he was able to perform his functions and duties as a perfusionist.
The majority, ante at 264, concludes that “the jury erred in concluding that the course of treatment Morinelli received was not appropriate care as contemplated by the policy.” Again, this finding is inadequate for a determination that the trial court erred in failing to grant plaintiff’s motion for jnov. Certainly the testimony in this case was such that reasonable minds could differ with regard to whether plaintiff met his burden of proof. That is the case even if Dr. LaFleur’s testimony were omitted. We are legally able to conclude that a JNOV was required when all evidence and legitimate inferences being viewed in a light most favorable to defendant fail to establish a claim as a matter of law. Phinney v Perlmutter, 222 Mich App 513, 524-525; 564 NW2d 532 (1997). This high hurdle, in my opinion, was simply not met, and the majority is unfortunately and impermissibly sub*277stituting its own judgment as trier of fact. This is an inappropriate role for ail appellate court.
For these reasons, I would affirm with regard to both issues.

=== CASE 3784485 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:12.937264+00 ===

The alien liquidator, Burgess, is in precisely the same situation, so far as the petitions show, as was the alien receiver Haavind in the case of State ex rel. Haavind, v.Crabbe, Atty. Genl., ante, 504, 151 N.E. 755, this day decided, to which decision we refer for reasoning and authority. The record contains the English statute, under which Burgess was appointed, from which it is *Page 521
evident that the liquidator has broad statutory powers. However, the appointment by the English courts of a statutory liquidator does not vest in him any property right or lien upon the corporation's property in the state of Ohio, superior to the lien of domestic policyholders and creditors. Carpinter Baker v. City Equitable Fire Ins. Co., Ltd., 238 N.Y. 147,144 N.E. 484. That being the case, whatever standing Burgess has here depends upon comity only. As a matter of strict right the courts of this state are not bound to recognize an alien liquidator. While upon considerations of judicial comity the courts of this state may recognize a liquidator appointed in another country, judicial comity does not require Ohio courts to recognize an alien liquidator applying under Section 641, General Code, for distribution of a fund which is held in this state for the benefit and security of policy holders of a foreign insurance corporation doing business within this state, no policy holder, nor creditor, having applied to the Attorney General to bring an action for distribution under Section 641, General Code.
The instant case differs from the Haavind case in the fact that the record shows that some 98 Ohio individuals and corporations who hold insurance in different insurance companies have had their risks reinsured in the City Equitable Company, and that the aggregate amount of the risks thus reinsured is over $110,000; namely, more than the face amount of the bond held as security. Until these claims have been purchased or matured, any distribution in the liquidation proceeding, if instituted, must be held in abeyance. Hence to *Page 522
grant this right until such time as the liabilities in question have matured or been canceled by the act of the parties would be futile. This fact makes it unnecessary to consider the effect of the assignment executed to Burgess by himself, as liquidator, of the property of the City Equitable Company.
The writ of mandamus is a high, prerogative writ, which does not lie if performance of the act prayed for is impossible. The writ, therefore, will be denied.
Writ denied.
MARSHALL, C.J., DAY, KINEADE and ROBINSON, JJ., concur. *Page 523

=== CASE 2227521 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:38.048997+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 920 (2000)
240 Mich. App. 504
Dale Edward MAY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Mathew A. SOMMERFIELD and George A. Sommerfield, Defendants-Appellees.
Docket No. 213378.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted February 3, 2000, at Grand Rapids.
Decided April 18, 2000, at 9:00 a.m.
Released for Publication June 26, 2000.
Arner & Banner, P.C. (by T.D. Arner), Boyne City, for the plaintiff.
Smith, Haughey, Rice & Roegge (by Jon D. Vander Ploeg), Grand Rapids, for the defendants.
Before: McDONALD, P.J., and NEFF and SMOLENSKI, JJ.
AFTER REMAND
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appealed as of right from an order summarily disposing of his third-party no-fault claim pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10). In its written judgment, the trial court found that plaintiff's injury did not meet the no-fault "threshold" requirement.[1] On appeal, plaintiff contended that the trial court erred in dismissing his claim. We concluded that the trial court erred in granting defendant's motion for summary disposition without making the findings required under M.C.L. § 500.3135(2)(a); MSA 24.13135(2)(a), which provides in pertinent part that the issue whether an injured person has suffered serious impairment of body function is a question of law for the court if the court finds that "[t]here is no factual dispute concerning the nature and extent of the person's injuries." We remanded this case to the trial court, instructing the *921 court to make appropriate findings concerning whether there is a factual dispute with respect to whether plaintiff's impairment affects his "general ability to lead his... normal life." May v. Sommerfield, 239 Mich.App. 197, 202-203, 607 N.W.2d 422 (1999); MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1), M.C.L. § 500.3135(2)(a); MSA 24.13135(2)(a), M.C.L. § 500.3135(7); MSA 24.13135(7).
In its written findings after remand, the trial court admittedly changed its original finding that plaintiff suffered an objectively manifested impairment of an important body function, stating that "[t]here is no objective manifestation of the injury the plaintiff now complains of aside from his subjective complaint of pain." Nonetheless, the court concluded that even if it had found that plaintiff had such an objectively manifested injury, "it would have found that there is no genuine issue of material factual dispute that the impairment does not affect plaintiff's `general ability to lead his ... normal life.'" The plain language of M.C.L. § 500.3135(7); MSA 24.13135(7) defines a serious impairment of body function in subjective terms, i.e., as an impairment that "affects the person's general ability to lead his or her normal life." The trial court properly compared plaintiff's lifestyle before and after the accident in determining whether a factual dispute existed with respect to the extent of plaintiff's injuries.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  See M.C.L. § 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1) ("[a] person remains subject to tort liability for noneconomic loss caused by his or her ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered ... serious impairment of body function...").

=== CASE 3784486 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:12.987252+00 ===

The petitioner claims that since the Pennsylvania indictments charge him with having committed the offenses in Pennsylvania while he was in the city of Cleveland, he is not a fugitive from justice of the state of Pennsylvania and, therefore, is not subject to extradition to that state. In this claim the petitioner relies on the provisions of Section 2, Article-IV of the Constitution of the United States, which reads in part as follows:
"A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall, on demand of the executive *Page 41
authority of the state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the state having Jurisdiction of the crime."
That constitutional provision is supplemented by a congressional enactment known as Section 662, Title 18, U.S. Code, the pertinent parts of which are as follows:
"Whenever the executive authority of any state or territory demands any person as a fugitive from justice, of the executive authority of any state or territory to which such person has fled, and produces a copy of an indictment found or an affidavit made before a magistrate of any state or territory, charging the person demanded with having committed treason, felony, or other crime, certified as authentic by the governor or chief magistrate of the state or territory from whence the person so charged has fled, it shall be the duty of the executive authority of the state or territory to which such person has fled to cause him to be arrested and secured, and to cause notice of the arrest to be given to the executive authority making such demand, or to the agent of such authority appointed to receive the fugitive, and to cause the fugitive to be delivered to such agent when he shall appear. * * *"
Since the petitioner was not in the state of Pennsylvania when the offense was there committed and did not flee from the state of Pennsylvania, this court is of the opinion that the provisions of the U.S. Constitution and laws enacted pursuant thereto, while all-inclusive and exclusive in the field of extradition where there is actual flight from the state wherein an offense is committed, have no application to the case of the petitioner because he was not a fugitive from justice as defined by the U.S. Constitution. See Wilcox v. Nolze, 34 Ohio St. 520;  Hyatt v. People of the State of New York, ex rel.Corkran, 188 U.S. 691, 47 L.Ed., 657, 23 S.Ct., 456; People ofthe State of Illinois, ex rel. *Page 42 McNichols, v. Pease, Sheriff, 207 U.S. 100, 52 L.Ed., 121,28 S.Ct., 58; Pierce v. Creecy, Chief of Police, 210 U.S. 387,52 L.Ed., 1113, 28 S. Ct., 714.
But the respondent Sheriff claims that Section 109-6, General Code, applies, and that the petitioner may be extradited under it.
Section 109-6, General Code, reads as follows:
"The Governor of this state may also surrender, on demand of the executive authority of any other state, any person in thisstate charged in such other state in the manner provided in section 3 [Section 109-3, General Code] with committing an actin this state, or in a third state, intentionally resulting ina crime in the state whose executive authority is making thedemand, and the provisions of this act not otherwiseinconsistent, shall apply to such cases, even though theaccused was not in that state at the time of the commission ofthe crime, and has not fled therefrom." (Italics supplied.)
Petitioner claims that Section 109-6, General Code, is unconstitutional because it is in conflict with Section 2, Article IV of the United States Constitution, and Section 662, Title 18, U.S. Code, above quoted, on the theory that the federal enactments cover the entire field of extradition, and petitioner cites in support of his contention Prigg v.Pennsylvania, 41 U.S. 539, 10 L.Ed., 1060; Hyatt v. People ofthe State of New York, ex rel. Corkran, supra; People of theState of Illinois, ex rel. McNichols, v. Pease, Sheriff, supra;Pierce v. Creecy, Chief of Police, supra; Innes v. Tobin,Sheriff, 240 U.S. 127, 60 L.Ed., 562, 36 S.Ct., 290; SouthCarolina v. Bailey, 289 U.S. 412, 77 L.Ed., 1292,53 S.Ct., 667.
Sections 109-1 to 109-32, inclusive, General Code, became effective August 20, 1937, subsequent to the dates of the decisions in all the above cases cited by the petitioner. This enactment is popularly known as *Page 43
the "Uniform Criminal Extradition Act" (See 9 U. L. A., 173et seq.) and has been adopted by the legislatures of not less than thirty-one states, including the state of Pennsylvania. See 8 Ohio State University Law Journal, 255, 256.
It is well recognized in the law that in order to charge one as an aider and abettor or conspirator in crime, it is not necessary to establish his presence at the scene of the crime. Constructive presence is sufficient.
Section 109-6, General Code, contemplates an extradition of a person charged with crime who may not be a fugitive from justice in the state from which he is to be extradited, by providing for the case where a person commits an act in one state the effect of which is the commission of a criminal offense in another state and authorizes his extradition into the state where the criminal effect is produced.
The fact that the Uniform Criminal Extradition Act, which does cover such situations, has been adopted by so many of the states indicates a need for such legislation to combat and suppress criminal conduct overlapping state boundaries. For that reason the court should be reluctant to strike down the legislative act in question unless it is clearly unconstitutional.
The federal enactments relating to extradition do not expressly or impliedly cover a situation such as that presented in the case at bar, and, since they do not, it would seem that there is no conflict between the federal and state enactments and that the latter merely supplement the former. It is to be observed that there are no negative provisions in the U.S. Constitution or federal legislation forbidding the extradition of one not physically present at the scene of crime in the demanding state. Congress in the enactment of Section 662, Title 18, U.S. Code, has exhausted its power on this subject under the constitutional grant and all *Page 44
additional power is reserved to the states.
Even if Congress had not exhausted its power, it has not attempted to legislate on this particular subject, and the state would have the power to do so in the form of enabling or supplemental legislation. See 8 Ohio Jurisprudence, 140, 161, Sections 39, 63; 35 Corpus Juris Secundum, 320; Cincinnati, W. Z. Rd. Co. v. County Commrs., 1 Ohio St. 77; City of Xenia
v. Schmidt, 101 Ohio St. 437, 130 N.E. 24.
This court is of the opinion that Section 109-6, General Code, does not conflict with constitutional provisions and constitutes a valid enactment.
The petitioner complains also that the warrant of the Governor is insufficient and that the indictments do not charge crimes under the laws of Pennsylvania, but we do not find any merit in these claims.
The writ of habeas corpus will be and is denied.
Writ denied.
WEYGANDT, C.J., TURNER, MATTHIAS, ZIMMERMAN, SOHNGEN and STEWART, JJ., concur. *Page 45

=== CASE 2227533 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:38.430045+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 735 (2000)
242 Mich. App. 172
Trevor GAUNTLETT, by his next friend, Meggen M. Maloney, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
AUTO-OWNERS INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellant.
Docket No. 212074.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted April 4, 2000, at Detroit.
Decided August 15, 2000, at 9:10 a.m.
Released for Publication October 18, 2000.
*736 Bodman, Longley & Dahling LLP (by Gary D. Reeves), Troy, for the plaintiff.
Anselmi, Mierzejewski & Ledwidge, P.C. (by Joseph S. Mierzejewski), Bloomfield Hills, for the defendant.
Before: MARK J. CAVANAGH, P.J., and SAWYER and ZAHRA, JJ.
MARK J. CAVANAGH, P.J.
In this action for no-fault survivor's loss benefits,[1] defendant Auto-Owners Insurance Company appeals as of right from the May 19, 1997, directed verdict in favor of plaintiff Trevor Gauntlett. Defendant also appeals as of right from the trial court's August 29, 1996, order denying defendant's motion for summary disposition and the trial court's January 23, 1997, order denying defendant's renewed motion for summary disposition and granting plaintiff's motion for summary disposition with respect to liability. We reverse.
In 1993, plaintiff was fourteen years old and lived in Augusta, Michigan, with his mother, Ellen Flinn, who was divorced. Flinn was not employed; however, she was the beneficiary of a trust. On March 19, 1993, plaintiff and Flinn were in an automobile accident. Flinn suffered injuries that led to her death that evening. Plaintiff became the sole beneficiary of the trust after his mother's death.[2] With the assistance of his next friend and sister, Meggen Maloney, plaintiff submitted a claim for no-fault insurance survivor's benefits under his mother's policy with defendant. Defendant denied the claim, contending that plaintiff failed to show any compensable loss of support after his mother's death.
Plaintiff filed a claim in the circuit court on November 2, 1995, seeking payment of the requested benefits by defendant. Defendant moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), arguing that plaintiff suffered no compensable loss after his mother's death because he continued to receive support from weekly child support payments and trust withdrawals, which were in the trustee's discretion but never denied to plaintiff; thus he received the same support after his mother's death as he received before her death. Plaintiff opposed the motion and moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(I)(2), arguing that the trust corpus was decreased because of estate and inheritance taxes, funeral expenses, and bequests; therefore, plaintiff suffered a yearly loss of investment income. On August 23, 1996, the trial court entered an order *737 denying both parties' motions and holding that plaintiff was required to show that he suffered a loss due to his mother's death, which the court would measure as the difference between the amount he received from the trust, through disbursements to his mother, during his mother's life and the amount he received in the trustee's discretion after his mother's death.
Defendant filed a renewed motion for summary disposition on November 15, 1996, arguing that plaintiff failed to show a loss as required by the court's August 23, 1996, order. The trial court denied defendant's motion and held that it would measure plaintiff's loss as the decrease in his mother's income-producing assets. The court then granted plaintiff's motion for summary disposition with regard to liability only.
A jury trial on the issue of damages was held on April 21, 1998. Plaintiff testified that he received various disbursements from the trustee after his mother's death, including disbursements for school, vacations, and a car, and he had never been denied a disbursement when he requested one. He further stated that he received approximately $33,000 a year in child support, half of which he was allowed to use and half of which was deposited into the trust. Pat Lewellen, an employee of the Old Kent Bank Trust Department, testified that her bank managed Ellen Flinn's trust. Lewellen stated that plaintiff was the sole beneficiary of the trust after Flinn's death and he would be entitled to all the trust income at age eighteen, half of the trust corpus at age twenty-five, and the balance of the trust corpus at age thirty. According to Lewellen, the means of plaintiff's support had not changed since the death of his mother; however, he received more support because he attended college. She agreed that the primary change to the trust caused by Flinn's death and the payment of taxes and administrative expenses was that plaintiff would likely inherit less money at ages twenty-five and thirty.
Following the testimony, the trial court noted that there was no contest between the parties regarding the amounts paid for taxes and administrative expenses. Thus, the court held that the only issue was a legal issue for the court to decide and it granted plaintiff a directed verdict. The court held that the measure of loss was the decrease in the income-producing assets and not the actual trust disbursements. The court determined that plaintiff had established that Ellen Flinn's estate was reduced because of administrative expenses for the funeral, lawyers, accounts, inheritance tax, and federal estate tax, all of which were attributable to Flinn's death. Therefore, the trial court entered a judgment of $157,422.70 in plaintiff's favor.
The question at issue in this case is whether the circuit court erred in measuring plaintiff's no-fault survivor's loss benefits under the no-fault insurance act, M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108, as the decrease in the income-producing assets contained in the trust used by the insured to support plaintiff, rather than as the difference between the amounts of support he received from the trust before and after his mother's death. We review a grant or denial of summary disposition or a directed verdict de novo. Spiek v. Dep't of Transportation, 456 Mich. 331, 337, 572 N.W.2d 201 (1998); Meagher v. Wayne State Univ., 222 Mich.App. 700, 708, 565 N.W.2d 401 (1997). Statutory interpretation is a question of law that is also reviewed de novo on appeal. Oakland Co.Bd. of Co. Rd. Comm'rs v. Michigan Property & Casualty Guaranty Ass'n, 456 Mich. 590, 610, 575 N.W.2d 751 (1998).
The primary purpose of statutory interpretation is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the Legislature. Frankenmuth Mut. Ins. Co. v. Marlette Homes, Inc., 456 Mich. 511, 515, 573 N.W.2d 611 (1998). When determining the intent of the Legislature, this Court must first look to the specific language of the statute. People v. Borchard-Ruhland, 460 Mich. 278, 284, 597 N.W.2d 1 (1999). If *738 the plain and ordinary meaning of the statute's language is clear, judicial construction is inappropriate. Id. However, if reasonable minds can differ regarding the statute's meaning, judicial construction is appropriate. Adrian School Dist. v. Michigan Public School Employees' Retirement System, 458 Mich. 326, 332, 582 N.W.2d 767 (1998). With these principles in mind, we look at the plain language of the statutory provision providing for no-fault survivor's loss benefits, M.C.L.§ 500.3108; MSA 24.13108.
Personal protection insurance benefits for survivors of individuals who die as a result of the ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle are covered in M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108.[3] The statute provides:
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2), personal protection insurance benefits are payable for a survivor's loss which consists of a loss, after the date on which the deceased died, of contributions of tangible things of economic value, not including services, that dependents of the deceased at the time of the deceased's death would have received for support during their dependency from the deceased if the deceased had not suffered the accidental bodily injury causing death and expenses, not exceeding $20.00 per day, reasonably incurred by these dependents during their dependency and after the date on which the deceased died in obtaining ordinary and necessary services in lieu of those that the deceased would have performed for their benefit if the deceased had not suffered the injury causing death. Except as provided in section (2) the benefits payable for a survivors' loss in connection with the death of a person in a single 30-day period shall not exceed $1,000.00 for accidents occurring before October 1, 1978, and shall not exceed $1,475.00 for accidents occurring on or after October 1, 1978, and is not payable beyond the first three years after the date of the accident.
(2) The maximum payable shall be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the cost of living under rules prescribed by the commissioner. A change in the maximum shall apply only to benefits arising out of accidents occurring subsequent to the date of change in the maximum. The maximum shall apply to the aggregate benefits for all survivors payable under this section on account of the death of any one person. [MCL 500.3108; MSA 24.13108 (emphasis added).]
The circuit court in this case of first impression was called on to determine the appropriate measure of plaintiff's loss of "contributions of tangible things of economic value" that he would have received for his support during his dependency from the decedent if she had not died. The court held that the appropriate measure was the decrease in the income-producing assets contained in the trust because of Ellen Flinn's death and the resulting payments of administrative expenses and taxes with trust assets. However, defendant contends that the proper measure of plaintiff's no-fault survivor's loss benefits is the difference between the amounts of support he received from the trust before his mother's death through trust disbursements to his mother and after his mother's death, when he became the beneficiary of the trust. We agree with defendant.
In analyzing whether the trial court correctly construed M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108, we read the language of the statute "in the light of its legislative history and in the context of the no-fault act as a whole." Gobler v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 428 Mich. 51, 61, 404 N.W.2d 199 (1987). "`The goal of the no-fault insurance system was to provide victims *739 of motor vehicle accidents assured, adequate, and prompt reparation for certain economic losses.'" Id., quoting Shavers v. Attorney General, 402 Mich. 554, 578-579, 267 N.W.2d 72 (1978). "The no-fault insurance act is remedial in nature and must be liberally construed in favor of persons intended to benefit thereby." Gobler, supra at 61, 404 N.W.2d 199, citing Bierbusse v. Farmers Ins. Group, 84 Mich.App. 34, 269 N.W.2d 297 (1978).
In Miller v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 410 Mich. 538, 302 N.W.2d 537 (1981), the Supreme Court discussed the issue of the proper method of calculating the amount of support a plaintiff would have received from the decedent if the decedent had not died. The Court stated that in analyzing the question, "our obligation is to discover and give effect to the Legislature's intention in enacting § 3108 as best we can determine it from the language employed in § 3108 and the no-fault act as a whole, and in light of such legislative history as is available." Id. at 556, 302 N.W.2d 537. The Court determined that the "fund of `tangible things of economic value'" was not limited to wages. Id. at 556-557, 302 N.W.2d 537.
In today's complex economic system, the "tangible things of economic value" which many persons contribute to the support of their dependents include hospital and medical insurance benefits, disability coverage, pensions, investment income, annuity income and other benefits. Had it been the intent of the Legislature to limit survivors' benefits to a sum equal to what eligible dependents would have received from wages and salary alone, it could be expected to have said so. It chose instead the far broader category of "contributions of tangible things of economic value" which, on its face, suggests the inclusion of benefits derived for family support from other and different sources. [Id. at 557, 302 N.W.2d 537.]
Analyzing the legislative history of the statute, the Supreme Court found that the phrase "contributions of tangible things of economic value" in M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108 evidenced an intent that benefits under this statute "should at least roughly correspond to economic loss damages recoverable under our wrongful death act. MCL 600.2922; MSA 27A.2922." Id. at 560, 302 N.W.2d 537 (emphasis in original). The Court continued:
Accordingly, it is our conclusion that the Legislature intended that the measurement of § 3108 survivors' loss benefits should include the value of tangible things other than, and in addition to, wages and salary. The dollar value of such items as employer-provided health insurance coverage, pensions, disability benefits, and other tangible things of economic value that are lost to the surviving dependents by reason of the insured's death must be taken into account. It is apparent then, that in many cases, the total amount of "contributions of tangible things of economic value" will exceed wage or salary income. [Id. at 561, 302 N.W.2d 537.]
The Supreme Court in Miller plainly stated that survivor's loss benefits include more than wages and employment benefits the decedent would have received and may include investment income. Thus, the trial court did not err in holding that plaintiff was not precluded from obtaining survivor's benefits merely because his mother's contribution to his support came from the interest income on her trust. However, this does not resolve the issue of the correct measure of plaintiff's loss of support caused by his mother's death.
In Miller, the defendant insurance company argued that the "contribution of tangible things of economic value" should be reduced by income-related taxes that the decedent would have paid and by an amount determined to be the decedent's "personal consumption factor." Regarding the question whether benefits should be reduced by income-related taxes the decedent would have had to pay, the Court stated:
*740 Tax liability associated with income is an inescapable fact of our modern economic life. In measuring the financial loss actually incurred by surviving dependents, it would be unrealistic to fail to acknowledge that surviving dependents would not have received for their support that portion of the deceased's income that he would have been required to pay in taxes. Moreover, the adjustment for such taxes can be accurately based on readily ascertainable information, without unnecessary administrative delays or time-consuming factual disputes. [Id. at 564, 302 N.W.2d 537 (emphasis in original).]
However, the Court held that calculation in every case of a "consumption factor" was "inconsistent with the declared legislative purposes of expeditious settlement of survivors' claims without complex factual controversy." Id. at 568, 302 N.W.2d 537.
A family is not run like a commercial enterprise. Family finances are not allocated or their expenditure accounted for as in a business. Accounting procedures are rarely, if ever, followed to account for the precise dollars-and-cents expenses in cash and in kind attributable to each member of the family. [Id. at 569, 302 N.W.2d 537.]
The Court concluded that the Legislature "did not intend that the calculation of § 3108 benefits should include adjustment for the decedent's `personal consumption factor.'" Id. at 569-570, 302 N.W.2d 537. Thus, the Court held that the calculation of survivor's loss benefits should be calculated:
(1) to include all demonstrable "contributions of tangible things of economic value" including, but not limited to, wages that would have been received as support by the surviving dependents from the deceased but for his death;
(2) reduced by an adjustment for the income-related taxes that would have been paid by the decedent on items contributed by him to his dependents' support;
(3) without adjustment for the decedent's "personal consumption factor."[Id. at 570, 302 N.W.2d 537.]
Where the decedent did not receive wages or a salary or have a regular income, it has been more difficult for the courts to determine what constitutes demonstrable contributions of tangible things of economic value that would have been received from the decedent. Grier v. DAIIE, 160 Mich.App. 687, 689-690, 408 N.W.2d 429 (1987), involved a temporarily unemployed decedent and a dispute over whether survivor's benefits should be based on what the decedent would have earned in the future if he had lived or should be based on his last month of employment. This Court stated:
Determining what plaintiffs "would have received" from decedent requires the trial court to predict the future....
* * *
[T]he Legislature stated that survivor's loss benefits are payable to replace the contributions the survivors "would have received" but for the decedent's death. Similar language employed by the Legislature regarding work-loss benefits in § 107(b) confers benefits only for actual loss of income.... To what extent wages would have been received but for the injury is a question of fact upon which proofs must be submitted.[Id.
In Gobler, supra, the Supreme Court also considered a case in which the decedent was unemployed at the time of his death. The Court determined that "the Legislature did not intend to automatically deny relief to dependents of a deceased on the sole basis that the deceased was unemployed at the time the accidental bodily injury causing death occurred." Id. at 64, 404 N.W.2d 199. The decedent had previously worked for the United States Forestry Service but was an unemployed student when he was killed in an automobile accident on March 16, 1976. Some time in 1975, the decedent had filed an application *741 for full-time employment with the Forestry Service and he qualified for inclusion on the Civil Service Registry on the basis of his education and superior academic standing. An inquiry of availability was forwarded to him on September 14, 1976, some six months after he died. A Forestry Service staffing specialist testified that four of the six people who qualified for the three open positions declined or failed to reply. The decedent therefore would have received a full-time position. Id. at 56-58, 404 N.W.2d 199. This Court denied the decedent's widow survivor's loss benefits based on these facts. Id. at 59, 404 N.W.2d 199. However, the Supreme Court agreed with the trial court that the decedent would have been employed by the Forestry Service if he had survived the accident and reinstated survivor's loss benefits. Id. at 66, 404 N.W.2d 199.
In McCollum v. Community Service Ins. Co., 137 Mich.App. 805, 359 N.W.2d 215 (1984), the decedent was a recently divorced mother who received welfare but was actively seeking employment. The decedent and her children lived in a house on the decedent's mother's farm with the understanding that the decedent would pay rent and utilities when she obtained employment. The decedent's mother also loaned her as much as $300 a month to meet the needs of her family. Id. at 807-808, 359 N.W.2d 215. The defendant insurer argued that because the maternal grandparents continued to provide financial support and rent-free housing to the decedent's children after her death in an automobile accident, the children had not sustained an economic loss. However, this Court held that the amounts loaned by family members to the decedent to care for her children while she was unemployed were "contributions of tangible things of economic value" received from the decedent because the decedent "exercised her independent judgment upon how these funds could best be used to support her children." Id. at 811, 359 N.W.2d 215. Moreover, the funds were loans that the decedent had agreed to repay. Id. at 812, 359 N.W.2d 215. Because her children had lost "this guarantee of repayment security," they had suffered tangible economic loss compensable under the statute. Id.
Although the fact pattern in McCollum. is similar to that of the present case because the decedent's source of income was not employment-related, the opinion is not on point here because the funds represented a debt undertaken by the decedent and there is no indication that those particular funds were directly available to the children after their mother's death. In the present case, by contrast, the trust continued after plaintiff's mother died and he received regular payments from the trust, including disbursements for non-necessities such as a car and vacations. According to the testimony, the trustee never denied plaintiff a requested disbursement.
In light of the relevant case law and the clear language of the statute, we conclude that the trial court erred in ruling that the proper measure of plaintiff's loss was the diminution of the trust principal. The measure employed by the trial court was contrary to the plain meaning of the statute, which controls and must be applied as written. See Grier, supra at 690, 408 N.W.2d 429. The statute clearly requires a plaintiff in a suit for no-fault survivor's loss benefits to submit proof of a loss of support that would have been received but for the decedent's death. MCL 500.3108(1); MSA 24.13108(1); see also Fredericksen v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 141 Mich.App. 235, 237-239, 366 N.W.2d 256 (1985).
The trial court determined that the diminution of the trust principal was the measure of plaintiff's loss. However, plaintiff would not have received these funds if his mother had lived because the trust would have continued in her name. Furthermore, even though plaintiff became the beneficiary of the trust after his mother's death, he was not allowed access to the principal until he was twenty-five years old. The trust principal was reduced by *742 the payment of taxes and administrative expenses, and therefore the income used to support plaintiff decreased, but there was no factual showing of the effect of the diminished trust principal on the support plaintiff received during the three years following his mother's death. Plaintiff was not allowed unfettered access to the interest from the trust in the three years following his mother's death, because he was not yet eighteen years old, and he could not have chosen to withdraw the entire interest.
The trial court erred in not requiring plaintiff to prove the amount of support he received from the trust before his mother's death and the amount of support he received from the trust after his mother's death. This comparison is the proper measure of plaintiff's loss of support that he would have received but for his mother's death under the plain meaning of the statute. See M.C.L. § 500.3108(1); MSA 24.13108(1). While plaintiff argues the difficulty of such proofs for a dependent who is a minor at the time of the decedent's death, the statute requires a showing of "demonstrable `contributions'" that he would have received from his mother but for her death. See Miller, supra at 570, 302 N.W.2d 537.
Therefore, we reverse the trial court's order entered May 19, 1997, granting plaintiff a directed verdict and judgment, and the court's order entered January 23, 1997, granting plaintiff summary disposition with respect to liability. We also reverse the trial court's order entered August 29, 1996, denying defendant's motion for summary disposition, because plaintiff demonstrated below, when challenged to show that he suffered a loss under the same standard we now hold is required by M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108, that there is no evidence establishing a genuine issue of material fact with respect to whether he would have received some greater amount of support but for his mother's death and thus that he is entitled to no-fault survivor's loss benefits.
In light of our holding regarding the issue discussed above, we need not address defendant's contention that the trial court erred in "amortizing" the payment of taxes and administrative expenses over the three-year period allowed by the statute rather than having them apply only to the month in which they were paid.
Reversed. We instruct the trial court to enter judgment in favor of defendant. MCR 7.216. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  See M.C.L. § 500.3108; MSA 24.13108.
[2]  We note that plaintiff was not a beneficiary of the trust before Flinn's death.
[3]  MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1) provides that "[u]nder personal protection insurance an insurer is liable to pay benefits for accidental bodily injury arising out of the ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle...." "Bodily injury includes death resulting therefrom...." MCL 500.3105(3); MSA 24.13105(3).

=== CASE 9741535 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:32.549864+00 ===

Wilder, J.
Plaintiffs Lena and Nuo Cacevic appeal as of right from a judgment entered following a jury verdict finding no cause of action in this products liability action. We reverse and remand.
1. FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS
Plaintiff Lena Cacevic worked as a palletizer operator at Johnson Controls’ Novi plant. While working the night shift on September 3, 1993, Lena sustained serious injuries to her right hand and arm when she reached inside the palletizer machine to free a pallet that became stuck in the elevator component of the *719machine. Lena tried to clear the jam by inserting her right hand and arm under a mesh guard into the pallet infeed opening to reach for the empty pallet and remove it from the machine. As Lena did this, the elevator raised the pallet, striking her hand and arm.
Plaintiffs filed the instant action against defendant Simplimatic Engineering Company, the manufacturer of the palletizer machine, alleging that defendant negligently designed and manufactured the palletizer by failing to include adequate and proper safeguards, provide adequate and proper instructions, devices, or methods to operate the machine, and provide adequate and proper warnings of both the inherently dangerous areas of the machine and the dangers in operating the machine. At the conclusion of the trial, the jury returned a verdict of no cause of action in favor of defendant.
The product at issue in this case is a Simplimatic Model 40 palletizer, a large, two-story machine that stacks eight layers of empty, plastic, soft drink bottles on wooden pallets that are wrapped for delivery to major soft drink companies. The palletizer was originally built by defendant in 1984 and subsequently sold to Hoover Universal in Taylor, Michigan. In 1989, Johnson Controls bought Hoover’s bottling operations and the palletizer was relocated to Johnson Controls’ Novi plant.
The palletizer consists of two levels and four major components: (1) an intake palletizer dispenser and conveyor, (2) a hoist or elevator, (3) an accumulator bed, and (4) an exit conveyor that releases the full pallets. The palletizing process begins with a wooden pallet being automatically placed on an intake conveyor and carried to the elevator shaft where it stops *720and waits for clearance to enter the elevator. Clearance is determined by photo cells that sense when full pallets exit the elevator and when empty pallets may enter. The empty pallet automatically moves forward into the elevator and is carried up about fifteen feet by hoist chains to the upper level where an accumulator bed gathers the bottles and then sweeps them onto the pallet. As each empty pallet is loaded with bottles in the elevator, another empty pallet enters the intake dispenser and is conveyed to the elevator where photo cells signal the machine to wait for the full pallet to leave the elevator before allowing the empty pallet to enter.
During normal use, the palletizer’s operator stands on a platform at the upper level near the moving accumulator bed where bottles coming down the assembly line are released. When a certain number of bottles have been collected, the operator presses a button to load them all onto an empty pallet that has been carried to the top of the machine by the elevator. As each layer of bottles is loaded, the elevator moves down just enough so that the tops of the bottles are even with the accumulator bed. The operator then places a “tier sheet” on top of the bottles to form a “floor” on which the next layer is placed. The operator repeats this process until there are eight layers of bottles on the pallet. When the pallet is ftdly loaded, the operator presses another button, lowering the elevator to ground level where the full pallet rests on a set of conveyor chains that slowly move the pallet out the discharge side of the elevator shaft. Once the full pallet is discharged, it is automatically transported to a wrapping area.
*721Most of the operation of the palletizer is automatic, but there are certain functions that an operator is required to perform to keep the machine running. Generally, an operator is required only at the upper level of the machine; however, on occasion, when a pallet gets jammed in the elevator, the operator or another employee must run down to the lower level to clear the jam before resuming normal operations. The palletizer is equipped with normal “on/off” controls, as well as three emergency stop buttons and a master electrical control panel with a lockable disconnect that completely isolates the machine from the electrical mains.
n. ANALYSIS
A JURY INSTRUCTIONS
Plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in instructing the jury that the manufacturer of a product owes no duty to design its product to eliminate foreseeable, unreasonable risks of harm that are “open and patent to all.” We agree.
Claims of alleged instructional error are reviewed on appeal for an abuse of discretion. Grow v W A Thomas Co, 236 Mich App 696, 702; 601 NW2d 426 (1999). Jury instructions are reviewed in their entirety to determine whether they fairly apprised the jury of the applicable law and the issues to be tried in the case. Id. This Court will not reverse a trial court’s decision regarding supplemental instructions unless failure to vacate the verdict would be inconsistent with substantial justice. Id.
*722At the conclusion of the presentation of proofs, the trial court instructed the jury in accordance with SJI2d 25.31 as follows:
The defendant has the duty to use reasonable care at the time it designed and manufactured the palletizer so as to eliminate unreasonable risks of harm or injury which were reasonably foreseeable.
However, the defendant has no duty to design or manufacture [the palletizer] to eliminate reasonable risks of harm or injury or risks that were not reasonably foreseeable.
Reasonable care means that degree of care which a reasonably prudent manufacturer would exercise under the circumstances which you find existed in this case at the time the machine was manufactured. It is for you to decide based on the evidence what a reasonably prudent manufacturer would do or would not do under these circumstances.
A failure to fulfill the duty to use reasonable care is negligence.
Pursuant to defendant’s request, the trial court also instructed the jury regarding a manufacturer’s duty with respect to open and obvious risks:
The manufacturer of a machine is under no duty to adopt a different design if the dangers to be avoided in the existing design, if any, are obvious and patent to all.
On appeal, plaintiffs object, as they did below, to the trial court’s reading of this supplemental instruction because it was not a standard jury charge and because neither the facts in the instant case nor the law in Michigan warranted an open and obvious danger instruction. Plaintiffs argue that SJI2d 25.31 adequately stated the relevant law governing a manufacturer’s duty in a case alleging design defects, and the open and obvious danger instruction was inapplicable.
*723In order for a trial court to give a requested jury instruction, sufficient evidence must be presented to warrant the instruction. Bordeaux v Celotex Corp, 203 Mich App 158, 169; 511 NW2d 899 (1993). A trial court may give an instruction not covered by the standard jury instructions as long as the instruction is applicable, accurately states the law, and is “concise, understandable, conversational, and nonargumentative . . . .” Chmielewski v Xermac, Inc, 216 Mich App 707, 713-714; 550 NW2d 797 (1996), aff'd 457 Mich 593; 580 NW2d 817 (1998); Bordeaux, supra. See MCR 2.516(D)(2) and (4).
In order to determine whether the trial court’s open and obvious danger instruction was proper in this case, we must examine the current state of Michigan law governing a manufacturer’s duty in cases alleging design defects. In Michigan, there are two theories that will support a finding of negligent design. Gregory v Cincinnati Inc, 450 Mich 1, 11; 538 NW2d 325 (1995). The first theory is based on a failure to warn. Id. The second, more traditional means of proving negligent design is premised on a defective design of the product at the time it left the manufacturer’s control. Id. at 11-12. Although plaintiffs’ complaint in this case alleged both theories, because the matter was submitted to the jury on the design defect theory, and because plaintiffs’ claim of alleged instructional error relates solely to the design defect theory, our analysis will focus on that theory only.
As a general rule, “[a] manufacturer has a duty to design its product to eliminate ‘any unreasonable risk of foreseeable injury.’ ” Ghrist v Chrysler Corp, 451 Mich 242, 248; 547 NW2d 272 (1996), quoting Prentis v Yale Mfg Co, 421 Mich 670, 693; 365 NW2d 176 *724(1984); Bazinau v Mackinac Island Carriage Tours, 233 Mich App 743, 757; 593 NW2d 219 (1999); Mallard v Hoffinger Industries, Inc (On Remand), 222 Mich App 137, 141; 564 NW2d 74 (1997). The law imposes a greater responsibility on one who manufactures and designs a product because the manufacturer is especially knowledgeable about the product’s capabilities and limitations as well as the foreseeability of harm. Christ, supra at 247. Further, the manufacturer is in the best position to effectuate the needed safety-related improvements. Id.
In Fisher v Johnson Milk Co, Inc, 383 Mich 158, 160-161; 174 NW2d 752 (1970), our Supreme Court, citing Jamieson v Woodward & Lothrop, 101 US App DC 32, 37; 247 F2d 23 (1957), established the open and obvious danger doctrine as a limit on a manufacturer’s potential liability in products liability cases. Recognizing that the law does not require that an article be accident proof or incapable of causing harm, and that users of products must assume some responsibility for their conduct, the Court held that “[t]here is no duty to warn or protect against dangers obvious to all.” Fisher, supra at 160 (emphasis added).
Subsequently, in Owens v Allis-Chalmers Corp, 414 Mich 413, 425; 326 NW2d 372 (1982), the Supreme Court limited its holding in Fisher to cases alleging design defects involving simple tools or products. A simple product is defined as “a simple thing of universally known characteristics, not a device with parts or mechanism, the only danger being not latent but obvious to any possible user . . . .” Jamieson, supra at 37. The Mallard Court noted that “the [Owens] Court stated that a manufacturer of a simple product is not required to design safety features to protect users *725from dangers that are obvious and inherent in the utility of the product.” Mallard, supra at 143 (emphasis added.) However, despite the Owens Court’s apparent approval of the holding in Fisher, the Owens Court then stated that the obviousness of the risks that inhere in some simple tools or products was merely a factor in determining whether such products were unreasonably dangerous. Owens, supra at 425. “The test, however, is not whether the risks are obvious, but whether the risks were unreasonable in light of the foreseeable injuries.” Id. The Court explained that some “[o]bvious risks may be unreasonable risks, and there is no justification for departing from general negligence . . . principles merely because the dangers are patent.” Id. Thus, a careful reading of Owens reveals that a manufacturer in a case alleging design defects is not absolved of liability simply because the danger associated with the product (simple or nonsimple) is open and obvious.
Several years later, in Glittenberg v Doughboy Recreational Industries (On Rehearing), 441 Mich 379, 399; 491 NW2d 208 (1992), a personal injury case involving a failure to warn of risks associated with an above-ground swimming pool, the Court held that there was no duty to warn of obvious dangers associated with a simple product. However, the Glittenberg Court expressly stated that with respect to a manufacturer’s duty in cases alleging design defects, its holding “signalled] no retreat from Owens”:
Our jurisprudence recognizes the well-established rule that there is no duty to warn of dangers that are open and obvious. We have also narrowed application of the no-duty rule to those cases involving “simple tools or products.” We have rejected the proposition that the “open and obvious *726danger” rule is an incantation that obviates the threshold inquiry of duty in design defect cases. . . .
In the design defect context, obvious risks may unreasonably breach the duty to adopt a design that safely and feasibly guards against foreseeable misuse. Because the manufacturer’s liability for choice of design is not determined solely by looking at the obvious nature of the alleged defect, obviousness of the danger does not preclude the possibility that an alternative design could reduce the risk of harm at a cost and in a maimer that maintains the product’s utility. [Id. at 393-394 (emphasis added; citations omitted).]
Although there has been some question whether the above language from Glittenberg was dicta only, and not controlling law, see Mallard, supra at 144, since the Glittenberg opinion was released, at least two panels of this Court have held that the open and obvious danger doctrine announced in Fisher and limited to simple products in Owens does not eliminate the design duty of a manufacturer, and that the obviousness of a danger is merely one factor in the analysis of whether a design is unreasonable. See Boumelhem v Bic Corp, 211 Mich App 175, 181; 535 NW2d 574 (1995); Adams v Perry Furniture Co (On Remand), 198 Mich App 1, 13; 497 NW2d 514 (1993).
Finally, in Casey v Gifford Wood Co, 61 Mich App 208; 232 NW2d 360 (1975), the plaintiff brought a products liability action against the manufacturer of an ice-crushing machine, alleging that the machine was not reasonably fit for its intended use because it was not equipped with guards. The trial court instructed the jury that “ ‘[i]f the manufacturer does everything necessary to make a machine function properly for the purpose for which it is designed, if the machine is without any latent defect and if its *727functioning creates no danger or peril that is not known to the user, then the manufacturer has satisfied the law’s demand.’ ” Id. at 211, n 1. After reviewing the law governing a manufacturer’s duty to design a safe product, this Court held that “the manufacturer of a product is not automatically relieved of the responsibility of providing safety devices merely because the danger causing the injury is obvious and patent.... The test of liability is no[t] . . . the latent-patent rule but whether the danger from which the plaintiff suffered injury was unreasonable and foreseeable.” Id. at 217. This Court explained that instructions to the jury should not be couched in latent-patent terms and, in this regard, the trial court’s instructions were erroneous. Id.
After a careful review of these cases, we conclude that, in cases alleging defective designs, in contrast to cases alleging a failure to warn, the focus of the inquiry is on the manufacturer’s conduct, not just the product. See Gregory, supra at 13. In this regard, the manufacturer’s duty at the time it designs the product is to eliminate any unreasonable risk of foreseeable injury. Once this duty is established, the factual inquiry presented to the trier of fact is whether the manufacturer exercised reasonable care in making the design choices it made at the time the product was created. The trier of fact must determine from the evidence whether the manufacturer knew or should have known of the design’s propensity for harm at the time the product was designed to the extent that the manufacturer’s conduct was unreasonable. Id. In deciding whether the manufacturer’s conduct was reasonable, an examination of whether the alleged design defect was open and obvious at the *728time the plaintiff was injured is relevant; however, the obviousness of a risk inherent in a product, alone, does not obviate the manufacturer’s duty to avoid unreasonable risks and foreseeable injuries at the time the product is designed. In other words, the focus of the inquiry is on the manufacturer’s knowledge of the product’s potential to cause harm or injury and the foreseeability of such harm at the time the product is designed, not whether the defective design in the product was open and obvious. Owens, supra.
Turning to the facts of this case, we find that the jury instruction provided by the trial court pursuant to defendant’s request was improper because it did not accurately relate the law regarding a manufacturer’s duty in cases alleging design defects. In the course of its instructions, the trial court asked the jury to determine whether the manufacturer’s failure to place adequate guards on the product created an unreasonable risk, but in the next sentence told the jury that if the product’s dangers were obvious and patent, the manufacturer had no other duty to design its product to avoid such dangers. This portion of the instruction was in error. Owens, supra at 425; Casey, supra at 218.
We further note that the Comment to SJI2d 25.31 states that “[t]he test for assessing a manufacturer’s liability to persons injured by its product is whether the risk to the plaintiff is unreasonable and foreseeable by the manufacturer, not whether the risk is patent or obvious to the plaintiff. Owens [supra]. For this reason, the instruction does not refer to obviousness.” See also MCR 2.516(D)(3).
*729Finally, we note that even if the open and obvious danger doctrine did apply to obviate a manufacturer’s duty in a case alleging defective design of a simple product, which we conclude it does not, we would not need to reach the open and obvious danger issue because there is no question that the palletizer machine at issue in this case was not a simple product. The palletizer was a large, complex, highly mechanized machine with four major automatic components and was capable of hoisting several hundred pounds off the ground. The machine contained a large number of mechanical parts, a separate electrical system, and required extensive training and education to understand its operation. In addition, although the machine functioned, in large part, automatically, it required a human operator to maintain proper operation. From these facts, we conclude that the palletizer was not “a simple thing of universally known characteristics,” Jamieson, supra at 37, but was a highly mechanized and intricately complex machine. Because we find no legal authority to support defendant’s position that the open and obvious danger doctrine should be extended to cases alleging design defects involving nonsimple products, the doctrine is inapplicable in this case.1
Therefore, having reviewed the instructions in their entirety and in conjunction with the testimony and *730evidence presented at trial, we hold that the trial court abused its discretion in instructing the jury that defendant had no design duty if the identified risks were “obvious and patent” to all. We further hold that the trial court’s erroneous instruction was not harmless error. In view of Lena’s testimony at trial that she was aware of the dangers associated with the palletizer machine and that she knowingly reached inside the machine to clear the jammed pallet despite the apparent dangers, and the substantial expert testimony that the mesh guard was inadequate to protect operators from reasonably foreseeable harm and that the Plexiglass hinged door installed shortly after Lena’s accident was both practical and economically feasible at the time the product was designed, it is entirely plausible that the jury relied on the erroneous open and obvious danger instruction in finding no cause of action. In this regard, we find that failure to vacate the verdict would be inconsistent with substantial justice. Grow, supra at 702. See Casey, supra at 217 (an instruction submitted to the jury relating an improper legal test warrants reversal). Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of no cause of action and remand for a new trial.2
*731B. ADMISSION OF EVIDENCE
Plaintiffs also argue that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of plaintiff Nuo Cacevic’s illegal entry into the United States and his subsequent use of a fictitious social security number for obtaining employment and filing tax returns. We agree. This evidence, while arguably minimally relevant to show the truthfulness of plaintiff Nuo Cacevic, was clearly unduly prejudicial to plaintiffs. MRE 403. Thus, to avoid further evidentiary error on remand, we direct the trial court to exclude on retrial all references to Nuo Cacevic’s illegal alien status or his use of a fictitious social security number.
Reversed and remanded for action consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Hood, J., concurred.
Defendant cites a number of cases for the proposition that the open and obvious danger doctrine has been applied to cases alleging design defects involving nonsimple products; however, these cases are inapposite because they are all based on a manufacturer’s duty to warn of open and obvious dangers and do not address application of the doctrine to cases alleging negligent design in which the duty to warn is not implicated. See Wiegerink v Mitts & Merrill, 182 Mich App 546; 452 NW2d 872 (1990); Bullock v Gulf & Western Mfg, 128 Mich App 316; 340 NW2d 294 (1983); Bishop v Interlake, Inc, 121 Mich App 397; 328 NW2d 643 (1982).
Defendant argues in its appellate brief that the trial court erred in failing to grant its motion for a directed verdict at the close of plaintiffs’ proofs. However, this issue is not properly before us because an appellee is limited to the issues raised by the appellant unless the appellee files a cross appeal. Beaudrie v Anchor Packing Co, 231 Mich App 242, 254, n 6; 586 NW2d 96 (1998); Barnell v Taubman Co, Inc, 203 Mich App 110, 123; 512 NW2d 13 (1993). Because defendant did not file a cross appeal in this case challenging the trial court’s denial of its motion for a directed verdict, we decline to consider that claim.

=== CASE 9741536 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:32.554772+00 ===

Jansen, P.J.
(concurring). I agree completely with the majority’s analysis and conclusion with regard to the instructional error. I also agree that the trial court abused its discretion in admitting evidence of plaintiff Nuo Cacevic’s illegal alien status and use of a fictitious social security number for obtaining employment and filing tax returns. However, I do not believe that this evidence could even be considered to be minimally relevant to any issue at trial.
Before trial, plaintiffs moved in limine to exclude all evidence relating to Nuo Cacevic’s alien status and use of a fictitious social security number. Defendant argued that this evidence was relevant to the issue of damages and the credibility of plaintiffs.1 The trial *732court denied plaintiffs’ motion, finding that the evidence was relevant with regard to plaintiffs’ credibility. This case, however, was about whether defendant negligently designed and manufactured the palletizer machine on which Lena Cacevic suffered a serious hand and arm injury. The evidence of Nuo’s alien status and use of a fictitious social security number is so prejudicial and completely irrelevant to this case that I can discern no reason for its admission other than to inflame the jury. Therefore, I find that the trial court clearly abused its discretion in admitting this evidence and agree with the majority that, on retrial, all reference to Nuo’s alien status and his use of a fictitious social security number must be excluded.
I agree that the trial court’s judgment in this case must be reversed and that the matter must be remanded for a new trial.
I note that Nuo Cacevic became a legal United States citizen in October 1992 and that the injury in this case occurred in September 1993.

=== CASE 9741570 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:58:20.557666+00 ===

JUSTICE McDADE, dissenting: After reviewing the facts of this case and the applicable law, I cannot find that the trial judge abused his discretion and I would affirm the decision. I, therefore, respectfully dissent from the majority opinion, which finds that there was such an abuse by the court. At issue in this appeal is whether the court abused its discretion when it, in essence, converted an earlier ex parte order of protection to a plenary order following an evidentiary hearing. The majority finds (1) there was no harassment by Ross Radke that would warrant such an action by the court, and (2) because Laine and her mother, Kathryn, had an improper purpose in seeking the original order, the court’s entry of an order prohibiting harassment must be set aside, even though it was grounded in evidence adduced at a full hearing and it rejected any restriction on respondent’s visitation. Even a cursory reading of the facts clearly, in my opinion, demonstrates that neither Ross nor Laine Radke was acting reasonably. The girl freely admitted that she screamed, cursed, and kicked at her father during the visitation incident because she wanted to go home. The father, after letting such conduct continue without disciplinary efforts for several months, apparently decided to cure Laine’s problems all at once through the use of threats and intimidation. Neither was behaving appropriately in my view. Irrational conduct of a 12-year-old girl, while it cannot be condoned, is easier to understand and to explain than is that of her adult father. Looking only at Ross’s testimony, he admitted to threatening to call the police if Laine did not come for her scheduled visitation on January 7, 2003; admitted to refusing to let her use the phone to call her mother or the police; admitted to disabling the phones by disconnecting them from their wall outlets; admitted to threatening Laine that he could hit her if he wanted because he was a black belt; and admitted to pushing her down the hallway but denied throwing her across the room. When you add Laine’s version of events, which the trial judge found to be credible, you end up with conduct that I do not believe can be fairly characterized as “reasonable direction” to a child. Nor, accepting the correctness of the trial court’s assessment of Laine’s credibility, does it appear that Ross and his new wife gave due or fair consideration to Laine’s complaints of unkindness and lack of respect when she was in their home. So, does any of this support the trial court’s finding that Laine was “harassed” by her father? I believe it does. The Illinois Domestic Violence Act protects against “abuse,” which includes physical abuse, harassment, or intimidation. “Harassment” is defined as knowing conduct that is not necessary to accomplish a reasonable purpose under the circumstances, would cause a reasonable person to feel distress, and does cause distress to the person. 750 ILCS 60/103 (7) (West 2002). A rebuttable presumption of emotional distress arises when a respondent improperly conceals a child from the petitioner or threatens physical force, confinement or restraint. 750 ILCS 60/103 (7) (v), (vi) (West 2002). The court heard all of the evidence and made a determination, which we cannot dispute, that Laine’s testimony was credible. The judge apparently credited her allegations that her father told her that she was insane and that he was going to take her to a hospital; that this threat frightened her and she tried to call her mother; that he repeatedly prevented her from making the calls; that, when she left the house, he held her arms behind her back, pushed her into a door and pushed her into her room; that he tried to punch her twice, and that she suffered a bruise on her arm during this incident; and that he had slapped her on a previous occasion, causing an injury to her lip. A reasonable person could conclude that these actions were not necessary to accomplish the purpose of disciplining Laine. In particular, the court could (and did) conclude that denial of the use of the telephone to call her mother or police officers was not necessary to accomplish this purpose. Additionally, a reasonable person could conclude that telling Laine that she was insane, disconnecting (or ripping out) the phones, and trying (or threatening) to punch her were not actions necessary to discipline a 12-year-old child — even an offensive and obstreperous one. In sum, a reasonable person could conclude that Ross’s actions constituted harassment as that term is defined by the Act. Cf. Peck v. Otten, 329 Ill. App. 3d 266, 768 N.E.2d 769 (2002); In re Marriage of Blitstein, 212 Ill. App. 3d 124, 569 N.E.2d 1357 (1991). Accordingly, I would find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in entering the order of protection against Ross. The majority has rejected Blitstein as irrelevant because the participants in the domestic conflict in that case were a husband and wife, not a father and daughter. While the case is certainly factually distinguishable on that basis, it does not necessarily follow that its basic principle does not apply. The refusal to allow any frightened family member — even a child — access to a protector, particularly the other parent, could be reasonably characterized as harassment under the domestic violence statute, and I do not believe that the decision of the trial judge to that effect constitutes an abuse of discretion. The challenge Ross has asserted to the entry of the plenary order of protection presents questions that are, for me, more troubling. It is clear from her own testimony that Laine wanted the order of protection as an instrument to remove any future obligation to have visitation in her father’s home unless she wanted to go. In some contrast, Kathryn testified that she obtained and used the interim protective order to keep Laine and her father separated between the date of its entry and January 30. It appears, if her testimony is credited, that she was seeking a cooling-off period because of the conduct involved in the incident, not an end to visitation. Nonetheless, her use of the domestic violence statute to accomplish that end was no more appropriate than its use to further the goal of her daughter. The trial judge firmly and quite properly found that the motives of both petitioners created an abuse of the statute. It is also of major concern that orders of protection are confrontational and divisive in nature and they should not be commonly or routinely employed in matters involving the discipline of children. Having said that, however, there certainly may be situations — hopefully rare — where the use of such an order would be appropriate. Turning to the specifics of this case, it appears to me that, if we accept the credibility determination of the trial judge, the court’s actual conclusion that there was harassment and that the plenary order was warranted could not be found to be either unreasonable or an abuse of discretion. The majority argues that the trial court implicitly rejected some of Laine’s testimony because it did not make an explicit finding of physical abuse. It appears to me, however, that the judge, by finding that prohibiting the girl’s use of the phone was harassment in light of her allegations, at least implicitly credited those allegations. At any rate, the statute does not require that the trial court find both physical abuse and harassment — the cognizable forms of abuse justifying an order of protection are stated in the disjunctive. The majority also asserts that the plenary order should not be affirmed because of the petitioners’ wrongful purpose in seeking the ex parte interim order of protection. I would agree with that position if the court had merely converted the order based on the petitioners’ original representations. It did not, however. It had a full-fledged evidentiary hearing and made its decision based on the testimony of all of the relevant actors and spectators. It is unfortunate to inject an order of protection into relations between parents and children. I would suggest, however, that it would be irresponsible for the trial court, in the face of its belief that the conduct at issue posed some threat to the child if allowed to continue or recur, to refuse to order protection for her because the interim order was improperly motivated. The plenary order does not have any impact on the right of the father to the extensive visitation he has previously enjoyed nor does it give Laine the ability to pick and choose whether or when she will spend time with her father in his home. It also does not enjoin Ross from any conduct with respect to his daughter that would not be inappropriate even without the order. In the trial court’s order, I see a concerned and restrained response to volatile conduct in an uncontrolled family situation; I do not see an abuse of discretion. I would affirm.

=== CASE 9741741 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:11.96448+00 ===

Levin, J.
The question is whether a land contract seller who sends notices of intent to forfeit and of forfeiture has made an irrevocable election requiring him to accept possession of the property when tendered by the purchaser in lieu of money damages for breach of the contract.
We hold that while the seller may not accept or take possession and still seek money damages, he may, even after sending notice of forfeiture, refuse tender of possession and either commence an ac*58tion for money damages or for foreclosure of the land contract.
One can agree with our colleagues that § 57501 does not evince a "clear and plainly expressed legislative intention to abrogate the common-law rule” without agreeing with their conclusion that sending notice of forfeiture is an election of remedy barring enforcement of the contract. Even if the Legislature did not intend to abrogate the common-law rule, neither did it evince a clear and plain purpose to retain it. It at least left the question of the effect of sending a notice for this Court to resolve, as it does so many other questions.
In all events, it is for this Court to decide whether a common-law rule shall be retained unless the Legislature states a rule that is inconsistent with or precludes a change in the common-law rule. Moreover, practice and procedure in the courts is constitutionally confided to this Court.
Strict adherence to the common-law rule that forfeiture of a land contract is an election of remedies ignores the many changes in the practice since the common-law rule developed and often causes an unjust result.
Sellers no longer are at liberty immediately after forfeiture of a land contract to seize possession of premises and put purchasers out on the street. Forfeiture can be effected only upon observance of procedures which provide land contract purchasers with protections similar to, in many cases equal to or better than, those provided mortgagors.
Mortgagees may obtain a deficiency judgment, whether the foreclosure is by action or advertisement. While the statute precludes a land contract *59seller from seeking a deficiency judgment if he obtains a writ of restitution and (by implication) if he otherwise obtains possession of the premises, it does not in terms require that result where he has merely announced a forfeiture of a land contract.
Forfeiture of the contract is a prerequisite to commencement of summary proceedings for possession of the premises.2 Thus, a seller wishing to avail himself of the remedy of summary proceedings must first send notice of forfeiture. It does not follow that the consequence of sending notice of forfeiture should be an irrevocable election precluding an action for damages for nonperformance or an action to foreclose with a view to obtaining a deficiency judgment.
While the seller has other options — he can commence an action for money damages or to foreclose —such actions are, by comparison with summary proceedings, cumbersome, lengthy and therefore frequently ineffectual.
In the context that summary proceedings are the customary form of action against a defaulting purchaser, forfeiture should not, despite the formal language of notices of intent to forfeit and of forfeiture (which we could henceforth change by court rule), be viewed as anything other than a condition precedent to the commencement of summary proceedings. The function of the notices is primarily to inform the purchaser that unless he cures the delinquency he faces court action.
Sending a notice of forfeiture is, except in the extraordinary case, but an early step in a seller’s often long drawn out efforts to obtain compliance by a delinquent purchaser with his obligations under the contract. If the purchaser’s response to the notice is, atypically, 'T am willing to surrender *60my equity”, or if he so responds after the commencement of summary proceedings, the seller must, indeed, by reason of the statute, make an election. He is then required to decide whether to accept possession or to seek a deficiency judgment.
I
In the instant case the land contract concerned an apartment building located at 1550 Seward, one and a half blocks east of Twelfth Street, in Detroit.
The purchase price was $40,000, with no down payment, payable with interest at 7% per annum in monthly installments of $400 beginning January 1, 1970, and the entire purchase money and interest was payable within 8 years from the date of the contract. The contract included all stoves, refrigerators and other appliances and goods located on the premises.
It was stated that "a City of Detroit inspection dated 8/12/69 consisting of 68 items in 7 pages” had been made, and the purchasers agreed to correct "all violations of record” within six months as "part of the consideration of purchase price”.
Installments of principal and interest were paid in 1970 and 1971. The principal balance on October 1, 1971, was $36,386.10.
About one year later, September 19, 1972, at a time when 12 installments at $400 ($4,800) plus taxes and insurance were in default, the sellers sent the purchasers notice of intention to forfeit the land contract.3 When the ten days for response *61expired on September 29, 1972, notice of forfeiture was sent.4
The purchasers responded by letter to the sellers’ attorney enclosing a quit-claim deed. The deed stated that it was "given to surrender and deliver up possession of said premises pursuant to” the notice of forfeiture. The letter suggested that the sellers "make immediate arrangements for care of the building and with the tenants. Mr. Stuart J. Montgomery has been the caretaker of the premises, but we believe he will be leaving shortly. Mr. Ben Gruskin was previously informed that the boiler needed repairs”.
Six days later, October 25, 1972, sellers’ attorney responded by letter to the purchasers’ attorney, returning the quit-claim deed, stating that it had been "refused by my clients”. The stated reason for refusal was that demand had been made for surrender of possession on September 19, "which your clients did not see fit to do until long after notice of forfeiture was served upon them”. The letter continued:
"My clients have elected to institute deficiency judgment proceedings in the Wayne County Circuit Court for some $36,000 balance due, plus interest.
"Investigation further indicates that your clients have totally milked the building and that it is presently in a poor state of repair with several building and health code violations. Under these circumstances, it is believed that your 'surrender of possession’ by delivery of the enclosed deed is for the sole purpose of escaping liability for these violations and perhaps some civil liability.”_
*62The purchasers’ attorney responded the following day that the deed was delivered in compliance with the demand for possession. "Your clients are, therefore, in possession of the real estate.”5
The purchasers’ motion for summary judgment on the ground that the sellers had elected their remedy and may not sue in the circuit court for deficiency was denied by the circuit judge who stated that § 5750 "provides, in the absence of a judgment in summary proceedings, the service of a notice of forfeiture is not a bar to circuit court foreclosure of land contract proceedings”.
The sellers’ motion for summary judgment claimed that, by reason of the building code and other violations, the City of Detroit had torn the building down and had placed a lien on the property for the cost of demolition, an amount greater than the value of the land. The property in question was located in an area of unoccupied and vandalized apartment buildings in various states of disrepair, some of which had been torn down by the city. It was opined that the property was without value.
Purchasers responded that the decreased value of the property was the result of the demolition of the building by the city, if such demolition had taken place, and that the demolition was the result of the sellers’ failure to act upon notices sent by the city to the sellers after they had regained possession of the property from the purchasers.
The sellers’ motion for summary judgment was granted and judgment entered in the amount of $36,386.10 principal, $5,305.53 interest and costs, *63with interest from November 1, 1973. The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the common-law rule had not been changed by the statute and that sending of the notice of forfeiture was an election of remedies precluding an action to foreclose.
II
Land contract purchasers generally do not willingly surrender possession or forfeit their equity. Most sellers do not seek a return of the property, but payment.
There is no reason to burden the circuit courts with actions to foreclose land contracts. Land contract sellers should not be encouraged to commence such proceedings.
Since the seller’s legitimate interests are generally protected by summary proceedings, he should not be constrained to commence foreclosure proceedings unless it appears that the purchaser does not wish to preserve and is willing to surrender his equity. There is no reason to put him to an election when he does not yet know whether the purchaser intends to protect his equity.
Suppose that a seller were to commence a circuit court action for foreclosure. In the Wayne Circuit Court such an action would not come to trial for three years or more. The seller’s attorney could move to advance, but the purchaser’s attorney might well respond that the judge should, in the exercise of discretion, deny the motion because the case belongs in the Landlord-Tenant Division of the Common Pleas Court where the purchaser’s interests will be better protected.6
*64A circuit judge may refuse to advance, with the result that the seller might have to wait more than three years, perhaps four or five years, before his case comes to trial. In the meantime, installments are not paid, taxes may go into default and insurance may be unpaid.
If the seller commences an action for the unpaid installments in the Common Pleas Court, that too may take two or three years to come to trial unless the cause is advanced. If the seller obtains a money judgment he may find that the purchaser is judgment-proof except, possibly, for his purchaser’s interest under the land contract, but that might also by then be encumbered.
Under the circumstances which prevail, sellers understandably commence summary proceedings with a view to obtaining a resumption of the installment payments. By comparison with an action for foreclosure or money damages, such proceedings move expeditiously and generally accomplish their purpose of persuading the purchaser to cure the delinquency.
If it appears that the purchaser does not desire or intend to perform and is willing to surrender his equity, then the seller must make a decision and, under the statute, is put to an election of remedies. He may accept possession or, if he wishes to obtain a deficiency judgment, abandon the summary proceedings in favor of foreclosure action.7
*65III
The statute does not require the result reached by the Court of Appeals. Insofar as the common-law rule is different, it may, like any other judge-made rule, be changed.
What should be borne in mind is that sending notice of forfeiture does not under the law today effect a forfeiture. The purchaser is protected by the statute from the effect of the notice of forfeiture.
At common law sending notice of forfeiture did forfeit the contract. The seller thereupon became entitled to possession of the premises. Actions for ejectment, trespass and self-help followed. Purchasers were summarily put out without opportunity to cure the default.
Today the significance of sending a notice of forfeiture is altogether different. Except for the rare case where the purchaser wishes to take advantage of the common-law rule to avoid performance of his obligations, it functions, as does the notice of intention to forfeit, as a warning that the seller is about to do something unless the deficiency is cured. A purchaser who receives a notice of intention to forfeit or a notice of forfeiture is simply advised that the seller is impatient and is about to take action because of the delinquency.
The purchaser is protected. The seller cannot evict merely because he sent notice of forfeiture. The seller must, rather, send the notice as a condition precedent to commencement of summary *66proceedings. If summary proceedings are commenced, the purchaser may still cure the default at any time during the proceedings, and, indeed, as late as three or six months (depending upon the amount theretofore paid) after the conclusion of the proceedings.8
The common-law rule has a certain logic to it— one should not be able to both forfeit a contract and enforce it. The fallacy in the logic is the assumption that today the mere sending of notice of forfeiture does in fact forfeit a land contract.
Today inconsistency in pleadings is permitted, inconsistent remedies may be sought and alternative relief granted. The concept of election of remedies has undergone considerable change in recent years. This development in the jurisprudence, eliminating artificial rules regarding consistency of remedies, gives secured creditors generally alternative remedies.9
The statute does not, in terms, characterize the seller’s action as an election of remedies until a writ of restitution in fact issues. It is far from clear that the Legislature did not intend to change the common-law rule. In all events, it did not preclude a change in the common-law rule. We are at liberty to change the common-law rule. Doing so would not be inconsistent with any provision of the statute, and would be entirely consistent with it.
The statute says that even a judgment for possession in summary proceedings after forfeiture "does not merge or bar any other claim for relief, except * * * for money payments due or in ar*67rears under the contract at the time of trial [emphasis supplied]”. Thus, although a judgment for possession has entered, the seller may still seek other relief.10
The statute provides further that a judgment for possession after forfeiture "which results in the issuance of a writ of restitution shall also bar any claim for money payments which would have become due under the contract subsequent to the time of issuance of the writ [emphasis supplied]”. Thus, although a judgment for possession has entered, until a writ of restitution issues, the seller may seek to recover additional amounts from the purchaser.
Under the defendants’ construction, if the seller takes any action other than the extraordinary action of commencing an action for a money judgment in district, common pleas or circuit court or an action for foreclosure in circuit court, the purchaser may at any time during the course of the summary proceedings — unless the default is fully cured and the proceedings are thereby terminated —surrender possession, and the purchaser has no alternative but to accept. That is at least arguably inconsistent with the statute which provides that it is not until the writ of restitution issues that the equitable right of redemption is foreclosed and any claim for money payments which become due under the contract subsequent to the time of issuance of the writ is barred.
Our colleagues refer to the Law Revision Commission report recommending changes in the procedures relating to summary proceedings for pos*68session of premises.11 The language submitted by the Law Revision Commission would have made the judgment for possession the final act,12 while § 5750 as enacted by the Legislature makes a judgment for possession only a bar to "any claim for money payments due or in arrears under the contract at the time of trial”, and defers until issuance of a writ of restitution a bar to "any claim for money payments which would have be*69come due under the contract subsequent to the time of issuance of the writ”.
IV
Concern has been expressed that unsophisticated land contract purchasers may be taken advantage of if we abrogate the common-law rule. A seller could obtain possession of the property, attempt to sell it and, failing to do so, could commence foreclosure proceedings and obtain a deficiency judgment.
A land contract seller may not take possession of the property and attempt to sell it and, if unable to do so, seek then to foreclose.13 The seller is required to make a choice. That is not the issue.
The issue is when should he be required to make that choice and whether he makes that choice irrevocably when he takes the steps that the law requires him to take as a condition precedent to commencing summary proceedings. The question is whether today he should be put at a disadvantage by having to make an election before he knows whether the purchaser wishes to maintain the contract and to make the required installment payments now that in many counties because of court congestion the only practical remedy for determining whether the defaulting purchaser will *70adhere to the terms of the contract is summary proceedings.
V
It is manifest that the sellers did not intend to waive the personal liability of the purchasers. After a year without payment, they took preliminary steps in an effort to obtain payment of the defaulted installments. The purchasers’ response was to offer to return the property to the sellers. If the sellers had accepted that offer, they would, indeed, under the statute have elected a remedy and could not have sought a deficiency judgment.
The policy of protecting purchasers who are in difficulty does not require that a seller’s pre-suit notices be transformed into an irrevocable election. Neither consistency nor fairness and the protection of purchasers’ rights, requires retention of the common-law rule.14
*71We do not, however, direct enforcement of the summary judgment for over $40,000 granted the sellers. The facts and circumstances should be further developed, especially since we are announcing a change in the common-law rule.
We reverse the Court of Appeals, vacate the summary judgment, and remand to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Coleman, C.J., and Kavanagh, Fitzgerald, and Ryan, JJ., concurred with Levin, J.
MCL 600.5750; MSA 27A.5750.
MCL 600.5726; MSA 27A.5726.
It was a printed form stating that by reason of the default, "you have forfeited your rights thereunder” and if the default is not cured "the undersigned will exercise their option under the said contract to declare said land contract forfeited” and that the purchasers will be required to deliver possession of the premises.
This notice was also a printed form which stated that by reason of the default the sellers elected "to declare * * * said land contract forfeited, effective 15 days after service of this notice”. Unless the default was cured, the purchasers would be required to deliver possession of the premises.
The letter continued that "[r]ather than play the charade of sending the deed back to you and your sending it back to us, we are holding the deed for your clients. You may have it at any time”, and then offered to accept service of process in the event of suit.
In a circuit court action, the seller can, if the land contract so provides (the standard forms of land contract do), accelerate the balance and require the purchaser to pay the entire amount of the land contract balance. In summary proceedings, acceleration is not *64permitted and the purchaser can cure the default by paying the installments in default.
We note that mortgage foreclosure by advertisement is as expeditious as most summary proceedings, and not subject to judicial supervision unless the mortgagee seeks a deficiency judgment, in which event the adequacy of the bid price can be inquired into, MCL 600.3280; MSA 27A.3280.
A seller who commences a foreclosure action after commencing summary proceedings and a refusal by the purchaser to cure the *65delinquency will be seen differently when he seeks in circuit court to advance his foreclosure action for prompt determination. It will then not appear that the seller has sought to take advantage of the purchaser, who had an opportunity to cure the delinquency by paying past-due installments.
MCL 600.5744(3); MSA 27A.5744(3).
See, e.g., White & Summers, Handbook of the Law Under the Uniform Commercial Code, pp 964-965; Osborne on Mortgages (2d ed), p 698; 69 Am Jur 2d, Secured Transactions, § 557, pp 446-448.
He may not, however, seek to recover payments in arrears through the time of trial if he has not already sought to recover them in the proceedings.
The commentary states only that a seller "cannot recover the premises under this chapter and then maintain a separate claim for payments due or to become due under the contract”. But that in a sense begs the question of whether tendering a deed following a notice of forfeiture constitutes recovery of the premises where the seller, as here, promptly returns the deed and never takes physical possession of the premises.
The second sentence of the commentary, stating that "if the plaintiff’ prefers to have money damages under the contract, he “should be required to elect that remedy or to foreclose in the circuit court” where the purchaser will receive credit for the proceeds of the foreclosure sale, again does not reach the question before us of whether the sellers’ actions in this case constituted an election of remedies precluding an action for foreclosure.
The proposal of the Law Revision Commission was as follows:
"A judgment for possession under this chapter does not merge or bar any other claim for relief, except that a judgment for possession after forfeiture of an executory contract for the purchase of land shall merge and bar any claim for money payments due or to become due under the contract.” Michigan Law Revision Commission, Fifth Annual Report (1970), p 36.
The statute provides:
"The remedy provided by summary proceedings is in addition to, and not exclusive of, other remedies, either legal, equitable or statutory. A judgment for possession under this chapter does not merge or bar any other claim for relief, except that a judgment for possession after forfeiture of an executory contract for the purchase of premises shall merge and bar any claim for money payments due or in arrears under the contract at the time of trial and that a judgment for possession after forfeiture of such an executory contract which results in the issuance of a writ of restitution shall also bar any claim for money payments which would have become due under the contract subsequent to the time of issuance of the writ. The plaintiff obtaining a judgment for possession of any premises under this chapter is entitled to a civil action against the defendant for damages from the time of forcible entry or detainer, or trespass, or of the notice of forfeiture, notice to quit or demand for possession, as the case may be.” MCL 600.5750; MSA 27A.5750 (emphasis supplied).
It is asserted that the market value of the property and duration of the land contract are factors weighed by the seller in selecting between forfeiture and foreclosure and that the choice between forfeiture and foreclosure puts the seller in a sufficiently advantageous position.
A number of assumptions are involved in those arguments, including that sellers are informed and that it is purchasers who are uninformed and may be taken advantage of. It appears that in some cases the reverse is the case, that it is the purchaser who is well-advised, and the seller who is not, regarding the procedures to be followed and the consequences that the common law attached to sending a notice of forfeiture.
The situation here resembles Smith v General Mortgage Corp, 402 Mich 125; 261 NW2d 710 (1978), where this Court modified a common-law rule to avoid an inequitable result.
The mortgagor’s property, insured for $18,000, was totally destroyed by fire. The plaintiffs were in default in their mortgage payments, the mortgagee foreclosed and bid in the property for $13,961, the amount due. The mortgagors argued that they were entitled to the insurance proceeds because the mortgage debt was extinguished when the mortgagee bid the amount owing at the foreclosure sale. The mortgagee contended that since the property was almost worthless, it was entitled to the portion of the proceeds equal to the debt.
Although the loss occurred before the mortgage sale and the mortgagee would have been entitled to the insurance proceeds to reduce the debt or repair the property, and, having purchased the property at the foreclosure sale, arguably had waived its rights under the mortgage, we held "that when the loss occurs before a foreclosure sale in which the mortgagee purchases the property for a bid which extinguishes the mortgage debt, the mortgagee is not entitled to the insurance proceeds”.
We declined to enforce the common-law rule, stating that strict application of it "would work an injustice in this case”. It would be "unfair” to award the insurance proceeds to the mortgagor "when the [mortgagee] paid the amount of the debt for worthless property”.

=== CASE 9741742 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:11.969547+00 ===

Blair Moody, Jr., J.
(dissenting). The question presented is whether the summary proceedings to recover possession of realty act, 1972 PA 120, MCL 600.5701 et seq.; MSA 27A.5701 et seq., has altered the common-law rule that a vendor’s forfeiture of a defaulted land contract constitutes an election of remedies which precludes a subsequent foreclosure and deficiency judgment based upon the contract.
I
Plaintiffs Myron, Ellen, Ben and Frances Grus-kin, and Joan H. Volin entered into a land contract in 1969 to sell an apartment building in Detroit to Marshall Fisher and Charles Burger. The consideration for the conveyance was the promise of the vendees to remedy a list of municipal code violations and pay $40,000 plus interest in installment payments. Before he died, Marshall Fisher transferred his interest in the land contract to an inter vivos trust, and the co-executors of his estate, defendants Irene R. Fisher and Gordon L. Fisher, were also the successor trustees of that trust.
On September 19, 1972, when the vendees had *72been in default on their payments for almost a year, the vendors sent the vendees a formal notice of intention to forfeit the land contract, demanding payment of the money then due ($4,800) or surrender of the premises. Notice of forfeiture was served ten days later, after the vendees failed to cure their default. That notice stated that the vendors elected to:
"declare said land contract forfeited, effective in 15 days after service of this notice; and you are hereby further notified that unless the money required to be paid is paid and any other alleged material breaches of the contract are cured, that you are to yield, surrender and deliver up possession of the premises. * * *
"You are further notified that from and after the service of this notice, you will be liable for damages which the undersigned may suffer by reason of your continued possession of said premises.”
In response to the notice, the vendees executed a quitclaim deed which was hand-delivered with a cover letter to the vendors’ attorney on September 29, 1972. However, the vendors returned the deed because it had not been delivered within the 15 days specified in the notice of forfeiture and because the vendees had failed to correct the building and health code violations as agreed in the land contract.1 Subsequent to service of the notice of forfeiture, the building in question was condemned by the City of Detroit and demolished in 1974.
The vendors never initiated summary proceedings for possession in district court to complete the *73forfeiture process under the summary proceedings act. Instead, they brought this action in circuit court to foreclose the land contract and to obtain a deficiency judgment. Defendant vendees answered claiming that plaintiff vendors’ forfeiture of the agreement was an election of remedies barring the foreclosure action on the contract. The trial court granted summary judgment for the plaintiffs. The trial court found that MCL 600.5750; MSA 27A.5750, changed the common-law rule of election of remedies so that the initiation of forfeiture does not bar alternative relief procedures until the land contract vendor has obtained a judgment for possession in district court.
The Court of Appeals determined that the statute in question did not abrogate the common-law rule and reversed the judgment of the circuit court. 70 Mich App 117; 245 NW2d 427 (1976). We granted leave to appeal. 399 Mich 885 (1977).
II
None of the parties disputes the long-established and well-settled common-law rule that a vendor’s forfeiture of a defaulted land contract constitutes an election of remedies which precludes subsequently seeking a foreclosure and deficiency judgment based upon the contract. See Goodspeed v Dean, 12 Mich 352 (1864); Balesh v Alcott, 257 Mich 352; 241 NW 216 (1932); Chicago Boulevard Land Co v Apartment Garages, 245 Mich 448; 222 NW 697 (1929).
The rationale supporting this rule is the legal inconsistency of extinguishing the contract through forfeiture and then attempting to resurrect and enforce that contract through foreclosure.
"Having elected to exercise his option to declare the *74contract at an end, the vendor cannot thereafter change his position and hold the purchaser liable to complete the purchase or pay any part of the unpaid purchase money. The remedy of the vendor by way of a rescission or forfeiture of the contract and the continued liability of the purchaser for the purchase money are totally inconsistent, and the exercise of the former terminates any further liability of the purchaser for the purchase money.” 77 Am Jur 2d, Vendor and Purchaser, § 602, p 732.
Therefore, the only question presented is whether the summary proceedings to recover possession of realty act (hereinafter the Summary Proceedings Act), MCL 600.5701 et seq.; MSA 27A.5701 et seq., has altered or abrogated that long-established common-law rule.
The Summary Proceedings Act, while most specifically directed at landlord-tenant relations, provides a procedure to recover possession of premises in various situations, including forfeitures of executory land contracts. MCL 600.5701(a); MSA 27A.5701(a).
In a land contract setting, a forfeiture of the contract is a prerequisite to use of summary proceedings to regain possession of the premises. MCL 600.5726; MSA 27A.5726. Additionally, the statute requires that the vendor give notice of forfeiture and provides a 15-day period in which the vendee can cure the default. MCL 600.5728; MSA 27A.5728.
These provisions differ substantially from the land contract foreclosure provisions of Chapter 31 of the RJA. MCL 600.3101 et seq.; MSA 27A.3101 et seq. Under the foreclosure provisions the vendee has at least three months to cure the default. See MCL 600.3110-600.3115; MSA 27A.3110-27A.3115. Furthermore, the vendee is entitled to possession *75of the premises until the actual foreclosure sale. MCL 600.3150; MSA 27A.3150.
The key provision of the Summary Proceedings Act in question in the instant case is MCL 600.5750; MSA 27A.5750 which states:
"The remedy provided by summary proceedings is in addition to, and not exclusive of, other remedies, either legal, equitable or statutory. A judgment for possession under this chapter does not merge or bar any other claim for relief, except that a judgment for possession after forfeiture of an executory contract for the purchase of premises shall merge and bar any claim for money payments due or in arrears under the contract at the time of trial and that a judgment for possession after forfeiture of such an executory contract which results in the issuance of a writ of restitution shall also bar any claim for money payments which would have become due under the contract subsequent to the time of issuance of the writ. The plaintiff obtaining a judgment for possession of any premises under this chapter is entitled to a civil action against the defendant for damages from the time of forcible entry or detainer, or trespass, or of the notice of forfeiture, notice to quit or demand for possession, as the case may be.”
The trial court, reading the first two sentences together, held that the initiation of forfeiture proceedings does not bar the land contract vendor from initiating foreclosure proceedings in the circuit court until the vendor has obtained a judgment for possession in district court. We disagree.
The first sentence merely states that the remedy provided by the statute to recover possession through summary proceedings does not eliminate any other remedy available to the land contract vendor, but exists as a separate remedy for obtaining possession of real property. The traditional remedies available to a vendor under a defaulted land contract including action for breach of con*76tract, rescission, specific performance and foreclosure have not been eliminated. Thus, the first sentence reaffirms well-established law that the vendor may select from among the traditional remedies when seeking redress on a defaulted contract.
The second sentence states the consequences of selecting forfeiture and summary proceeding as the method for obtaining possession. After forfeiture of an executory land contract, a judgment for possession or the issuance of a writ of restitution merges and bars any claim for money payments due or in arrears under the contract at the time of trial.2 However, according to the second sentence, a judgment for possession or the issuance of a writ of restitution after a judgment for possession does not bar any other claim for relief permitted under the Summary Proceedings Act.
Section 5739 of the Summary Proceedings Act delineates the claims for relief which are available in an action for summary possession:
"Except as provided by court rules, a party to summary proceedings may join claims and counterclaims for money judgment for damages attributable to wrongful entry, detainer or possession, for breach of the lease or contract under which the premises were held or for waste or malicious destruction to the premises, but the court may order separate summary disposition of the claim for possession, without prejudice to any other claims or counterclaims. A claim or counterclaim for *77money judgment shall not exceed the amount in controversy which otherwise limits the jurisdiction of the court.” MCL 600.5739; MSA 27A.5739.
Therefore, in an action for summary possession a vendor may join a claim for money damages, but is precluded from claiming any amount due under the contract.
Support for this interpretation can be found in the comments issued by the Michigan Law Revision Commission in a 1970 report which recommended the adoption of the then proposed 1972 amendments. The commission comment on § 5750 is as follows:
"The first sentence is intended to state explicitly the intent of the present statute. The second sentence is intended to make clear that in land contract cases the plaintiff cannot recover the premises under this chapter and then maintain a separate claim for payments due or to become due under the contract. If the plaintiff prefers to have money damages under the contract, he should be required to elect that remedy or to foreclose in the circuit court where the defendant will receive credit for the proceeds of the foreclosure sale.” Michigan Law Revision Commission, Fifth Annual Report (1970), p 36.
Ill
We agree with the Court of Appeals that § 5750 of the Summary Proceedings Act does not evince a clear and plainly expressed legislative intention to abrogate the common-law rule. Accordingly, we hold that when a vendee defaults on a land contract, the vendor may still pursue any of the traditional remedies, including forfeiture and obtaining possession of the premises through the *78new Summary Proceedings Act. Additionally, a vendor who chooses summary proceedings may obtain incidental money damages through claims for relief listed in §5739. However, once having elected the remedy of forfeiture and having made a claim for possession through notice of forfeiture, a land contract vendor is barred from pursuing any other inconsistent remedy which would resurrect the contract and would seek damages under it.
Plaintiff vendors’ foreclosure action is barred. The Court of Appeals is affirmed. Costs to appellees.
JWilliams, J., concurred with Blair Moody, Jr.,
The vendors’ claim that the deed had to be delivered within the 15-day period, in order for the forfeiture to be complete, is invalid. The 15-day period is a statutory notice provision enacted in 1972 to provide a vendee with a specified period of time within which the forfeiture may be avoided by payment of the amount then in arrears. MCL 600.5728; MSA 27A.5728. See Michigan Law Revision Commission, Fifth Annual Report (1970), pp 29-30.
A judgment for possession constitutes a bar to any claim for money payments due under the contract at the time of trial because the contract is terminated by the notice of forfeiture. The vendor is not entitled to payments under the contract, unless the vendee chooses to make the payments and thereby reinstates the contract. The issuance of the writ of restitution bars a claim for money payments due under the contract subsequent to the issuance of the writ for the same reason: the contract has been terminated by the forfeiture. The vender is not entitled to have both the money under the contract and possession of the property.

=== CASE 2228531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:04.640697+00 ===

87 Wis. 2d 38 (1978)
273 N.W.2d 373
GRUTZNER, Personal Representative of the Estate of Roland W. Klevene, Sr., Deceased, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
KRUSE, and another, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 77-604.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs September 18, 1978.
Decided November 22, 1978.
*39 For the appellants the cause was submitted on the briefs of W. Thomas Terwilliger and Steven R. Schilke, and Terwilliger, Wakeen, Piehler, Conway & Klingberg, S.C., of Wausau.
For the respondent the cause was submitted on the brief of Grutzner, Byron & Holland, S. C., of Beloit.
Before Gartzke, P.J., Bablitch and Dykman, JJ.
*40 DYKMAN, J.
An automobile-pedestrian accident occurred near the intersection of North Third Avenue and West Grand Avenue in Wisconsin Rapids. Both streets are four lanes wide. Appellant Ronald M. Kruse was driving north on North Third Avenue and stopped at the traffic light at the intersection of West Grand Avenue. He was in the inside lane of the two northbound lanes and intended to make a left turn into West Grand Avenue. When the light turned green, he proceeded into the intersection where he allowed an oncoming vehicle to go by, then turned left into the inside lane of the two westbound lanes of West Grand Avenue. Roland Klevene, Sr., a pedestrian, was crossing West Grand Avenue from north to south. He was struck by the Kruse vehicle, which had accelerated to about ten miles per hour and the resulting injuries caused his death. There was conflicting evidence as to whether Klevene was in the crosswalk when he was struck. Klevene's personal representative, Edward Grutzner, commenced this action.
The jury found both Kruse and Klevene causally negligent, and apportioned forty percent of the negligence to Kruse and sixty percent to Klevene.
On motions after verdict, the trial court granted the personal representative's motion to modify the jury's answers, and apportioned fifty percent of the negligence to Kruse and fifty percent to Klevene. Grutzner had also moved for a new trial on the basis that the verdict was contrary to the weight of the evidence, and alternatively, in the interest of justice. The trial court did not rule on the motion for a new trial. Judgment was entered upon the verdict as modified. Kruse appeals.
[1]
The standard of review is "whether there is any credible evidence which under any reasonable view fairly admits of an inference supporting the findings. The evidence is to be viewed in the light most favorable to *41 the verdict." May v. Skelley Oil Co., 83 Wis. 2d 30, 35, 264 N.W.2d 574 (1978).
[2]
Klevene was lying on the pavement fifty-six feet west of the crosswalk after the accident. A policeman who investigated the accident found no marks on the car that would indicate a blow sufficient to propel or carry Klevene fifty-six feet. A witness testified that he observed the Kruse car make a "normal turn," and after the rear of the car was west of the crosswalk, "I seen the brake lights; and then I looked in the air above the car; and there was a body or person above the car, I would say maybe four or five feet above the top of the car in the air." Kruse testified that Klevene was west of the crosswalk when the car collided with Klevene. This evidence was credible and permitted an inference supporting a finding that Klevene was outside the crosswalk and therefore negligent in failing to yield the right of way to Kruse.
[3, 4]
Credible evidence reasonably admitting of an inference supporting the jury's finding that Kruse was negligent also exists. Although Kruse testified that he was traveling ten miles per hour, and there was nothing in the record that showed anything but a traffic-free street in front of him, he failed to see Klevene, who had walked from the north curb of West Grand Avenue fourteen feet south into Kruse's path. Looking and not seeing what is in plain sight is as negligent with respect to lookout as not looking at all. Lake to Lake Dairy Cooperative v. Andrews, 264 Wis. 170, 173, 58 N.W.2d 685 (1953).
[5, 6]
If there is credible evidence which supports a jury's verdict, the action of a trial court in changing a jury's verdict on the ground that it must be changed as a matter *42 of law will be set aside on appeal. Smith v. Flash City Transit Co., 66 Wis. 2d 595, 600, 225 N.W.2d 481 (1975). We cannot say that the jury's finding that a jaywalking pedestrian was more negligent than a motorist turning at ten miles per hour is based on speculation. The judgment as modified by the court is therefore reversed.
[7, 8]
Respondent contends that if the jury's verdict is reinstated we should order a new trial either because the verdict is contrary to the weight of the evidence or in the interest of justice. It was error for the trial court not to rule on respondent's motion for a new trial. A trial judge's review of the evidence is relatively contemporaneous with the trial. Unlike a reviewing court, which must rely on a transcript and exhibits, the trial judge is able to view the demeanor of the witnesses and to gain an impression of the evidence as a whole. Section 805.15(4), Stats., requires the trial court to rule on motions for a new trial even if it grants a motion to change the answers in a verdict:
(4) ALTERNATE MOTIONS; CONDITIONAL ORDER. If the court grants a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or a motion to change answer and render judgment in accordance with the answer so changed, or a renewed motion for directed verdict, the court shall also rule on the motion for new trial, if any, by determining whether it should be granted if the judgment is thereafter vacated or reversed, and shall specify the grounds for granting or denying the motion for new trial. (Emphasis supplied.)
Section 805.15(4); Stats., is derived from Rule 50(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. This rule has been criticized as unrealistic and burdensome upon trial courts.[1] Its provisions are mandatory, however, and promote *43 efficiency on appeal. Wright and Miller[2] comment on an analogous situation as follows:
If the court grants judgment notwithstanding the verdict and fails to act on the alternative motion for a new trial, litigation will be needlessly protracted should the appellate court find that the grant of judgment was erroneous. In that case it must remand so that the trial court can rule on the new trial motion.
Of the three alternatives considered by this court (1) remand for decision by trial court and possible appeal by adversely affected party, (2) decision on motion by this court, and (3) retention of jurisdiction with remand for decision by trial court, and review by this court the latter, which was the procedure adopted in Nodak Oil Co. v. Mobil Oil Corp., 526 F.2d 798 (8th Cir. 1975), seems to be best suited to the present posture of this case. In Nodak, the court concluded:
In view of the district court's failure in the instant case to make the required conditional ruling of the alternative motion for a new trial, we retain jurisdiction and remand this case for the purpose of such a ruling pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 50 (c) (1). 526 F.2d at 799.
The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to reinstate the verdict. Jurisdiction *44 retained by this court. The circuit (previously county) court of Wood county shall certify to this court within ninety days its ruling on both parts of plaintiff's motion for a new trial in accordance with sec. 805.15 (4), Stats.
The party adversely affected by the ruling on the motion for a new trial shall have twenty days from the certification to file a supplemental brief. The prevailing party shall have twenty days in which to respond.
By the Court.Judgment reversed and cause remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
NOTES
[1]  See C. Wright, Handbook of the Law of Federal Courts §96, at 427 (2d ed. 1970), where the author comments:
Though this practice is desirable in avoiding an unnecessary remand, it is extremely unrealistic in asking the trial judge to make a conditional ruling on the assumption that, for reasons which he cannot know, his ruling on the motion for judgment is held to be erroneous. Further, with all the possibilities present when the court may either grant or deny either or both branches of the alternative motion, the practice is necessarily very complicated, and has often been misunderstood by courts and counsel.
A review of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decisions which address changing answers to a jury's verdict leads to the conclusion that a trial court should only infrequently do so. For example, in the six cases cited by respondent, the jury's verdict was ultimately upheld in five, and the trial court's interference with a verdict was reversed in three. The situation described by Wright therefore should be troublesome on only a few occasions.
[2]  9 C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure §2539, at 610 (1971).

=== CASE 2227551 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:38.866203+00 ===

2 N.Y.3d 773 (2004)
812 N.E.2d 1250
780 N.Y.S.2d 301
CHRISTOPHER COLAROSSI, Appellant,
v.
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER, Respondent.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Decided May 6, 2004.
*774 Petrone & Petrone, P.C., Rochester (Elizabeth C. Clarke and Janet F. Neumann of counsel), for appellant.
Ward Norris Heller & Reidy LLP, Rochester (Harold A. Kurland of counsel), for respondent.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges G.B. Smith, Ciparick, Rosenblatt, Graffeo, Read and R.S. Smith concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
Plaintiff, an undergraduate student, was shot without provocation by a nonstudent while standing outside a fraternity house located in a residential area of defendant's campus known as the "fraternity quad." Plaintiff alleged that inadequate security and lighting were a proximate cause of his injuries. Supreme Court denied defendant's motion for summary judgment dismissing the complaint, and by a divided Court the Appellate Division reversed and granted defendant summary judgment.
In opposition to defendant's prima facie showing of entitlement to summary judgment, plaintiff presented no evidence other than "[m]ere conclusions, expressions of hope or unsubstantiated allegations" that the alleged insufficient security and lighting in the fraternity quad were a proximate cause of the shooting (Rodriguez v New York City Hous. Auth., 87 NY2d 887, 888 [1995] [internal quotation marks and citations omitted]), or that the criminal attack was foreseeable or preventable in the normal course of events (see Maheshwari v City of New York, 2 NY3d 288, 294-295 [decided today]). Accordingly, the Appellate Division properly granted defendant summary judgment dismissing the complaint.
On review of submissions pursuant to section 500.4 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.4), order affirmed, with costs, in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9741537 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:37.42952+00 ===

JUSTICE MAAG delivered the opinion of the court: The respondent, Linda W., was involuntarily admitted into a psychiatric facility in December 2002. The State’s first petition for involuntary admission was dismissed by the circuit court. The State immediately filed a second petition. A hearing was held on the second petition. The circuit court determined that the respondent was a person subject to involuntary admission and ordered that she be hospitalized in the Department of Human Services. The respondent filed a timely notice of appeal. We reverse. The relevant facts are as follows. According to the respondent, she had been receiving medication for mental illness for 28 years. She had been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder. Although the respondent had been in and out of several mental health institutions over the years, she apparently did not believe that she had a mental illness and she refused to take medication for her condition. The respondent was involuntarily admitted to Gateway Regional Medical Center (Gateway) on December 6, 2002. On December 9, 2002, a petition for involuntary admission was filed in Madison County case No. 02 — MH—103. According to a certificate that was attached to the petition, the respondent had refused to take her psychiatric medication for two weeks. The respondent was angry and belligerent toward “KK and ex[-]husband.” The respondent’s ex-husband was attempting to care for her, but due to his own physical problems, he was unable to do so. The respondent was “morbidly obese” and unable to meet her basic needs of food, clothing, and personal hygiene without assistance. The respondent refused a voluntary placement in shelter care and offers for assistance in the home. The respondent was “exceedingly paranoid” and “delusional” about her family and anyone in the medical profession and believed that they were only trying to “control her.” The petition was involuntarily dismissed on December 19, 2002. Although the record does not show why the petition was dismissed, the respondent states that the petition was dismissed “for failure to comply with statutory pleading requirements.” On the same date, at 2:40 p.m., the State filed another petition for involuntary admission to a facility, in Madison County case No. 02— MH — 106. The respondent tore up that copy of the petition and hit a nurse in the face with her fist. The first certificate to support the second petition was executed by another registered nurse following an examination on December 19, 2002, at 4 p.m. The first certificate stated that the respondent was “extremely angry, agitated, cursing, yelling, [and] throwing papers” when she was presented with a copy of the petition. The respondent tore up the petition and threw it in the nurse’s face. She proceeded to strike the nurse’s cheek with her fist. The respondent threatened to kill the nurse. She also threatened another nurse and told her that she would “burn in hell for a million years.” The respondent physically pushed security personnel and verbally abused them. The respondent was unable to stay on one topic and screamed and yelled. She made irrational statements such as “I bleed for my kids, but they will not bleed for me,” and “Why don’t you kill me? I would be better off.” The respondent also claimed that the hospital staff was sending air through the vents that caused all the respondent’s medical problems. The respondent was later observed “shouting out” and then denied wanting anything. She claimed that she needed medical assistance and that the staff at Gateway was incompetent. She then refused medical help. The respondent told her psychiatrist that “they enjoy controlling [her]” and later told Carol Dugan Faulk, a licensed clinical social worker, that she and the Gateway staff were poisoning her. The certificate stated that the respondent required immediate hospitalization due to her inability to care for herself and the failure to comply with both medical and psychiatric medications. For all these reasons, the certifícate stated that the respondent is “at risk to self and others.” A second certificate was signed by a psychiatrist, Dr. Narishma Muddasani, on December 19, 2002, at 10 p.m. Dr. Muddasani stated in the certificate that the respondent had delusional beliefs that “people are trying to poison her with the vents.” He also said that the respondent was in denial about her mental illness despite her 30 years of psychiatric treatment. Dr. Muddasani stated that the respondent also had delusional beliefs that her ex-husband was “trying to kill her” and she is unable to care for herself. The respondent filed a motion to dismiss the second petition. She claimed that it was void because she had been unlawfully detained between the time that she was served with a copy of the second petition on December 19, 2002, at 2:40 p.m. and the time that the first certificate to support the petition was executed on December 19, 2002, at 4 p.m. The circuit court denied the motion and conducted a hearing on whether the respondent was subject to involuntary admission and involuntary administration of psychotropic medication. The testimony at the hearing was as follows. Faulk testified that the respondent had been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder. Faulk stated that the respondent was very paranoid and disorganized. She said that the respondent threatened to kill one of the nurses. The respondent believed that the staff at Gateway was poisoning her by piping something through the air vents. The respondent also claimed that the doctors were giving her silicone and that it caused her to have medical problems. The respondent stated that her current doctor is reincarnated. The respondent also believed that the food that Gateway fed her caused her medical problems. The respondent threatened the staff and the doctor, and she almost hit a patient. She threatened to kill a nurse. Faulk recommended that the respondent continue to reside at Gateway until her condition was stabilized with medication. Faulk stated that if the respondent complied with the medication orders, she would be released on February 3, 2003. Faulk testified that no less-restrictive facility than Gateway was available to serve the respondent’s needs. Faulk opined that the respondent was unable to care for herself and was dangerous to herself and others. The respondent refused to participate in treatment or take medication. Faulk also stated that on December 19, 2002, when the first petition was dismissed, the respondent’s attorney called a cab for her. When the cab arrived, the respondent refused to get in. The respondent asked to go upstairs and gather her belongings. By the time that the respondent was ready to go, the second petition was finished, and she was readmitted. We note, however, that the petition states that within 12 hours after admission, the respondent was given a copy of the petition. Hence, the respondent was readmitted prior to 2:40 p.m., when the petition was given to her. The respondent testified that she was 59 years old at the time of the hearing. The respondent stated that she had four admissions to psychiatric hospitals within the previous two years. She said that her legs were semiparalyzed and that she had “awful pain” in her legs due to the Haldol injections. The respondent stated that the stiffness in her legs was “severe” and that she was fearful of falhng and getting hurt. She said that she was unable to get out of a bathtub. Prior to her current admission, the respondent had been staying with her ex-husband because he had a shower. The respondent testified that she had not been overweight prior to the time that the doctors began giving her shots. She claimed that after the shots, she weighed 300 pounds. The respondent agreed that she was loud but denied that she was vicious or ferocious. She denied that she threatened to kill anyone and denied that she thought about harming herself or anyone else. Dr. Muddasani testified that he was the respondent’s treating psychiatrist. He stated that the respondent suffered from schizoaffective disorder. He opined that her disease was characterized by depression and paranoid delusions. Dr. Muddasani stated that the respondent does not believe that she has a mental illness and that, therefore, she does not understand the need for the medication. The respondent had been given Haldol and other medications for her condition. Because the respondent was refusing medication, Dr. Muddasani wanted to administer Haldol because it could be given by injection once a month. Although the respondent claimed that Haldol caused her leg paralysis, Dr. Muddasani stated that it was not a side effect of the medication. Even though the respondent was having problems with her weight, Dr. Muddasani stated that it could be controlled by diet, exercise, and good judgment. Dr. Muddasani’s treatment goal was to stabilize the respondent so she could leave the hospital. He stated that the benefits of the medication outweighed the risks and that the respondent did not have the capacity to make a reasoned and informed decision regarding whether she should take the medication. After Dr. Muddasani testified, the respondent took the stand again. She testified that prior to her admission to Gateway, she had been taking Celexa, Topamax, and Zyprexa. These medications were prescribed by Dr. McCormick after she was released from Alton Mental Health Center. The respondent stopped taking the medications approximately one to two weeks prior to her admission to Gateway. The respondent claimed that she had been forced to take shots for 28 years. She stated that her problems with pain and paralysis in the legs began when she started Haldol injections in 1993. The circuit court determined that the respondent was subject to the involuntary administration of psychotropic medication and to involuntary admission. The hearing was held on January 2, 2003, and the circuit court’s order was filed the same day. The respondent was discharged from Gateway on January 23, 2003, and released to the Cherrywood Health Care Center in Vandalia, Illinois. The respondent filed a timely notice of appeal on February 3, 2003. We note parenthetically that the State claims that the respondent’s notice of appeal was untimely. We find no merit to the State’s argument. See Mentesana v. LaFranco, 73 Ill. App. 3d 204, 207, 391 N.E.2d 416, 419 (1979) (the court determined that when the last day to file a notice of appeal falls on a Saturday, the notice of appeal is timely if filed on the following Monday).  Before addressing the merits of the respondent’s appeal, we note that this case is moot. The circuit court’s order authorizing involuntary admission could only be in effect for up to six months. See 405 ILCS 5/4 — 611(a) (West 2002). The respondent was legally discharged from Gateway on January 23, 2003. Nevertheless, since this case involves an event of short duration that is capable of repetition yet evades review, we will address the issues raised by the respondent. See In re Robert S., 341 Ill. App. 3d 238, 247, 792 N.E.2d 421, 427 (2003). Initially, the respondent claims that the circuit court’s order should be reversed because she was unlawfully detained for 1 hour and 20 minutes. We agree.  Pursuant to section 3 — 602 of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code (Code) (405 ILCS 5/3 — 602 (West 2002)): “The petition shall be accompanied by a certificate executed by a physician, qualified examiner, or clinical psychologist which states that the respondent is subject to involuntary admission and requires immediate hospitalization. The certificate shall indicate that the physician, qualified examiner, or clinical psychologist personally examined the respondent not more than 72 hours prior to admission. It shall also contain the physician’s, qualified examiner’s, or clinical psychologist’s clinical observations, other factual information relied upon in reaching a diagnosis, and a statement as to whether the respondent was advised of his rights under [s]ection 3 — 208.” (Emphasis added.) Hence, a person alleged to be subject to involuntary emergency admission cannot be taken into custody, admitted, or otherwise detained unless both a petition and a certificate have been executed. While we recognize that section 3 — 603 of the Code (405 ILCS 5/3 — 603 (West 2002)) sets forth a procedure whereby an individual can be detained until a certificate is obtained, the State failed to comply with those procedures in the instant case. While anyone can complete the petition, the requirement of a certificate ensures that a physician, qualified examiner, or clinical psychologist has recently examined the respondent and that the respondent is subject to involuntary admission and requires immediate hospitalization. 405 ILCS 5/3 — 602 (West 2002).  Although a circuit court’s decision in an involuntary admission proceeding is given great deference (In re Bennett, 251 Ill. App. 3d 887, 888, 623 N.E.2d 942, 944 (1993)), the Code’s procedural safeguards are not mere technicalities. Rather, they are essential tools to safeguard the liberty interests of respondents in mental health cases. In re George O., 314 Ill. App. 3d 1044, 1046, 734 N.E.2d 13, 16 (2000). The need for strict compliance with the statutory requirements is compelling in mental health cases since commitment is involuntary and liberty interests are involved. In re Lanter, 216 Ill. App. 3d 972, 974, 576 N.E.2d 1219, 1220 (1991). Because involuntary admission proceedings pose a grave threat to an individual’s liberty interests, the Code’s procedural safeguards should be strictly construed in favor of the respondent. In re George O., 314 Ill. App. 3d at 1046, 734 N.E.2d at 16. Any noncompliance with the statutorily prescribed involuntary commitment procedures renders the judgment entered in such a case erroneous and of no effect. In re Nancy A., 344 Ill. App. 3d 540, 549-50, 801 N.E.2d 565, 575 (2003).  In the case at hand, the first petition for involuntary admission was filed on December 9, 2002, and was accompanied by two certificates signed by psychiatrists showing that the respondent needed hospitalization for the treatment of her mental illness. On December 19, 2002, the first petition was dismissed. At 2:40 p.m. the same day, the second petition for involuntary admission was served on the respondent. The first certificate that was filed to support the petition was signed about 4 p.m., and the second certificate was signed at approximately 10 p.m. A period of approximately 1 hour and 20 minutes elapsed between the time that the second petition was served and the time that the first certificate to support that petition was executed. The State claims that the record is silent regarding whether the respondent was detained during that period of time. We note, however, that a review of the record shows that Margaret Merrell, a registered nurse, signed the second petition on December 19, 2002, at 2:40 p.m., stating that the respondent had already been readmitted to Gateway. Hence, the respondent was unlawfully detained between 2:40 p.m. and 4 p.m., when the first certificate to support the petition was signed. For this reason, the circuit court’s order finding that the respondent was a person subject to involuntary admission and ordering her to be hospitalized in the Department of Human Services is erroneous. See In re Nancy A., 344 Ill. App. 3d at 549-50, 801 N.E.2d at 575. Reversed. KUEHN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:37.433945+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. It is true, as the majority points out, that section 3 — 603 of the Code (405 ILCS 5/3 — 603 (West 2002)) outlines the procedure whereby an individual may be detained pending a certificate (349 Ill. App. 3d at 443), and I believe that the State should be admonished for failing to comply strictly with that procedure in this case. However, I do not believe that the State’s failure to comply should result in a reversal under the circumstances of this case. It is clear from the record that the respondent was subject to involuntary admission on December 19, 2002. Accordingly, had the State complied with the requirements of section 3 — 603, the result would have been the same: the respondent would have been involuntarily admitted. I believe that under these circumstances, and given the respondent’s 28-year history of mental illness, the State’s responsibility to protect and care for individuals who are subject to involuntary admission, as well as to safeguard innocent bystanders who might suffer from the actions of released individuals who are subject to involuntary admission, outweighs any harm caused by the State’s failure to strictly comply with the procedures of section 3 — 603. Therefore, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s decision to reverse the circuit court.

=== CASE 9741539 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:37.686556+00 ===

KONENKAMP, Justice
[¶ 1.] Cirilo Martin Rodriguez was convicted of felony possession of marijuana and sentenced to ten years in the penitentiary after a traffic stop and search of the vehicle he was driving uncovered over ninety-four pounds of marijuana in a hidden compartment. In his application for a writ of habeas corpus he contended, among other things, that his trial attorney was ineffective. A urine sample taken after his arrest proved there was no trace of marijuana in his body, but the State failed to disclose this result, and his lawyer, who knew of the test but not the result, failed to pursue it. Other than Rodriguez, trial counsel called no witnesses in support of Rodriguez’s claim that he was an innocent dupe in a scheme to transport illegal substances. Habeas relief was denied and he now appeals on multiple grounds, including the failure to disclose the results of the urinalysis, and the denial of effective assistance of counsel. We affirm, as we conclude that there is no reasonable probability that the outcome of the trial would have been different had the errors not occurred.
Background
[¶ 2.] On February 19, 1996, Rodriguez was eastbound on 1-90 about five miles east of the Wyoming-South Dakota border. He was driving alone in a 1982 Chevrolet Blazer bearing Washington State license plates. Highway Patrol Trooper Michael Shafer stopped him for speeding. Rodriguez produced an Illinois driver’s license issued on December 5, 1995, with the name Cirilo Martin Rodriguez. The vehicle registration showed the owner as Andres Sanchez Lopez of Pasco, Washington. Shafer asked Rodriguez to come back with him and take a seat in his patrol car.
[¶ 3.] Trooper Shafer noticed a bulge in Rodriguez’s pocket. When asked what it was, Rodriguez said it was a pager. It was a leased satellite-linked sky pager. He claimed he carried the pager all the time so that his family could contact him. It was later learned that it had been rented only two days earlier, not in the name of Cirilo Rodriquez, but in the name Maria Cuevas, who Rodriquez later said was the wife of a friend. Expert testimony at trial disclosed that those involved in the drug trade often use these pagers to communicate without being traced.
[¶ 4.] Trooper Shafer asked about the person named on the vehicle registration. Rodriguez said Lopez was his brother-in-law and that he was buying the Blazer from him. Rodriguez explained that he was returning to his home in Chicago, Illinois, from a weeklong visit with his brother-in-law in Pasco. He was unable to tell Shafer in what part of Washington Pasco was located, indicating that his brother-in-law had picked him up at the airport and had taken him there. Shafer asked Rodriguez what airport he had flown into, and Rodriguez said, ‘Washington, D.C.” When told that Washington, D.C. is on the eastern seaboard, Rodriguez thought it must have been the airport in Seattle instead. Again Shafer asked about *137the owner of the Blazer. Rodriguez then declared that he did not know Lopez and that his brother-in-law, Fernando Lara, had “all the papers” on the vehicle. Rodriguez said, “I buy it for him!”referring to Lara.
[¶5.] Some of Rodriguez’s communication difficulties can be ascribed to his inability to converse well in English. But even repeated questions for clarification only revealed more incongruities. Shafer became suspicious that Rodriguez was a drug cornier. After telling Rodriguez that he would be free to go once a warning ticket was written, and then issuing the ticket, Shafer asked if Rodriguez minded if he asked a few more questions. Rodriguez said “Sure.” Shafer asked him if he was transporting any guns or narcotics in the vehicle. Rodriguez said “No.” Trooper Shafer told Rodriguez, “I’m gonna be honest with you, I’m suspicious.” Rodriguez responded, “Do you want to check the vehicle, go ahead.” Shafer asked several more questions to be certain Rodriguez understood he was giving permission to search the vehicle, and Rodriguez said, “Go ahead.”
[¶ 6.] During the search of the Blazer, Shafer found indications that it was being-used to transport drugs, including a roll of duct tape, a container of carpet freshener (often used to mask the pungent odor of marijuana), and signs of a hidden compartment. This compartment appeared to be accessible from underneath the floorboard carpeting. Shafer walked over to Rodriguez and advised him that “there had been some alterations in his vehicle, and asked if there was a compartment in his vehicle.” Rodriguez’s demeanor changed: he became more nervous, jittery; his voice cracked.
[¶ 7.] Shafer*, along with another trooper who had just arrived, ripped out the carpet to find a cutout in the floorboard. They discovered that the fuel tank had been modified so that part of the area ordinarily occupied by the tank had been refitted, creating a container within a container. Thus the gas tank appeared normal to an untrained eye when looking from underneath the vehicle. Trooper Shafer, however, had noticed amateur welds in the gas tank area. The officers retrieved from the hidden compartment thirty-six individually -wrapped packages, cumulatively holding just over ninety-four pounds of marijuana. The marijuana had evidently been machine-compressed into extremely hard brick-like forms. The bricks were wrapped in duct tape, and coated with oil. In this condition, the illegal substance was calculated to have a value of $100,000. And once reprocessed and packaged for individual sales, its estimated value increased to $300,000.
[¶ 8.] Rodriguez was indicted on the charge of possession of more than ten pounds of marijuana, in violation of SDCL 22-42-6. At trial, his defense was that he did not know the marijuana was in the vehicle. He was “duped,” his lawyer said, “by Fernando Lara, who left him then high and dry.” Through a translator, Rodriguez told the jury that he met Fernando Auturo Lara in a park in Ontario, California. Lara was moving to Chicago and needed someone to drive one of his two vehicles. Temporarily out of work, Rodriguez volunteered to help. He was not promised any specific pay. Lara said he would fly Rodriguez back to California and give him “something.” Lara, .his wife, and Rodriguez alternated driving the Blazer and the other vehicle. The day before they arrived in South Dakota they had spent the night in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Rodriguez testified that when Trooper Shafer stopped him, Lara and his wife passed them and just drove on. Rodriguez explained to the jury that he lied to Officer Shafer because Lara told him to, but he did not know why Lara told him to he. He assumed it was because the vehicle title had not yet been formally transferred. Despite efforts by the South Dakota DCI, Highway Patrol, and Attorney General, the true ownership of the Blazer could not be traced.
*138[¶ 9.] Other details in Rodriguez’s background proved irregular. He had used different dates of birth and different social security numbers. At the time he was stopped, three active driver’s licenses were shown as issued to him. One was a license from Illinois, issued December 5, 1995, showing a date of birth of April 15, 1960. Two were California licenses. One showed a date of birth of April 15, 1965. The other was under an assumed name, Miguel Alvizo Rodriguez, date of birth September 29, 1960, issued on June 29, 1992. In the past, license plates had been issued on a vehicle in New Mexico under this false name.
[¶ 10.] Rodriguez, age thirty-one at the time of trial, said that he obtained different identifications in part to evade immigration authorities because he came to this country illegally at age fourteen. Yet he was issued a “green card” (conferring resident alien status) in 1987 making his presence here legal from that time on. When asked why he got a driver’s license in 1992 under a false name, he answered, he “just had it ... never used it.... Just to have it.”
[¶ 11.] After a jury trial, he was found guilty of the charge and was sentenced to ten years in the state penitentiary. On direct appeal, his conviction was summarily affirmed. See State v. Rodriguez, 570 N.W.2d 246 (S.D.1997). Rodriguez then filed an application for a writ of habeas corpus, listing ten separate grounds for relief. The circuit court denied the application. Rodriguez now appeals that denial, asserting the following issues: (1) Did the State’s failure to disclose a negative urinalysis result violate Rodriguez’s right to due process of law? (2) Did the State’s use of a peremptory challenge to remove a juror of Mexican descent violate Rodriguez’s right to a trial by a fair and impartial jury? (3) Was Rodriguez denied his constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel?
Analysis and Decision
[¶ 12.] Habeas corpus is a collateral attack on a final judgment, and therefore our scope of review is limited. Lodermeier v. Class, 1996 SD 134, ¶ 12, 555 N.W.2d 618, 621. A habeas applicant bears the initial burden to establish a col-orable claim for relief. Jenner v. Dooley, 1999 SD 20, ¶ 11, 590 N.W.2d 463, 468. Accordingly, the State has only the burden of meeting the petitioner’s evidence. Davi v. Class, 2000 SD 30, ¶ 26, 609 N.W.2d 107, 114. The habeas court’s factual findings are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard, while legal conclusions are reviewed de novo. Meinders v. Weber, 2000 SD 2, ¶ 5, 604 N.W.2d 248, 252 (citations omitted).
1. Failure to Disclose Negative Urinalysis
[¶ 13.] Sometime after his arrest, Rodriguez provided a urine specimen for analysis. Although trial counsel had filed a motion for discovery of any scientific test results, the urinalysis (UA) result was not provided. Rodriguez argues that his rights under both the United States and the South Dakota constitutions were violated by the State’s failure to disclose his negative UA. As the result was exculpatory evidence, he contends, the State’s suppression of it violated due process. To Rodriguez the result proved that he was not using drugs. The habeas court concluded that the test result was neither exculpatory nor material because proof that Rodriguez did not use drugs had no tendency to disprove knowing possession of such a large amount of marijuana.
[¶ 14.] Due process under the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution, and Article VI, § 2 of the South Dakota Constitution, requires the State to reveal exculpatory evidence to the defense. Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 87, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 1196-97, 10 L.Ed.2d 215, 218 (1963); State v. Hanson, 278 N.W.2d 198, 200 (S.D.1979). We use a four-part test to decide whether a due *139process violation occurred when the State fails to disclose evidence. Black v. Class, 1997 SD 22, ¶ 16, 560 N.W.2d 544, 548 (citations omitted). If all four of the following elements are established, then the court must grant a new trial:
1. Was the defense unaware of the evidence?
2. Is the evidence favorable to the defense?
3. Is the evidence material to the defense?
4. Did the defense make a request for the evidence?
Id. (citations omitted).
[¶ 15.] Under, the first question, Rodriguez asserts that defense counsel was unaware of the negative result of the UA during the criminal proceedings. However, Rodriguez knew that he had given a urine sample and made his counsel aware of that fact. Testimony in the habe-as hearing verified that counsel was aware at the time of trial that a UA had been performed. “If a defendant knows or should know of the allegedly exculpatory evidence, it cannot be said that the evidence has been suppressed by the prosecution.” State v. Wilde, 306 N.W.2d 645, 647 (S.D.1981)(citing United States v. Brown, 628 F.2d 471, 473 (5thCir.l980)). The Brady rule requiring disclosure does not abrogate the responsibility of the defense to discover and develop evidence. Id. Rodriguez had notice of the essential facts that would have permitted him to take advantage of the allegedly exculpatory evidence. See id. The first element has not been met, and as all four inquiries must be answered affirmatively, this disposes of the issue. Nonetheless, we examine the remaining questions.
[¶ 16.] Addressing the second and third questions, Rodriguez argues that the results from the test were both favorable and material to his defense. In his view, people involved in drug trafficking are more likely to use illegal drugs, and the negative result would have been useful to distance himself from the marijuana found in the Blazer, especially as his defense was lack of knowledge. He points to our decision in State v. Buchholz, 1999 SD 110, 598 N.W.2d 899, where we discussed the seizure of the defendant’s urine for the purpose of having it tested for the presence of drugs after methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia were found in the defendant’s vehicle. There, although the question before us was the constitutionality of the seizure, we explained that Buchholz’s positive UA tended to show a knowing possession of drugs. Id. ¶ 24, 598 N.W.2d at 904.
[¶ 17.] Buchholz can be distinguished. In that case, the drugs and paraphernalia were found in a fanny pack in the defendant’s vehicle. Id. ¶ 4, 598 N.W.2d at 901. The nature of the items found suggested that they belonged to a user, as opposed to simply a transporter. In that situation, the presence of drugs in the defendant’s body would tend to show that the items were knowingly in her possession. We discussed the use of a positive UA as well in State v. Hanson, 1999 SD 9, 588 N.W.2d 885. There, evidence of a positive UA for drug consumption was crucial to establishing the defendant’s knowing possession of marijuana as distinct from the two other occupants of the vehicle where the drugs were found. 1999 SD 9, ¶ 40, 588 N.W.2d at 894.
[¶ 18.] Here, in contrast, Rodriguez was transporting ninety-four pounds of marijuana. Trooper Shafer did not report that he detected the odor of burnt marijuana in the Blazer. No marijuana and no drug paraphernalia were found in the passenger area of the vehicle, nor were there any indications that Rodriguez was under the influence of any substance. More important, the amount and condition of the marijuana found in the hidden compartment suggested that it was not. ready for immediate personal use. It was compressed into hard bricks and securely wrapped, so it obviously was intended for further processing before it could be used.
*140[¶ 19.] “[E]videnee is .favorable where it creates a reasonable doubt that did not otherwise exist ... [and] ‘material only if there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.’ ” Black, 1997 SD 22, ¶ 18, 560 N.W.2d at 548 (quoting State v. Fowler, 1996 SD 79, ¶ 22, 552 N.W.2d 391, 395)(other citations omitted) (alterations in original). We conclude that the negative test result would not have created a reasonable doubt on knowledge of the presence of marijuana in the Blazer. One need not be a drug user to be a drug courier.
[¶ 20.] We think it highly unlikely that the result of the trial would have been different had the UA result been disclosed to the jury. The defense of lack of knowledge relied in great part on whether the jury found credible Rodriguez’s explanation for how he came to be driving a vehicle with almost one hundred pounds of marijuana. His credibility came under considerable attack with evidence, for example, that he lied repeatedly when stopped for speeding, and in his words, lied only because someone told him to; that he had two driver’s licenses issued in his name and one in an assumed name; that he obtained a license in an assumed name even when by his own rationale it was no longer necessary to do so; and that the pager he said he always carried had been rented only two days earlier. After so much evidence of dishonesty, proof that he had no illicit substances in his body at the time of his arrest creates no reasonable probability of a different result. Accordingly, the second and third prongs of the Brady test are not met. While the defense did make a request for the evidence by its motion for discovery, meeting the fourth element, because the other three questions cannot be answered affirmatively, there was no Brady violation. We affirm the habeas court’s decision on this issue.
2. Improper Use of Peremptory Challenge
[¶ 21.] Rodriguez next asserts that his right to a fair and impartial jury was violated when the State used one of its peremptory challenges to strike the only prospective juror of Mexican descent. Rodriguez is also Mexican. The State counters that Rodriguez did not meet the required initial burden of proving the existence of purposeful discrimination. We examine the matter under the standard set in Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 106 S.Ct. 1712, 90 L.Ed.2d 69 (1986) and followed by this Court in State v. Rhines, 1996 SD 55, 548 N.W.2d 415. To prevail on a claim under Batson, a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination in the jury selection process must be proved.
[¶ 22.] In Honomichl v. Leapley, 498 N.W.2d 636 (S.D.1993) we explained that to establish a prima facie case, it must be shown that (1) the defendant is a member of a cognizable racial group; (2) the prosecution removed members of that racial group; and (3) circumstances raise the inference that the challenge was motivated by race. 498 N.W.2d at 638-39. The second element was modified by the United States Supreme Court in Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400, 111 S.Ct. 1364, 113 L.Ed.2d 411 (1991). There, the Court held that the excluded juror and the defendant need not be of the same race for the defendant to object to race-based exclusion. Id. at 409, 111 S.Ct. at 1369, 113 L.Ed.2d at 424. “The race of the defendant and the race of jurors peremptorily challenged are now circumstances for the trial court to consider in determining whether defendant raised an inference that State used its peremptory challenges for race-based reasons.” Honomichl, 498 N.W.2d at 639 (citations omitted). Once a defendant establishes a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination, the burden shifts to the State to present a race-neu*141tral explanation for the peremptory challenge.
[¶ 23.] Here, Rodriguez did not object at .the time the juror’s name was stricken. The question whether the peremptory strike was purposefully discriminatory was also not raised in the direct appeal. Batson, however, requires a timely objection. See Ford v. Georgia, 498 U.S. 411, 422, 111 S.Ct. 850, 857, 112 L.Ed.2d 935, 948 (1991); Ruff v. Armontrout, 77 F.3d 265, 267 (8th Cir.1996); Clark v. Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co., 937 F.2d 934, 939 (4th Cir. 1991). “Unless the facts supporting the Batson claim are articulated at trial, ‘they are lost to the record and appellate review becomes impossible.’ ” Williams v. Calderon, 48 F.Supp.2d 979, 997 (C.D. Cal. 1998) (citations omitted).
[¶ 24.] This matter may nonetheless be reviewed for plain error. SDCL 23A-44-15 (Rule 52(b)); see United States v. Contreras-Contreras, 83 F.3d 1103 (9th Cir.1996). Under an examination for plain error, “the defendant bears the burden of showing the error was prejudicial.” State v. Nelson, 1998 SD 124, ¶ 8, 587 N.W.2d 439, 443 (citation omitted). We explained in Nelson what must be shown:
Plain error requires (1) error, (2) that is plain, (3) affecting substantial rights; and only then may we exercise our discretion to notice the error if (4) it “seriously affectfe] the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” We invoke our discretion under the plain error rule cautiously and only in “exceptional circumstances.” Such circumstances may include cases in which “ ‘a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result,’ ” i.e., a defendant is actually innocent.
Id. ¶ 8, 587 N.W.2d at 443 (alteration in original)(internal citations omitted).
[¶ 25.] Because this is a habeas proceeding, Rodriguez must make a greater showing to establish plain error than if the matter had been raised on direct appeal. Williams, 48 F.Supp.2d at 997 (citing Engle v. Isaac, 456 U.S. 107, 134-35, 102 S.Ct. 1558, 71 L.Ed.2d 783, 805 (1982))(other citations omitted). Rodriguez contends -that the.prosecutor’s comments at trial suggest that he had a discriminatory state of mind. Rodriguez points to several occasions when the prosecutor asked potential jurors whether they spoke Spanish and whether those who reside in this country should be fluent in the English language. Rodriguez insists these questions show the prosecutor’s discriminative intent.
[¶ 26.] A closer look at the voir dire shows that the questions were asked chiefly because Rodriguez used Spanish as his primary language, which required the use of an interpreter .during the trial. We conclude that Rodriguez has not established that the “fairness, integrity or public reputation” of the proceedings was seriously affected, and that unless this mistake is corrected, “a miscarriage of justice” would occur. See Nelson, 1998 SD 124, ¶ 7, 587 N.W.2d at 443. Moreover, Rodriguez has not shown that had the excused individual remained on the jury the outcome would have been different. Because Rodriguez has failed to meet his burden of showing prejudicial error, we affirm on this issue.
3. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
[¶ 27.] Finally, Rodriguez argues that his constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel was violated in multiple ways by both his trial and appellate attorneys.* He was represented by a court *142appointed attorney in both the trial and the direct appeal. Thomas E. Adams was his trial counsel. After the sentencing, Rodriguez requested a change of attorney, and Thomas T. Zollinger was appointed to handle the appeal.
[¶ 28.] Rodriguez contends his trial attorney fell below the required standard of competence in several respects.
Whether a defendant has received ineffective assistance of counsel is essentially a mixed question of law and fact. In the absence of a clearly erroneous determination by the circuit court, we must defer to its findings on such primary facts regarding what defense counsel did or did not do in preparation for trial and in his presentation of the defense at trial. This court, however, may substitute its own judgment for that of the circuit court as to whether defense counsel’s actions or inactions constituted ineffective assistance of counsel.
Meinders, 2000 SD 2, ¶ 42, 604 N.W.2d at 264 (quoting Sund v. Weber, 1998 SD 123, ¶ 14, 588 N.W.2d 223, 225)(other citations omitted). The petitioner has the burden of overcoming the strong presumption that counsel’s performance was competent. Sprik v. Class, 1997 SD 134, ¶ 23, 572 N.W.2d 824, 829 (citations omitted). We will not second-guess the tactical decisions of trial counsel, but we “should not hesitate to reverse a conviction if the record reveals that a defendant was not afforded effective assistance of counsel.” New v. Weber, 1999 SD 125, ¶ 7, 600 N.W.2d 568, 572 (quoting Jones v. State, 353 N.W.2d 781, 784 (S.D.1984))(eiting Grooms v. State, 320 N.W.2d 149 (S.D.1982)).
[¶ 29.] We have adopted the test in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984) for evaluating claims of ineffective assistance of counsel:
First, [the applicant] must prove that his trial counsel’s performance was deficient. He must show that trial counsel made errors “so serious that counsel was not functioning as the ‘counsel’ guaranteed ... by the Sixth Amendment.” Secondly, he must show that the deficient performance “prejudiced the defense” by showing that “counsel’s errors were so serious as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial[.]” The reasonableness of trial counsel’s action is evaluated from his perspective at the time the alleged error occurred.
Meinders, 2000 SD 2, ¶ 42, 604 N.W.2d at 264 (quoting Sund, 1998 SD 123, ¶ 13, 588 N.W.2d at 225)(alterations in original). Under the first prong of this test, where we employ an objective standard of reasonableness, counsel’s errors must be “so serious that [he or she] was not functioning as the ‘counsel’ guaranteed ... by the Sixth Amendment.” Garritsen v. Leapley, 541 N.W.2d 89, 93 (S.D.1995)(quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. at 2064, 80 L.Ed.2d at 693). In the second prong of the test, we examine whether the result of the proceeding was fundamentally unfair or unreliable, not simply whether the outcome would have been different. Rhines v. Weber, 2000 SD 19, ¶ 15, 608 N.W.2d 303, 307 (citing Siers v. Class, 1998 SD 77, ¶ 12, 581 N.W.2d 491, 495)(other citations omitted). However, we are not *143required to determine the sufficiency of counsel’s performance before we review whether there was prejudice from the “alleged deficiencies.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 104 S.Ct. at 2069, 80 L.Ed.2d at 699. “If it is easier to dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of lack of sufficient prejudice, ... that course should be followed.” Id.; New, 1999 SD 125, ¶ 7, 600 N.W.2d at 572. “Failure to make the required showing of either deficient performance or sufficient prejudice defeats the ineffectiveness claim.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 700, 104 S.Ct. at 2071, 80 L.Ed.2d at 702. The habeas court ruled that Rodriguez failed to establish that Adams’ performance was deficient and that any deficiencies in counsel’s representation did not prejudice him.
a.Failure to object to the removal of a juror
[¶30.] Rodriguez argues that the failure of attorney Adams to object to the State’s exclusion of the only juror of Mexican descent on the panel supports his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. Under the Batson standard, he must point to facts and circumstances that show that the potential juror was excluded because of race. “While it is true that striking a [minority] venireperson for racial reasons is always violative of the Constitution, it is not true that • all peremptory strikes of [minority] venirepersons aré for racial reasons.” Honomichl, 498 N.W.2d at 639 (quoting United States v. Lewis, 892 F.2d 735, 736 (8th Cir.1989)). Rodriguez must do more than merely point out that the prosecution excluded a venireperson of Mexican descent with a peremptory challenge. United States v. Cooper, 19 F.3d 1154, 1159 (7th Cir.1994). He “must point to facts and circumstances raising an inference that the potential juror ... [was] excluded because of race. Otherwise, every peremptory challenge used to exclude any cognizable minority from a petit jury would require a Batson-type hearing.” Id. (alterations in original). As stated earlier, Rodriguez does not point to facts or circumstances during voir dire that show that the use of the -peremptory challenge was race based. As such, counsel’s failure to object' was not an instance of professional deficiency. Furthermore, Rodriguez has not shown that the failure to object to the removal of this juror prejudiced him, that the outcome of the trial would have been different, or that it was fundamentally unfair or unreliable. His claim of ineffective assistance of counsel on this basis fails.
b. Failure to obtain results of the urinalysis
[¶ 31.] Rodriguez next argues that Adams’ failure to obtain the exculpatory UA result was deficient. Attorney Adams testified at the habeas hearing that if he had had the result he “might have used it,” but that he felt that it was not “real relevant.” As we explained in Part 1, Rodriguez has not shown that the UA result was particularly material, or that it would have served to create a reasonable probability of a different result. Even if Adams was deficient in this regard, therefore, Rodriguez has not shown that he was prejudiced by counsel’s performance. Rodriguez’s credibility was so, thoroughly impugned that showing he had a clean UA would not likely have made a difference in the outcome.
c. Failure to remove jurors
[¶ 32.] Rodriguez asserts that Adams should have removed three jurors with peremptory challenges, and that he failed to offer any reason during the habe-as hearing for leaving them on the jury panel. He points to jurors Wayne Reynolds, Jennifer Bradley, and David Jewitt.
[¶ 33.] Juror Reynolds said during voir dire that he was bothered that Rodriguez lived in the United States yet used Spanish as his primary language. Reynolds was “firmly convinced” that a person who becomes a citizen should learn English. Juror Bradley was left on' -the jury even though her husband had just been hired as a reserve police officer in Spearfish. Ju*144ror Jewitt was an administrator of the Spearfish School District, and stated during voir dire that the prosecutor had worked with the Spearfish school on drug issues.
[¶ 34.] All three of these jurors, however, assured Adams that they could put these feelings and experiences aside and decide the case on the evidence presented. Reynolds answered “absolutely” when asked if he could “see past” his feelings on the use of the English language “and still judge this case on the facts.” Bradley responded “no” when Adams asked whether her decision would be influenced by her husband’s occupation, and answered affirmatively when asked if she could weigh the facts independent of her husband’s job. Jewitt told Adams that his contact with the prosecutor was limited to asking him for his input on school policies. As did the other jurors in question, he indicated that he could decide this case based on the evidence presented, and that his contacts with the prosecutor would not interfere with his ability to hear the case.
[¶ 35.] Decisions on how to exercise peremptory challenges involve tactical choices, and claims of ineffective assistance of counsel are not established “by merely complaining about counsel’s failure to challenge certain jurors or his failure to make proper objections.” Tsipouras v. State, 567 N.W.2d 271, 276 (Minn.Ct.App.1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1114, 118 S.Ct. 1049, 140 L.Ed.2d 113 (1998). Rodriguez has failed to sustain his burden of showing that Adams’ performance was deficient, and therefore we need not decide whether he was prejudiced by the alleged failure. See Stead v. United States; 67 F.Supp.2d 1064, 1080 (D.S.D.1999)(citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 700, 104 S.Ct. at 2069, 2071, 80 L.Ed.2d at 699-700, 702; Stokes v. Armontrout, 851 F.2d 1085, 1092 (8thCir.l988)).
d. Failure to investigate or call potential witnesses
[¶ 36.] Rodriguez next contends that Adams’ performance fell below the Strickland standard when he failed to investigate or consider calling potential witnesses that could have confirmed the existence of Fernando Lara. Rodriguez was the only defense witness called at his criminal trial. He did not provide his counsel with information to help locate Lara, other than a business card from a restaurant in Chicago where he said he was supposed to meet Lara if they became separated during their cross-country trip. Yet, Rodriguez admitted that the only thing he knew about Lara was his name and that Lara was moving from California. The card had nothing noted on it about Lara; it was simply a printed restaurant business card. Furthermore, when the Lawrence County Sheriffs office contacted California law enforcement to get information on Lara, the California authorities could not find the name in their computer records.
[¶ 37.] Rodriguez said that when Adams asked him if he had any witnesses, he thought it was a “ridiculous question” because he felt his attorney was the one who was supposed to find witnesses. At the habeas hearing Adams testified, “We didn’t ever make an attempt to try and find another witness, you know, to get one here, no.” According to Rodriguez, his wife, his sister, and the owner of the Blazer could have been called as witnesses on his behalf. Rodriguez believed his sister could have testified that she had seen Lara pick him up at his parents’ home. He was vague about what he felt the owner of the Blazer could have testified to, stating that “[w]ell, at least he could provide more information than I - than I do to try to locate the guy that I believe is this Fernando Arturo Lara, you know, because I believe he know more than I do about him, you know.” None of these witnesses were called to testify at the habeas hearing, so we have only Rodriquez’s speculation about what they would have said.
[¶ 38.] “Failure to call a witness will not automatically produce ineffec*145tive assistance of counsel.” Lodermeier, 1996 SD 134, ¶ 20, 555 N.W.2d at 625 (citing Garritsen, 541 N.W.2d at 94). There must be a showing of prejudice that deprived the accused of a fair trial. Sund, 1998 SD 123, ¶ 21, 588 N.W.2d at 226 (citations omitted). Rodriguez must show how these witnesses would have changed the outcome of his trial. Fast Horse v. Weber, 1999 SD 97, ¶ 16, 598 N.W.2d 539, 544. Unlike the showing of prejudice in Sund, where potential witnesses testified at the petitioner’s habeas hearing and thereby produced evidence of reasonable doubt on whether Sund had the requisite criminal intent, here only Rodriguez and attorney Adams testified at the habeas hearing. We find that Rodriguez has not met his burden of showing that counsel’s errors were sufficiently serious and prejudicial to deprive him of a fair trial.
[¶ 39.] Affirmed.
[¶ 40.] MILLER, Chief Justice, and AMUNDSON and GILBERTSON, Justices, concur.
[¶ 41.] SABERS, Justice, concurs in result.
In addition to the grounds discussed in Part 3, Rodriguez also contends that (1) counsel was ineffective in not bringing to the attention of the court that law enforcement officers questioned him about the ownership of the Blazer without notifying his attorney. He does not direct us to anything inculpatory gained during the questioning, however. Nor does he assert that anything obtained at this questioning was introduced at trial. Rodriguez has *142not established any prejudicial error. We also find the following arguments unmeritorious because either insufficient evidence was offered at the habeas hearing to support them or there was no prejudice shown: (2) Trial counsel was ineffective in failing to object to leaving the ninety-four pounds of marijuana in the courtroom during the trial. All of the marijuana had been admitted into evidence, however, and Rodriguez does not argue that it was erroneously admitted. (3) Trial counsel failed to object to Rodriguez not being released on a surety bond because of false information about an INS hold. A formal INS detainer was not put into place until approximately seven months after his arraignment. (4) Trial counsel was ineffective in failing to explore and preserve the issue of proportionality of sentence. (5) Appellate counsel was ineffective in failing to communicate with his client about possible issues that could be raised on appeal. (7) The cumulative effect of all counsel errors denied him effective assistance.