=== CASE 9737482 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:25.48615+00 ===

LaROCQUE, J.
(dissenting). I dissent. The Murray decision has no application here. Murray deals with the police failure to mention to the issuing magistrate *629the fact of their illegal forced entry into the subject warehouse where they observed hundreds of bales of marijuana. This case is controlled by Karo. That case also involved an illegal pre-warrant police search, but those facts were presented to the magistrate in the search warrant affidavit. Karo holds that if sufficient untainted evidence is included in the application for a search warrant, the warrant is valid. The majority here notes that Murray makes no mention of Karo, yet, if the facts here are controlled by Murray, then Karo is overruled. I believe that Murray does not mention Karo, decided only four years earlier, because the cases deal with different circumstances.
I would reverse the order suppressing the evidence based upon the conclusion reached by both the trial court and this court that there was sufficient evidence to support a search warrant without the clipped marijuana bud.

=== CASE 2210663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:56.43841+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 378 (1968)
67 Cal. Rptr. 197
MONTY HOLMES, a Minor, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CITY OF OAKLAND, Defendant and Respondent.
Docket No. 24370.
Court of Appeals of California, First District, Division One.
March 25, 1968.
*380 Arthur C. Zief and Raymond Glickman for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Edward A. Goggin, City Attorney, and William C. Sharp, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendant and Respondent.
MOLINARI, P.J.
Plaintiff, a minor appearing by his guardian ad litem, filed a complaint purporting to allege four causes of action against the City of Oakland and other *381 defendants for damages for personal injuries incurred when a Santa Fe railroad train ran over plaintiff, severing both of his legs. The court sustained with leave to amend the City's demurrer to all four causes of action on the ground that none of them stated a cause of action against the City. Plaintiff having declined to amend, the court entered judgment of dismissal in favor of the City, from which plaintiff appeals.
Plaintiff concedes that his claim of liability against the City is predicated solely upon Government Code section 835[1] which provides that a public entity is liable for injury caused by a dangerous condition of its property if the injury was proximately caused by the dangerous condition, the dangerous condition created a reasonably foreseeable risk of the kind of injury that was incurred, and the City had actual or constructive notice of the dangerous condition and sufficient time prior to the injury to have taken protective measures. Section 830, subdivision (a) defines a dangerous condition as one creating a substantial risk of injury when such property or adjacent property is used with due care in a manner in which it is reasonably foreseeable that it will be used.
The complaint alleges essentially that the 6-year-old plaintiff was run over by a Santa Fe train while a pedestrian on Lowell Street in Oakland on June 3, 1965. The "first cause of action" alleges that the City owned a certain railroad right-of-way which it negligently maintained, operated, leased, and controlled so as to cause the said train to be negligently maintained, owned, operated and controlled by the Santa Fe Railroad Company. The "second cause of action" contains the foregoing allegations and in addition alleges that Lowell Street is owned by the City; that the railroad tracks were located on the street in close proximity to a grammar school, a fact known to the City; that the City allowed trains to be operated on the street at or near the time students were dismissed from school; that many students, including plaintiff, crossed the tracks on their way home from school; that the students were attracted to and regularly played on or around the trains and railroad cars; that the City realized or should have realized this was a dangerous condition; that this attractive and dangerous condition could have been remedied by imposing restrictions on the operation of the trains, or by providing guards or other safeguards, at the time when children were on their way home from school; that although the *382 City had knowledge of the dangerous condition, it failed to take any measures whatsoever to protect the children; and that plaintiff while crossing Lowell Street on his way home from school was attracted to the train and railroad cars, causing him to be thrown under the wheels thereof.
The "third cause of action," which alleges that the City conducted classes in said grammar school, realleges essentially all of the foregoing allegations and alleges that the City knew or should have known that students of tender years would be attracted to the railroad tracks and that they regularly played thereon or upon the train and cars which were run on said tracks. Finally, the "fourth cause of action" alleges all of the foregoing facts and alleges further that the City negligently failed to instruct or supervise plaintiff as to his conduct in returning home from said school.
In determining whether the trial court was justified in sustaining the demurrer we must ascertain whether the complaint states at least one cause of action. Our consideration of whether the subject complaint states one or more causes of action requires that we examine it in relation to certain well-defined rules. These are: [1] "A demurrer reaches only to the contents of the pleading and such matters as may be considered under the doctrine of judicial notice" (Weil v. Barthel, 45 Cal.2d 835, 837 [291 P.2d 30]; County of Los Angeles v. Security First Nat. Bank, 84 Cal. App.2d 575, 579 [191 P.2d 78]); the material and issuable facts pleaded in the complaint must be regarded as true (Stigall v. City of Taft, 58 Cal.2d 565, 567-568 [27 Cal. Rptr. 441, 375 P.2d 289]; Flores v. Arroyo, 56 Cal.2d 492, 497 [15 Cal. Rptr. 87, 364 P.2d 263]; Hauger v. Gates, 42 Cal.2d 752, 755 [269 P.2d 609]); a demurrer does not, however, admit contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law alleged in the complaint (Marin v. Jacuzzi, 224 Cal. App.2d 549, 552 [36 Cal. Rptr. 880]; Howard v. City of Los Angeles, 143 Cal. App.2d 195, 197 [299 P.2d 294]), or facts impossible in law (Griffin v. County of Colusa, 44 Cal. App.2d 915, 918 [113 P.2d 270]), or allegations contrary to facts of which a court may take judicial knowledge. (Chavez v. Times-Mirror Co., 185 Cal. 20, 23 [195 P. 666]; Griffin v. County of Colusa, supra, at p. 918; American Distilling Co. v. Johnson, 132 Cal. App.2d 73, 77 [281 P.2d 598]; Livermore v. Beal, 18 Cal. App.2d 535, 540 [64 P.2d 987].) We are also to be guided by the following basic principle: [2] All that is necessary against a general demurrer is that, upon a consideration of all the facts stated, *383 it appears that the plaintiff is entitled to any judicial relief against the defendant, notwithstanding that the facts may not be clearly stated, or may be intermingled with a statement of other facts irrelevant to the cause of action shown, or although the plaintiff may demand relief to which he is not entitled under the facts alleged. (Gressley v. Williams, 193 Cal. App.2d 636, 639 [14 Cal. Rptr. 496]; Hilltop Properties, Inc. v. State of California, 233 Cal. App.2d 349, 354 [43 Cal. Rptr. 605].)
Adverting to the instant complaint in the light of the foregoing principles we first conclude that it purports to state only one cause of action although stated differently in each of the four counts. The action seeks to enforce a single right allegedly violated by the City, the essence of the complaint being that the City had the duty of maintaining its property in a safe condition, that it owed this duty to plaintiff, and that it breached that duty. There is, therefore, an attempt to plead only one single cause of action, which, if it exists, arises under the provisions of section 835.
[3] The first count does not state a cause of action because it not only fails to allege that the City maintained a "dangerous condition" as that term is defined in section 830, but also fails to allege that the condition alleged to exist created a reasonably foreseeable risk of the kind of injury that was incurred and neglects to allege that the City had actual or constructive notice of such condition.
A cause of action is stated, however, in the second and third counts. The only apparent difference between the allegations of these counts is that the second count predicates liability on a dangerous condition of the City's own property while the third count bases liability on the theory that the City's own property was dangerous because a condition on adjacent property exposed those using the public property to a substantial risk of injury.
[4a] Directing our attention, first, to the second count we note that plaintiff alleges that the City owns the railroad right-of-way. The City argues that the Santa Fe has a franchise from the City to run trains over and along Lowell street and that, therefore, section 830, subdivision (c) is applicable. That section excepts from the definition of property of a public entity "easements, encroachments and other property that are located on the property of the public entity but are not owned or controlled by the public entity." *384 Although the complaint does not allege facts which would invoke section 830, subdivision (c) by indicating that the City merely owns the underlying land and the railroad owns and controls an easement or franchise to lay tracks and operate trains thereon, regulations and enactments of the City which disclose the relationship between the City and the railroad and the legal status and nature of the subject right-of-way are matters which may be judicially noticed and read into the complaint. (Evid. Code, §§ 451 and 452; see South Shore Land Co. v. Petersen, 226 Cal. App.2d 725, 745-746 [38 Cal. Rptr. 392].) The record does not disclose that any such matter was properly noticed by the trial court or that an appropriate request therefor was made to such court under Evidence Code section 453. Accordingly, since section 459 of the Evidence Code provides authority for the reviewing court to exercise the same discretionary power to take judicial notice as is possessed by the trial court, we elected to invoke section 459 and requested the City to furnish us with pertinent information for the purpose of determining the propriety of taking judicial notice and the tenor of the matter to be noticed, and we afforded plaintiff the opportunity to meet such information.
Pursuant to said request we have been furnished with a certified copy of Ordinance No. 6457 C.M.S. of the City granting the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad Company a franchise to construct, maintain and operate a commercial railroad along with and across various public streets in the City of Oakland. The geographical boundaries of the franchise are delineated in a print referred to in the ordinance, a copy of which has also been furnished to us. The ordinance and said print disclose that among the public streets designated is Lowell Street, along and in which the railroad is franchised to construct and maintain tracks and to operate thereon a common carrier transportation line. Adverting to the provisions of the ordinance we note that the franchise is nonexclusive and permits the City to grant over the routes therein specified identical, similar or other types of franchise to any person, firm or corporation other than the grantee railroad. The ordinance prohibits the use of steam locomotives, prohibits the stopping or standing on tracks in improved streets of trains and cars excepting the switching of cars and the stopping at stations, and limits the time for such stops at vehicular crossings. The ordinance further provides for notice to the City of street work to be performed by the railroad on the franchise *385 property, other than routine maintenance and repairs and emergency work, and provides for authority to regulate and restrict the time and manner of performing work in the public streets in the area covered by the franchise, and provides further that when the City repaves or changes the grade of the public street under certain circumstances the railroad is required to repave and regrade the franchise property to conform with the City's work and to the City's satisfaction. Provision is also made for the City to control the construction of the tracks by the railroad, grade crossings, and crossing protection, and for the City to construct, repair and remove public improvements and facilities under or above any street covered by the franchise. Finally, the ordinance provides that the City has the right to inspect the property constructed and maintained pursuant to the franchise.
[5] It is apparent from the foregoing provisions of the ordinance that the property subject to the railroad franchise is under the control of the City and is included within the meaning of "property of a public entity" or "public property" under section 830, subdivision (c). The "Law Revision Commission Comment" following section 830[2] notes that the exclusion of easements, encroachments and similar property from the meaning of "property of a public entity" is based upon the theory that it is the duty of the person or entity that owns the easement, encroachment or similar property to inspect such property for hazards, rather than being the duty of the owner of the servient estate. In the instant case it appears that the City has reserved unto itself under the ordinance the right to make such inspection, and therefore has a concomitant duty to inspect. Certainly, under the terms of the ordinance we cannot say that as a matter of law the City did not control the property under franchise or that it did not have the duty to inspect such property.
[6a] Having concluded that the subject right-of-way constitutes *386 "public property," we now turn to the second count of plaintiff's complaint to ascertain whether he has alleged a "dangerous condition" of such property. [7] Section 830, subdivision (a) defines a "dangerous condition" as "... condition of property that creates a substantial (as distinguished from a minor, trivial or insignificant) risk of injury when such property or adjacent property is used with due care in a manner in which it is reasonably foreseeable that it will be used." The meaning of this statutory definition is discussed in the aforementioned comment as follows: "A condition is not dangerous within the meaning of this chapter unless it creates a hazard to those who foreseeably will use the property or adjacent property with due care. Thus, even though it is foreseeable that persons may use public property without due care, a public entity may not be held liable for failing to take precautions to protect such persons. The definition would, however, take into consideration the standard of care that would be applicable to foreseeable users of the property. Where it is reasonably foreseeable that persons to whom a lower standard of care is applicable  such as children  may be exposed to a substantial risk of injury from the property, the public entity should be required to take reasonable precautions to protect such persons from that risk. Thus, a public entity may be expected to fence a swimming pool or to fence or lock up a dangerous instrumentality if it is reasonably foreseeable that small children may be injured if such precautions are not taken."
[8] The question whether a dangerous condition existed that caused the plaintiff's injury is, as a general rule, one of fact, although it may be determined as a matter of law if reasonable men can draw but one conclusion from the evidence presented. (Branzel v. City of Concord, 247 Cal. App.2d 68, 73 [55 Cal. Rptr. 167]; Aguirre v. City of Los Angeles, 46 Cal.2d 841, 844 [299 P.2d 862]; Gray v. Brinkerhoff, 41 Cal.2d 180, 183 [258 P.2d 834].) In the instant case we must decide whether it can be concluded from the facts pleaded in the complaint that an unguarded railroad operation on Lowell Street near a grammar school created a substantial risk of injury to children using Lowell Street and exercising what for them would constitute due care. (See Callahan v. City & County of San Francisco, 249 Cal. App.2d 696, 703-704 [57 Cal. Rptr. 639] [hearing den. 5-17-67].) As noted in Callahan. the test is whether the condition created a substantial risk of harm to persons, generally, who would use the public property *387 with due care in a forseeable manner. (Pp. 702-703; see also Van Alstyne, California Tort Liability [Cont.Ed.Bar. (1964)] p. 195.) Accordingly, in order to prove his case, plaintiff must show "that the condition was one that created a hazard to a person who foreseeably would use the property or adjacent property with due care." (Italics added.) (Law Revision Com. Comment, § 830; Callahan v. City & County of San Francisco, supra.) He need not, however, allege that he was free from contributory negligence since contributory negligence is a matter of defense under subdivision (b) of section 815. (Callahan v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, at p. 703.)
[6b] Applying the foregoing principles to the facts pleaded in plaintiff's second count, we cannot conclude that as a matter of law the subject public property did not constitute a dangerous condition. In the light of the allegations that children going home from school on Lowell Street customarily were attracted to the trains and railroad cars and played about them, it is not unreasonable to conclude that children were foreseeable users of the railroad right-of-way, that such use and the danger inherent therein were reasonably foreseeable, that the City was required to take reasonable precautions to protect children from that risk, and that plaintiff child was a person exposed to such risk. In this connection we note that standards of care for minors have always been much lower than those for adults, and that in dealing with a young child one must exercise greater caution than in dealing with an adult. (See Schwartz v. Helms Bakery, Limited, 67 Cal.2d 232, 240 [60 Cal. Rptr. 510, 430 P.2d 68]; Hilyar v. Union Ice Co., 45 Cal.2d 30, 36 [286 P.2d 21]; McKay v. Hedger, 139 Cal. App. 266, 274 [34 P.2d 221].) Accordingly, in this state the cases have found foreseeable many types of injuries to children arising out of childish carelessness, immaturity or heedlessness to danger. (See Schwartz v. Helms Bakery Limited, supra; Hilyar v. Union Ice Co., supra; McKay v. Hedger, supra; Holder v. City of Santa Ana, 205 Cal. App.2d 194 [22 Cal. Rptr. 707]; Gallipo v. City of Long Beach, 146 Cal. App.2d 520 [304 P.2d 106]; Torkelson v. City of Redlands, 198 Cal. App.2d 354 [17 Cal. Rptr. 899].)
Of particular interest is Gallipo, supra. There the defendant city owned, operated and maintained a bridge which served vehicular traffic but did not have a pedestrian walkway. Just outside the railing of the bridge a gas pipe one foot in diameter was attached to it. The pipe ran parallel and *388 almost horizontal with the lower railing and had two planks flanking it which rested on the structure supporting the pipe. There was no barrier at either end of the approaches to the bridge to prevent pedestrians from walking upon the pipe or the planks. Plaintiff, an 8-year-old boy who had walked along the pipeline to cross the bridge once or twice a week over a period of two years, fell from the bridge while walking along the pipeline and sustained injuries. Several witnesses testified that children were wont to play near the bridge and cross it over the pipeline. There was no dispute that the city knew the conditions of the bridge and the pipeline. There was evidence, also, that the city's officers knew that young children congregated about the bridge and that young children crossed it in going and coming from nearby grammar schools. The appellate court, in reversing a judgment of nonsuit, held that the city's liability was governed by the Public Liability Act (the predecessor to the Tort Claims Act) and the principles developed in construing the act, and that whether a given set of circumstances creates a dangerous or defective condition is normally to be determined by the trier of fact. The appellate court observed that the city had the duty to keep its streets in a reasonably safe condition for travel by the public, that the city could be liable for failure to guard against accidents due to a dangerous or defective condition though the condition exists off the traveled portion of the highway so long as the condition is connected with or in close proximity to the traveled portion so as to render the highway unsafe for those traveling thereon, and that the jury could find that the absence of a proper barrier across the pipeline structure made the bridge dangerous in view of the city's duty to take action reasonably necessary to protect the public against a condition from which a risk of injury to pedestrians is reasonably to be foreseen.
[4b] We conclude, therefore, that sufficient facts are pleaded in the second count showing that the City could reasonably foresee that children would be attracted to trains and railroad cars operating over and upon Lowell Street, and that children might be injured if reasonable precautions were not taken to protect them from that risk. These allegations, when coupled with the allegation that such precautions were not taken and that plaintiff, a 6-year-old child, was attracted *389 to such trains and sustained injuries when thrown under the wheels thereof, suffice, with the other allegations hereinabove alluded to, to state a cause of action.[3]
The cases of Demmer v. City of Eureka, 78 Cal. App.2d 708 [178 P.2d 472] and Howard v. City of Fresno, 22 Cal. App.2d 41 [70 P.2d 502], are clearly distinguishable. In Demmer the injured minor plaintiff left a city street and paddled about on a log in an adjacent pond; in Howard, children in a city park left the playground area and were burned while playing in a remote trash burning area. In Branzel v. City of Concord, supra, 247 Cal. App.2d 68, we pointed out that the decisions adverse to the plaintiffs in Demmer and Howard were predicated upon the ground that it was not reasonable that the pond or the trash burning area would be used as a playground.
[9] The foregoing principles are likewise applicable to the third count which, as we have hereinbefore pointed out, pleads facts predicated on the theory that if the City does not own or control the railroad right-of-way it is nevertheless liable to plaintiff on the basis that the City's public property consisting of that portion of Lowell Street running along the right-of-way is dangerous because a condition on the adjacent right-of-way exposes those using the public property to a substantial risk of injury. In this connection we note that the condition of property defined as a "dangerous condition" in subdivision (a) of section 830 includes "adjacent property."
The Law Revision Commission Comment to section 830 states in part: "`Adjacent property' as used in the definition of `dangerous condition' refers to the area that is exposed to the risk created by a dangerous condition of the public property.... Under the definition as it is used ..., a *390 public entity cannot be held liable for dangerous conditions of `adjacent property' A public entity may be liable only for dangerous conditions of its own property. But its own property may be considered dangerous if ... a condition on the adjacent property exposes those using the public property to a substantial risk of injury."
In Branzel v. City of Concord, supra, 247 Cal. App.2d 68, a case arising under former section 53051 providing for liability of a public entity for a defective or dangerous condition of public property, we took cognizance of the fact that said section had been supplanted by new sections of the California Tort Claims Act (§§ 830-840.6)[4] dealing with liability of public entities for dangerous conditions of public property (p. 71, fn. 5), and we particularly noted that the new sections in point (§§ 835 and 830, subd. (a)) indicated no material changes in the law applicable to the facts then before us. (Pp. 72-73, fn. 6.) In holding that a municipality's flying field for model airplanes could constitute a dangerous condition (under former § 53051) because of its close proximity to the high voltage lines of a public utility, we specifically noted, in discussing the unreasonableness of the risk there involved, that under the new sections (§§ 835 and 830, subd. (a)) it is specifically provided that the property of a public entity may be considered dangerous if a condition on adjacent property exposes those using public property to a substantial risk of injury. (Pp. 72-73, fn. 6.)
We are satisfied, moreover, that no case arising under former section 53051 has held that the injury must occur on the public property in order for liability to attach. Thus, in Marsh v. City of Sacramento, 127 Cal. App.2d 721 [274 P.2d 434], a city was held liable for injuries sustained by a pedestrian as a result of a fall from the edge of a sidewalk into an excavation on private property adjacent to the sidewalk upon the rationale that a sidewalk whose surface was without defect could nevertheless be made dangerous for use by conditions existing without its boundaries. (P. 724.) Beyer v. City of Los Angeles, 229 Cal. App.2d 378 [40 Cal. Rptr. 341], relied on by the City, is clearly distinguishable. There the plaintiff drove her car off a public road and struck a water valve about four feet away from the dirt shoulder and entirely on a privately-owned strip of land. The reviewing court affirmed a judgment of nonsuit on the basis that the water valve was not a menace to anyone using the street or shoulder of the road in *391 its normal and customary manner. The court did not state, however, that recovery was barred because the injury took place off the street, but rather because there was no foreseeable risk of injury to users of the street inherent in the water valve. In the instant case, however, plaintiff alleges that the presence of the trains did cast a risk of injury over customary users of the street.
The City further relies on a statement from McQuillin, Municipal Corporations, that the general rule is that a municipality, by granting a public service company the right to use its streets, does not become liable for injury to private rights resulting therefrom. (12 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations, § 34.73, p. 242.) Most of the cases cited in the foregoing rule from McQuillin merely hold that in granting a franchise to a railroad a municipality does not become liable to owners of property adjoining the right-of-way. Two of the cases appear to articulate the principle that the city is not liable for the railroad's negligent acts, a principle which we do not contest. (Frith v. Dubuque, 45 Iowa 406, 412; Green v. Portland, 32 Me. 431, 434.) However, none of the cases cited in support of the foregoing rule discuss statutes analogous to the California Tort Claims Act. Although this act provides local government entities various specific defenses and immunities, it nowhere states that a city may escape liability for the operations of a public service company, such as a railroad, which operations cause public property to be in a dangerous condition.
The City claims that no case purports to hold a governmental entity liable for injury caused by the activity of others, as distinguished from conditions on its own property. Plaintiff does not allege, however, that the intervening negligence of the railroad company was the sole proximate cause of the injury, but rather that the street is in a dangerous condition by reason of the very presence of the unguarded railroad tracks. Thus, this case is distinguishable from such cases as Campbell v. City of Santa Monica, 51 Cal. App.2d 626 [125 P.2d 561], and Seybert v. County of Imperial, 162 Cal. App.2d 209 [327 P.2d 560].[5] We note, moreover, that in Marsh v. City *392 of Sacramento, supra, 127 Cal. App.2d 721, where the excavation was negligently constructed by a private property owner, liability was nevertheless held to exist because the City had ample notice of the unguarded condition and opportunity to remedy it.
In reaching the foregoing conclusions we are not unmindful of our recent decision in Avey v. County of Santa Clara, 257 Cal. App.2d 708 [65 Cal. Rptr. 181], where we held that a city and a county could not be held liable for an alleged dangerous condition of a public highway and an adjacent island strip consisting of the lack of a barricade at a bus stop for children which might have rendered a store on the opposite side of the thoroughfare inaccessible or unattractive to children waiting at the bus stop. Our holding was predicated upon the basis that the highway and the island strip were owned and controlled by the state, that neither the city nor the county had authority to remedy the situation, and that such a barricade was not required in the exercise of ordinary care by the city and county to maintain their streets in a reasonably safe condition in the absence of a showing on the part of plaintiffs as to what type of barricade would accomplish the desired result without at the same time interfering with the public right to enter the store in question, to enter and leave vehicles parked on the thoroughfare, and generally to use that thoroughfare with its adjacent curbs and sidewalks, (Pp. 712-713.) Further, in Avey we were dealing with a summary judgment; here we are concerned with whether the complaint states a cause of action. Accordingly, by this opinion we do not purport to foreclose the presentation of other issues of fact which may arise upon the filing of the answer; nor do we purport to give judicial recognition to the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint which we are required to accept as true in considering a general demurrer.
[10] Adverting, lastly, to the fourth count, we conclude that it does not state a cause of action because no facts are stated indicating that the City had a duty to instruct or supervise plaintiff.[6]
*393 The judgment is reversed with directions to the trial court to overrule the general demurrer to the second and third counts of the complaint, and to rule on the points presented by the special demurrer to said counts in conformity with the views expressed in this opinion. Plaintiff shall recover costs on appeal.
Sims, J., and Elkington, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied April 17, 1968, and respondent's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied May 22, 1968.
NOTES
[1]  Unless otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the Government Code.
[2]  It is noted in Van Arsdale v. Hollinger, 68 Cal.2d 245, 249 [66 Cal. Rptr. 20, 437 P.2d 508], that reports of commissions which have proposed statutes that are subsequently adopted are entitled to substantial weight in construing the statutes, especially when the statute proposed by the commission is adopted by the Legislature without any change and where the commission's comment is brief, since in such situations there is reason to believe that the legislator's votes were based largely upon the commission's explanation in proposing the bill. Here, although the commission's comment is not brief, the proposed statute was adopted by the Legislature without any other than trivial changes. (See 1 Cal. Law Revision Com. Rep. 848.)
[3]  We note that liability under the Tort Claims Act rests upon the existence of a "dangerous condition" as defined in the act and in the principles developed in construing the act, and that such liability is separate and apart from liability predicated through the doctrine of attractive nuisance. (See Gallipo v. City of Long Beach, supra, 146 Cal. App.2d at p. 526.) Accordingly, cases like Gutirrez v. Southern Pac. Co., 174 Cal. App.2d 866 [345 P.2d 326] and Herrera v. Southern Pac. Co., 188 Cal. App.2d 441 [10 Cal. Rptr. 575] are distinguishable. Those cases involved situations where children, who were injured while playing or riding on railroad cars, were trespassers and the attractive nuisance doctrine was invoked. In Gutirrez, involving a 14-year-old boy, it was held that the allegations of the complaint were insufficient to meet the requirements of the attractive nuisance doctrine because the danger was obvious and should have been appreciated by a child of that age. In Herrera, a judgment of dismissal after a nonsuit was granted was affirmed as to a 13-year-old boy, on the same basis.
[4]  These sections became effective September 20, 1963.
[5]  In Campbell, the harm was caused by a negligent motor vehicle operator on a city Promenade. In Seybert, the injury was caused by a negligent motor boat operator and the charge was negligent failure to regulate motor boat traffic on a public lake. These cases merely establish that the city is under no duty to regulate traffic and that it is not responsible for the negligent acts of intervening third parties. Here, plaintiff relies not only on the negligence of the railroad company but on the danger inherent in the entire physical layout of the tracks in the vicinity of the school.
[6]  We note that the recent case of Gilbert v. Sacramento Unified School Dist., 258 Cal. App.2d 505 [65 Cal. Rptr. 913], relying on Wright v. Arcade School Dist., 230 Cal. App.2d 272 [40 Cal. Rptr. 812], has held that a school district is under no active duty to supervise children on their way home from school and hence is not liable for the death of a 6-year-old child who was killed on her way home from school when she was crossing a railroad track and was struck by a train. The complaint in that case alleged that the school district knew that the decedent and other children customarily crossed the tracks when there was a train scheduled and had previously been urged to change the school boundaries to obviate the need of children crossing the tracks. It would seem to follow a fortiori from Gilbert that the City had no duty to plaintiff to supervise his going to and from school and that no liability of the City can be predicated on such a theory in this case.

=== CASE 2210665 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:56.462724+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 556 (1990)
Patrick McGOVERN, Appellant,
v.
CARGILL, INCORPORATED, Respondent.
No. C4-90-1315.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
December 4, 1990.
*557 Terence P. Durkin, Severson, Wilcox & Sheldon, P.A., Apple Valley, for appellant.
John D. Levine, David J. Lauth, Dorsey & Whitney, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Considered and decided by CRIPPEN, P.J., FOLEY and SCHUMACHER, JJ.
OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
This appeal is from a summary judgment dismissing appellant's defamation complaint. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant Patrick McGovern alleges that in 1979 or 1980 the respondent, Cargill, Inc., placed defamatory material about him in its files.[1] McGovern further alleges that in September 1988 Cargill voluntarily released this material on threat of subpoena to be used to impeach appellant's testimony in a pending criminal trial. Appellant claims both this release and the original publication within Cargill are actionable. The trial court rejected these claims and granted summary judgment for Cargill. Critical to this appeal, the court concluded the 1988 release of material was privileged.
ISSUE
Is an allegedly defamatory disclosure by a potential impeachment witness to counsel in a pending trial absolutely privileged?
ANALYSIS
On review of a summary judgment, this court must determine whether any genuine issues of material fact exist and whether the trial court erred in its application of the law. Betlach v. Wayzata Condominium, 281 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Minn.1979).
Statements made in judicial proceedings are absolutely privileged and therefore not actionable in defamation. Matthis v. Kennedy, 243 Minn. 219, 224, 67 N.W.2d 413, 417 (1954). In Matthis, the court described when the privilege attaches:
The recognized class of occasions where the publication of defamatory matter is absolutely privileged is confined within narrow limits. * * * Any publication made, whether oral or in writing, must be made `in office' in the character of judge, juror, witness, litigant, or counsel.
Id. at 223, 67 N.W.2d at 417.
A communication is made in office and therefore is privileged if it is (1) published in the due course of a judicial proceeding and (2) relevant to that proceeding. See id. at 224-26, 67 N.W.2d at 417-18. Appellant does not contest that the documents Cargill released were relevant to a pending trial. The only issue, then, is whether these documents were released in the course of a judicial proceeding.
Communications and reports made by a witness in preparation for trial are absolutely privileged. See Jenson v. Olson, 273 Minn. 390, 394, 141 N.W.2d 488, 491 (1966) (citing Restatement (Second) of *558 Torts § 588 (1965)). This Restatement section provides:
A witness is absolutely privileged to publish defamatory matter concerning another in communications preliminary to a proposed judicial proceeding or as a part of a judicial proceeding in which he is testifying, if it has some relation to the proceeding.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 588 (1977).
This rule on the scope of privilege coincides with authority in other states. E.g., Kalish v. Illinois Educ. Ass'n, 157 Ill.App.3d 969, 978-79, 110 Ill.Dec. 72, 79, 510 N.E.2d 1103, 1110 (holding absolutely privileged voluntary written statements to state bar character and fitness committee about candidate for bar), rev. denied, 116 Ill.2d 559, 113 Ill.Dec. 300, 515 N.E.2d 109 (1987); Middlesex Concrete Products v. Carteret Indus. Ass'n, 68 N.J.Super. 85, 91-92, 172 A.2d 22, 25 (App.Div.1961) (holding absolutely privileged pretrial investigative report from expert to counsel).
Appellant argues that because Cargill was not actually subpoenaed, the privilege should not attach. This contention is not supported in judicial decisions on the privilege. E.g., Kalish, 157 Ill.App.3d at 978, 110 Ill.Dec. at 79, 510 N.E.2d at 1110. Moreover, there is no question that either party to the criminal trial in which appellant was a witness could have subpoenaed a Cargill representative to testify and to produce the documents at trial. See Fed.R. Crim.P. 17.
Appellant also contends that the original publication within Cargill in 1979 or 1980 remains actionable. This claim is barred by the applicable two year statute of limitations. Minn.Stat. § 541.07 (1978). Appellant first argues that the cause of action didn't arise until he became aware of the statements in 1988. In Minnesota, however, the statute of limitations for defamation begins to run on publication, not on discovery. Wild v. Rarig, 302 Minn. 419, 449 & n. 21, 234 N.W.2d 775, 794 & n. 21 (1975) (per curiam), appeal dismissed, 424 U.S. 902, 96 S.Ct. 1093, 47 L.Ed.2d 307 (1976). Finally, appellant argues that the statute of limitations was tolled in 1979 or 1980 because Cargill fraudulently concealed the allegedly defamatory material until 1988. Appellant has not alleged any facts constituting fraudulent concealment. See McGaa v. Glumack, 441 N.W.2d 823, 825 (Minn.App.1989) (requiring plaintiff to plead specific act of fraud), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Aug. 15, 1989).
DECISION
The trial court correctly dismissed plaintiff's defamation complaint on the basis of the applicable statute of limitations and the privilege in judicial proceedings.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  McGovern alleges that Cargill compiled reports falsely accusing him of rigging bids, accepting personal favors from bidders, stealing and misusing corporate assets.

=== CASE 9737483 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:35.428571+00 ===

MOSER, P.J.
The City of Milwaukee (City), representing eleven firefighters in their individual capacity *593and the Minority Brotherhood of Fire Protection (Minority Brotherhood), a fraternal organization, and two officers of that organization, petitioned this court for leave to appeal from an order denying summary judgment against Captain David P. Miller's (Captain Miller) lawsuit against them for defamation and conspiracy pursuant to sec. 134.01, Stats.
On April 28,1987, Captain Miller, one of forty-five-to-fifty fire department captains in the City of Milwaukee, wrote what is referred to in the fire department as a F-105 memo. Such a memo generally comes from an inferior member of the fire department to a superior and usually deals with some form of complaint. The issues raised by F-105 memos are resolved up the chain of command in the fire department. Such a memorandum can be about any form of complaint registered by an inferior against a superior or against working conditions. Captain Miller's F-105, in this instance, expressed concern for the deteriorating morale and discipline at Engine House 18 because of transfer trends which increased the number of minority firefighters.
Captain Miller discussed this F-105 memo with his associate, Captain Reincke. As an outcome of this discussion, Captain Miller intended to redraft the memo. He placed the memo into an envelope, sealed it and put the envelope inside a green shift officer's work record and time card file. Captain Miller then left on vacation and when he returned two days later to pick up his paycheck, he was informed that the rough draft of his memo had been circulated through Engine House 18. On June 9,1987, he was informed that a number of letters of complaint had been filed against him with the fire department administration, who had forwarded copies to the Milwaukee Police and Fire Commission and the city attorney's office.
*594Copies of the published F-105 were circulated to the Minority Brotherhood. One function of the Minority Brotherhood is the gathering of information regarding racial injustices in the fire department and taking action to rectify those injustices. Captain Miller's F-105 precipitated a letter prepared by Bradley Thurman and Issac Hatton, officers of the Brotherhood, to the chief of the fire department and the Milwaukee Fire and Police Commission. The letter excoriated Captain Miller for his "venomous and biased attitudes" indicating his dislike for minorities, claiming his actions were "unprofessional to an officer" and not in the best interests of Milwaukee. It concluded that immediate steps should be taken to rescind his appointment. Similar letters were written and forwarded by nine individual firefighters who may or may not have been members of the brotherhood.
Captain Miller sued the Minority Brotherhood, the two officers of the Minority Brotherhood, and the other letter writers individually, claiming that through their letters they knowingly, willfully, wantonly and maliciously, made false, libelous, slanderous and defamatory interpretations of his F-105 memo for the purpose of permanently damaging his employment record and thereby damaging him economically. Captain Miller also sued the City in its capacity as the employer of the individual defendants who wrote the alleged defamatory letters. Under an agency theory, he claimed that whoever stole his F-105 memo and circulated it was acting for the City in violation of his privacy. He also sued the City for negligently not protecting the privacy of his sealed, unfinished and undelivered F-105. Captain Miller further sued all parties named under a conspiracy claim pursuant to sec. 134.01, Stats. The latter claim is not part of this appeal and will therefore not be addressed.
*595The City answered the complaint and affirmatively alleged immunity from liability for intentional torts of its employees. Furthermore, the City stated that the other claims alleged against it failed to state causes of action, and that any injuries or damages suffered by Captain Miller were caused by his wrongful conduct and not by the City. The Minority Brotherhood and the individual firefighters answered the claim and affirmatively alleged that the complaint failed to state a claim for which relief could be granted in that the alleged defamatory statements were opinions of the individuals' privileged communications to an employer, the statements were within the rights of the Brotherhood and the individual defendants to petition government and elected officials, that the statements were true, and that the injury and the damage Captain Miller claims were caused by his wrongful conduct.
The Minority Brotherhood and its officers Thurman and Hatton, subsequently moved for summary judgment pursuant to sec. 802.08(2), Stats., claiming that the words used in each letter were conditionally privileged under Wisconsin common law. Furthermore, they contended that Captain Miller could not prove the necessary malice to maintain the suit against them, nor could he prove that the words used were false, and, finally, that the words used were protected under the first amendment to the United States Constitution and Wisconsin common law. The City also moved for summary judgment on behalf of itself and the individual firefighters on the basis that the letters written by the individual defendants were conditionally privileged communications, and argued that the City was immune from liability for the first and second claims because .they alleged intentional torts. Captain Miller opposed both motions *596and sought summary judgment of his claims pursuant to sec. 802.08(6), Stats.
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the City on all claims against it. We note this part of the trial court's summary judgment order is not appealed. The trial court denied the Minority Brotherhood's and the individual firefighters' summary judgment motions on the defamation claim. It held that Captain Miller was neither a public official nor a public figure. Therefore, he was not required to show actual malice in order to sue for damages from these defendants for the claimed defamatory and libelous statements. The trial court further held that the written statements were not conditionally privileged, and were not expressions of opinion. After the trial court's order was entered, the Minority Brotherhood and the City, on behalf of individual firefighter/defendants, filed a timely petition for leave to appeal which we granted.
The issues on this appeal are whether Captain Miller is a public official, whether those same statements were conditionally privileged under Wisconsin common law, and whether the statements made in the Minority Brotherhood's and the individual firefighters' letters to the fire chief and the Milwaukee Fire and Police Commission were constitutionally protected free speech under the federal and state constitutions. We hold that the trial court erred in determining that Captain Miller was not a public official, and that those opinions expressed in the defendants' letters were not conditionally privileged under the common law of Wisconsin. In that the resolution of these issues disposes of this case, we need not address the constitutional issue of whether the appellants' speech was constitutionally protected.1 .
*597SUMMARY JUDGMENT
The purpose of summary judgment is to determine whether a dispute can be resolved without a trial.2 Appellate and trial courts must use the same methodology in applying summary judgment. That is:
Under that methodology, the court, trial or appellate, first examines the pleadings to determine whether claims have been stated and a material factual issue is presented. If the complaint. . . states a claim and the pleadings show the existence of factual issues, the court examines the moving party's affidavits for evidentiary facts admissible in evidence or other proof to determine whether that party has made a prima facie case for summary judgment. To make a prima facie case for summary judgment, a moving defendant must show a defense which would defeat the claim. If the moving party has made a prima facie case for summary judgment, the court examines the affidavits submitted by the opposing party for evidentiary facts and other proof to determine whether a genuine issue exists as to any material fact, or reasonable conflicting inferences may be drawn from the undisputed facts, and therefore a trial is necessary.
Summary judgment methodology prohibits the trial court from deciding an issue of fact. The court determines only whether a factual issue exists, resolving doubts in that regard against the party moving for summary judgment.3
*598PUBLIC OFFICIAL
Néither criminal nor civil libel laws of this state may be used to infringe on free speech which is guaranteed by the first amendment and incorporated with respect to the states through the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution.4 The United States Supreme Court has held that a public official cannot recover "damages for a defamatory falsehood relating to his official conduct unless he proves that the statement was made with 'actual malice' — that is, with knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.5 In light of this, the Supreme Court has held that the status of a plaintiff in a defamation action, whether he or she is or is not a public official or a public figure, is a question for a court to decide as a matter of law.6 Appellate courts decide questions of law independently without deference to the decision of the trial court7 but lower courts, like this court and the trial courts, are both bound by mandates of the United States Supreme Court and their respective state supreme courts.8
To date, Pronger v. O'Dell is the only reported decision in Wisconsin that has found an individual to be a *599public official for purposes of a defamation action.9 In that case, the chief of police for the city of Adams was found to be a public official.10 We turn to other jurisdictions for additional illustrative and instructive case reports.
First, it should be noted that our search is limited to the cases dealing with non-elected public officers who have been held to be public officials under the New York Times standard.11 The United States.Supreme Court has noted that there is no precise boundary for the category of "public official" but it cannot be thought to include all public employees.12 There are no cases directly on point dealing with firefighters, however, other jurisdictions have determined that a state highway patrolman,13 deputy sheriff,14 and police patrolman15 are public officials for the purpose of applying New York Times. Public school teachérs and athletic coaches have likewise been adjudicated public officials,16 as have appointed *600auditors.17
Other persons categorized as public officials have included a physician hired to provide medical services for five Anchorage, Alaska area corrections facilities,18 a Little Haven, Delaware, appointed alderman,19 the chief deputy clerk for the clerk of the circuit court for Winnebago County, Illinois,20 a private nursing home in St. Clair County, Illinois,21 and a Steele County, Minnesota grand jury.22 Additional public officials have included a manager of a Grandin, Missouri community center,23 a *601non-elected Oklahoma City license tag agent,24 a social worker for Washington County, Tennessee,25 a Cowlitz County, Washington motor pool supervisor,26 and the appointed city clerk for Tukwila, Washington.27 All of these persons claimed that they were libeled or defamed because of writings or statements concerning their work or official conduct and were required to meet the New York Times malice standards before the various courts would entertain their damage claims because they were deemed to be public officials.
In this case, the trial court properly noted that public officials are "those among the hierarchy of government employees who have, or appear to have, substantial responsibility for or control over the conduct of governmental affairs."28 It held that Captain Miller did not qualify under that definition because he was one of forty-five-to-fifty captains in the fire department whose duties included taking care of the equipment and building, keeping things neat and orderly for immediate use, preserving order and discipline, and enforcing strict compliance with city ordinances and regulations. The court held that Captain Miller was not a public official under the Rosenblatt definition because his duties were more supervisory than policy-setting.
The City's ordinances address the powers of a fire department captain and read as follows:
*602313-07. Powers and Duties of Captain. It shall be the duty of the captain of each company to see that the engines and other apparatus committed to his care, and the several buildings in which the same are deposited, and all things in and belonging to the same, are kept neat and clean and in order for immediate use. It shall also be their duty to preserve order and discipline at all times in their respective companies, and require and enforce a strict compliance with the city ordinances and the rules and regulations of the fire department.
The record reflects that Captain Miller is one of forty-five-to-fifty captains in the Milwaukee Fire Department which has approximately 850-900 firefighter personnel below his rank. A captain is the highest ranking department officer at a firehouse. Captain Miller testified in his deposition that his duties included general supervision of personnel on his shift at his firehouse. He trained all fire personnel under his command to perform their jobs, worked to insure that the firefighters' conduct represented the best interests of the department and that work was completed at the firehouse. His supervisory duties included disciplinary power over all subordinates at the firehouse. It was also Captain Miller's duty to enforce firefighters' compliance with department rules and regulations. At the scene of a fire he was in charge of a fire truck and the men on that truck, and controlled activities via instructions from a battalion chief. He further stated in his deposition that a captain sets up internal firehouse policies concerning the department's rules and regulations. Miller also noted that the captain has considerable discretion in performing these duties.
*603The trial court erred in concluding that Captain Miller was not a public official. The trial court held that to come under the malice requirements of New York Times, a public employee needs to "qualify under the Rosenblatt rule" as a policy-making employee like a battalion chief and not a supervisory person like Captain Miller. Rosenblatt does not require that a public employee be a policy-maker to be a public official under the New York Times malice strictures. Second, many jurisdictions have found that personnel who obviously had considerably less responsibility and discretion in their jobs and less policy-making functions than that of Captain Miller were public officials under the New York Times mandate. Finally, given Captain Miller's described duties, he is a person in the hierarchy of the city of Milwaukee government with considerable power and discretion in the use of that power, and has responsibility for and control over the conduct of governmental affairs in the City's fire department. Thus, he is a public official. As such, he is required to meet the malice strictures of New York Times and its progeny.
CONDITIONAL PRIVILEGE
Our Wisconsin Supreme Court has long held that a citizen can state his or her opinion of a public official's conduct provided the charges or claims in the opinion have a fair and reasonable basis in facit and are not libelous.29 In the case of Grell v. Hoard, a local newspaper referred to the county highway commissioner as a "highwayman" who was inefficient and incapable of per*604forming his duties properly in that he built "killing ditches" along the highways leading into and from Jefferson, Wisconsin.30 The court held that what constitutes efficiency and capability must always be matters of opinion and it noted that there "are no absolute standards by which the conduct of public officials may be judged."31 It concluded that in doubtful cases of claimed libel, the doubt should always be resolved in favor of free discussion and criticism.32
This statement of the law of privilege was discussed even earlier as to candidates for public office in the case of Lukaszewicz v. Dziadulewicz.33 The court held that discussions of qualifications and fitness of candidates for public office are conditionally privileged, but that such discussions must be confined to truthful statements.34 "They must not malign, falsify, insult, or hold to public hatred, contempt, or ridicule, but comment may be caustic and severe when confined to facts."35
"It is the function of the court as a matter of law to determine whether a communication is capable of a defamatory meaning."36 The Wisconsin Supreme Court has noted and adopted as a defense against defamation and libel suits, the conditional privilege set out in Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 594 (1976), which reads as follows:
Protection of the Publisher's Interest *605An occasion makes a publication conditionally privileged if the circumstances induce a correct or reasonable belief that
(a) there is information that affects a sufficiently important interest of the publisher, and
(b) the recipient's knowledge of the defamatory matter will be of service in the lawful protection of the interest.37
In this case, the Minority Brotherhood and the individual defendants are the publishers of the alleged defamatory statements and the fire chief and the commission are the recipients who required knowledge of these statements in order to prevent alleged racial bias in the city fire department in violation of federal38 and Wisconsin public policy.39
Our state high court in Zinda v. Louisiana Pacific Corporation40 has also adopted the Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 596 (1976) which reads as follows: "Common Interest[:] An occasion makes a publication conditionally privileged if the circumstances lead any one of several persons having a common interest in a particular subject matter correctly or reasonably to believe that there is information that another sharing the common interest is entitled to know.”41 The court further noted that comment (d) of this Restatement is particularly apropos to communications between co-*606employees who have the common interest.42 The Brotherhood, its officers and the individual firefighters have a common interest in seeing that federal and state public policy against racial discrimination in the workplace is secure. Further, it cannot be denied that the senders and at least the fire chief as a receiver, both have a common interest in securing the workplace against such possible racial bias.
The individual defendants have a common law conditional privilege to comment on whether a superior officer's purloined F-105 shows bias against minority firefighters. This is particularly true of the Minority Brotherhood because one of its main purposes is to search out and challenge what it perceives to be bias in the fire department. Certainly, it is fair comment to discuss possible racial bias in the workplace in light of our federal and state public policy concerning racially discriminatory employment practices. Thus, the defendants' act of forwarding their letters to the fire chief was a conditionally privileged comment based upon their opinion of the content of Captain Miller's memo. Therefore, as a matter of law, the defendants' statements were not defamatory nor libelous because Captain Miller is a public official and under Wisconsin's common law. conditional privilege, they were entitled to give the opinions they did.
We hold that the trial court's rejection of the Minority Brotherhood's and the individual defendants' argument of a common law conditional privilege to comment on Captain Miller was error. Even though Captain Miller was not the catalyst for the document's release because it was stolen, the F-105 was nevertheless pub*607lished. The document can be read and construed by any person to show that Captain Miller feared that additional minority personnel at Station House 18 would lead to greater morale and discipline problems. Furthermore, the F-105 indicated that Captain Miller personally did not care to have an increase in minority employees at that station house. This can be construed to show bias against minority employees. The F-105 publication set in motion the Minority Brotherhood's and the individual defendants' common law right to comment on the document and its author.
In conclusion, we hold that because Captain Miller is a public official, he is required to show malice in the defendants' actions. We also hold that the Brotherhood and the individual defendants have a common law conditional privilege to comment in writing on Captain Miller's fitness for office, due to their reasonably perceived view of his bias against minority firefighters, to the fire chief and the commission. We further hold that the conditional privilege exercised in writing these letters was not abused by any of the defendants.
Because of these holdings, there were no material issues of fact and this case should have been dismissed.
By the Court. — Order reversed with directions for the trial court to vacate the order and dismiss the action.
Grogan v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 109 Wis. 2d 75, 77, 325 N.W.2d 82, 83 (Ct. App. 1982).
See sec. 802.08, Stats; In re Cherokee Park Plat, 113 Wis. 2d 112, 115, 334 N.W.2d 580, 582 (Ct. App. 1983).
In re Cherokee Park Plat, 113 Wis. 2d at 116, 334 N.W.2d at 582-83 (citations omitted).
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 276-77 (1964).
Id. at 279-80.
Rosenblatt v. Baer, 383 U.S. 75, 88 (1966); see also Lewis v. Coursolle Broadcasting, 127 Wis. 2d 105, 110-11, 377 N.W.2d 166, 168 (1985).
Ball v. District No. 4, Area Bd., 117 Wis. 2d 529, 537, 345 N.W.2d 389, 394 (1984).
See, e.g., South Carolina v. Bailey, 289 U.S. 412, 420 (1933); Ripley v. Brown, 141 Wis. 2d 447, 455, 415 N.W.2d 550, 553 (Ct. App. 1987).
127 Wis. 2d 292, 295, 379 N.W.2d 330, 331 (Ct. App. 1985).
Id.
New York Times, 376 U.S. at 279-80.
Hutchinson v. Proxmire, 443 U.S. 111, 119 n.8 (1979).
NAACP v. Moody, 350 So. 2d 1365, 1369 (Miss. 1977).
St. Amant v. Thompson, 390 U.S. 727, 730 (1968) (East Baton Rouge, La.); Ammerman v. Hubbard Broadcasting, Inc., 572 P.2d 1258, 1260-61 (N.M. Ct. App. 1977) (Bernolillo County, N.M.), cert. denied, 436 U.S. 906 (1978).
Moriarty v. Lippe, 294 A.2d 326, 330-31 (Conn. 1972) (Norwalk, Conn, patrolman); Coursey v. Greater Niles Township Publishing Corp., 239 N.E.2d 837, 841 (Ill. 1968) (Skokie, Ill. patrolman); see Pride v. Quitman County Voters League, 226 So. 2d 735, 737 (Miss. 1969) (City of Marks, Miss, police officer).
Basarich v. Rodeghero, 321 N.E.2d 739, 742 (Ill. App. Ct. 1974) (public teachers and athletic coaches in Lockport, Ill.); Mahoney v. Adirondack Publishing Co., 123 A.D.2d 10, 12, 509 N.Y.S. 2d 193, 195 (N.Y. App. Div. 1986) (St. Lawrence County, *600N.Y. high school football coach), rev'd on other grounds, 517 N.E.2d 1365 (N.Y. 1987); Johnston v. Corinthian Television Corp., 583 P.2d 1101, 1103 (Okla. 1978) (Skiatook, Okla. grade school wrestling coach); Luper v. Black Dispatch Publishing Co., 675 P.2d 1028, 1031 (Okla. Ct. App. 1984) (Oklahoma City public school teacher).
Vazquez Rivera v. El Dia, Inc., 641 F. Supp. 668, 671-72 (D. P.R. 1986) (auditor for San Juan, Puerto Rico Housing Authority); see Kruteck v. Schimmel, 27 A.D.2d 837, 837, 278 N.Y.S.2d 25, 26 (N.Y. App. Div. 1967) (auditor for Westchester County, N.Y. water works).
Green v. Northern Publishing Co., 655 P.2d 736, 741 (Alaska 1982), cert. denied, 463 U.S. 1208 (1983).
Ross v. News-Journal Co., 228 A.2d 531, 532-33 (Del. 1967) (In Delaware, an alderman is an individual appointed by a municipal governing body to try and determine charges of violations of that municipality's ordinances.).
Cooper v. Rockford Newspapers, Inc., 365 N.E.2d 744, 745 (Ill. App. Ct. 1977).
Doctors Convalescent Center v. East Shore Newspapers, Inc., 244 N.E.2d 373, 377 (Ill. App. Ct. 1968).
Standke v. B.E. Darby & Sons, Inc., 193 N.W.2d 139, 142-43 (Minn. 1971), cert. denied, 406 U.S. 902 (1972).
Brown v. Kitterman, 443 S.W.2d 146, 155 (Mo. 1969).
Hodges v. Oklahoma Journal Publishing Co., 617 P.2d 191, 193-94 (Okla. 1980).
Press, Inc. v. Verran, 569 S.W.2d 435, 443 (Tenn. 1978).
Clawson v. Longview Publishing Co., 589 P.2d 1223, 1227 (Wash. 1979).
Kinney v. Bauch, 596 P.2d 1074, 1079 (Wash. Ct. App. 1979).
Rosenblatt, 383 U.S. at 85.
See Grell v. Hoard, 206 Wis. 187, 191, 239 N.W. 428, 430 (1931).
Id. at 189, 239 N.W. at 429.
Id. at 191, 239 N.W. at 430.
Id. at 193, 239 N.W. at 430.
198 Wis. 605, 225 N.W. 172 (1929).
Jd at 606, 225 N.W. at 173.
Id.
Lathan v. Journal Co., 30 Wis. 2d 146, 153, 140 N.W.2d 417, 421 (1966).
Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 594 (1976), cited with approval in, Converters Equip. Corp. v. Condes Corp., 80 Wis. 2d 257, 264-65, 258 N.W.2d 712, 715-16 (1977).
42 U.S.C. sec. 2000e-2.
iSee secs. 111.321-111.325, Stats.
149 Wis. 2d 913, 922-23, 440 N.W.2d 548, 552 (1989).
Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 596 (1976).
See Zinda, 149 Wis. 2d at 923, 440 N.W.2d at 552.

=== CASE 9737484 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:35.433915+00 ===

FINE, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result. First, the Minority Brotherhood and the individual defendants had, as a matter of law, a conditional privilege to comment to superiors about Captain Miller and his memorandum. See Lathan v. Journal Co., 30 Wis. 2d 146, 152, 140 N.W.2d 417, 420 (1966); Restatement (Second) of Torts secs. 594, 598 (1976). Second, Captain Miller has not pointed to any evidentiary material in the appellate *608récord that supports his claim that the Minority Brotherhood and the individual defendants abused their conditional privilege. See Zinda v. Louisiana Pacific Corp., 149 Wis. 2d 913, 924-925, 440 N.W.2d 548, 553 (1989) (adopting Restatement (Second) of Torts secs. 600 through 605A). Thus, the Minority Brotherhood and the individual defendants were entitled to summary judgment. See Rule 802.08, Stats. Accordingly, there is no need to decide the close question of whether Captain Miller, was a "public official" for the purposes of New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964), and its progeny. See Gross v. Hoffman, 227 Wis. 296, 300, 277 N.W. 663, 665 (1938) (only dispositive issue need be discussed).

=== CASE 9737485 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:37.115665+00 ===

Murphy, J.
Defendant Consolidex Corporation, doing business as Americar Rental Systems, appeals by leave granted from the trial court’s denial of its motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (C)(10), on plaintiffs claims for nuisance per se and nuisance in fact. Americar also appeals from the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of defendant Regency Inn Corporation on its cross-claim against Americar for indemnification. Defendant Regency Inn cross appeals from the trial court’s denial of summary disposition on plaintiffs nuisance claims. We affirm.
On October 25, 1985, plaintiff, a resident of the Grand Rapids area, traveled to Grosse Pointe to attend a garage sale. After deciding to purchase some furniture, plaintiff telephoned defendant Americar to arrange for a rental vehicle in order *161to move the furniture. Plaintiff was advised that the Americar office closest to the garage sale was at the Regency Inn situated off the Interstate 94 expressway on the corner of Harper and Conner in the City of Detroit.
Plaintiff drove to the Regency Inn and entered the hotel building lobby where defendant Americar was located. While plaintiff was standing at the counter arranging to rent a truck, two men came out of the hotel bar and stood behind plaintiff harassing her in a suggestive manner. The men then left the building, and plaintiff completed her rental transaction.
Shortly thereafter, plaintiff went out to the hotel parking lot to retrieve her checkbook from her car. As she walked toward her car, plaintiff heard the door of a van slam open. She turned around to see one of the men from the hotel lobby standing at the door of the van holding a shotgun. The other man grabbed plaintiff from behind and pushed her into the van. After the men shut the van door, they robbed and raped plaintiff. They then drove the van out of the parking lot and dropped plaintiff, only partially clothed, out onto the expressway. A passer-by rescued plaintiff and took her to a hospital.
Defendant Americar, on appeal, and defendant Regency Inn, on cross appeal, contend that the trial court erroneously denied their motions for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (0(10). Defendants contend that plaintiffs nuisance claims cannot be maintained because her injuries were solely the direct and proximate result of intervening criminal acts of other parties. Defendants argue that plaintiff merely alleges a negligence claim under the guise of nuisance and conclude that they were entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Defendants’ conclusion is based on *162our Supreme Court’s holding that a merchant has no duty, in the exercise of reasonable care, to protect its customers from the criminal acts of third parties merely because their business is located in a high-crime area. Williams v Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc, 429 Mich 495; 418 NW2d 381 (1988). See also Harkins v Northwest Activity Center, Inc, 434 Mich 895; 453 NW2d 677 (1990), and Papadimas v Mykonos Lounge, 176 Mich App 40; 439 NW2d 280 (1989), and cases cited therein. We disagree.
A motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(8), for failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted, tests only the legal sufficiency of the claim as stated in the pleadings. The motion should be denied unless the claim is so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development could possible justify recovery. Mills v White Castle Systems, Inc, 167 Mich App 202, 205; 421 NW2d 631 (1988).
As defendants correctly note, our Supreme Court has stated that the duty of reasonable care owed by owners and occupiers of land to their invitees does not extend to conditions from which an unreasonable risk cannot be anticipated or to dangers so obvious and apparent that the invitee may be expected to discover them himself. Williams, supra, 500. Accordingly, a merchant’s duty of reasonable care does not include providing armed, visible security guards to deter criminal acts by third parties. Id., 500-504. Moreover, a landowner has no duty to anticipate the hazards arising from a defective condition on its premises, such as a hole in a fence, that could facilitate criminal acts by third parties. Harkins, supra. Nevertheless, we do not read these holdings to bar claims of nuisance under facts such as those of the present case. We perceive a valid distinction be*163tween limiting a landowner’s duty to protect his invitees from third-party crime and imposing liability on a landowner for creating or allowing continuing patterns of criminal activity on his premises which endanger his invitees.
Williams and its progeny focus on whether the relationship between a landowner-invitor and an invitee gives rise to a duty on the part of the invitor for the benefit of the invitee. By contrast, under a nuisance theory, liability is based on a dangerous, offensive, or hazardous condition of the land or on activities of similar characteristics which are conducted on the land. Stevens v Drekich, 178 Mich App 273, 277; 443 NW2d 401 (1989). A defendant held liable for the nuisance must have possession or control of the land. Id., 278.
The essence of plaintiffs nuisance claims is that defendants, who owned or controlled the Regency Inn premises, intentionally or negligently created or allowed the existence of certain dangerous physical conditions and protracted criminal activities on their premises which combined to constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance is an unreasonable interference with a right common to the general public. 4 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 821B, p 87; Sanford v Detroit, 143 Mich App 194, 199; 371 NW2d 904 (1985). The term "unreasonable interference” includes: (1) conduct that significantly interferes with public health, safety, peace, comfort, or convenience; (2) conduct that is prescribed by law; (3) conduct of a continuing nature that produces a permanent or long-lasting effect, and, as the actor knows or has reason to know, has a significant effect on public rights. Id., 199-200.
The possessor of land upon which the third person conducts an activity that causes a nuisance is subject to liability if: (1) he knows or has reason *164to know that the activity is being conducted and that it causes or involves an unreasonable risk of causing the nuisance, and (2) he consents to the activity or fails to exercise reasonable care to prevent the nuisance. 4 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 838, p 157.
A nuisance per se is an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances. Eyde Bros Development Co v Roscommon Co Bd of Rd Comm’rs, 161 Mich App 654, 669; 411 NW2d 814 (1987).
By contrast, a nuisance in fact is a nuisance by reason of circumstances and surroundings. An act may be found to be a nuisance in fact when its natural tendency is to create danger and inflict injury on person or property. Eyde, supra, 669. A negligent nuisance in fact is one that is created by the landowner’s negligent acts, that is, a violation of some duty owed to the plaintiff which results in a nuisance. Buckeye Union Fire Ins Co v Michigan, 383 Mich 630; 178 NW2d 476 (1970); Young v Groenendal, 10 Mich App 112; 159 NW2d 158 (1968). A nuisance in fact is intentional if the creator intends to bring about the conditions which are in fact found to be a nuisance. To establish intent, the plaintiff must show that, when the defendant created or continued the condition causing the nuisance, he knew or must have known that the injury was substantially certain to follow, in other words, deliberate conduct. McCracken v Redford Twp, 176 Mich App 365, 371; 439 NW2d 374 (1989); Sanford, supra, 199. We have reviewed counts i through m of plaintiff’s complaint and conclude that when the factual allegations are accepted as true, along with any inferences which may be fairly drawn therefrom, plaintiff stated sufficient claims for nuisance per se *165and nuisance in fact, both negligent and intentional. Mills, supra, 205.
Moreover, after reviewing the documentary evidence on the record, we conclude that the trial court also correctly denied defendants’ motions for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(10), because plaintiff had sufficiently raised genuine issues of material fact. Deposition testimony by an employee of defendant Americar and the affidavit of a security guard employed at defendant Regency Inn detailed the prevailing conditions on the premises at issue. Stolen cars, shootings, and calls to the police were almost daily occurrences. Prostitutes maintained rooms in the hotel on a daily basis. Drug trafficking was a constant problem with Young Boys, Inc., a notorious drug trafficking gang, renting entire floors of the hotel from which to run their operations. Breakings and enterings, assaults, armed robberies, and car thefts were frequent occurrences on the premises. A fire bombing once "took out” an entire floor of the hotel. Defendants and their agents and employees were aware of these occurrences.
Plaintiff also presented a report by an expert who opined that, on the basis of the frequent occurrence of crime on the premises and the physical condition of the premises, such as a privacy fence around the parking lot, the premises was a "crime magnet,” that is, a place where crimes were even more likely to occur than in the surrounding high-crime area. The physical condition of the premises conveyed a message that "anything goes” and that there would be no proprietary intervention.
According to the terms of its lease, defendant Americar controlled office and lobby space in the hotel and portions of the parking lot. Americar was obligated to keep the premises in good repair.
*166Courts are liberal in finding a genuine issue of material fact. St Paul Fire & Marine Ins Co v Quintana, 165 Mich App 719, 722; 419 NW2d 60 (1988). Summary disposition is proper only when the court is satisfied that it is impossible for the claim asserted to be supported at trial. Peterfish v Frantz, 168 Mich App 43, 48-49; 424 NW2d 25 (1988). Giving the benefit of reasonable doubt and inference to plaintiff, it is reasonable to infer that defendants at least tolerated the conditions amounting to a nuisance and at worst condoned or created them. One need not stretch the imagination far to infer that defendants Regency Inn and Americar derived a substantial portion of their income from the illegal on-premises activities. One may infer that they knew or should have known that the physical condition of the premises and-high degree of on-premises crime created an atmosphere of criminality which posed a significant risk to public safety and was substantially certain to result in types of activity such as that which caused plaintiff’s injury. Contrary to defendants’ contentions, evidence that they regularly called the police for assistance does not conclusively show that they took reasonable steps to abate the nuisance. It only creates a question of fact regarding defendants’ intent and exercise of due care.
The existence of a nuisance per se is proved by evidence of the act which created it. Eyde, supra, 669. The existence of a nuisance in fact is a question for the trier of fact. Id. Whether a nuisance in fact is negligent or intentional is also a question of fact. We conclude that plaintiff presented sufficient documentary evidence to raise a question of fact concerning whether defendants created and maintained a nuisance per se and in fact on their premises and that the trial court *167properly denied defendants’ motions for summary disposition.
Defendant Americar also contends that the trial court erroneously made determinations of material fact when it granted summary disposition in favor of defendant, cross-plaintiff Regency Inn on the basis of an express indemnity provision contained in the parties’ lease agreement. We disagree.
On August 9, 1984, defendant Patel, then operating under the name "Quality Inn of Detroit,” entered into an agreement to lease space on the hotel premises to defendant Consolidex Corporation, doing business as defendant Americar. The lease, drafted by Americar, contained a provision by which Americar agreed to "indemnify and hold harmless Quality from any liability for damages to any person or property in, on or about said premises from any cause whatsoever.” The lease also provided that a holdover by Americar after the expiration of the lease term would constitute a month-to-month tenancy in the absence of a written agreement to the contrary. The effective term of the lease was from August 1, 1984, through July 31, 1985.
When the term expired, defendant Americar did, in fact, continue as a holdover tenant. Therefore, at the time of plaintiff’s injury, Americar was a month-to-month tenant.
Defendant Americar now contends that questions of fact existed concerning its liability under the agreement because the original lease agreement was with Quality Inn rather than Regency Inn, because the terms of the lease were no longer in effect during the month-to-month tenancy, and because the scope of the indemnity provision did not include occurrences in the parking lot. We agree with the trial court that these contentions are without merit.
*168First, the trial court correctly found that there was no question concerning the identity of the indemnitee. The same person, defendant Patel, signed the original lease, on behalf of Quality Inn, and a later lease, acting on behalf of defendant Regency Inn. Second, when a tenant under a valid lease for years holds over, the law implies a contract to renew the tenancy on the same terms for another year. Kokalis v Whitehurst, 334 Mich 477, 480; 54 NW2d 628 (1952); Scherer v Moran, 217 Mich 607; 187 NW2d 322 (1922). Therefore, the trial court correctly found that the provisions of the parties’ lease continued during the holdover period.
Third, Americar agreed to indemnify the lessor, Regency Inn, for any liability for damages to any person in, on, or around the premises, from any cause whatsoever. Although indemnity contracts are strictly construed against the indemnitee, they are also construed against the drafter. Pritts v J I Case Co, 108 Mich App 22, 29; 310 NW2d 261 (1981). Defendant Americar drafted the lease and indemnity agreement. The plain and unambiguous language of this particular indemnity agreement is so broad.it can only be construed as applicable to plaintiffs claim. Calladine v Hyster Co, 155 Mich App 175, 182; 399 NW2d 404 (1986). While plaintiffs injury, which occurred in the hotel parking lot, may not have occurred on the actual premises leased and controlled by Americar, it occurred in proximity to, in other words, "on or about,” the leased premises. See People v Fochtman, 226 Mich 53, 62; 197 NW 166 (1924) (defining "about” in a temporal context).
Last, Americar argues that the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to rehear or reconsider its ruling that the indemnity clause was valid and enforceable because the grant of sum*169mary disposition on plaintiffs negligent claims leaves Americar to indemnify Regency Inn for its intentional acts. We need not address this contention at length because there has been no determination that plaintiffs injuries were solely the result of Regency Inn’s intentional acts. Our review of the record shows that the trial court merely ruled that the indemnity provision was valid and enforceable, but made no findings concerning the scope of Americar’s liability. To the extent that the trial court’s ruling may be construed to render Americar liable for indemnification of intentional wrongdoing on the part of Regency Inn, we agree that it is void and unenforceable. See Klann v Hess Cartage Co, 50 Mich App 703; 214 NW2d 63 (1973). However, although the provision would be invalid if applied to indemnify Regency Inn for its intentional or wilful and wanton conduct, it may be validly applied to indemnify Regency Inn for liability for negligence. Redfern v R E Dailey & Co, 146 Mich App 8, 15-16; 379 NW2d 451 (1985); Klann, supra, 709. The plain, unambiguous, and all-inclusive language of the indemnity contract may be construed to render Americar liable to indemnify Regency Inn for liability arising out of its sole negligence and its concurrent negligence. Chrysler Corp v Brencal Contractors, Inc, 146 Mich App 766; 381 NW2d 814 (1985); Gartside v Young Men’s Christian Ass’n, 87 Mich App 335, 339; 274 NW2d 58 (1978).
Affirmed.
T.M. Burns, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737486 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:37.120519+00 ===

Danhof, C.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). While I agree with the majority’s conclusion regarding indemnification by defendant Americar, I cannot agree with its conclusion that the *170trial court properly denied defendant’s motion for summary disposition regarding plaintiffs’s nuisance claims. Because a nuisance may not be predicated upon an act or a failure to act, Hobrla v Glass, 143 Mich App 616, 630; 372 NW2d 630 (1985), plaintiffs nuisance claims are insufficient on their face. I would find that the nuisance claims are simply claims of negligence restated as another tort. And, a claim of negligence would fail, given our Supreme Court’s ruling that defendants did not have the duty to protect plaintiff from criminal assaults by third parties. Williams v Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc, 429 Mich 495, 499; 418 NW2d 381 (1988). Moreover, criminal activity, by virtue of its deviant nature, is normally unforeseeable, and no higher standard of duty is applied to a business in a "high crime” area than to a business in other areas. Papadimas v Mykonos Lounge, 176 Mich App 40; 439 NW2d 280 (1989), lv den 433 Mich 907 (1989).
Regardless, plaintiffs nuisance claim cannot lie. It cannot be said that the natural tendency of defendants’ conduct was to create danger and inflict injury upon a person or property. By plaintiffs own statement of facts, defendants neither permitted nor acquiesced in the illegal use of their premises by third persons. Accordingly, I would reverse the judgment of the trial court and grant defendants’ summary disposition.

=== CASE 9737487 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:38.287438+00 ===

EICH, C.J.
Allen Johnson appeals from a judgment of conviction and sentence and an order denying his motion for sentence reduction.. He was convicted of three counts of second-degree sexual assault and two counts of bail jumping. He received consecutive terms of ten, ten, and five years for the sexual assaults and probation for bail jumping.
Johnson raises several issues, all related to his sentence: (1) whether the trial court may consider the victim's wishes in framing a sentence; (2) if so, whether the victim's change of mind constitutes a new factor requiring resentencing; (3) whether the trial court based its sentence on erroneous information; (4) whether the court improperly considered offenses for which Johnson *463was not charged; (5) whether the court erred by failing to explain why it did not adopt the sentencing recommendation in the presentence report and by failing to explain its deviation from the experimental sentencing guidelines; and (6) whether Johnson is entitled to be resen-tenced because the presentence report incorrectly reported the number of his prior convictions. We resolve all issues against Johnson and affirm.
Johnson was initially charged with seven counts of second-degree sexual assault involving three young boys. He entered pleas of no contest to three counts, two involving M.H. and one involving W.L., both of whom were under the age of sixteen when the assaults occurred. He also pleaded no contest to two counts of bail jumping resulting from his attempts to contact one of the victims, W.L., in violation of the conditions of his bond. In exchange for his pleas, the prosecutor dismissed the other charges, although they were "read in" for sentencing purposes.
Our review of sentencing decisions is limited to determining whether the trial court abused its discretion. State v. Harris, 119 Wis. 2d 612, 622, 350 N.W.2d 633, 638 (1984). ”[S]uch questions will be treated in light of a strong policy against interference with the discretion of the trial court in passing sentence." Elias v. State, 93 Wis. 2d 278, 281, 286 N.W.2d 559, 560 (1980) (citations omitted). The trial court is presumed to have "acted reasonably . . . [unless] the defendant [can] show some unreasonable or unjustified basis ... for the sentence . . .." Harris at 622-23, 350 N.W.2d at 638-639.
Johnson argues first that the trial court abused its discretion when it considered the victims' "wishes" as to the length of his sentence. He points to a comment in the presentence report that W.L. had told the investiga*464tor that he (Johnson) should receive "three life sentences" for his crimes.
Johnson offers no authority for the proposition he advances. Instead, he argues that because cases Such as State v. Jones, 151 Wis. 2d 488, 495, 444 N.W.2d 760, 763 (Ct. App. 1989), which refer to and compile permissible sentencing factors, do not mention "victim wishes" in their lists, it must be an improper factor. We disagree.
It is well established that in sentencing a defendant the court should consider the gravity of the offense, the need for protection of the public and the character of the offender. Elias, 93 Wis. 2d at 284, 286 N.W.2d at 561. In its discretion, the court may also consider a variety of other factors. See Jones, 151 Wis. 2d at 495, 444 N.W.2d at 763, for an illustrative list of relevant factors.
Neither Jones nor any of the other cases discussing factors which may be considered in sentencing1 purport to set forth exclusive or preemptive listings, and we have no doubt that trial courts may consider the recommendations of interested parties in framing a sentence. Indeed, trial courts are routinely provided with sentencing "recommendations" from prosecutors, probation and parole agents and others who prepare presentence reports — including persons privately retained by defendants to do so — as well as expert witnesses such as psychiatrists and psychologists. Nor is it uncommon for a defendant's friends and relatives to appear and testify at the sentencing hearing, often urging the court to impose a light or nonincarcerative sentence.
*465We agree with the state that trial courts are not rubber stamps. They do not blindly accept or adopt sentencing recommendations from any particular source. They accept recommendations only if they can independently conclude that the recommended sentence is appropriate in light of the acknowledged goals of sentencing as applied to the facts of the case.
We agree, too, that the fact that victims may not be objective in the matter is of little import. If bias or personal interest were a ground for rejecting sentencing arguments and recommendations, few defendants (or members of their families) or defense attorneys would be competent to comment.
We believe that consideration of the comments — even the "wishes" — of a victim is within the sentencing court's prerogatives. Courts are entitled — even encouraged — to consider the rights and interests of the public in imposing a sentence in a particular case. Jones, 151 Wis. 2d at 495, 444 N.W.2d at 763. Indeed, we held in Jones that consideration of the victim's "rehabilitative needs" was a "logical extension" of the universally accepted practice of considering the rights and interests of the public in sentencing offenders. Id. at 496, 444 N.W.2d at 764.2
*466We reach a similar conclusion here. A sentencing court does not abuse its discretion when it considers statements and recommendations from victims.3
Johnson next argues that even if the victim's statements were properly considered, the court erred in denying his request for resentencing in light of the victim's change of heart since the original sentencing. He asserts that W.L., who had, as we have indicated, told a presentence investigator that he felt Johnson should be severely punished, now believes he should receive only counseling. Johnson contends this is a "new factor" entitling him to be resentenced.
Whether a fact is a new factor warranting resen-tencing is a question of law. State v. Hegwood, 113 Wis. 2d 544, 547, 335 N.W.2d 399, 401 (1983). A new factor is one which is "highly relevant to the imposition of sentence, but not known to the trial judge at the time of the original sentencing, either because it was not then in existence or because, even though it was then in existence, it was unknowingly overlooked by all of the parties." Rosado v. State, 70 Wis. 2d 280, 288, 234 N.W.2d 69, 73 (1975). The new factor must be an event or development that "frustrates the purpose of the original sentencing." State v. Michels, 150 Wis. 2d 94, 97, 441 N.W.2d 278, 279 (Ct. App. 1989).
*467Among the reasons advanced by the trial court for imposing the sentence were the "rights of the public to punish for punishment's sake when necessary," the court's "obligation to deter other [child molesters],'1 the fact that the victims were "severely emotionally damaged," the "substantial contacts the defendant had [with his victims]" and the fact that "he . . . encouraged other children to engage in sexual activity while he watched them." These are all appropriate factors for consideration by the court and Johnson has not persuaded us that the alleged changed opinion of one victim frustrates the purpose of the original sentencing. Moreover, on this record we do not believe W.L.'s brief, generally-stated opinion, though considered by the court, was "highly relevant to the imposition of sentence."
We also note the supreme court's comment in State v. Macemon, 113 Wis. 2d 662, 668, 335 N.W.2d 402, 406 (1983) (citation omitted), that a court "should not reduce a sentence on 'reflection' alone or simply because it has thought the matter over and has second thoughts. It must base its modification on 'new factors' brought to its attention." We agree with the state's comment that "if a change of heart by the sentencing court itself is not a new factor supporting resentencing, it can hardly be argued that resentencing is required every time a victim [or a member of a defendant's family, or anyone else addressing the court at sentencing] has a change of heart.''4
*468Johnson next asserts that the trial court abused its discretion when it "based its sentence upon erroneous information." He refers to the court's statement that it was aware of the severe emotional damage and the "suffering" incurred by the victims. He contends that the information was erroneous because one of the victims was not emotionally damaged.
Defendants have a due process right to be sentenced on the basis of accurate information. United States v. Tucker, 404 U.S. 443 (1972). However, a defendant who requests resentencing based on inaccurate information must show both that the information was inaccurate, and that the court actually relied on the inaccurate information in the sentencing. United States ex rel. Welch v. Lane, 738 F.2d 863, 865 (7th Cir. 1984).
The record supports the trial court's statement that the victims suffered emotional damage. M.H., with whom Johnson had as many as six hundred episodes of sexual contact over a two-year period, wrote a letter to the court explaining the damage he sustained from the assaults:
I don't know where to begin telling you how this crime has affected myself and my family .... I have suffered from low self-esteem, tremendous guilt, haunted days, and sleepless nights .... I didn't like myself very much .... I was so confused that I even questioned my sexual orientation . . ..I felt so unsafe and so unclean .... I now see many poor career choices I have made due to my lack of self-confidence because of the assaults.
*469The other victim, W.L., also had a large number of sexual contacts with Johnson over a four-year period. He was forced to change schools to avoid harassment after Johnson's assaultive behavior was discovered and his therapist told the presentence investigator that W.L. suffered "significant damage" from the incidents. On this record, Johnson has failed to carry his burden of establishing that the trial court improperly relied on erroneous information.
Johnson next asserts that the court improperly considered criminal activity for which he was not charged. We reject this contention as well. The supreme court has expressly held that uncharged offenses may be considered by a sentencing court because they indicate whether the crime was an isolated act or a pattern of conduct. State v. McQuay, 154 Wis. 2d 116, 126, 452 N.W.2d 377, 381 (1990); Elias, 93 Wis. 2d at 284, 286 N.W.2d at 562. As the trial court noted, the uncharged assaults indicate a pattern of sexually victimizing young boys.
Equally unpersuasive is Johnson's argument that the trial court erred when it failed to explain why it deviated from the recommendation in the presentence report. Such a recommendation may be a relevant factor in determining type and length of sentence, but it is not binding on the sentencing court. Ocanas v. State, 70 Wis. 2d 179, 188, 233 N.W.2d 457, 462 (1975). As long as " [t]he trial judge [exercises] discretion [and] sentence^] within the permissible range set by statute," id. at 185, 233 N.W.2d at 461, the court need not explain why its sentence differs from any particular recommendation.
In a similar vein — and with similar results — Johnson contends that it was error for the trial *470court to deviate from the experimental sentencing guidelines without explaining the reasons therefor. Section 973.012, Stats., specifically provides that "[t]here shall be no right to appeal on the basis of the trial court's decision to render a sentence that does not fall within the sentencing guidelines." Thus, even where a court departs from statutorily-mandated guidelines, "[its] compliance or noncompliance with [the guidelines] is not an appellate issue . . . because the Court of Appeals has no jurisdiction" in the matter. State v. Halbert, 147 Wis. 2d 123, 132, 432 N.W.2d 633, 637 (Ct. App. 1988).
Finally, Johnson asserts that the presentence report incorrectly stated that he had five prior felony convictions for indecent liberties with a minor, when, in reality, his record included only three counts of contributing to the delinquency of a minor (a misdemeanor), one fel- • ony count of indecent behavior with a child, and one felony count of enticing a child for immoral purposes.
Johnson's attorney reviewed the presentence report prior to sentencing and did not note any objection to it or point the court to any purported inaccuracies. In a similar situation, the supreme court held that where the facts stated in a presentence report "were not challenged or disputed by the defendant at the time of sentencing, we find no abuse of discretion by the sentencing judge [in considering them]." Handel v. State, 74 Wis. 2d 699, 704, 247 N.W.2d 711, 714 (1976).
In addition, we note that while Johnson's presentence report does note "5 counts" of indecent liberties with minors, the narrative portion of the report states that he "was charged with five counts," not that he had been convicted of them. We note, too, the trial court, in its sentencing remarks, referred to a single conviction for indecent liberties, noting that it had been "a *471five-count complaint." Johnson has failed to demonstrate either that the report was inaccurate or that the trial court relied on inaccurate information in sentencing him.
By the Court. — Judgment and order affirmed.
See, for example, McCleary v. State, 49 Wis. 2d 263, 276, 182 N.W.2d 512, 519 (1971); State v. Harris, 119 Wis. 2d 612, 623-24, 350 N.W.2d 633, 639 (1984).
Although not specifically discussed in the majority opinion in Jones, sec. 950.04(2m), Stats., bolsters our conclusion that the trial court did not err in this case. Section 950.04 is entitled "Basic bill of rights for victims and witnesses," and among those rights is the right " [t]o have the court provided with information pertaining to the economic, physical and psychological effect of the crime upon the victim of a felony and have the information considered by the court."
Obviously, a court can abuse its sentencing discretion "if [it] fail[s] to state . . . the factors influencing the sentence, or if it g[ives] too much weight to one factor in the face of other contravening factors," or perhaps in some other manner. Jones, 151 Wis. 2d at 495, 444 N.W.2d at 763. There is no suggestion in this record, however, that any such abuse occurred.
Finally, we note that Johnson's "evidence" that the victim had a change of heart is, to be charitable, skimpy and suspect. It consists solely of an affidavit from his (Johnson's) own mother and an unsworn statement purported to have been taken from W.L. by Johnson's father. We again agree with the state that this *468is hardly the type of clear and convincing evidence required to gain a resentencing on "new factor" grounds.
There is little consensus as to what should be included in a victim impact statement. McLeod, Victim Participation at Sentencing, 22 Crim. L. Bull, at 510-11. Some states not only authorize an objective assessment of crime impact but invite recommendations for disposition of the case. Id. at 511; see Minn. Stat. Ann. sec. 609.115, subds. lb and lc (allowed victim to recommend disposition of case but was repealed by 1987 Minn. Laws, ch. 331, sec. 13).

=== CASE 9737488 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:38.292+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(concurring). I concur in the majority's opinion in all respects except I do not believe we should decide that the victim's recommendation as to the appropriate sentence may be considered by the sentencing court. There is nothing in the record of the sentencing hearing to support Johnson's argument that the trial court gave any weight to the victim's wishes or opinions as to the appropriate sentence for the defendant. The trial court simply stated that it was aware of the presentence report in which the preparer described how the victims felt about the matter.
When the sentencing hearing record is considered in its entirety, it is evident that the trial court was considering the contents of the pre-sentence report insofar as that report related how the victims were severely emotionally damaged. There is no evidence that the trial court considered any of the victims' views as to the appropriate sentence for Johnson. Accordingly, when we approve for trial courts' consideration the "wishes" of a victim as to the appropriate sentence, we prematurely place our imprimatur on a practice not followed in this case.
Further, before we approve for trial courts' sentencing discretion the wishes of a victim as to the appropriate sentence, we should require that the issue be thoroughly briefed. First, we should inquire whether the victim's opinion or wish as to the appropriate sentence may properly be included in a presentence investigation report under sec. 972.15(2m), Stats., which provides:
*472The person preparing the presentence investigation report shall attempt to contact the victim to determine the economic, physical and psychological effect of the crime on the victim. The person preparing the report may ask any appropriate person for information. This subsection does not preclude the person who prepares the report from including any information for the court concerning the impact of a crime on the victim. [Emphasis added.]
Sections 950.04(2m) and 950.05(l)(dm), Stats., which also deal with victim rights, are concerned with the impact of the offense upon the victim and not with the opinion or wish of the victim as to the appropriate sentence.
Second, we should be concerned as to the constitutionality of the use of victim impact statements generally and particularly those which can be considered as invading the province of the trial court. At least thirty-six states permit the use of victim impact statements in some context. Booth v. Maryland, 482 U.S. 496, 509 n.12 (1987)1 (citing National Organization for Victim Assistance, Victim Rights and Services: A Legislative Directory, 32-33 (1985) (chart); and McLeod, Victim Participation at Sentencing, 22 Crim. L. Bull. 501,507 and n.22 (1986)). Congress has also provided for victim participation in federal criminal cases. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(c)(2)C. In Booth, the supreme court expressed no *473opinion as to the use of victim impact statements in non-capital cases. The Court did, however, hold invalid a Maryland statute requiring consideration by the jury of a victim impact statement at the sentencing phase of a capital murder trial. The Court held that the statute violated the eighth amendment.
Third, if we allow victims to recommend sentences, we raise the specter of a victim challenging a sentence if the judge does not consider the victim's recommendation. See McLeod, 22 Crim. L. Bull, at 517. Section 950.04, Stats., provides in part: " Victims ... of crimes . . . have the following rights: . . . (2m) To have the court provided with information pertaining to the economic, physical and psychological effect of the crime upon the victim of a felony and have the information considered by the court." (Emphasis added.) This language is mandatory.
If the trial court's consideration is limited to the effects upon the victims, as I believe the record in this case requires, I see no error. The defendant waived any objection to the trial court's considering the impact of his acts upon the victims. He advised the court: "I feel very badly about what I have done to these people. I've hurt not only them but their families and friends and my family and friends. I hope that they can get on with their lives, lead productive lives."

=== CASE 9737489 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:38.551606+00 ===

Hunter, J.
Petitioners seek transfer to this Court as a result of an adverse ruling by the Court of Appeals. Plaintiff-respondents originally brought suit to obtain possession of certain real estate through the enforcement of a forfeiture clause in a land sale contract. Plaintiff-respondents suffered a negative judgment, from which they appealed. The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the defendant-petitioners had breached the contract and that the plaintiff-respondents had not waived their right to enforce the forfeiture provisions of the contract.
In December of 1958, Mary Burkowski, as vendor, entered into a land sale contract with Charles P. Marshall and Agnes P. Marshall, as vendees. The contract provided for the sale of certain real estate for the sum of $36,000.00, payable as follows:
“$500.00, at the signing, execution and delivery of this contract, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged; $500.00 or more on or before the 25th day of December, 1958, and $2500.00 or more on or before the 15th day of January, 1960, and $2500.00 or more on or before the 15th day of January of each and every year thereafter until the balance of the contract has been fully paid, all without *229interest and all without relief from valuation and appraisement laws and with attorney fees.” (See 289 N. E. 2d at 770.)
The contract also contained a fairly standard section which provided for the treatment of prepayments — but which the Court of Appeals found to be of particular importance. It provided as follows:
“Should Vendees have made prepayments or paid in advance of the payments herein required, said prepayments, if any, shall at any time thereafter be applied in lieu of further principal payments required as herein stated, to the extent of such prepayments only.” (Id.)
The following is the forfeiture/liquidated damages provision of the land sale contract.
“It is further agreed that if any default shall be made in the payment of said purchase price or any of the covenants and/or conditions herein provided, and if any such default shall continue for 30 days, then, after the lapse of said 30 days’ period, all moneys and payments previously paid shall, at the option of the Vendor without notice or demand, be and become forfeited and be taken and retained by the Vendor as liquidated damages and thereupon this contract shall terminate and be of no further force or effect; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to prevent the Vendor from enforcing specific performance of this agreement in the event of any default on the part of the Vendees in complying, observing and performing any of the conditions, covenants and terms herein contained. * * (Id.) (Emphasis added.)
The vendor, Mary Burkowski, died in 1963. The plaintiffs in this action are the assignees (under the vendor’s will) of the decedent’s interests in the contract. They received their assignment from the executrix of the estate of the vendor on June 27, 1968. One year after this assignment, several of the assignees filed their complaint in this action alleging that the defendants had defaulted through non-payment.
The schedule of payments made under this contract was shown by the evidence to be as follows:
*230Total of “Date Amount Paid Paid Principal
12/1/1958 $ 500.00 $ 500.00
12/25/1958 500.00 1,000.00
3/26/1959 5,000.00 6,000.00
4/5/1960 2.500.00 8.500.00
5/23/1961 2.500.00 11,000.00
4/6/1962 2.500.00 13.500.00
1/15/1963 2.500.00 16,000.00
6/30/1964 2.500.00 18.500.00
2/15/1965 2.500.00 21,000.00”
(289 N. E. 2d at 770.)
No payments have been made since the last one indicated above — 815,000.00 remains to be paid on the original contract price.
In response to the plaintiff’s attempt to enforce the forfeiture provision, the defendants raised the affirmative defense of waiver. The applicable rule is well established and was stated by the Court of Appeals as follows:
“Where a contract for the sale and purchase of land contains provisions similar to those in' the contract in the case at bar, the vendor may waive strict cornpliance with the provisions of the contract by accepting overdue or irregular payments, and having so done, equity requires the vendor give specific notice of his intent that he will no longer be indulgent and that he will insist on his right of forfeiture unless the default is paid within a reasonable and specified time.” (289 N. E. 2d at 771, emphasis added, citing)
“Smeekens v. Bertrand (1969), 144 Ind. App. 656, 248 N. E. 2d 48. (transfer denied); Conner v. Fisher (1964), 136 Ind. App. 511, 202 N. E. 2d 572; McBride v. Griffith, et al. (1962), 134 Ind. App. 12, 185 N. E. 2d 22; Chambers et al. v. Boatright et al. (1961), 132 Ind. App. 378, 177 N. E. 2d 600; Carr et al. v. Troutman et al. (1954), 125 Ind. App. 151, 123 N. E. 2d 243; Hill v. Rogers (1951), 121 Ind. App. 708, 99 N. E. 2d 270 (transfer denied); Clayton v. Fletcher Savings & Trust Co. (1927), 89 Ind. App. 431, 155 N. E. 539 (transfer denied.)”
It follows that where the vendor has not waived strict compliance by acceptance of late payments, no notice is required to *231enforce its provisions. (289 N. E. 2d at 771, citing Conner v. Fisher, supra; Clayton v. Fletcher Savings & Trust Co., supra.)
In essence, the Court of Appeals found that there was no waiver because the vendors were obligated to accept prepayment, and, “the payments made, although irregular in time and amount, were prepayments on the unpaid balance through and including the payment due on January 15, 1965.” (289 N. E. 2d at 771.) The Court concluded that up to January 15, 1966, “the vendors waived no rights under the contract, because they were obliged to accept prepayment.” (Id.) and that, “[t]he vendors could not have insisted on forfeiture prior to January 15, 1966, the date of the first missed payment.” (Id.) (We believe the Court of Appeals miscalculated here; the vendors could not have insisted on forfeiture until January 16,1968.)
If forfeiture is enforced against the defendants, they will forfeit outright the sum of $21,000, or well over one-half the original contract price, as liquidated damages, plus possession.
Forfeitures are generally disfavored by the law. Carr v. Troutman (1954), 125 Ind. App. 151, 123 N. E. 2d 243. In fact, “. . . [e]quity abhors forfeitures and beyond any question has jurisdiction, which it will exercise in a proper case to grant relief against their enforcement.” 30 C. J. S., Equity, § 56 (1965) and cases cited therein. This jurisdiction of equity to intercede is predicated upon the fact that, “the loss or injury occasioned by the default must be susceptible of exact compensation.” 30 C. J. S., supra.
Pomeroy defines this doctrine of equitable interference to relieve against penalties and forfeitures as follows:
“Wherever a penalty or a forfeiture is used merely to secure the payment of a debt, or the performance of some act, or the enjoyment of some right or benefit, equity, considering the payment, or performance, or enjoyment to be the real thing intended by the agreement, and the penalty or *232forfeiture to be only an accessory, will relieve against such penalty or forfeiture by awarding compensation instead thereof, proportionate to the damages actually resulting from the non-payment, or non-performance, or non-enjoyment, according to the stipulations of the agreement. The test which determines whether equity will or will not interfere in such cases is the fact whether compensation can or cannot be adequately made for a breach of the obligation which is thus secured. If the penalty is to secure the mere payment of money, compensation can always be made, and a court of equity will relieve the debtor party upon his paying the principal and interest . . .
“ [The granting of relief in such circumstances is based on the ground that it is wholly against conscience to say that because a man has stipulated for a penalty in case of his omission to do a particular act — the real object of the parties being the performance of the act — if he omits to do the act, he shall suffer a loss which is wholly disproportionate to the injury sustained by the other party.]” Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence, § 433, 5th Edition (1941). (Emphasis added.)
Paragraph 17 of the contract, supra, provides that all prior payments “become forfeited and be taken and retained by the Vendor as liquidated damages.” “Reasonable” liquidated damage provisions are permitted by the law. See 22 Am. Jr., 2d Damages §212 (1965). However, the issue before this Court, is whether a $21,000 forfeiture is a “reasonable” measure of damages. If the damages are unreasonable, i.e., if they are disproportionate to the loss actually suffered, they must be characterized as penal rather than compensatory. See Melfi v. Griscer Industries, Inc. (1967), 141 Ind. App. 607, 231 N. E. 2d 54; Czeck v. Van Helsland (1968), 143 Ind. App. 460, 241 N. E. 2d 272. Under the facts of this case, a $21,000 forfeiture is clearly excessive.
The authors of American Law Reports have provided an excellent analysis of forfeiture provisions in land contracts:
“As is frequently remarked, there is no single rule for the determination of whether a contractual stipulation is one for liquidated damages or a penalty, each case depending largely upon its own facts and equities, and this *233apothegm is fully applicable to the decisions.involving provisions in land contracts for the forfeiture of payments.
“There is a plethora of abstract tests and criteria for the determination of the nature of a contractual provision as one for a penalty or liquidated damages, and in most instances the courts struggle valiantly to make the result reached by them accord reasonably well with one or more of the more prominent of these abstract tests. But it must be observed that, in the last analysis, these factors and criteria are so vague and indefinite that it is doubtful if they are of much aid in construing a specific contractual provision, even assuming that the court makes a conscious and conscientious effort to apply them. At any rate, a reading of the cases collected herein conveys the impression that the ultimate catalyst is the court’s belief as to the equities of the case before it.
“Granting this, however, certain tendencies of decision are clearly discernible in the cases. If, for example, the contract involved calls for deferred payments of the purchase price which are relatively small in amount and extend over a number of years, and if it appears that at the time of the purchaser’s breach and the consequent invocation of the forfeiture clause by the vendor a comparatively small proportion of the total price remains unpaid, the courts are prone to find that the forfeiture clause was one for a penalty, at least if, as is usually the case, such a holding will tend to give the purchaser another chance to complete the purchase.
“On .the other hand, if the amount of the payments received by the vendor at the time the purchase was abandoned represents but a small percentage of the total purchase price, and if the purchaser’s breach occurred soon after the execution of the agreement (and particularly if the circumstances indicate that the purchase was made for speculative purposes or that the breach represented an effort on the part of the purchaser to escape an unfortunate turn in the market), the courts tend to hold that the forfeiture clause was one for liquidated damages with the result that the purchaser cannot recover back the payments made.” 6 A. L. R. 2d 1401 (1949.)
If we apply the specific equitable principle announced above — namely, that the amount paid be considered in relation to the total contract price — we are compelled to conclude that the $21,000 forfeiture as liquidated damages, is incon*234sistent with generally accepted principles of fairness and equity. The vendee has acquired a substantial interest in the property, which, if forfeited, would result in substantial injustice.
Under a typical conditional land contract, the vendor retains legal title until the total contract price is paid by the vendee. Payments are generally made in periodic installments. Legal title does not vest in the vendee until the contract terms are satisfied, but equitable title vests in the vendee at the time the contract is consummated. When the parties enter into the contract, all incidents of ownership accrue to the vendee. Thompson v. Norton (1860), 14 Ind. 187. The vendee assumes the risk of loss and is the recipient of all appreciation in value. Thompson, supra. The vendee, as equitable owner, is responsible for taxes. Stark v. Kreyling (1934), 207 Ind. 128, 188 N. E. 680. The vendee has a sufficient interest in land so that upon sale of that interest, he holds a vendor’s lien. Baldwin v. Siddons (1910), 46 Ind. App. 313, 90 N. E. 1055.
This Court has held, consistent with the above notions of equitable ownership, that a land contract, once consummated constitutes a present sale and purchase. The vendor “ ‘has, in effect, exchanged his property for the unconditional obligation of the vendee, the performance of which is secured by the retention of the legal title.' ” Stark v. Kreyling, supra, at 135. The Court, in effect, views a conditional land contract as a sale with a security interest in the form of legal title reserved by the vendor. Conceptually, therefore, the retention of the title by the vendor is the same as reserving a lien or mortgage. Realistically, vendor-vendee should be viewed as mortgagee-mortgagor. To conceive of the relationship in different terms is to pay homage to form over substance. See Principles of Equity, Clark, 4th edition, Sec. 9, p. 23.
■ The piercing of the transparent distinction between a land contract and a mortgage is not a phenomenon without prece*235dent. In addition to the Stark case, supra, there is an abundance of case law from other jurisdictions which lends credence to the position that a land sales contract is in essence a mortgage:
“While the legal title remains in the vendor, the vendee in possession acquires an equitable title and the vendor holds the legal title in trust as it were for the vendee. There is an equitable conversion so that while the heirs of the vendor in case of his death must make conveyance of the legal title, the rights of the vendor under a contract, in case of his death intestate, pass to his representatives rather than to his heirs; the title of the vendee in possession is such that in the event of his death intestate, his interest in the realty descends to his heirs; so that, following the doctrine that equity deems that as done which ought to be done, the vendee in possession for all practical purposes becomes the owner of the property with all the rights of an owner in the operation of it, subject only of course to the terms of the contract; the vendor holds the legal title as security for the performance of the contract, but in effect has a vendor’s lien upon the property; the status of the parties is somewhat analogous to that of mortgagor and mortgagee. 3 Pomeroy’s Equity Jurisprudence (4th Ed.), p. 3042, §1261; Champion v. Brown, 6 Johns. Ch. 398, 10 Am. Dec. 343; Sewell v. Underhill, 197 N. Y. 168, 90 N. E. 430, 27 L. R. A. (N. S.), 233, 134 Am. St. Rep. 863, 18 Am. Cas. 795.” Conners v. Winans (1924), 122 Misc. 824, 204 N. Y. Supp. 142, 145;
“Where one contracts to convey real estate to another upon the payment of the agreed price, retaining the title until payment is fully made, it is not very important, in our opinion, what the security so retained is called, whether a trust, a vendor’s lien, an equitable mortgage, an equitable security, or any other kind of a lien. Like the Supreme Court of Tennessee:
“ ‘We are not able to draw any sensible distinction between the cases of a legal title conveyed to secure the payment of a debt, and a legal title retained to secure the payment of a debt. In both cases, courts of chancery consider the estate only as security for the payment of the debt, upon a discharge of which the debtor is entitled to a conveyance in one instance, and a reconveyance in the other.’ Graham v. McCampbell, 19 Tenn. 52, 33 Am. Dec. 126.
*236“Where the title is retained by the seller as security for the payment of the debt, the security is, in this country, very generally regarded as possessing all the essential features of a mortgage, and the vendor as standing for all practical purposes as mortgagee in relation to the vendee. See 29 Cyc. pp. 770, 771, and notes; Hardin v. Boyd, 113 U.S. 764, 5 Sup. Ct. 771, 28 L. Ed. 1141; Lewis v. Hawkins, 90 U.S. 126, 23 L. Ed. 113; Wheeling Bridge & T. Ry. Co. v. Reymann Brewing Co., 90 Fed. 189, 32 C. C. A. 571; Seattle L. S. & E. Ry. Co. v. Union Trust Co., 79 Fed. 179, 24 C. C. A. 296. And as such, he seems to be regarded by statute in Idaho. Rev. St. Idaho 1887, §§ 3440, 4520, and 4521.” Ferguson v. Blood (1907), 82 C. C. A. 482, 152 Fed. 98, 103; cited with approval in 243 F. 2d 478 and 373 P. 2d 565;
“. . . The position of a vendor in a land contract is in many respects similar to that of an equitable mortgagee. In an early case, Button v. Schroyer, 5 Wis. 598, in speaking of the relationship of a vendor and vendee in a land contract, the court said:
“ ‘The relation between the parties is analogous to that of equitable mortgagor and mortgagee. The former has an equity of redemption, the latter has the correlative right of foreclosure.’ ” Harris v. Halverson (1927), 192 Wis. 71, 211 N. W. 295, 297;
“This court has several times said that — ‘Where a vendor sells land, takes the notes of the vendee for the purchase money, and executes to him a bond for title, the effect of the contract in equity is to create a mortgage in favor of the vendor upon the land to secure the purchase money subject to all the essential incidents of a mortgage.’ Newman v. Mountain Park Land Co., 85 Ark. 208, 107 S. W. 391, 122 Am. St. Rep. 27; Strauss v. White, 66 Ark. 170, 51 S. W. 64, and cases there cited.” Fairbairn v. Pofahl (1920), 144 Ark. 313, 222 S. W. 16, 17;
“ ‘Where a sale of land is evidenced by a contract only, and the purchase price has not been paid, and the vendor retains the legal title, the parties occupy substantially the position of mortgagor and mortgagee. The vendor has a lien for his purchase money by virtue of his contract.’ Roby v. Bismarck National Bank, 4 N. D. 156, 160, 59 N. W. 719, 720, 50 Am. St. Rep. 633. See, also, First National Bank v. Zook, 50 N. D. 423, 429, 196 N. W. 507, 509. “The general rule is that where in a contract for sale the vendor reserves title, ‘the transaction creates in equity the relation of mortgagor and mortgagee.’ ” D. S. B. Johnston *237Land Co. v. Whipple (1930), 60 N. D. 334, 234 N. W. 59, 61. See also 77 A. L. R. 270 and cases cited therein.
It is also interesting to note that the drafters of the Uniform Commercial Code abandoned the distinction between a conditional sale and a security interest. Section 1-201 of the UCC (IC 1971, 26-1-1-^01 (Ind. Ann. Stat. §19-1-201 [1964 Repl.])) defines “security interest” as “an interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment or performance of an obligation . . . retention or reservation of title by a seller of goods notwithstanding shipment or delivery to the buyer is limited in effect to a reservation of ‘security interest.’ ” We can conceive of no rational reason why conditional sales of real estate should be treated any differently.1 .
A conditional land contract in effect creates a vendor’s lien in the property to secure the unpaid balance owed under the contract. This lien is closely analogous to a mortgage — in fact,, the vendor is commonly referred to as an “equitable mortgagee.” D. S. B. Johnston Land Co. v. Whipple, supra; Harris v. Halverson, supra. In view of this characterization of the vendor as a lienholder, it is only logical that such a lien be enforced through foreclosure proceedings. Such a lien “has all the incidents of a mortgage” (D. S. B. Johnston Land Co. v. Whipple, supra, at 61), one of which is the right to foreclose.
There is a multitude of cases upholding the vendor’s right to foreclose. (See 77 A. L. R. 276, and the cases cited therein.) The remedy is most often referred to as a foreclosure of an *238executory contract. (A land contract is “executory” until legal title is actually transferred to the vendee.) A 1924 New York case best describes this remedy:
“Out of the nature of the relationship created by a land contract, where the vendee is in possession, there have developed certain equitable remedies, among which is the right of the vendor in a proper case to sell out the interest of the vendee for the purpose of satisfying his lien under the contract, in case of default, and while it seems a misnomer, for convenience this remedy is spoken of as foreclosure, and the action as one to foreclose the contract. 3 Pomeroy’s Equity Jurisprudence (4th Ed.) 3046, § 1262.” Conners v. Winans (1924), 122 Misc. 824, 204 N. Y. Supp. 142, 145. See also, Keller v. Lewis (1878), 53 Cal. 113, for another excellent characterization.
The foreclosure of a land sale contract is undeniably comprehended by our Trial Rules. TR. 69(c) deals with the foreclosure of liens upon real estate:
“Unless otherwise ordered by the court, judicial foreclosure of all liens upon real estate shall be conducted under the same rules and the sale procedures applicable to foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate, including without limitation redemption rights, manner and notice of sale, appointment of a receiver, execution of deed to purchaser and without valuation and appraisement. Judicial lien foreclosures including mortgage foreclosures may be held at any reasonable place stated in the notice of sale. In all cases where a foreclosure or execution sale of realty is not confirmed by the court, the sheriff or other officer conducting the sale shall make a record of his actions therein in his return to be filed promptly with the record of the case and also in the execution docket maintained in the office of the clerk.” (Emphasis added.)
The vendor’s interest clearly constitutes a “lien upon real estate” and should, therefore, be treated as one. The basic foreclosure statute — that is for mortgages executed after July 1, 1957 — provides for a six-month period of redemption, commencing with the filing of the complaint. Additionally, it establishes the procedures attendant to the foreclosure sale. The statute reads as follows:
*239“Mortgages executed after July 1, 1957 — Time of issuing execution — Sale—Notices.—In any proceeding for the foreclosure of any mortgage hereafter executed on real estate, no process shall issue for the execution of any such judgment or decree of sale for a period of six [6] months after the filing of a complaint in any such proceeding: Provided, That such period shall be twelve [12] months in any such proceeding for the foreclosure of any mortgage executed prior to July 1, 1957. Thereafter, upon the filing of a praecipe therefor by any judgment creditor in said proceeding a copy of the judgment and decree shall be issued and certified by the clerk under the seal of the court, to the sheriff, who shall thereupon proceed to sell the mortgage premises or so much thereof as may be necessary to satisfy the judgment, interest and costs, at public auction at the door of the court house of the county in which said real estate is situated, by advertising the same by publication once each week for three [3] successive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation printed in the English language and published in the county where the real estate is situated, the first of which publications shall be made at least thirty [30] days before the date of sale; and by posting written or printed notices thereof in at least three [3] public places in the township in which the real estate is situated, and at the door of the courthouse of the county:
Provided, That if the sheriff be unable to procure the publication of such notice within such county he may dispense with such publication but he shall in his return state his inability to procure such publication and the reason therefor. [Acts 1931, ch. 90, § 1, p. 257; 1957, ch. 220, § 1, p. 476.]” IC 1971, 32-8-16-1 (Ind. Ann. Stat. §3-1801 [1968 Repl.]).
TR. 69(C) requires that the procedures outlined in the above statute be applied “without limitation” to the “judicial foreclosure of all liens upon real estate.” We believe there to be great wisdom in requiring judicial foreclosure of land contracts pursuant to the mortgage statute. Perhaps the most attractive aspect of judicial foreclosure is the period of redemption, during which time the vendee may redeem his interest, possibly through refinancing.
Forfeiture is closely akin to strict foreclosure — a remedy developed by the English courts which did not contemplate *240the equity of redemption. American jurisdictions, including Indiana, have, for the most part, rejected strict foreclosure in favor of foreclosure by judicial sale:
“The doctrine of strict foreclosure developed in England at a time when real property had, to a great extent, a ■fixed value; the vastly different conditions in this country, in this respect, led our courts to introduce modifications to the English rules of foreclosure. Generally, in consonance with equity’s treatment of a mortgage as essentially a security for the payment of the debt, foreclosure by judicial sale supplanted strict foreclosure as the more equitable mode of effectuating the mutual rights of the mortgagor and mortgagee; and there is at the present time, in the majority of the American states, no strict foreclosure as developed by the English courts — either at law or in equity —by which a mortgagee can be adjudged absolute owner of the mortgaged property. The remedy of the mortgagee is by an action for the sale of the mortgaged premises and an application of the proceeds of such sale to the mortgage debt, and although usually called an action to foreclose, it is totally different in its character and results from a strict foreclosure. The phrase ‘foreclosure of a mortgage’ has acquired, in general, a different meaning from that which it originally bore under the English practice and the common law imported here from England. In this country, the modern meaning of the term ‘foreclosure’ denotes an equitable proceeding for the enforcement of a lien against property in satisfaction of a debt.” 55 Am. Jur. 2d, Mortgages, § 549 (1971).
Guided by the above principles, we are compelled to conclude that judicial foreclosure of a land sale contract is in consonance with the notions of equity developed in American jurisprudence. A forfeiture — like a strict foreclosure at common law — is often offensive to our concepts of justice and inimical to the principles of equity. This is not to suggest that a forfeiture is an inappropriate remedy for the breach of all land contracts. In the case of an abandoning, absconding vendee, forfeiture is a logical and equitable remedy. Forfeiture would also be appropriate where the vendee has paid a minimal amount on the contract at the time of default and seeks to retain possession while the *241vendor' is paying taxes, insurance, and other upkeep in order to preserve the premises. Of course, in this latter situation, the vendee will have acquired very little, if any, equity in the property. However, a court of equity must always approach forfeitures with great caution, being forever aware of the possibility of inequitable dispossession of property and exorbitant monetary loss. We are persuaded that forfeiture may only be appropriate under circumstances in which it is found to be consonant with notions of fairness and justice under the law.
In other words, we are holding a conditional land sales contract tobe in the nature of a secured transaction, the provisions of which are subject to all proper and just remedies at law and in equity.
Turning our attention to the case at hand, we find that the vendor-assignees were seeking forfeiture, including $21,000 already paid on said contract as liquidated damages and immediate possession. They were, in fact, asking for strict application of the contract terms at law which we believe would have led to unconscionable results requiring the intervention of equity. “Equity delights in justice, but that not by halves.” (Story, Eq. Pl. § 72.) On the facts of this case, we are of the opinion that the trial court correctly refused the remedy sought by the vendor-assignees, but in so refusing it denied all remedial relief to the plaintiffs. Eauity will “look upon that as done which ought to have been done.” (Story, Eq. Jur. § 64(g)). Applying the foregoing maxims to the case at bar, where such parties seek unconscionable results in such an action, eauity will treat the subject matter as if the final acts and relief contemplated by the parties were accomplished exactly as they should have been in the first instance. Where discretionary power is not exercised by a trial court, under the mistaken belief that it was without this power, a remand and direction by a court of review is necessary and proper. 5 Am. Jur. 2d § 773, p. 216, *242n.3 (cases cited therein). This is not an unwarranted interference with the trial court’s function. Upon appeal to this Court, we have the judicial duty to sua sponte direct the trial court to apply appropriate equitable principles in such a case. 5 Am. Jur. 2d, §656, p. 107, citing: Mark v. Kahn (1956), 333 Mass. 517, 131 N. E. 2d 758, 53 A. L. R. 2d 908. Consistent with such above-stated rules, this Court has the undeniable authority to remand with guidelines which will give substantial relief to plaintiffs under their secured interests and will prevent the sacrifice of the vendees’ equitable lien in the property.
For all of the foregoing reasons, transfer is granted and the cause is reversed and remanded with instructions to enter a judgment of foreclosure on the vendors’ lien, pursuant to Trial Rule 69(C) and the mortgage foreclosure statute (IC 1971, 32-8-16-1 (Ind. Ann. Stat, §3-1801 [1968 Repl.])) as modified by Trial Rule 69(C). Said judgment shall include an order for the payment of the unpaid principal balance due on said contract, together with interest at 8 % per annum from the date of judgment. The order may also embrace any and all other proper and equitable relief that the court deems to be just, including the discretion to issue a stay of the judicial sale of the property, all pursuant to the provisions of Trial Rule 69(C). Such order shall be consistent with the principles and holdings developed within this opinion.
Reversed and remanded with instructions.
Arterburn, C.J., DeBruler and Prentice, JJ., concur in this opinion on the merits; Prentice, J., filing an additional statement ; Given, J., dissents.
. In fact, the Commissioners on Uniform State Laws have recognized the transparency of any such distinctions. Section 3-102 of the Uniform Land Transactions Code (working draft of first tentative draft) reads as follows:
“This Article applies to security interests created by contract, including mortgage . . . land' sales contract . . . and any other lien or title • retention contract intended as security.”
We believe this position is entirely consistent with the evolving case law in the area.

=== CASE 9737538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:07.722132+00 ===

Fitzgerald, J.
Defendant was convicted by a jury in the Saginaw county circuit court of the manslaughter1 of her husband in the Wonder Bar in the city of Saginaw on the night of July 13, 1963. She appeals. The facts relevant to the case will be outlined within the framework of our discussion of the several issues of error alleged by defendant to have occurred during the course of her trial.
A preliminary hearing was held pursuant to CL 1948, § 766.4 (Stat Ann 1954 Eev § 28.922). Defendant alleges that error occurred at this time when the people did not produce testimony of a medical expert as to an unnatural cause of the husband’s death, resulting in a failure to establish the corpus delicti of the offense of murder in the second degree.2 A medical pathologist had performed an autopsy but he was not called to testify. The death certificate was introduced pursuant to CL 1948, § 326.6, as amended by PA 1962, No 202 (Stat Ann 1965 Cum Supp § 14.226), to show the identity, occurrence, time and death, but not the cause of death, although an opinion as to the cause is included. More testimony was adduced. The nonmedical coroner was called and he described a small wound found • in the husband’s chest. Several witnesses were called and they gave testimony concerning profuse bleeding of deceased, statements made by deceased following his wounding, and actions taken by *73one of them to stop the bleeding. In the ease of People v. Jackson (1965), 1 Mich App 207, 211, it is stated:
“In homicide cases the corpus delicti is sufficiently-shown by testimony of the finding of the dead body and evidence of an unnatural cause of death.”
A preliminary hearing is held to establish to the satisfaction of the examining magistrate that a crime has been committed and that there is probable cause to believe that the accused committed the crime. People v. Jackson, supra.
The testimony of a medical expert is indeed preferable in a situation where the crime charged involved physical injury, but we do not find that error existed in this preliminary hearing when there is other competent and substantial evidence of an unnatural cause of death or injury. Laymen are not necessarily incapable of testifying competently as to observable surrounding circumstances of an incident so that the examining magistrate would err in believing that a crime had been committed based on their testimony. All facts and incidents which plainly relate to the offense are admissible. See 1 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law and Procedure (2d ed), § 303, p 361.
Defendant’s counsel requested the names of the people’s expert witnesses who would testify to rebut the defense of temporary insanity, but his motion was denied by the trial court. Two police officers did testify that defendant appeared sane to them at the time she was being interrogated shortly after her husband was stabbed, and their names appeared on the information. They were not expert witnesses and the trial court did not abuse its discretion nor prejudice defendant by denying the motion.
Rosia Flores, the sister of defendant, was at the Wonder Bar when deceased was injured. She was *74indorsed on the information by the prosecutor and she testified on direct examination, but the trial court refused to permit defendant’s counsel to cross-examine her on the issue of the alleged insanity of defendant. This refusal constitutes error as the right to cross-examine as to facts in issue or relevant facts is broadly granted in Michigan subject generally to the discretion of the trial court as to the credibility of the witness. Schwartz v. Triff (1966), 2 Mich App 379. However, the people allege that this error is not prejudicial to defendant as she later called Rosia Flores as her own witness and substantial testimony was given on the issue of insanity at that time. "We agree with the observation made at 3 Am Jur, Appeal and Error, § 1132, p 651:
“And where a party has been denied by the trial court the right to cross-examine a witness relative to facts and circumstances connected with the matters brought out on the direct examination, the error may be rendered harmless if such party examines the witness during the subsequent progress of the cause relative to the matters concerning which he was erroneously denied the right to cross-examine.”
Defendant was fully given the opportunity to develop the testimony of Mrs. Flores concerning the issue of insanity and we hold this error of the trial court to be nonprejudicial to defendant. See Harrington v. Los Angeles R. Company (1903), 140 Cal 514 (74 p 15, 63 LRA 238).
Defendant attempted to offer into evidence 2 exhibits of emergency room records of St. Mary’s Hospital to show her alleged insanity; these records described her admission to the hospital on 2 occasions, 4 months prior to the death of her husband, because of her consumption of an unknown amount of phenobarbital, with a contemporaneous diagnosis of her condition. The court refused to admit these *75exhibits at any time for any purpose during the course of the trial, being of the opinion that such records are not admissible to prove diagnosis or history of the case.
The people cite the case of People v. Lewis (1940), 294 Mich 684, for the proposition that hospital records are never admissible under the business entry statute, CLS 1961, § 600.2146 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27A.2146), in a criminal case, because the accused •will he denied his constitutional right to he confronted by the witnesses against him, i.e., the maker of the hospital record who is not present in the courtroom. However, we believe that the desire to obtain the best evidence possible concerning the accused’s plea of insanity would require that she be able to introduce a portion of such hospital records following the preparation of a proper foundation. We agree with the statement in Weihofen, Mental Disorder as a Criminal Defense, ch 6, § 3, p327:
“Data obtained in the regular course of medical practice and entered on such (hospital) records are regularly relied upon by the medical profession in matters no less important than those involved in lawsuits, and their exclusion in court leads to error rather than to truth.”
We believe that the limitations of the Lewis Case were intended to apply to the particular facts of that case wherein the defendant was accused of practicing medicine without a license in an abortion case, where the hospital records showed that the complaining witness was previously treated in connection with a pregnancy. In cases such as the present, concerning physical condition, hospital records are generally held to he admissible to show facts relating to the medical treatment and history *76of- patients in criminal as well as in civil cases. See 23 CJS, Criminal Law, § 851, p 332.
The objection of the people is that they” “can’t cross-examine the record”, but this is not the reason given by the Court in the Lewis Case for excluding such evidence. • Rather, the objection is that the accused is unable to confront the witnesses against him when such records are admitted, so this objection must be qualified where the accused himself seeks to admit the records as an essential part of a defense of insanity. A number of safeguards have evolved to remove the hearsay objection by insuring the regularity of the entries made in the ordinary course of business by persons whose duty it is to make them, the records being duly authenticated and having been made by a person having knowledge of the facts set forth therein. The Michigan business entries statute, supra, is interpreted as follows:
“Under the statute authorizing the admission of records made in regular course of business, a hospital record made in writing and in the regular course of business is admissible in evidence, as regards acts,. events, occurrences or transactions incident to the hospital care or treatment, when it was the regular course of business to make such record.” 5 Callaghan, Michigan Pleading and Practice (2d ed), § 36.572, p 216.
Defendant would have this Court extend the’ statute to include a diagnosis contained in the hospital record as admissible in evidence. See Shinabarger v. Phillips (1963), 370 Mich 135. We do not support this contention in a criminal case such as the present one. The diagnostician is unavailable for cross-examination and we believe that the admission of his unsupported diagnosis would not be in keeping with sound criminal trial procedures. Two exhibits were refused admission by the trial judge.' We' find *77error in Ms refusal to admit exhibit #11 concerning her admission to the hospital on March 10, 1963, her apparent physical condition, and her consumption of an unknown amount of phenobarbital, but not as to the diagnosis made at that time. The doctor who treated defendant on her re-admission 2 days' later testified at the trial, referring to the hospital record (exhibit #12) made at that time. We find that defendant suffered no prejudice by the initial exclusion of exhibit #12 as the diagnostician fully testified as to her condition later in the trial.
Defendant called a psychiatrist to testify' on the issue of her insanity. She alleges error in that the trial court did not permit the psychiatrist to testify as to the history given him by defendant when he examined her; that he was not allowed to give his opinion as to defendant’s mental state at the time of the alleged offense unless counsel framed his inquiries in the form of hypothetical questions; and that the psychiatrist was not allowed to present his diagnosis of defendant which was based upon her medical history and his examination of her.
The parties agree that a psychiatrist may testify as to his opinion partially based upon a personal history of the patient given to him if he is the “treating” psychiatrist. However, the people allege that this psychiatrist was consulted for the purpose of trial preparation oh behalf of defendant and that the history would be self-serving and hearsay, and, thus, that it should be excluded. Defendant denies that the psychiatrist was consulted only for trial preparation, and alleges that he did treat defendant, but if it is found that the contention of the people-is true, asks this Court find the history essential to any evaluation of a patient by a psychiatrist.
Four general situations may occur when medical testimony is sought to be introduced into evidence *78on the issue of an opinion formed by the doctor based on a history obtained from the patient.
1. The “treating” physician or psychiatrist: may testify as to personal history given by the patient.
2. The “nontreating” physician: may not testify in Michigan (Layton v. Gregan & Mallory Company, Inc., (1934), 269 Mich 574). The fear persists that the patient who is sent to a doctor following an incident will readily make self-serving statements. The modern trend in the United States is to allow the nontreating doctor to consider these statements in order that he may have the opportunity to form an intelligent opinion on the basis of as much information as is available. Reliance is placed on his ability to detect malingering. See 6 Am Jur, Trials, § 17, p 137.
3. The “referral and treating” physician and psychiatrist: may testify as to the personal history given by the patient to him as a treating doctor if this is one purpose of the visit. This trend is exemplified by the case of Ritter v. Coca Cola Company (1964), 24 Wis 2d 157 (128 NW2d 439).
4. The “nontreating psychiatrist”: may testify as to history in those states which make an exception to the exclusionary rule because of the unique problems faced by the psychiatrist in making subjective observations predicated on a full understanding of a patient’s life. 6 Am Jur Trials, § 19, p 140.
Defendant first urges us to find that the psychiatrist would fall under (3) above because, following the birth of another child in August, 1964, the psychiatrist recommended that she be sterilized to prevent further pregnancy, based on his opinion of her mental condition prior to that time. However, the issue of permitting him to testify as to the history given to him by defendant was objected to and ruled on by the trial court long before testimony was in*79troduced concerning possible “treatment” by the psychiatrist.
Dne to the subjective nature of a psychiatrist’s diagnosis, we agree that it is essential for him to employ the tool of the patient’s verbal description of her life and mental history, as in (4) above. The “self-serving” objection to the history can be overcome by reliance upon the psychiatrist’s expertise, experience, and ability in detecting liars. The trial court repeatedly refused to permit the psychiatrist to testify as to his diagnosis of defendant’s condition on July 13 because of the probability, as alleged by the people in reliance on an 1888 New York case, that the statements were self-serving when they were made to a physician months after the incident by a person claiming insanity at the time of the incident. People v. Hawkins (1888), 109 NY 408 (17 NE 371).
It is highly unlikely that a defendant will always consult a psychiatrist before committing an act under an irresistible impulse and it is not reasonable to restrict subsequent psychiatric diagnosis by barring an essential history because of a lack of foresight by a person who would be required to see a psychiatrist before being seized by such an impulse. The Hawkins concept is not acceptable in the light of modern psychiatric techniques. The psychiatrist did testify that in November, 1963, when he first examined defendant, he found her to be schizophrenic with paranoid features. The frustration faced by the psychiatrist in attempting to arrive at a diagnosis without being permitted to consider the history of the patient is apparent throughout the record of this trial. He has been denied a vital psychiatric tool essential to a proper diagnosis of his patient’s mental condition. We believe that to deny counsel the opportunity to prepare a founda*80tion for a diagnosis by a psychiatrist by omitting any statement made to the psychiatrist by the patient is error. However, in the present case, we do not believe this particular error to be prejudicial to defendant’s right to a fair trial as the doctor was permitted in the presence of the jury to form an opinion based upon a hypothetical question composed of facts already elicited from other witnesses:
“Q. Now, assuming those facts only, do you have an opinion — do you have an opinion as to her mental condition on July 13, 1963? * * *
“A. Yes, I’d have an opinion.
“Q. What is that opinion, doctor?
“A. That she was mentally ill. I would not have a specific opinion regarding the absolute diagnosis, but that would be adequate evidence in my opinion that she would be mentally ill and severely so.
“Q. And would that condition bring about the acts that she’s accused of having performed? * * *
“A. I would like to say that the severity of the illness would make the alleged act a compatible product of it.”
We do not find that prejudice resulted to defendant on the issue, considering the present state of Michigan law.
We have seen that the trial court did not permit the psychiatrist to give his opinion as to defendant’s sanity as of July 13, 1963, unless counsel used a hypothetical question, including only the facts which had been presented to the court and facts which were before the jury at that particular time. G-CR 1963, 605, substantially limits the former rule that the nontreating physician is permitted only to answer a “hypothetical question”. Such questions are asked in order to limit the testimony of an expert who is testifying, and giving his opinion based on facts related to him by others. GCR 1963, *81605 is expressly intended to make better nse of tbe testimony of an expert and not to bind him to an opinion of a single question composed of the facts already introduced into evidence by others. It remains within the discretion of the trial judge to use the hypothetical question to assist the court or jury in understanding the expert opinions.
Careful perusal and examination of the record does not show an abuse of discretion by the trial judge in requiring counsel to employ the hypothetical question. Again, we find error in the trial court’s refusal to permit the psychiatrist to discuss the history given to him by the patient, but we do not find it prejudicial for the psychiatrist did answer the hypothetical question as to defendant’s mental condition on July 13, 1963, by stating that in his opinion she was mentally ill, without consideration of the interview that he had with her.
The people called 2 police officers as their only witnesses on rebuttal. One police officer arrested the defendant and brought her to the police station and the other joined with the first in questioning the defendant.. The officers were called for the purpose of rebutting defendant’s testimony as to her insanity and to give their observations of defendant. The trial court permitted these policemen to testify over the repeated objections of defendant’s counsel who alleged that they only had a conversation with her for one hour and 10 minutes at a time when she was under arrest, handcuffed, disheveled, wet, and informed that her husband was dead. We are concerned with the admissibility of nonexpert opinion testimony.
The fundamental rule in the State of Michigan was first stated in the civil case of Beaubien v. Cicotte (1864), 12 Mich 459, 503, as follows:
*82“But, from the nature of things, no rule can he laid down declaring what amount of acquaintance, or what opportunities are necessary to enable an observer to be a witness. There are cases of insanity open to the slightest scrutiny while others defy the keenest search. But no testimony can be of any real value, unless it appears the witness had adequate means and opportunities for forming some conclusion.”
This principle was restated in the criminal case of People v. Zabijak (1938), 285 Mich 164, 185, wherein the Court states:
“A nonexpert witness who has had ample means to observe and form conclusions as to the mental condition of a person and who testifies to pertinent facts on which his conclusions are based may state his conclusions as to the insanity of a person.”
The Zabijak decision has been interpreted once by an equally divided Michigan Supreme Court in the case of People v. Hannum (1961), 362 Mich 660. The Court held that lay testimony which constituted opinion evidence as to the sanity of the defendant presented a question for the jury but reversal was not had on this ground. Pour justices concurred in the reversal, but they found that prejudicial error was also committed by the trial court in admitting the opinion testimony of the 3 nonexpert witnesses. In the Hannum Case, the trial court admitted the opinion testimony of the policemen over defendant’s objection because, in its view, the question of limited opportunities for observation of defendant by the witnesses went only to the weight to be given by the jury to the opinion testimony, and not to its admissibility. The trial court did the same in the present case in permitting the officers to testify, when in particular one officer could not answer counsel’s question, “Would you say that a normal person who had *83been told her husband was dead wonld be cool, calm and collected?” Defendant’s counsel immediately objected, but the court overruled him, saying, “The weight of his [the witness’] opinion would be taken into consideration by the jury.” The 4 justices who did not reverse on this ground in the Hannum Case agreed with the statement in the case of People v. Borgetto (1894), 99 Mich 336, 341, to wit:
“But there is a difference in the nature of the testimony requisite as bases for opinions in the two cases of sanity and insanity. The former is the normal condition; the latter, the abnormal. The latter is based upon unnatural conduct; the former may safely rest upon the absence of unnatural action or language. Once it is shown that the witness has a sufficient acquaintance under circumstances that give a reasonable opportunity for judging, and the testimony that he saw nothing unusual or abnormal is competent. What is required to show a sufficient opportunity depends upon circumstances which may properly move the judicial discretion, the testimony being more or less valuable as the circumstances are convincing.”
In order to determine whether the trial court abused its discretion in permitting the police officers to testify, we must determine whether there was sufficient basis for the court to determine that ample opportunity existed for the witnesses to form an opinion.
The time necessary to obtain enough facts for a reasonable opinion will vary according to the circumstances. A proper foundation was prepared when the police officers testified as to their experience with insane persons, the initial contact with defendant at the Wonder Bar, subsequent conversations with defendant, her appearance, her comments, and her emotional reaction to the news of her husband’s death. The trial court then deter*84mined that there was ample opportunity to form an opinion and permitted the officer to testify, noting that the jury could determine and weigh the validity of his opinion that the defendant appeared sane. We find no abuse of discretion by the court in finding ample opportunity for observation.
Defendant requested the trial court to instruct the jury that if they were to find her not guilty by reason of insanity, she would be confined in the State hospital for the insane, the request being denied. The Michigan statute required mandatory commitment upon a finding of insanity, at the time of this trial, and was found at CL 1948, § 766.15c (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.933[3]), subsequently repealed by PA 1966, No 266.
Defendant argues that the “Lyles instruction” should have been given, this instruction being derived from the case of Lyles v. United States (1957), 103 App DC 22 (254 F2d 725), wherein an instruction was approved and required, unless the defendant does not want it, in the courts of the District of Columbia to the effect that if a defendant is found not guilty by reason of insanity, he will be committed to a mental hospital. The reasoning given is that a jury, although aware of what the results of a guilty or not guilty decision will be, does not know what will happen to a defendant if the verdict is not guilty by reason of insanity. We agree with the opinion of the Supreme Court of the State of Vermont in the ease of State v. Hood (1963), 123 Vt 273 (187 A2d 499, 11 ALR3d 732), that jurors are not this ill-informed and that the Lyles decision is certainly not binding on this Court. We do not require that such an instruction be given, and we do not find that the trial court has erred in refusing this request. See People v. Cole (1967), 8 Mich App 250.
*85Defendant also requested the trial court to make a charge based only upon second degree murder as that was the same charge as was set forth in the warrant and in the information, said request being refused, and the lesser offense of manslaughter also being included in the charge along with second degree murder. Defendant argues that if an accused is faced with the open charge of common law murder, the trial court may include all offenses thereunder, but where a specific charge of first- or second-degree murder is made, the court need not instruct the jury on the lesser offenses and, when the defendant objects to such lesser charge instructions, the court should respect his request.
We refer to CL 1948, § 768.32 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.1055):
“Upon an indictment for any offense, consisting of different degrees, as prescribed in this chapter, the jury may find the accused not guilty of the offense in the degree charged in the indictment and may find such accused person guilty of any degree of such offense, inferior to that charged in the indictment, or of an attempt to commit such offense.”
We do not find error in the trial court’s refusal to omit a charge as to manslaughter. As is stated in 2 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law and Procedure (2d ed), § 674, p 865:
“Where there is testimony under which the defendant may be convicted of an offense of a lesser degree than the principal offense, it is not error for the court to refuse to charge that the jurors must confine their deliberations to the principal charge and cannot convict the respondent of a lesser offense, but, where there is some evidence upon which a respondent may be convicted of a lesser offense, it is error for the court to limit the verdict to the greater offense.”
*86Were the trial court to have accepted defendant’s request and omitted the charge as to manslaughter, we may well have been forced to disagree with him and find that he had erred. See People v. Hamilton (1889), 76 Mich 212; People v. Milhem (1957), 350 Mich 497. The court must charge in relation to lesser degrees of an offense where there is evidence which would tend to support conviction of a lesser degree. We find evidence of manslaughter and do not hold that the trial court erred in requiring the jury to consider manslaughter.
We affirm the propriety of the conviction of Lupe Ruth Herrera. Although several errors have been noted, we do not find any of them to be of sufficient prejudice to Mrs. Herrera’s right to a fair trial to require a reversal. Her rights to a fair trial were carefully protected by the trial judge, her defense of temporary insanity was presented for the jury’s consideration by several witnesses, and the evidence supported the verdict of the jury. The trial court was required to make numerous rulings, and did so, based on existing Michigan law, and we do not find that defendant suffered prejudice where error existed. This trial was fair. It need not be perfect.
Affirmed.
McGregor, J., concurred with Fitzgerald, J.
CL 1948, 8 750.321 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev 8 28.5531.
CL 1948, 8 750.317 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev 8 28.549').

=== CASE 9737490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:38.557367+00 ===

Concurring Statement
Prentice, J.
I have some concern that our opinion herein might be viewed by some as indicating an attitude of indiference towards the rights of contract vendors. Such a view would not be a true reflection.
*243Because the installment sales contract, with forfeiture provisions, is a widely employed and generally accepted method of commerce in real estate in this state, it is appropriate that a vendee seeking to avoid the forfeiture, to which he agreed, be required to make a clear showing of the inequity of enforcement. In any given transaction anything short of enforcing the forfeiture provision may be a denial of equity to the vendor. It has been set forth in the majority opinion that if the vendee has little or no real equity in the premises, the court should have no hesitancy in declaring a forfeiture. It follows that if the vendee has indicated his willingness to forego his equity, if any, whether by mere abandonment of the premises, by release or deed or by a failure to make a timely assertion of his claim, he should be barred from thereafter claiming an equity.
If the court finds that forfeiture, although provided for by the terms of the contract, would be unjust, it should nevertheless grant the vendor the maximum relief consistent with equity against a defaulting vendee. In so doing, it should consider that, had the parties known that the forfeiture provision would not be enforceable, other provisions for the protection of the vendor doubtlessly would have been incorporated into the agreement. Generally, this would require that the transaction be treated as a note and mortgage with such provisions as are generally included in such documents customarily employed in the community by prudent investors. Terms customarily included in such notes and mortgages but frequently omitted from contracts include provisions for increased interest during periods of default, provision for the acceleration of the due date of the entire unpaid principal and interest upon a default continuing beyond a reasonable grace period, provisions for attorneys’ fees and other expenses incidental to foreclosure, for the waiver of relief from valuation and appraisement laws and for receivers.
Note. — Reported in 301 N. E. 2d 641.

=== CASE 2210719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.118704+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 526 (1973)
Eugene BARNETT et al., Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
The CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS et al., Defendants-Appellees, Shumaker Brothers Industries, Inc., Intervenor-Appellee.
No. 2-673A140.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
October 1, 1973.
*527 Michael T. Dugan, II, Indianapolis, for plaintiffs-appellants.
Ronald L. Baker, Indianapolis, for defendants-appellees.
Paul J. DeVault, Krieg, DeVault, Alecander & Capehart, Indianapolis, for intervenor-appellee.
On Appellees' Motion to Dismiss
PER CURIAM.
This cause is pending before the Court on the Appellees' Motion to Dismiss which alleges that this action was a Public Lawsuit as defined by Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-3306, IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X, that any appeal from a public lawsuit must be taken as an interlocutory appeal, and that because appellants failed to timely perfect their appeal within 30 days after the judgment dismissing the cause, and further failed to file their brief within 10 days thereafter, this attempted appeal should be dismissed.
The crux of the matter then is whether the action in the trial court was, or was not a public lawsuit.
The complaint in the trial court, a Petition for Temporary Restraining Order Without Notice and for Permanent Injunction was filed by the Petitioner Eugene Barnett, a member of a class of Plaintiffs, and alleges that the class was so numerous that joinder of all members was impractical, that there were questions of fact and law common to the class, that the claims of the representative parties are typical of the claims of the class and that the representative parties of the class will fairly and adequately protect the interests of all of the class. The complaint then alleged that the Department of Transportation of the City of Indianapolis adopted a resolution for permanent improvements for a certain area, and circulated petitions for approval of the project; that the petitioner also circulated petitions opposing said project; that the defendants illegally completed said project are now proceeding with collection of assessments, all to the irreparable harm and injury of the petitioners. Petitioners prayed for a temporary restraining order to restrain defendants from taking any further action against the petitioners, and that a hearing be set on petitioners' request for permanent injunction to determine the validity of the acts of defendants. Pursuant to this petition a temporary restraining order was issued, restraining the defendants "from any further acts whatsoever against the petitioners in this matter" until further order.
In response to this Petition the defendants filed a motion to dismiss which alleged that the plaintiffs had an adequate remedy at law, that the plaintiffs were guilty of laches in not seeking review of defendants' actions before completion of the improvement, that plaintiffs have accepted the benefits of the improvements and should be estopped from enjoining assessment of the cost, that this is a public lawsuit as defined by statute and the plaintiffs did not fulfill an important condition precedent to bringing such an action, namely, they did not exhaust the administrative remedies available to them.
Subsequently, Shumaker Brothers Industries, Inc., sought and was granted leave to intervene, and filed its motion to dismiss which alleged essentially the same matters as the defendants' motion to dismiss.
Thereafter the trial court held a pretrial conference. The record reflects that on January 23, 1973, "Arguments were heard and the court now finds for defendants, City of Indianapolis, and Intervenor, Shumaker Bros. Industrial, Inc., cause dismissed." *528 The judgment formalizing this decision was entered on February 1, 1973. Plaintiffs filed their Motion to Correct errors on March 21, 1973, which was overruled the same day with the restraining order being continued against the defendants. Plaintiffs filed their praecipe on March 27, 1973, and filed the record of the proceedings in this court on June 19, 1973.
As earlier stated, Appellees contend this was a public lawsuit, and therefore the appeal should have been perfected within the time permitted for interlocutory appeals, that this appeal was not timely filed and should be dismissed.
Appellants, on the other hand, assert that this was an action to enjoin certain actions of the defendants because of fraud, that it was brought after the public improvements were completed, that it was not a public lawsuit and no reason exists to accelerate the appeal process in this case.
After having examined the statute, having carefully read the cases decided under the statute, and having compared this case to the statute and prior cases, we reach the conclusion that this case falls within the ambit of the public lawsuit statute.
The statute defining public lawsuits is Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-3301(b) (Burns' 1968 Repl.), IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X(b), and reads as follows:
"(b) `Public lawsuit' shall mean any action whereby the validity, location, wisdom, feasibility, extent or character of construction, financing or leasing of any public improvement by any municipal corporation is questioned directly or indirectly, including but not limited to suits for declaratory judgments or injunctions to declare invalid or to enjoin such construction, financing or leasing, and shall mean any action to declare invalid or enjoin the creation, organization or formation of any municipal corporation. This definition, as used in this act, shall not be construed to broaden any right of action as is now validly limited by applicable law." (our emphasis)
The import of the plaintiffs complaint was that the construction project was initiated in an arbitrary and capricious manner. The allegations directly questioned the validity of the public improvement project. Moreover, it sought to enjoin the final adoption of the Final Assessment Roll and thus, enjoin the financing of the project. Such action appears to us to be clearly within the statutory definition of a public lawsuit.
Plaintiffs-Appellants chose not to follow the statutory remedy provided for appeal from the decision of the Board of Public Works to make the improvement, as provided for by Ind. Ann. Stat. § 48-2808 (Burns' 1963 Repl.), IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X. Neither did they choose to avail themselves of the remedy of appeal to the Circuit or Superior Court from the final assessment against their property as provided by Ind. Ann. Stat. § 48-2814 (Burns' 1963 Repl.), IC 1971, XX-X-XX-XX. Instead, plaintiffs-appellants chose the extraordinary remedy of seeking to enjoin collection of the assessments made against their property by the City. This action, in our view, clearly fits the type of case defined by the public lawsuit statute.
The public lawsuit statute was enacted to protect against a flood of harrassing litigation which obstructs and delays public improvement. State ex rel. Haberkorn v. DeKalb Circuit Court (1968), 251 Ind. 283, 241 N.E.2d 62; Johnson v. Tipton Comm. School Corp. (1970), 253 Ind. 460, 255 N.E.2d 92.
In the case of City of Elkhart v. Curtis Realty Co. (1970), 253 Ind. 619, 256 N.E.2d 384, the appellee Curtis Realty Co. had filed a complaint to appeal a declaratory resolution of the board of public works, said complaint being filed pursuant to the *529 statutory procedure outlined in Ind. Ann. Stat. §§ 48-4501 to 48-4509, IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X to XX-X-XX-X. Our Supreme Court, in holding that this was not a public lawsuit, pointed out that this was the case of an individual landowner, seeking to protect its individual rights, and that the appellee was exercising its statutory right to appeal the decision of the board of public works, and therefore its suit was not a public lawsuit.
In the case of Hatcher v. Board of Commrs. of Lake County (1972), Ct.App., 290 N.E.2d 801, this Court held that in an action brought Pursuant to statutory authority to appeal an action from the Board of County Commissioners to the Circuit or Superior Court, the public lawsuit statute does not apply.
However unlike those cases, the plaintiffs in this case did not follow the avenues of statutory redress open to them. Instead, they filed, as a class action, a Petition for Restraining Order and Injunction, to enjoin collection of the assessments levied against their respective properties after they had received the benefits of the improvement. This clearly appears to be the type of harassing litigation that the legislature sought to prevent or limit when it enacted the public lawsuit act.
Having determined that this was a public lawsuit, it is readily apparent that the appeal was not perfected within the time permitted by statute and rule of Court. The statute providing for the time within which to appeal decisions in public lawsuits is Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-3306 (Burns' 1968 Repl.) and reads as follows:
"Appeals from final judgment.  Appeals from any final judgment on a public lawsuit shall be governed by, and taken in the same manner and with the same time limits, as appeals from interlocutory orders of a circuit or superior court under applicable law, including but not limited to Acts 1921, c. 251."
This procedure was recently affirmed by our Supreme Court in the case of Teperich v. North Judson-San Pierre H.S. Bldg. Corp. (1971), Ind., 275 N.E.2d 814. In that case the Supreme Court pointed out the provisions of rule TR 65(E) which reads in part as follows:
"Nothing in this rule shall affect provisions of statutes extending or limiting the power of a court to grant injunctions. By way of example and not by way of limitation, this rule shall not affect the provisions of 1967 Indiana Acts, ch. 357, §§ 1-8 [Burns' Stat., §§ 3-3301 - 3-3308 (Repl. 1968)] relating to public lawsuits. * * *"
Rule TR 59(G) provides that a Motion to Correct errors shall not be required in the case of appeals from interlocutory orders. Rule AP 3(B) requires that in appeals and reviews of interlocutory orders, the record of the proceedings shall be filed within 30 days of the ruling. Rule AP 8. 1(B) provides that in appeals from interlocutory orders, the appellant shall have 10 days after the filing of the record to file his brief.
The record in this case reveals that the trial court's judgment dismissing the case was entered on February 1, 1973. Instead of appealing directly from that judgment as provided by statute and rule, appellants interposed a Motion to Correct errors. The record of the proceedings was not filed in this Court until June 19, 1973, more than four months after the judgment was entered. Appellants did not file their brief within 10 days thereafter, nor did they petition within the 10 day period for an extension of time within which to file their brief.
Because this appeal was not perfected within the time permitted by statute and rule, this Court is without jurisdiction and the Appellees' Motion to dismiss must be sustained.
Cause dismissed.

=== CASE 9737491 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:51.262701+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice (on reassignment).
United Fire & Casualty Company (United) appeals a circuit court judgment hold*846ing it liable for the costs and expenses incurred by the City of Ft. Pierre (City) in defending an action brought against City by the federal government.
FACTS
United issued a public officials errors and omissions insurance policy to City. Under this policy United agreed:
To pay on behalf of the Insured all sums which the Insured shall become legally obligated to pay on account of any claim made against the Insured except as hereinafter limited and caused by any negligent act, error or omission of the Insured or any other person for whose acts the Insured is legally liable in the conduct of his duties as the public official holding the office shown in the Declarations. (Emphasis added.)
The policy specifically excluded coverage for “injury to or destruction of any tangible property including loss of use thereof;” and “liability for any loss caused intentionally by or at the direction of the Insured.” (Emphasis added.) City was required to give United notice “[a]s soon as practicable” after City became aware of any negligent act, error or omission, and to “immediately forward” every summons or other process if suit was brought against City.
On March 18, 1980, City applied to the United States Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) for a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 (1988), to construct a roadway across a slough. The land involved, commonly known as the Ft. Pierre slough, lies between U.S. Highway 83 and the Missouri River, within the boundaries of City. The Corps then issued public notice of the application and invited public comments on it. The United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) both responded and recommended that the application be denied. City failed to respond to either the FWS or the EPA objections to the issuance of the permit.
On August 4, 1980, City began construction of the roadway in question, without the benefit of a permit. The City used 6,481 cubic yards of fill material to construct the 700 feet by 5 feet deep and 50 feet wide road. Thereafter, the Corps notified City by certified mail that these actions violated the Clean Water Act. The Corps further notified City that it must cease and desist in its actions.
On August 14, 1980, City began construction of a second roadway across the slough. This time, City placed 18,500 cubic yards of shale loam in the slough to construct a 2,000 feet by 5 feet deep and 50 feet wide roadway. City did not apply for nor did it receive a permit for the construction of the second roadway.
On July 29, 1981, the United States Government brought suit against City, alleging that it violated the Clean Water Act by discharging fill material into protected wetland waters without a permit. City had constructed the roadways based upon the advice of its attorney1 that the slough was not a wetland area within the meaning of the Clean Water Act, thereby making a permit unnecessary. In its lawsuit, the United States sought to (1) permanently enjoin City from conducting any future fill activity without a permit; (2) to require City to perform restoration and erosion control work on that part of the slough already affected; and (3) to impose civil penalties in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each day of violation.
City did not notify United about the lawsuit or request defense of the action until February 3, 1983. The delay in notification was evidently due to oversight of City or its former attorney regarding the existence of the insurance policy. United responded by informing City it would not defend the action because it believed the lawsuit was not covered by the policy.
Trial of the federal action commenced in the United States district court on August 31, 1983, and a decision was rendered December 30 of that year. The trial court ruled in favor of the United States. United States v. City of Ft. Pierre, South Dakota, 580 F.Supp. 1036 (D.S.D.1983). *847City appealed to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals and, in October of 1984, that court reversed the district court’s decision, concluding that the slough was not a protected wetland under the Clean Water Act. United States v. City of Ft. Pierre, South Dakota, 747 F.2d 464 (8th Cir.1984). City’s legal fees defending the federal lawsuit totaled $28,445.56, $16,618.49 of which was incurred after United was notified of the action.
City ultimately brought this suit against United seeking to recover its legal fees and expenses incurred in defending the federal lawsuit. United answered, asserting that it was not obligated to provide a defense because City’s conduct at issue in the federal lawsuit was outside the coverage of the insurance policy. The circuit court concluded that defense of the federal lawsuit was within the coverage of the policy, thereby entitling City to recover the costs and expenses it incurred after United was notified of the lawsuit. United appeals, claiming that the circuit court erred in concluding that the conduct alleged in the federal lawsuit was within policy coverage and that the delayed notification did not preclude coverage. By notice of review, City claims the circuit court erred in requiring United to pay only the expenses incurred after notification, rather than all legal defense expenses.
We reverse, holding that United had no duty to defend under the policy.
ISSUE I
WHETHER UNITED HAD A DUTY TO DEFEND WHEN THE ERRORS AND OMISSIONS POLICY SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDED INTENTIONAL CONDUCT.
Insurance may protect the insured from the consequence of his negligent acts, errors and omissions. 13A G. Couch, Couch on Insurance § 48:166 (2nd ed. 1982). Errors and omissions policies are a hybrid form of insurance coverage. It guards against loses arising to the insured, as well as liabilities arising on the part of the insured, by reason of errors or omissions. 9 J. Appleman, Insurance Law & Practice § 5256 (1981). An errors and omissions policy provides a specialized and limited type of insurance coverage. Grieb v. Citizens Cas. Co. of N.Y., 33 Wis.2d 552, 148 N.W.2d 103 (1967).
Here, the coverage included in the policy was for “any negligent act, error or omission” of City. The policy further excluded “injury to or destruction of any tangible property” or “liability for any loss caused intentionally or at the direction of the insured.” (Emphasis added.) The duty of an insurance company to defend its insured is determined by the allegations of the complaint and the action brought against the insured. Bayer v. Employers Reinsurance Corp., 383 N.W.2d 858, 860 (S.D.1986); U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co. v. Louis A. Roser Co., 585 F.2d 932, 936 (8th Cir.1978).
The complaint brought by the United States alleged that the City intentionally violated the Clean Water Act. The prayer for relief sought injunction and civil penalties. In a letter to City’s Mayor from the Corps of Engineers, City’s continued construction of a road in the absence of a permit was characterized as a “willful and flagrant violation of federal statutes.” The federal government never alleged that City’s conduct was negligent or the result of some error or omission. (Obviously, City believed that the federal government’s classification of this “wetland” was incorrect and so it continued to build a roadway without a federal permit. City’s belief was later determined to be legally correct since the United States Court of Appeals, Eighth Circuit, held that the slough was not a wetland.)
The burden of showing no duty to defend rests on the insurer. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co. v. Clifford, 366 N.W.2d 489, 492 (S.D.1985). The insurer must show the claim clearly falls outside of policy coverage. Id. If, after considering the complaint, and when appropriate, other record evidence, doubt exists whether the claim against the insured arguably falls within the policy coverage, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the insured. Id.
In Black Hills Kennel Club v. Firemens’ Fund Indemnity Co., 77 S.D. 503, 506-507, 94 N.W.2d 90, 92 (1959), we noted that:
*848The scope of liability insurance is determined from the contractual intent and objectives of the parties as expressed in the policy. We are mindful of the rule of construction that where the provisions of an insurance contract are not clear and are fairly susceptible of different interpretation that one most favorable to the insured should be adopted. This rule does not mean, however, that the court may seek out a strained or unusual meaning for the benefit of the insured. Insurers may assume some risks and exempt themselves from liability for others.
(Citations omitted.) The federal government’s lawsuit arose exclusively because City decided to intentionally ignore the government’s permit requirements. City made a knowing, conscious decision to construct the roadway, being fully aware that the federal government would require an application for a permit (in fact, City ultimately applied for such a permit). This is not conduct which is negligent or an error or omission. Thus, United had no duty to defend under the policy. See Continental Casualty Co. v. Richmond, 763 F.2d 1076 (9th Cir.1985). Black Hills Kennel Club, supra.
ISSUE II
WHETHER THE FEDERAL LITIGATION WHICH SOUGHT CIVIL PENALTIES CONSTITUTED A SUIT FOR “DAMAGES” UNDER THE INSURANCE POLICY, REQUIRING UNITED TO DEFEND CITY.
United contends that the circuit court erred in concluding that the civil penalties requested by the United States in the federal lawsuit were not excluded from coverage under the policy. United asserts that a civil penalty is not covered by the policy because such penalties are punitive in nature and public policy prevents insurance coverage for punitive damages.
The terms of the insurance contract required United “[t]o pay on behalf of the Insured all sums which the Insured shall become legally obligated to pay on account of any claim made against the Insured -” However, this language is limited by the exclusions in the policy.
As stated earlier, the federal government’s complaint alleged nothing which could be characterized as a negligent act, nor as an error or omission.2 It brought an injunction action with possible civil penalties as a consequence. The civil penalties prayed for by the federal government were punitive in nature and not a request for compensatory damages. United States v. Edwards, 667 F.Supp. 1204, 1213-15 (W.D.Tenn.1987). The civil penalty, in connection with the injunctive relief, is often included to motivate the alleged wrongdoer to quick action, as well as for punishment, or a combination thereof. Punitive damages are not compensatory but are in addition to compensatory damages.
Although there is a split in authority, as a general rule, it is against public policy to allow the insured wrongdoer to shift the burden of payment of punitive damages to its insurer.3 Two interests implicated by an award of punitive damages are punishment to the wrongdoer and de*849terrence of the wrongdoer’s conduct. Here, City committed the “wrong” and is attempting to shift responsibility for its actions to its insurer. To allow City to do so would allow it to act with impunity. City would not be punished, nor would it be deterred from similar actions. “Were a person able to insure himself against economic consequences of his intentional wrongdoing, the deterrence attributable to financial responsibility would be missing.” Ambassador Ins. Co. v. Montes, 76 N.J. 477, 483, 388 A.2d 603, 606 (1978).
Thus, because we have determined that the civil penalties prayed for by the federal government were punitive in nature and that in this instance the award of punitive damages would violate public policy, we hold that United had no duty to defend City under the policy.
We have considered the other issues raised and find them to be without merit or moot.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed.
WUEST and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON and SABERS, JJ., dissent.
. City's attorney at that time is not involved in this litigation.
. Note that this is distinguishable from the situation wherein the language of the insurance policy covers the underlying liability, as was presented in Providence Washington Ins. Co. of Alaska v. City of Valdez, 684 P.2d 861 (Alaska 1984). Here, the language of the insurance policy specifically excludes coverage of the underlying liability, thus Valdez is distinguishable.
. Rossman v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 832 F.2d 282 (4th Cir.1987); Northwestern Nat'l. Cas. Co. v. McNulty, 307 F.2d 432 (5th Cir.1962); City Prod. Corp. v. Globe Indem. Co., 88 Cal.App.3d 31, 151 Cal.Rptr. 494 (1979); U.S. Concrete Pipe Co. v. Bould, 437 So.2d 1061 (Fla.1983); Beaver v. Country Mut. Ins. Co., 95 Ill.App.3d 1122, 1125, 51 Ill.Dec. 500, 420 N.E.2d 1058 (1981); Crull v. Gleb, 382 S.W.2d 17 (Mo.Ct.App.1964); LoRocco v. N.J. Mfr. Indem. Ins. Co., 82 N.J.Supr. 323, 197 A.2d 591 (1964); Hartford Acc. & Indem. Co. v. Village of Hemstead, 48 N.Y.2d 218, 422 N.Y.S.2d 47, 397 N.E.2d 737 (1979); Casey v. Calhoun, 40 Ohio App.3d 83, 531 N.E.2d 1348 (1987); Dayton Hudson Corp. v. American Mut. Liab. Ins. Co., 621 P.2d 1155 (Okla.1980); Esmond v. Liscio, 209 Pa.Super. 200, 224 A.2d 793 (1966); 15A G. Couch, Couch on Insurance § 56.9. See also Union L.P. Gas Sy., Inc. v. *849International Surplus Lines Ins. Co., 869 F.2d 1109 (8th Cir.1989); Creed v. Allstate Ins. Co., 365 Pa.Supr. 136, 529 A.2d 10 (1987); Contra Skyline Harvestore Sys. Inc. v. Centennial Ins. Co., 331 N.W.2d 106 (Iowa 1983); Creech v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 516 So.2d 1168 (La.App.1987) writ denied 519 So.2d 128 (La.1988); Harrell v. Travelers Indem. Co., 279 Or. 199, 567 P.2d 1013 (1977); First Bank (NA)-Billings v. TransAmerica Ins. Co., 209 Mont. 93, 679 P.2d 1217 (1984); Mazza v. Medical Mut. Ins. Co., 311 N.C. 621, 319 S.E.2d 217 (1984); American Home Assur. Co. v. Safway Steel Prods. Co., Div. of Figgie Int’l Inc., 743 S.W.2d 693 (Tex.App.1987); United Serv. Auto. Ass’n. v. Webb, 235 Va. 655, 369 S.E.2d 196 (1988); Sinclair Oil Co. v. Columbia Casualty Co., 682 P.2d 975 (Wyo.1984).

=== CASE 9737492 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:51.26765+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent.
1. United had a duty to defend.
The scope of insurance policy coverage is determined from the contractual intent and objectives of the parties as expressed by the policy language. See Black Hills Kennel Club, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Indem. Co., 77 S.D. 503, 94 N.W.2d 90 (1959). An insurance contract’s language is to be construed according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Grandpre v. Northwestern Nat’l Life Ins. Co., 261 N.W.2d 804 (S.D.1977).
The City’s policy from United covers “any claim made against the Insured ... caused by any . •.. error ... of the Insured,” and United is obligated to defend “any suit against the Insured alleging such ... error ... and seeking damages on account thereof[.]” The plain and ordinary meaning of error is: “A mistaken judgment or incorrect belief as to the existence or effect of matters of fact, or a false or mistaken conception or application of the law.” Black’s Law Dictionary 487 (5th ed. 1979). Accordingly, the policy covers any claims against the City that are the result of the City’s mistaken judgment as to a matter of fact.
An insurer must defend its insured in an action brought against the insured if the pleadings in the action allege facts that, if true, fall within the policy’s coverage. Bayer v. Employers Reinsurance Corp., 383 N.W.2d 858 (S.D.1986). The insurer bears the burden of showing that it has no duty to defend the action because it clearly falls outside the policy coverage. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co. v. Clifford, 366 N.W.2d 489 (S.D.1985). Therefore, United has a duty to defend any claim against the City that alleges facts that are the result of the City’s mistaken judgment as to a matter of fact.
The United States action against the City alleged the City discharged fill into a protected wetland without a permit. If those facts were true, the claim by the United States against the City would be caused by the City’s mistaken judgment as to a matter of fact, i.e., the slough’s status as a protected wetland. The mistaken judgment would have been the City’s belief that the slough was not a protected wetland, making a permit unnecessary. Indeed, in its brief, United acknowledged that the City proceeded without a permit because *850“the City felt that the United States government’s classification of the slough as a ‘wetland’ was incorrect.” Consequently, contrary to the majority’s conclusion, the federal lawsuit fell within the policy’s general coverage, or, at a minimum, does not clearly fall outside the policy coverage.
2. Exclusion for intentional loss does not apply.
An insurance policy exclusion for a loss caused intentionally by an insured applies only when the insurance company is able to show that the insured acted for the purpose of causing the loss. See Rajspic v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 110 Idaho 729, 718 P.2d 1167 (1986); Horace Mann Ins. Co. v. Independent School Dist. No. 656, 355 N.W.2d 413 (Minn.1984). That is, the loss itself must be intended before the exclusion will apply. As explained by the court in Allstate Ins. Co. v. Steinemer, 723 F.2d 873 (11th Cir.1984):
Under the majority rule the exclusion applies if the insured intended to do a particular act, and intended to do some harm, even if the harm actually done was radically different from that intend-ed_ On the other hand, an “intentional injury” exclusion will not apply if the insured intentionally does an act, but has no intent to commit harm, even if the act involves the foreseeable consequences of great harm or even amounts to gross or culpable negligence.
Id. at 875 (citation omitted); see also Farmers Ins. Group v. Sessions, 100 Idaho 914, 918, 607 P.2d 422, 426 (1980) (“We follow the great weight of authority and hold that for this ‘intentional tort’ exclusion to operate the insurance company must be able to show that its insured acted ... for the purpose of causing injury in the person or property in which it resulted.”). This rule was applied by the Oklahoma Supreme Court in a case involving policy language almost identical to that at issue here. In Lumbermens Mut. Ins. Co., Mansfield, Ohio v. Blackburn, 477 P.2d 62, 64 (Okl.1970), the court considered an exclusion for “bodily injury or property damage caused intentionally by or at the direction of the Insured” (emphasis omitted), and concluded:
[T]he majority of the better-reasoned opinions in cases involving insurance policy exclusion provisions with language like the one involved here, or wording of similar import, require that the intention of the person, whose act caused the injury, ‘must be to inflict the injury actually inflicted....’
■Id. at 65. In short, the intention must be to cause the loss as well as to do the act.
The trial court found that the City’s actions were not undertaken with any intent to cause a loss. As the trial court explained: “The City was only doing that which it believed it had a right to do within the law.” Although the City acted intentionally to discharge the fill material into the Ft. Pierre slough, it did not intend to cause any harm by that conduct. The City did not intend to wrongfully discharge the fill without a necessary permit, because it believed a permit was not necessary. In fact, the City was correct in so thinking and the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals so held. Contrary to the majority’s conclusion, the exclusion for intentional loss does not apply to this case.
3. The civil penalty is not punitive in nature.
The majority holds that a civil penalty is not covered by the policy because a civil penalty is punitive in nature and public policy prevents insurance coverage for punitive damages.
Before punitive damages may be awarded, malice on the part of the party from whom the punitive damages are sought must be shown. Yankton Prod. Credit Ass’n v. Jensen, 416 N.W.2d 860 (S.D.1987). No similar requirement exists for the imposition of the civil penalty. Therefore, the civil penalty the United States sought to have imposed upon the City of Ft. Pierre cannot be equated to punitive damages.
Moreover, the civil penalty falls within the policy coverage as set forth by the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s language. The policy requires United to pay “all sums which the insured shall be*851come legally obligated to pay on account of any claim made against the insured.” If a civil penalty had been assessed against the City as a result of the federal lawsuit, the penalty would constitute a “sum” the City would be legally obligated to pay on account of a claim made against the City.*
4. Other Issues.
Although the majority does not reach these issues, United also claims coverage should be denied because the policy expressly excludes coverage for injury to tangible property, and because the City failed to promptly notify United of the federal lawsuit.
It is not necessary to address the tangible property damage exclusion because if any claim of a cause of action against an insured falls within policy coverage, then the insurer must defend all claims. See First Newton Nat’l Bk. v. General Casualty Co. of Wisconsin, 426 N.W.2d 618 (Iowa 1988); Reurink Bros. Star Silo, Inc. v. Maryland Casualty Co., 131 Mich.App. 139, 345 N.W.2d 659 (1983); Senger v. Minnesota Lawyers Mut. Ins. Co., 415 N.W.2d 364 (Minn.App.1987). Since United was obligated to defend the City based upon the civil penalty, it was obligated to defend the other claims as well.
As to the delayed notification issue, this court has not previously ruled on the effect of an insured’s failure to promptly advise an insurer of a covered liability. However, the better and more modern view among the states which have addressed the issue is:
An unexcused delay by the insured in giving notice to the insurer of [a loss] does not relieve the insurer of its obligation to defend and indemnify unless the delay operates materially to prejudice the insurer’s ability to investigate and defend.
Great American Ins. Co. v. C.G. Tate Constr. Co., 303 N.C. 387, 390, 279 S.E.2d 769, 771 (1981); accord Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Bowes, 381 Mass. 278, 409 N.E.2d 185 (1980); Brakeman v. Potomac Ins. Co., 472 Pa. 66, 371 A.2d 193 (1977); A & W Artesian Well Co. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 463 A.2d 1381 (R.I.1983); Reliance Ins. Co. v. St. Paul Ins. Companies, 307 Minn. 338, 239 N.W.2d 922 (1976).
The traditional position, that the failure to strictly comply with notice requirements releases an insurer from its obligation to defend and indemnify an insured, is based on the inaccurate and outdated view that insurance policies are private contracts in the traditional sense. As the Pennsylvania Supreme Court has explained:
Such a position fails to recognize the true nature of the relationship between insurance companies and their insureds. An insurance contract is not a negotiated agreement; rather its conditions are by and large dictated by the insurance company to the insured.
Brakeman 371 A.2d at 196. The North Carolina Supreme Court echoed this sentiment when it stated:
The terms of an insurance contract are not bargained for in the traditional sense. Insurance policies are offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis and, frequently, the only term over which the insured has any say is the amount of coverage.
Great American, 279 S.E.2d at 774.
The modern view of notice requirements focuses on the purpose for the requirement and realizes that it is not to provide a technical escape hatch to allow the insurance company to deny coverage. The modern view does not belittle the need for notice to the insurer, but instead puts the notice requirement in its proper perspective. “The clear purpose of the notice provision is to protect the ability of the insurer to prepare a viable defense by preserving its ability fully to investigate the accident.” Great American, 279 S.E.2d at 775. In other words, notice requirements are included in insurance contracts to protect the insurance company’s interest from being prejudiced. If delayed notification has not prejudiced the insurer’s ability to defend a claim, then there is no reason to strictly *852enforce the notice requirement. As the court explained in Brakeman, 371 A.2d at 197:
Where the insurance company’s interests have not been harmed by a late notice, even in the absence of extenuating circumstances to excuse the tardiness, the reason behind the notice condition in the policy is lacking, and it follows neither logic nor fairness to relieve the insurance company of its obligation under the policy in such a situation.
Under the facts of this case, United has not been prejudiced. The City’s defense of the federal lawsuit was effective, so United is not obligated to pay any judgment. Instead, the City is simply requesting its legal defense costs which United would have incurred even if the notification had been prompt. Therefore, since the delayed notification had no adverse effect upon United’s ultimate liability, they cannot claim to have been prejudiced by the delayed notification.
Finally, by notice of review, the City claims the trial court erred in failing to order United to pay all defense costs incurred by the City, rather than the costs incurred after United was notified of the federal lawsuit. When an insurer breaches its obligation to defend an insured, the insured is entitled to recover his legal defense expenses. Wilson v. Allstate Ins. Co., 85 S.D. 553, 186 N.W.2d 879 (1971). Accordingly, if there has been no breach of the obligation to defend, then no expenses may be recovered. Thus, any expenses incurred by the insured before the insurer has .breached its duty to defend are not recoverable. In this case, United did not breach its duty to defend until after it had been notified of the claim because it could not conduct a defense without knowing about the claim against the City.
Therefore, I would hold that the City may recover from United the expenses it incurred defending against the federal lawsuit, but only those expenses incurred after the City’s notification to United.
HENDERSON, J., joins this dissent.
We also note that the Alaska Supreme Court concluded that punitive damages are covered under a policy using the same language as that used by United. Providence Washington Ins. Co. of Alaska v. City of Valdez, 684 P.2d 861 (Alaska 1984).

=== CASE 2211171 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:02.890444+00 ===

247 Cal. App. 2d 817 (1967)
JOSEPHINE ROMEO et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
JUMBO MARKET, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 694.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
Jan. 18, 1967.
Horace E. Cecchettini and William S. Gregory for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Bradford, Cross, Dahl & Hefner and John Quincy Brown, Jr., for Defendant and Respondent.
GARGANO, J.
Plaintiffs appeal from a judgment entered upon a jury's verdict in favor of the defendant. Plaintiff Josephine Romeo was injured as a result of a fall which occurred on November 29, 1962, in the defendant's food market. She had gone to the market to shop for groceries, accompanied by her sister- in-law, Norma Scorza. After she *819 arrived she selected a shopping cart in which to place her groceries and began to shop, walking up and down the various aisles. As she was proceeding down an aisle, pushing her cart in front of her, she turned her head to talk to Norma, who was following about 10 feet behind. At that point, while plaintiff was still looking at Norma, her feet went out from under her and she fell on her back, allegedly sustaining the injuries of which she complains. After the fall a broken jar of Maraschino cherries was discovered where plaintiff had fallen. The spilled syrup (still in a liquid condition) and red cherries were spread over the light grey floor in a circular area of approximately one and one-half feet in diameter. The broken glass was also scattered around the floor. The plaintiff had not seen the broken bottle prior to her fall, and it is conceded that neither the plaintiff nor anyone else knew how the bottle had been broken.
Plaintiffs' first contention is that the trial court committed prejudicial error in allowing defendant's attorney to call plaintiffs' attorney as a witness against his own clients. In this connection, they assert that because of "the extreme closeness of the issues of the case" the testimony should not have been admitted by the court over the objection of their counsel. They also argue that in being called as a witness their counsel was put in the embarrassing position of having to give testimony detrimental to his clients' cause, and that this was prejudicial to their case.
At the trial Doctor Steinberg was called by plaintiffs' counsel to testify on behalf of the plaintiffs. In rebuttal defense counsel called Doctor Nork who testified as a witness for defendant. The testimony of both doctors was mainly concerned with the nature of the plaintiff's injury, the extent to which the fall contributed thereto, and the extent to which previous back ailments were the source of her infirmity. Just before defendant rested its case the following transpired:
"... just before we rest I would ask for a stipulation from Mr. Cecchettini that Doctor Steinberg had seen and read Doctor Nork's report before he testified."
Mr. Cecchettini: Your Honor, I take except to counsel's remark and cite it as misconduct. He has never asked me this before, and I have no knowledge whatsoever about it. I refuse to make such a stipulation.
Mr. Brown: I'll call Mr. Cecchettini to the stand as my next witness, then.
The Court: Very well. Mr. Cecchettini. *820
Mr. Cecchettini: Your Honor, I object to this impropriety and take specific exception to it and cite counsel for misconduct; I want the record to show that.
The Court: Very well.
The following testimony of Mr. Cecchettini was given under direct examination by Mr. Brown:
"Mr. Brown: Q. Mr. Cecchettini, did I provide you with a copy of Doctor Nork's written report?"
A. You most certainly did after about one year of constant demand, counsel.
Q. One year?
A. Approximately.
Q. So whatever it took from the time you got the report, eight months--
A. Ten months.
Q. Well, Mr. Cecchettini, I gave you a copy before trial of Doctor Nork's report.
A. Of course you did. Court rules provide for that.
Q. Did you forward it to Doctor Steinberg?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Did he have it in his file when he came to testify last week?
A. Yes, he did.
Mr. Brown: Thank you. That is all I have.
Mr. Cecchettini: Your Honor, I move that all of this testimony be stricken and the jurors admonished to disregard it as it is immaterial and irrelevant and misconduct on the part of Mr. Brown.
The Court: Well, the motion is denied. Mr. Cecchettini, please take your seat.""
[1] An attorney participating in a trial is competent to give testimony (American Trust Co. v. Fitzmaurice, 131 Cal. App. 2d 382 [280 P.2d 545]). The real objection to such testimony (where the attorney testified on behalf of his client) is not one of competence, but of legal ethics (Thompson v. Beskeen, 223 Cal. App. 2d 292 [35 Cal. Rptr. 676]). Thus, if an attorney has relevant information he may be compelled to testify even if it is detrimental to his client, unless the information is privileged. As was stated in People v. Boford, 117 Cal. App. 2d 576, 580 [256 P.2d 334]: "It is true, as stated by the court, that it is unusual when one side calls the attorney of the opposing side to stand as a witness, but if the testimony sought to be elicited is material it may be done. Even the judge who is trying a case, and any juror, *821 may be called as a witness by either party. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1883.) Section 1879 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that all persons except certain ones specified in sections 1880 and 1881 may be witnesses. Attorneys are excepted only when their testimony would reveal communications declared privileged. No privilege was claimed in the instant case nor would the facts have supported such a claim had it been made. ..."
[2] Therefore, since the testimony elicited from plaintiffs' attorney was admittedly material and relevant (plaintiffs admitted that defendant could have easily solicited this information from Doctor Steinberg), and since no claim of privilege was made and none is now asserted, plaintiffs' argument that their attorney should not have been compelled to testify simply because of the closeness of the issues or because he was put in the embarrassing position of having to testify against his clients, is without merit.
Plaintiffs also contend that the court abused its discretion in compelling their attorney to testify because his position of integrity and competence was damaged, and because he was made to appear that he was attempting to conceal important evidence. This contention is equally without merit.
It goes without saying that the better practice when requesting a stipulation from opposing counsel is to do so outside of the presence of the jury. When this is done embarrassing and even harmful situations are avoided. The stipulation requested by defendant's counsel in this case, however, was innocuous and would not have injured plaintiffs' case in any manner had Mr. Cecchettini simply refused to so stipulate. Mr. Cecchettini chose not to do so. Instead, he chose to elaborate by stating in the presence of the jury that he "had no knowledge about it." Thus, the die was cast and plaintiffs' counsel is responsible for the embarrassing position in which he later found himself. Had the trial court ruled otherwise, it would have unduly penalized the defendant for Mr. Cecchettini's imprudent statement. If plaintiffs' argument is carried to its logical conclusion, the defendant could not even have recalled Doctor Steinberg to testify, for his testimony would have been more damaging to Mr. Cecchettini's reputation. By testifying as he did, Mr. Cecchettini at least demonstrated that he was a truthful witness and that his previous statement was probably an impulsive outburst made during the heat of trial. *822
Plaintiffs' argument is not fortified by their reference to Code of Civil Procedure section 2066 which protects a witness against improper or insulting questions. This section applies when the questions have little or no evidentiary value, and where their sole or principal purpose is to insult or degrade the witness.
Plaintiffs next contend that the court committed prejudicial error in allowing defendant to elicit evidence that the market was always clean during Norma Scorza's shopping visits, and then compounded that error by refusing to allow the witness to testify that on one occasion the floor was dirty.
Norma Scorza was called as a witness to testify for the plaintiffs. She was questioned by Mr. Brown on cross-examination as follows
"Q. And the time Mrs. Romeo fell, the store was a year or so old, a year or two old?"
"A. I guess so."
"Q. And so far as you know it was always kept in a neat and clean condition, wasn't it?"
"Mr. Cecchettini: (Interposing) Objection, irrelevant, incompetent and immaterial, your Honor."
"The Court: I'm goint [sic] to overrule the objection."
"Mr. Cecchettini: Always clean, your Honor, is my objection."
"The Court: As far as she knows. This means to the Court, and I assume to the witness on the occasions when she was present in the store."
"Mr. Brown: Q. When you yourself were present, the store was run in a neat and clean condition?"
"A. Well, it is not a dirty store, it is a new store. You want to know broken linoleum and all that, no, it is a new store."
"Q. And the store was run to your satisfaction I take it, or you wouldn't remain to be a customer, right?"
"A. Right."
Although plaintiffs' counsel interposed a general objection to the question first put to the witness by defendant's counsel, he later explained to the court that his objection was to the use of the words "always clean." Accordingly, the question was rephrased by Mr. Brown (with the objectionable language removed therefrom), and the witness was permitted to answer without further objection. Thus, even if the testimony was inadmissible the objection was waived. [3] When evidence is received without objection no complaint *823 may be made upon appeal that the evidence was not admissible under the rules of evidence. (Standley v. Feather River Pine Mills, 112 Cal. App. 2d 101 [245 P.2d 657].)
Moreover, at the end of the cross-examination plaintiffs joined defendant in offering into evidence a four-page written statement previously made and signed by the witness. This statement, which was read into the record in its entirety at Mr. Cecchettini's request, contained the following excerpt: "I am a regular shopper at this store, and this is the first time I have ever seen anything on the floor. The store is always very clean. The floor of the store is an inlaid linoleum tile and in good condition, with the exception of the broken bottle of cherries."
[4] Consequently, even if it is assumed arguendo that Mr. Cecchettini's initial objection had not been waived by his subsequent explanation and failure to object, the objection was certainly waived when he joined Mr. Brown in the offer of the witness's written statement which contained the same objectionable material. (Heiman v. Market Street Ry. Co., 21 Cal. App. 2d 311 [69 P.2d 178].) In Heiman defendant's motion pictures were received in evidence over objection. Later on plaintiffs caused the pictures to be exhibited again to the jury. The court held that in doing so plaintiffs waived their prior objection.
[5] In any event, we are not persuaded by plaintiff's argument that the disputed testimony was clearly irrelevant. It was apparently offered to prove defendant's habit of maintaining its store in a clean and orderly condition, and as proof that defendant had fulfilled its duty to plaintiff Josephine Romeo notwithstanding the accident. Under proper circumstances, such evidence is admissible. The general test as to whether testimony is relevant is whether it tends logically, naturally and by reasonable inference to prove or disprove a material issue. (People v. Jones, 42 Cal. 2d 219 [266 P.2d 38].) Consequently, habit evidence has been used to prove lack of due care and conversely, habit of care in certain activities may be shown to prove due care. (Witkin, California Evidence (2d ed. 1966)  338, pp. 297-298.)
Admittedly, Josephine Romeo was a business invitee of the defendant at the time of the accident. Thus, defendant was under a duty to keep the premises reasonably safe for her use as a business visitor. As a matter of fact, it was under a duty to keep the store aisles and passageways in a reasonably safe condition so as not to unnecessarily expose the plaintiff, as *824 well as other customers, to danger or accident. (Neel v. Mannings, Inc., 19 Cal. 2d 647 [122 P.2d 576]; Goldsmith v. Mills, 130 Cal. App. 2d 493 [279 P.2d 51].) However, as stated in Louie v. Hagstrom's Food Stores, 81 Cal. App. 2d 601, 606-607 [184 P.2d 708]: "... To impose liability for injuries suffered by an invitee due to the defective condition of the premises, the owner or occupier 'must have either actual or constructive knowledge of the dangerous condition or have been able by the exercise of ordinary care to discover the condition, which if known to him, he should realize as involving an unreasonable risk to invitees on his premises. His negligence in such cases is founded upon his failure to exercise ordinary care in remedying the defect after he has discovered it.' ..."
In the instant case, plaintiffs do not contend that defendant had actual knowledge of the broken bottle of Maraschino cherries, nor is there any evidence to support a finding that the bottle was broken as a result of defendant's negligence. To the contrary, plaintiffs' theory of defendant's liability is obviously based on its failure to detect and remedy the dangerous condition which existed. In other words, plaintiffs apparently contend that the dangerous condition would have been discovered and remedied if defendant had used reasonable care in the operation and management of its store. It was probably to fortify this theory that plaintiffs' counsel questioned defendant's employee as to defendant's janitorial policies and procedures relating to the method, manner and frequency of cleaning its store. If so, the questions were relevant and the testimony admissible. Defendant was also entitled to offer evidence of its habit of maintaining its store in a clean and orderly condition, not only to rebut any contrary inference, but as evidence that it had exercised due care.  [fn. 1] Such habit could be shown not only through its janitorial procedures, but by the testimony of informed and knowledgeable eyewitnesses as well.  [fn. 2]*825
[6] In rebuttal to the plaintiffs' contention that the court erred in refusing to allow the witness Norma Scorza to testify on redirect examination that on a certain occasion the floor was dirty, the defendant argues that plaintiffs were attempting to offer evidence of a prior accident without meeting the requirements of the rule on the admissibility of evidence of prior accidents. Defendant further argues that if the evidence was not offered for this purpose, then plaintiffs were attempting to impeach their own witness without laying a proper foundation to do so. We do not agree with the defendant on either of these points.
The disputed testimony was not necessarily offered to prove a prior accident or a prior dangerous condition. The question asked by plaintiffs' counsel was directed to the answer previously made by the witness during cross-examination, and was evidently asked to enable the witness to further explain her answer. In other words, plaintiffs' counsel was entitled to ascertain exactly what the witness meant when she said the store was always clean, and her answer was not rendered inadmissible simply because it disclosed a prior dangerous condition. Evidence which is admissible for one purpose but inadmissible for another is admissible for its proper purpose. (Witkin, California Evidence (2d ed. 1966)  316, pp. 279- 280.)
Moreover, plaintiffs' counsel was not attempting to impeach plaintiffs' own witness. As we have stated, the question was not asked to discredit or contradict the witness. Furthermore, in questioning the witness as to the store's condition at times other than when the accident occurred, the defendant may have exceeded the scope of proper cross-examination. Thus, in the practical sense (although perhaps not in the technical sense for plaintiffs' counsel did not object on this ground) the defendant had made Norma Scorza his own witness on the subject of the condition of the store at times other than the date of the accident; consequently, plaintiffs' counsel should have been given greater leeway in examining the witness in relation to her previous answer. In *826 other words, in view of the broad discretion of the trial judge in controlling the scope of cross-examination and impeachment, plaintiffs' counsel should have been given the opportunity to clarify the new matter which had been injected into the case by defendant's cross-examination.
We do not believe, however, that the error was prejudicial and that it is reasonably probable that a more favorable verdict to plaintiffs would have resulted had the disputed testimony not been stricken by the court. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal. 2d 818 [299 P.2d 243].) In the first place the witness's ultimate answer to Mr. Brown's question was not particularly harmful to the plaintiffs. She made it reasonably clear that by stating that the store was always clean she meant that it was a new store without broken linoleum or similar defects. Secondly, as plaintiffs have admitted, the evidence of defendant's negligence was slight. In fact, there was substantial evidence to the contrary, viz., there was substantial evidence to support a finding that the condition had not existed long enough to be discovered in the exercise of due care. For example, the cherries observed on the floor after the accident were whole, not smashed or damaged; the juice was fresh and had not become solidified or stuck to the floor; it was still in a liquid condition and the cherries appeared to be fresh. Moreover, there was substantial evidence to support a finding of contributory negligence on the part of Josephine Romeo. She did not look down the aisle before she fell and she never saw the cherries, broken bottle, juice or syrup on the light grey floor. At the time she fell she was engaged in a conversation with her sister-in-law, Norma Scorza, about Christmas napkins. In fact, she had turned her head over her right shoulder and was looking behind at Norma when the fall occurred.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.
Conley, P. J., and Stone, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. In the instant case it is admitted by both parties that there were no eyewitnesses as to how or when the bottle of cherries was broken. Thus, even under the limitation which excludes habit and custom evidence where there are eyewitnesses, this evidence was admissible. Moreover, section 1105 of the new Evidence Code abandons this restriction. As the comment under that section states, "Eyewitnesses frequently are mistaken, and some are dishonest. The trier of fact should be entitled to weigh the habit evidence against the eyewitness testimony as well as all of the other evidence in the case."
[fn. 2]  2. A better foundation could probably have been laid to qualify the witness, Norma Scorza, to testify on the condition of the store. For example, questions relating to the frequency of her shopping visits to the store, when in point of time in relation to the accident the visits occurred, etc., could have been asked. Plaintiffs' counsel, however, did not object on this ground, nor did he request permission of the court to take the witness on voir dire. In fact, as we have stated, he explained to the court that his objection was to the use of the words "always clean," which obviously called for a conclusion of the witness. Thus, since the witness testified that she was a regular customer, and since no objection was made for lack of foundation, the objection was waived.

=== CASE 2210734 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.28693+00 ===

186 Mich. App. 324 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 487
AMORELLO
v.
MONSANTO CORPORATION
Docket No. 112838.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 20, 1990, at 9:04 A.M.
Thomas A. Stotz, for the plaintiffs.
Dickinson, Wright, Moon, Van Dusen & Freeman (by John E.S. Scott), for Monsanto Corporation.
Barbier & Tolleson, P.C. (by Christopher G. Manolis), for Detroit Edison Company.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and SAWYER and DOCTOROFF, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiffs appeal as of right from an order granting defendants' motions for summary *326 disposition. Plaintiffs allege that they suffered a variety of medical problems as a result of exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBS) which allegedly leaked from a Detroit Edison electrical transformer located in their backyard. Defendant Monsanto was the manufacturer of the electrical transformer. Plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition because sufficient evidence existed to raise a question of material fact regarding whether plaintiffs suffered adverse health effects from PCBS leaking from a Detroit Edison transformer on plaintiffs' property. We disagree and affirm.
We first note that some of the facts presented in this opinion are taken from the briefs filed on appeal and from discovery materials which were not part of the lower court record nor presented to the trial court prior to its ruling on the motion for summary disposition. They are included in this opinion where necessary for presentation of the facts.
In late September or early October 1980, a Detroit Edison employee was called to plaintiffs' home to investigate a complaint of low voltage. The investigation revealed that the electrical transformer in plaintiffs' yard was leaking. There was an oil residue on the ground and on the pole, and there were oil stains on the side of the transformer. The employee wrote an order that the transformer be changed, and it was replaced soon thereafter.
In April 1983, plaintiff Leonard Amorello noticed that several trees at the back of the yard were dying. Mr. Amorello noticed that the bottom of the transformer was covered with oil and dust, that the pole was black, and that there was a "big, black puddle" at the base of the pole. Detroit Edison employee Ed Ferasin investigated plaintiffs' *327 complaint and found no evidence that the transformer was leaking. According to plaintiffs, employees of Detroit Edison told them that the transformer contained PCBS. Ferasin took four soil samples. PCBS were not detected in the two samples taken farthest from the pole. PCBS were detected in the other two samples in amounts of 1.5 and 3.0 parts per million (ppm).
In the latter part of 1983, plaintiff Doris Amorello's health began to deteriorate. Mr. Amorello's health began to deteriorate in the latter part of 1984. Both plaintiffs were subsequently examined by several physicians. Dr. Irwin Feldman performed several tests on Mr. Amorello and found that his blood serum contained less than five parts per billion (ppb) of PCBS.
In late 1986, Dr. Paul Grundland performed several tests on Mrs. Amorello which revealed that she suffered from elevated triglyceride levels, an elevated lipoprotein level, and an enlarged liver. Dr. Grundland testified in deposition that these conditions may have been caused by exposure to PCBS. Mrs. Amorello's blood serum contained less than five ppb of PCBS.
Dr. Norman Zimmerman, plaintiffs' expert toxicologist, testified in deposition that the transformer leak was the source of plaintiffs' PCB contamination.
Plaintiffs' complaint was filed on February 6, 1986. On September 19, 1986, the trial court granted plaintiffs' counsel's motion to withdraw. Plaintiffs obtained another attorney, and an amended complaint was filed on March 13, 1987. Discovery closed on January 23, 1988. On June 24, 1988, plaintiffs' attorney moved to withdraw. The trial court granted the motion on July 29, 1988.
Defendant Monsanto filed a motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) on September *328 2, 1988. Defendant Detroit Edison joined in the motion. The grounds for the motion were that (1) plaintiffs had not been exposed to PCBS from the leaking transformer, and (2) even if plaintiffs had been exposed to PCBS, plaintiffs could not establish a causal relationship between the exposure and their health problems. In support of the motion, defendants stated that the transformer which had been replaced in October 1980 and the existing transformer use mineral oil as a dielectric fluid and were not designed to use dielectric fluid containing PCBS. Defendants presented deposition testimony, including Mr. Amorello's testimony that he never touched the black puddle on the ground and Ferasin's testimony that there were no records of an oil spill on the site and that he was aware of instances where PCBS were detected in soil in the absence of any spill.
The affidavit of Dr. Raymond D. Harbison, an expert in the field of toxicology, and two 1987 articles by Dr. Renate Kimbrough, an expert on PCBS, were attached to defendants' motion. Dr. Harbison stated that all people have background levels of PCBS in their blood ranging from five to thirty ppb, even though they have no known source of PCB exposure. Both plaintiffs had PCB blood levels of less than five ppb. Dr. Harbison explained that no scientific study has shown that body levels of PCBS increase merely because a person has been in the presence of PCB contaminated soil. Dr. Harbison further stated that the opinions expressed by Drs. Feldman and Grundland were not supported by literature considered reliable in the scientific and medical community or by valid scientific data and methods. According to the articles by Dr. Kimbrough, there is no conclusive scientific evidence that PCB exposure causes significant chronic health effects.
*329 Plaintiffs filed a response to the motion in propria persona. In support of the response, plaintiffs attached excerpts from two books published in 1981 which indicate that acute or excessive chronic exposure to PCBS can cause chloracne and liver damage.
The hearing on the motion was held on October 14, 1988. Plaintiffs appeared in propria persona. The trial court granted defendants' motion, ruling that plaintiffs failed to present evidence that the transformer was the source of the PCBS in the ground or that there was a causal connection between the transformer leak and plaintiffs' medical problems.
On appeal, plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition because sufficient evidence existed to raise a question of material fact regarding whether they were exposed to PCBS and that the exposure was the proximate cause of their health problems.
A motion for summary disposition may be granted pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) when, except with regard to the amount of damages, there is no genuine issue of any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment or partial judgment as a matter of law. A motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests whether there is factual support for a claim. The party opposing the motion has the burden of showing that a genuine issue of disputed fact exists. Ewers v Stroh Brewery Co, 178 Mich. App. 371, 374; 443 NW2d 504 (1989). The opponent must, by documentary evidence, set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. Id.; MCR 2.116(G)(4). The existence of a disputed fact must be established by admissible evidence. Pauley v Hall, 124 Mich. App. 255, 262; 335 NW2d 197 (1983), lv den 418 Mich. 870 (1983). The court must *330 consider the pleadings, affidavits, depositions, admissions, and other documentary evidence available to it. Gruett v Total Petroleum, Inc, 182 Mich. App. 301, 304; 451 NW2d 608 (1990). Giving the benefit of reasonable doubt to the opponent, the court must determine whether a record might be developed which would leave open an issue upon which reasonable minds might differ. Id., p 305. The court may not make findings of fact or weigh credibility in deciding a summary disposition motion. Paul v U S Mutual Financial Corp, 150 Mich. App. 773, 779; 389 NW2d 487 (1986).
Review of plaintiffs' written response to defendants' motion and the transcript of the hearing clearly reveals that plaintiffs failed to meet their burden. Plaintiffs did not present any affidavits or documentary evidence showing that the PCBS detected in the soil came from the transformer that leaked or that their health problems were caused by the alleged exposure to PCBS from the transformers.
Plaintiffs' argument on appeal ignores the general rule that this Court's review is limited to the record presented in the trial court or administrative tribunal. MCR 7.210(A); Traverse Oil Co v Chairman, Natural Resources Comm, 153 Mich. App. 679, 691; 396 NW2d 498 (1986); Burrill v Michigan, 90 Mich. App. 408, 412; 282 NW2d 337 (1979). Enlargement of the record on appeal is generally not permitted. Ass'n of Businesses Advocating Tariff Equity v Public Service Comm, 173 Mich. App. 647, 673; 434 NW2d 648 (1988); Hawker v Northern Michigan Hospital, Inc, 164 Mich. App. 314, 318; 416 NW2d 428 (1987). Thus, plaintiffs' references to documents which were not presented to the trial court cannot be considered by this Court.
We reject plaintiffs' apparent assertion that we *331 should consider the documents which were not presented to the trial court because plaintiffs acted in propria persona. Baird v Baird, 368 Mich. 536, 539; 118 NW2d 427 (1962); Hoven v Hoven, 9 Mich. App. 168, 174; 156 NW2d 65 (1967); Bachor v Detroit, 49 Mich. App. 507, 512; 212 NW2d 302 (1973). The trial court properly granted summary disposition to defendants.
Furthermore, even if the documents presented to this Court had been properly presented to the trial court prior to its grant of the motion for summary disposition, we find that summary disposition was proper. Plaintiffs contend that circumstantial evidence could lead a reasonable juror to conclude that the transformer that leaked and was removed in 1980 was contaminated with PCBS. Defendants contend that the general and circumstantial evidence on which plaintiffs rely does not raise an issue of fact regarding whether the transformer replaced in 1980 contained PCBS or whether the transformer was the source of the PCBS detected in the two soil samples taken in 1983. We agree with defendants. The evidence presented by plaintiffs is insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact. Even with that evidence, speculation is required to conclude that the transformer replaced in 1980 contained PCBS or that the transformer was the source of the PCBS detected in the 1983 soil samples.
Plaintiffs also argue that testimony establishes that plaintiffs' health problems were caused by PCB exposure. Plaintiffs rely on the testimony of the examining physicians, Drs. Feldman and Grundland, and of Norman Zimmerman, a toxicologist.
Summary disposition is not precluded simply because a party has produced an expert to support its position. The expert's opinion must be admissible. MRE 403; MRE 702. For an expert's opinion to *332 be admissible, the court must determine whether the opinion will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, and the opinion must not tend to mislead or confuse the jury. Id. The facts and data upon which the expert relies in formulating an opinion must be reliable. In re "Agent Orange" Product Liability Litigation, 611 F Supp 1223, 1245 (ED NY, 1985), aff'd 818 F2d 187 (CA 2, 1987); In re Paoli Railroad Yard PCB Litigation, 706 F Supp 358, 368 (ED Pa, 1988); Viterbo v Dow Chemical Co, 646 F Supp 1420 (ED Tex, 1986), aff'd 826 F2d 420 (CA 5, 1987). Plaintiffs offer no evidence to rebut defendants' claim that the testimony of plaintiffs' experts did not have a reasonable medical or reliable scientific basis and is not supported by scientific and medical literature. Hence, plaintiffs did not show that the opinion testimony was admissible. Summary disposition was appropriate.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2210744 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.407241+00 ===

260 Cal. App. 2d 84 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
TIMOTHY ALLEN FOSTER, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 13572.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Mar. 14, 1968.
V. Lane Knight, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, George J. Roth and Philippe J. Monet, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
By information defendant was charged with possession of marijuana in violation of section 11530, Health and Safety Code; a jury found him guilty. His motion for a new trial was denied and he was sentenced to the state prison for the term prescribed by law. Defendant appeals from the judgment and order denying motion for a new trial. The appeal from the order is dismissed. ( 1237, Pen. Code; People v. Ing, 65 Cal. 2d 603, 614 [55 Cal. Rptr. 902, 422 P.2d 590].)
On April 15, 1966, around 2:20 a.m., Officer Corbett, on a burglary stake-out, after observing defendant's suspicious conduct, attempted to apprehend him in his automobile after identifying himself and requesting defendant to pull to the curb; defendant looked at the officer and started speeding down Sunset Boulevard; a chase with siren and spotlight ensued during which the officer observed him extend his left arm out of the driver's window and throw a bottle containing marijuana over the roof of the car onto the lawn of a house; upon defendant's arrest a search of his pants pocket revealed some zig-zag papers. *86
[1a] Appellant's sole contention is that section 11530, Health and Safety Code, does not properly describe a crime and that a violation of the provisions thereof, either by act or omission, is not punishable because the "possession of a narcotic" is not an act proscribed by the Penal Code; that Penal Code, section 6, forbids punishment for criminal acts except as prescribed or authorized by the Penal Code.
The Penal Code became effective in 1873; it contained section 6  [fn. 1] which remains in effect today. The Legislature captioned the section "Effect of Code Upon Past Offenses"; and by its own terms section 6 was intended to affect only past offenses. All it says is that after 12 o'clock noon on January 1, 1873, the only acts cognizable as crimes in California are those defined in the Penal Code and the statutes which were specifically preserved by it and in those municipal, county or township ordinances in force at that time.penal Code, section 23, which enumerated the statutes "continuing in force" referred to in section 6, was repealed in 1959, leaving no such statutes in effect. Thus, if we give validity to appellant's contention contrary to legislative intent, the result would be a removal from the list of crimes in California any not set forth in the Penal Code, and an invalidation of all city and county ordinances having criminal sanctions passed after January 1, 1873.
It is clearly apparent from the language of section 6 that the Legislature never intended to limit criminal offenses in this state to those listed in the Penal Code; its only intention was thereby to eliminate common law or statutory offenses existing prior to 1873 except for those which it specifically provided would continue in existence. Nor does it appear from section 6 that the Legislature intended to regulate future legislative acts (criminal laws) or direct where they shall be placed or prohibit future Legislatures from placing criminal statutes in other codes for convenience. Thus, we find no inconsistency between section 6 and section 11530, Health and Safety Code.
To our knowledge no reported case involves the specific *87 issue herein raised, although on various grounds our courts have upheld the constitutionality of California statutes prohibiting the possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs. (See People v. Widener, 220 Cal. App. 2d 826, 830 [34 Cal. Rptr. 130]; People v. Glaser, 238 Cal. App. 2d 819, 824 [48 Cal. Rptr. 427], and cases cited therein.) [2] A statutory provision otherwise constitutional and valid is not void simply because found in any particular code (County of Butte v. Merrill, 141 Cal. 396, 399 [74 P. 1036]), and there is no requirement that penal statutes to be valid be a part of the Penal Code. (Ex parte Liddell (1892) 93 Cal. 633 [29 P. 251].) In Liddell, the Supreme Court said at page 640: "We think there is no merit in the contention that section 16 [State Reform School Act] is void because not made a part of the Penal Code. It is true, it could have been enacted as an amendment to the code, and perhaps it would have been more consistent with our system of codification if it had been, but we know of no provision which requires penal statutes to be made a part of the code." (Italics added.) In In re Porterfield (1946) 28 Cal. 2d 91, on code separation the Supreme Court said at page 100 [168 P.2d 706, 167 A.L.R. 675]: "The mere fact that labor unions are treated in the Labor Code and professions in general by the Business and Professions Code does not mean that the act of an employee of a labor union in soliciting workers to become members of a particular union does not constitute engaging in an occupation or business subject to license for purposes of regulation or revenue. Labor unions exist for very practical business as well as social reasons. The code separation is for convenience only. It is a well- recognized rule that for purposes of statutory construction the codes are to be regarded as blending into each other and constituting but a single statute. (Proctor v. Justice's Court (1940) 209 Cal. 39, 43 [285 P. 213]; County of Butte v. Merrill (1903) 141 Cal. 396, 399 [74 P. 1036]; Clarke v. Mead (1894) 102 Cal. 516, 520 [36 P. 862].)"
[1b] Since there is nothing in section 6, Penal Code, directing future Legislatures where to place criminal laws, a statutory provision otherwise constitutional and valid is not void because found outside of the Penal Code and there is no requirement that penal statutes be made a part of the Penal Code, we conclude that section 6 does not forbid punishment for a criminal act which is a violation of the provisions of section 11530 of the Health and Safety Code.
Inasmuch as we find no inconsistency between section 6, Penal Code, and section 11530, Health and Safety Code, we *88 deem it unnecessary to discuss whether the later statute making acts proscribed by the Health and Safety Code criminal, effects an implied repeal of Penal Code, section 6.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "No act or omission, commenced after twelve o'clock noon of the day on which this code takes effect as a law, is criminal or punishable, except as prescribed or authorized by this code, or by some of the statutes which it specifies as continuing in force and as not affected by its provisions, or by some ordinance, municipal, county, or township regulation, passed or adopted, under such statutes and in force when this code takes effect. Any act or omission commenced prior to that time may be inquired of, prosecuted, and punished in the same manner as if this code had not been passed."

=== CASE 2210745 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.41308+00 ===

13 Ill. App. 3d 987 (1973)
301 N.E.2d 612
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
GEORGE MURRAY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 12163.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
September 10, 1973.
Rehearing denied October 16, 1973.
John F. McNichols, Deputy Defender, of Springfield, (J. Daniel Stewart, Assistant Appellate Defender, of counsel,) for appellant.
Richard J. Doyle, State's Attorney, of Danville, (John R. McClory, Assistant State's Attorney, of counsel,) for the People.
Defendant discharged.
Mr. JUSTICE SIMKINS delivered the opinion of the court:
On March 5, 1969, defendant-appellant George Murray entered a plea of guilty to an indictment which charged him with the offense of aggravated battery. On January 26, 1970, defendant was placed on three years probation. Subsequently, on September 27, 1972, the probation officer filed a report indicating that defendant had violated the terms of his probation, and a bench warrant issued on the same date. On November 28, 1972, defendant's probation was revoked and he was sentenced to a term of one year at the Illinois State Penal Farm at Vandalia.
Defendant here seeks sentence credit for the time which he had served on probation prior to imposition of the sentence imposed and cites section 5-6-4(h) of the Uniform Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1972 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005-6-4(h)), which provides:
"Resentencing after revocation of probation or of conditional discharge shall be under Article 4. Time served on probation or conditional discharge shall be credited against a sentence of imprisonment or periodic imprisonment." (Emphasis added.)
It is clear that defendant had spent or served in excess of two years on probation at the time of the imposition of the one-year sentence. Section *988 8-2-4 of the Code (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1972 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1008-2-4) provides in pertinent part that "* * * if the offense being prosecuted has not reached the sentencing stage or a final adjudication, then for purposes of sentencing the sentences under this Act apply if they are less than under the prior law upon which the prosecution was commenced." A judgment pending on appeal has not reached final adjudication. (People v. Chupich, 53 Ill. 2d 572, 295 N.E.2d 1; People v. Lobb, 9 Ill. App. 3d 650, 292 N.E.2d 750.) Thus the sentence imposed is controlled by the provisions of the Uniform Code of Corrections, section 5-6-4(h) quoted above. Since the time spent on probation exceeds the sentence imposed (and indeed the maximum sentence available to be imposed) the defendant is entitled to be discharged from that sentence.
Accordingly, the defendant is ordered discharged.
CRAVEN, P.J., and TRAPP, J., concur.

=== CASE 2210751 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.515995+00 ===

260 Cal. App. 2d 434 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOHN LEE BROWN, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 12626.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Mar. 26, 1968.
John Lee Brown, in pro. per., and Gilbert F. Nelson, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and David Gould, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *436
FRAMPTON, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
Defendant was charged by information with violation of section 288 Penal Code (lewd and lascivious act upon the body of a child under 14 years of age) in two counts. He was also charged with four prior convictions of felony and with having served a term of imprisonment in the state prison upon each of such convictions. The priors alleged were for burglary, a felony, in the State of Alabama on April 4, 1938; attempted robbery, a felony, on October 18, 1955, in the State of California; burglary, a felony, on October 18, 1955, in the State of California, and violation of section 288 Penal Code, a felony, on October 15, 1962, in the State of California.
Defendant entered a plea of not guilty and on the day set for trial he admitted the truth of the allegations with respect to the second, third and fourth priors and the allegations as to the first prior were stricken on motion of the district attorney.
The cause was tried before a jury which returned its verdicts finding the defendant guilty as charged on both counts.
The minutes of the court disclose that on May 10, 1966, upon the return of the jury verdicts, a probation report was ordered, the probation hearing, motion for a new trial, sentencing, "and further proceedings under Section 5504 Welfare and Institutions Code" were continued to June 9, 1966. Two psychiatrists were appointed to examine the defendant and to make their reports pursuant to the provisions of section 5504 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. On June 9, 1966, the record discloses that the motion for a new trial was denied as to count one and was granted as to count two, and that count two was dismissed on motion of the district attorney. At this time, according to the court's minutes, the trial judge made the following finding: "The Court finds that Defendant is a Mentally Disordered Sex Offender but will not benefit by hospital treatment." Probation was denied, and the defendant was sentenced to state prison. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the defendant was ever certified for hearing to determine whether he was a mentally disordered sex offender within the meaning of chapter 4, part 1, division 6, of the Welfare and Institutions Code, as provided by section 5501 of such code, or that a hearing was had to determine such question as is provided in sections 5503 et seq. of such code.
Section 1203 of the Penal Code provides in part that "except as hereafter provided in this section, probation shall not *437 be granted ... to any defendant unless the court shall be satisfied that he has not been twice previously convicted of felony in this state. ..."
"In unusual cases, otherwise subject to the preceding paragraph, in which the interests of justice would best be served thereby, the judge may, with the concurrence of the district attorney, grant probation." There was no finding by the trial judge that the case was unusual, and that it was one in which the interests of justice would best be served by the granting of probation, nor is there anything in the record to indicate that the district attorney would have concurred in the granting of probation, had the trial judge made such a finding and indicated his desire to grant probation. Section 5500.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code provides in part that "this article shall not apply ... to any person ineligible for probation under the Penal Code."
The defendant urges three grounds of error upon which he seeks a reversal of the judgment. They are (1) insufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict; (2) the trial court erred in finding him to be a mentally disordered sex offender, and (3) error in the giving of instructions.
The Facts
In January 1966, Cynthia, who was 11 years of age, was living at 464 East 27th Street, in the City of Los Angeles with her mother, father, brother and grandmother. Defendant, Cynthia's uncle, came to her house on January 29, 1966; he drove into the driveway, got out of his vehicle and came upon the porch of the house, at which time he asked Cynthia if her mother or her father was at home. Cynthia replied that they were not at home. Defendant then said that he would like to see Cynthia's grandmother, who at that time was not well and was confined to her bed. She opened the door for defendant who then went to the grandmother's room. Finding the grandmother asleep, the defendant then told Cynthia to go to the bathroom. Cynthia refused this request, whereupon the defendant shoved her into the bathroom and closed and locked the door.
In the bathroom the defendant told Cynthia to pull up her dress. Upon her refusal to comply with this request, the defendant pulled down her underpants, grabbed both of her arms and forced her to lie on her back on the floor. At this juncture, Cynthia testified that the defendant unbuttoned her blouse and began "to play with my breasts and between my legs." The defendant then dropped his pants and placed his private parts *438 between Cynthia's legs, touching her private parts. After this was over the defendant left the bathroom after telling Cynthia to "wash up." Cynthia remained in the bathroom where she washed what she described as a "white and slimy like" substance from her privates and from between her legs.
The defendant told Cynthia not to tell her mother what he had done to her and said that if she did tell her mother, "he would do something worser." Cynthia testified that when her mother came home on the night of January 29th, she questioned Cynthia about the way she was walking, she examined Cynthia's privates then took her to a doctor. Cynthia then told her what had happened.
Cynthia's mother testified that when she saw Cynthia, she appeared to be walking as if in pain, "it was an unusual walk, as if she were ... as if she was hurting or something"; she then examined Cynthia's privates and "She had heavy white liquor up in her," and the exterior of her privates were bruised, soiled and very dirty; she took her to a doctor who examined her; that Cynthia then told her what had happened.
The defendant testified that he had gone to Cynthia's house on January 29, 1966; had driven his car into the driveway and blew his horn; he stopped his vehicle and walked to the garage to look for a case of soap; as he was looking for the soap, Cynthia came to a window of the house and called out saying, "Hey, what is the big idea ... Mommy is not here"; he did not enter or approach the house; he said "Well, I guess I will take one of the puppies with me now, one of the dogs here with me now," and Cynthia responded, "Oh, no, don't do that Johnny," whereupon he backed his car out of the driveway and left, telling Cynthia to "Tell Ethel [Cynthia's mother] that I have been by here, and I will see you later." Defendant testified further that he had never placed his hands on Cynthia "in my whole life."
[1a] . . The defendant points out certain inconsistencies between Cynthia's testimony at the preliminary hearing and her testimony at the trial relating to the time of day that the offense occurred and to the type of shoes the defendant was wearing at such time. We have examined the record of the oral proceedings in these respects and we cannot say, as a matter of law, that these discrepancies are of such a nature as to totally destroy the testimony of the complaining witness. [2] The court on appeal will not attempt to determine the weight of the evidence, but will decide only whether upon the face of the evidence it can be held that sufficient facts could *439 not have been found by the jury to warrant the inference of guilt. (People v. Newland, 15 Cal. 2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778].) [1b] The testimony here furnishes sufficient facts to sustain the jury's finding of guilt.
[3] The defendant's contention that the trial court erred in finding him to be a mentally disordered sex offender must be sustained. The Legislature, in enacting section 1203 of the Penal Code, laid down the policy of the law to be that a defendant who had twice previously been convicted of felony was ineligible to receive probation, unless the judge found that the defendant's case was an unusual one in which the interests of justice would best be served by the granting of probation, and where there was such a finding by the judge, then before probation could be granted it would be necessary to obtain the concurrence of the district attorney before the judge could act in accordance with such finding. It is our opinion that it was unnecessary for the trial court to have found that the defendant's case was not unusual and that the interests of justice would not be best served by the granting of probation in order to render him ineligible therefor, as the Legislature had already rendered such a finding immaterial. We are of the opinion that in the case at bench the defendant was ineligible to receive probation by reason of his prior convictions, under the policy declared by the Legislature, and that he remained ineligible unless the court made a positive finding in his favor, as provided in section 1203 of the Penal Code, and the district attorney concurred in granting probation. (People v. Cox, 259 Cal. App. 2d 653 [66 Cal. Rptr. 576], 2d Crim. 13036, decided Feb. 29, 1968; but see People v. McGill, 257 Cal. App. 2d 759, 763-764 [65 Cal. Rptr. 482].)  [fn. 1]
[4] The defendant being ineligible for probation, it was error for the court to consider proceedings under sections 5500 et seq. of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Assuming that it was the intent of the trial judge to invoke the procedures provided in the above sections, the record discloses that such procedures were not followed. In the circumstances here shown it was error for the trial court to make a finding that the defendant was a mentally disordered sex offender. (People v. Foster, 67 Cal. 2d 604, 608 [63 Cal. Rptr. 288, 432 P.2d 976]; *440 People v. Succop, 67 Cal. 2d 785 [63 Cal. Rptr. 569, 433 P.2d 473].)
[5] The defendant urges that the instructions given relating to the credibility of a witness and the right of the jury to be the sole judge of the credibility of a witness in the face of conflicting statements bearing upon the impeachment of such witness, were confusing and prejudicial. The criticized instructions are set forth below.  [fn. 2] Defendant contends that these instructions told the jury to disregard any testimony tending to impeach the prosecutrix. We do not agree with this *441 contention. The instructions, viewed as a whole, gave the jury a reasonable and proper guide as to its duty in weighing and judging the credibility of testimony received in evidence.
The order determining the defendant to be a mentally disordered sex offender is vacated. The judgment is affirmed.
Ford, P. J., and Moss, J., concurred.
"You are not bound to decide in conformity with the testimony of a number of witnesses which does not produce conviction in your mind, as against the declarations of a lesser number or a presumption or other evidence which appeals to your mind with more convincing force. This rule of law does not mean that you are at liberty to disregard the testimony of the greater number of witnesses merely from caprice or prejudice, or from a desire to favor one side as against the other. It does mean that you are not to decide an issue by the simple process of counting the number of witnesses who have testified on the opposing sides. The final test is not in the relative number of witnesses, but in the relative convincing force of the evidence."
"The impeachment of a witness does not necessarily mean that [his] [or] [her] testimony is completely deprived of value, or that its value is destroyed in any degree. The effect, if any, of the impeachment upon the credibility of the witness is for you to determine."
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 1]  1. The court in McGill, in referring to language found in People v. Ware, 241 Cal. App. 2d 143 [50 Cal. Rptr. 252], states that such language suggests that in order to make a person convicted of an offense wholly ineligible, the court should make an express finding that the case is not an unusual one where the interests of justice demand a departure from the declared policy of the Legislature.
[fn. 2]  2. "Every person who testifies under oath is a witness. You are the sole and exclusive judges of the credibility of the witnesses who have testified in this case. In judging the credibility of witnesses, you shall have in mind the law that a witness is presumed to speak the truth. A witness, however, may be impeached and this presumption overcome by contradictory evidence; by the manner of the witness on the stand; the degree of intelligence exhibited by him; the character of his testimony; by evidence showing his motive or interest in the outcome of the case or his bias or prejudice for or against one of the parties; by evidence that on some former occasion he made a statement or statements inconsistent with his present testimony; by evidence adversely affecting the character of the witness for truth, honesty, or integrity; or by proof that he has been convicted of a felony. You will note that I do not say that any of the matters I have mentioned do overcome the presumption that the witness is speaking the truth; I only say that they may overcome that presumption. It is for you to decide whether they do or do not. The impeachment of a witness does not necessarily mean that his testimony is completely deprived of value, or that its value is destroyed in any degree. The effect, if any, of the impeachment upon the credibility of the witness is for you to determine. A witness wilfully false in one material part of his testimony is to be distrusted in others. You may reject the whole testimony of a witness who wilfully has testified falsely as to a material point, unless, from all the evidence, you shall believe the probability of truth favors his testimony in other particulars. However, discrepancies in a witness's testimony or between his testimony and that of others, if there were any, do not necessarily mean that the witness should be discredited. Failure of recollection is a common experience, and innocent misrecollection is not uncommon. It is a fact, also, that two persons witnessing an incident or a transaction often will see or hear it differently. Whether a discrepancy pertains to a fact of importance or only to a trivial detail should be considered in weighing its significance."

=== CASE 2210754 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.551226+00 ===

260 Cal. App. 2d 445 (1968)
WILLARD A. RIGLEY, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
BOARD OF RETIREMENT OF THE SAN DIEGO COUNTY EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT ASSOCIATION, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 8739.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Mar. 26, 1968.
Bertram McLees, Jr., County Counsel, and Joseph Kase, Jr., Deputy County Counsel, for Defendant and Appellant. *447
Carlson & Hofflund and Robert G. Carlson for Plaintiff and Respondent.
COUGHLIN, J.
This is a proceeding under section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure to review the decision of a retirement board denying the application of a member of the retirement system for a service connected disability retirement allowance.
Willard A. Rigley, petitioner-respondent, was a safety member of the San Diego County Employees' Retirement System for more than five years, having served as a deputy sheriff of that county for 23 years; became permanently incapacitated for the performance of duty because of heart trouble; applied for a service connected disability retirement allowance, which was denied by the Board of Retirement of the San Diego County Employees' Retirement Association, appellant; was awarded a nonservice connected disability retirement allowance; and brought the instant proceeding to require the Board to grant him a service connected allowance.
The trial court entered judgment ordering issuance of a peremptory writ of mandamus commanding the Board to set aside its decision denying petitioner's application for a service connected disability retirement allowance and to grant him such allowance effective August 23, 1965. The Board appealed from this judgment. We conclude the judgment directing the Board to grant petitioner a service connected disability retirement allowance was proper.
The hearing on petitioner's application, at which evidence oral and documentary was received, consumed three days, i.e., November 10, 15 and 17, 1965. On the latter date counsel for the respective parties presented their arguments, and the matter was submitted for decision.
[1] The Board was comprised of seven members. Only five of the members were in attendance throughout the hearing. At that time "By-Laws and Regulations" which had been adopted by the Board on January 8, 1964, and approved by the Board of Supervisors on January 14, 1964, were in effect. Rule XIII of the By-Laws and Regulations prescribed the "procedure for acting upon applications" for retirement allowances.pertinent to the case at bench are the following provisions:
"The board shall determine all factual issues raised by the application. At the hearing for disability retirement, the board shall determine first whether the member is permanently incapacitated for the performance of duty, and second, whether *448 his incapacity is a result of injury or disease arising out of and in the course of his employment or whether he has completed five years of service."
"* * *"
"... All hearings before this board shall be conducted in the following manner:"
"* * *"
"... No hearing before the board shall be held unless at least a majority of the entire board is present. The same members must be in attendance throughout the hearing and only those members who have been in attendance throughout the hearing may vote thereon."
"* * *"
".... The board shall render its decision by the second regular meeting following the meeting at which the matter is submitted for decision. Any finding or decision of the board must be made by a majority of the members of the board voting. A tie vote results in a failure to find in favor of the applicant and constitutes a denial of the application, or that portion of the application, on which the vote is taken."
"* * *"
".... A copy of this rule shall be furnished to applicant and to any party at the time notice of hearing is given."
Adoption of rule XIII was authorized by Government Code, sections 31525 and 31526; the former provides: "The board may make regulations not inconsistent with this chapter [viz. the County Employees' Retirement Law of 1937]. The regulations become effective when approved by the board of supervisors"; and the latter provides: "The regulations shall include provisions: (a) For the election of officers, their terms, meetings, and all other matters relating to the administrative procedure of the board. (Italics added.) ..."
Clearly the provisions of rule XIII were not inconsistent with the retirement statute and concerned "matters relating to the administrative procedure of the board." (Cf. Wilson v. Civil Service Com., 224 Cal. App. 2d 340, 345 [36 Cal. Rptr. 559].)
At a meeting on December 8, 1965, the Board further considered petitioner's application. Only four of the five members who had been in attendance throughout the hearing were present. By the unanimous vote of these four members the Board found petitioner was "permanently incapacitated for the performance of his duties in the service." Thereupon the question whether his incapacity was service connected was considered; the temporary chairman put the question: "Is *449 this permanent incapacity a result of an injury or disease occurring in and arising out of and in the course of his employment"; a vote on this question by the four members resulted in two "Ayes" and two "Noes"; further discussion ensued; the chairman again put the question to a vote which resulted in three "Ayes" and one "No"; the temporary chairman, who had not been in attendance throughout the hearing, announced his wish to read the transcript and participate in the voting; and, after further discussion, a motion rescinding all action, ordering a transcript of the proceedings and continuing the deliberations to a future time was adopted, only the four attending members voting.
The application was considered again on January 26, 1966. All seven members of the Board were present. The two members who had not been in attendance throughout the hearing stated they had read a transcript of the proceedings. Following a discussion, a motion was made that the Board find petitioner's incapacity was "a result of injury or disease occurring in and arising out of and in the course of his employment." Three of the members who had been in attendance throughout the hearing voted "Aye"; two of the members who had been in attendance throughout the hearing voted "No"; and the two members who had not been in attendance throughout the hearing voted "No." Thereupon, as stated in the minutes of the meeting: "The chairman announced that the Board finds that the permanent incapacity of Willard Rigley is not a result of injury or disease occurring in and arising out of and in the course of his employment." After reciting the findings in the premises, the minutes then set forth the following:
"It is Therefore Ordered that the application of Willard A. Rigley for a service connected disability retirement be denied, and that said applicant be retired for a non-service connected disability retirement effective August 23, 1965."
In allegedly making the finding as announced by the chairman and denying petitioner's application, the Board did not proceed in the manner required by law; its action constituted an abuse of discretion as defined in section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure; the decision should be set aside; and the Board should be ordered to grant petitioner's application as directed by the trial court.
[2] Under rule XIII the motion to find petitioner's incapacity was service connected was adopted by the affirmative *450 vote of three of the five members of the Board who were in attendance throughout the hearing. Only those members were entitled to vote on the matter. The votes of the two members not in attendance at the hearing were a nullity. Thus, on the face of the record, the motion was adopted and the announcement by the chairman that the Board found petitioner's incapacity was not service connected was incorrect. The minutes should be amended accordingly.
[3] The By-Laws and Regulations adopted by the Board, pursuant to Government Code, section 31525, had the force of law; were binding until abrogated; and could not be modified except in the manner prescribed by the statute. (Wilson v. Civil Service Com., supra, 224 Cal. App. 2d 340, 344-345; Globe v. County of Los Angeles, 163 Cal. App. 2d 595, 598 [329 P.2d 971]; Viner v. Civil Service Com., 59 Cal. App. 2d 458, 465 [139 P.2d 88]; Campbell v. City of Los Angeles, 47 Cal. App. 2d 310, 312 [117 P.2d 901]; Bruce v. Civil Service Board, 6 Cal. App. 2d 633, 637 [45 P.2d 419]; Mitchell v. McKevitt, 128 Cal. App. 458, 461 [17 P.2d 789].)
[4] The Board contends the rule permitting only those who were in attendance throughout the hearing to vote on the issues presented is not a "regulation" within the meaning of Government Code, section 31525; is merely a rule for the guidance and protection of the members of the Board; and may be suspended or ignored by them, who alone may complain of their action in so doing. The decision in Grosjean v. Board of Education, 40 Cal. App. 434, 437 [181 P. 113], is cited in support of this position. The situation in the cited case is not analagous to the situation in the case at bench. The rule in question was adopted in the manner prescribed by Government Code, section 31525, as a regulation authorized by that section. Its adoption was approved by the Board of Supervisors as required by Government Code, section 31525, and any decision to suspend or terminate its application would require previous approval by the Board of Supervisors. The rule incorporates the concept a trier of fact who sees and hears the witnesses is in a better position to judge their credibility and the meaning of their testimony than one who does not see or hear them. (Gen. see Dillard v. McKnight, 34 Cal. 2d 209, 223 [209 P.2d 387, 11 A.L.R. 2d 835]; Estate of Gianelli, 146 Cal. 139, 142 [79 P. 841]; People v. Silva, 119 Cal. App. 2d 421, 426 [259 P.2d 74]; Security-First Nat. Bank v. Bruder, 44 Cal. App. 2d 767, 772 [113 P.2d 3].) Its purpose is not to guide or protect the members of the Board but to *451 prescribe an accepted fact-finding procedure. Noteworthy is the requirement in rule XIII that a copy of its provisions be furnished an applicant before the hearing, affording him knowledge of the procedure governing the determination of his application. A decision in his favor predicated on a vote of four members of the Board, two of whom were not in attendance through the hearing, would be contrary to law. For the same reason, a vote against him under the same circumstances would be contrary to law.
In support of its position the Board also cites the decision in Cooper v. State Board of Medical Examiners, 35 Cal. 2d 242, 244-246 [217 P.2d 630, 18 A.L.R. 2d 593], holding that a member of an agency who had read a transcript of the evidence received at a hearing was not foreclosed from voting on the issue presented by a statute declaring no member of the agency " 'who did not hear the evidence shall vote on the decision.' " In the case at bench rule XIII is broader in scope than the statute in the cited case; is not limited to the requirement a voting member shall hear the evidence on the issue to be decided; instead, by prescribing "attendance" throughout the hearing, requires the personal presence of a Board member at the hearing to qualify him to vote on the issues tried.
[5] Petitioner claims the Board found his incapacity was service connected at its December 8th meeting, by the vote in his favor of three of the four qualified voting members then present; contends the Board had no authority to reconsider this action; and cites the general rule stated in De Witt v. Board of Supervisors, 53 Cal. 2d 419, 422 [348 P.2d 567], in support of this contention. Previously, the vote of the same members was a tie which, under rule XIII, constituted "a failure to find in favor of the applicant." However, the votes taken at this meeting did not result in a finding or decision. The minutes of the Board show the votes at the December 8th meeting were on "the question" whether applicant's incapacity was service connected, whereas the vote at the January 26th meeting was on "the motion" that the Board find the applicant's incapacity was service connected; also show the chairman at the December 8th meeting did not declare the Board had reached a decision, whereas at the January 26th meeting he "announced" the Board "finds" the applicant's incapacity was not service connected; and set forth the decision of the Board at the January 26th meeting to deny the application for a service connected retirement, which was the *452 only decision upon the application the Board made.
It is unnecessary, in light of our conclusion, to consider petitioner's contention respecting the insufficiency of the evidence to support the decision.
The judgment is modified by adding thereto the command to the Board to correct the minutes of its January 26, 1966 meeting to show the Board finds the permanent incapacity of Willard Rigley is a result of injury or disease occurring in and arising out of and in the course of his employment; and as modified, the judgment is affirmed. Respondent Rigley to recover costs on appeal.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Whelan, J. concurred.

=== CASE 2210762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.689394+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 562 (1990)
DUANE WOLFF AGENCY, INC., Respondent,
v.
NORTHSHORE MARINE, INC., Appellant.
No. C8-90-1382.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
December 4, 1990.
Robert N. Roningen, Duluth, for respondent.
*563 Keir R. Johnson, Conrad M. Fredin Law Office, Duluth, for appellant.
Considered and decided by SHORT, P.J., and LANSING and GARDEBRING, JJ.
OPINION
GARDEBRING, Judge.
Appellant Northshore Marine, Inc. (Northshore) was ordered to pay an additional $4906 in premiums for a commercial liability policy purchased from respondent Duane Wolff Agency, Inc. (Agency). Northshore appeals, contending it did not receive notice of the change in terms for calculating premiums as required by statute. Minn.Stat. § 60A.30 (1986). We reverse.
FACTS
Northshore sells and services pleasure boats and accessories. In 1986, Northshore purchased an Auto-Owners Insurance commercial general liability policy from Agency. The policy was issued with a flat fee premium for the policy period of October 8, 1986, to October 8, 1987. The declarations page states the policy is not auditable.
The policy was renewed in 1987 for the 1987/1988 policy period. The top of the declarations page is identical to that of the original policy except that the audit period was changed from "not auditable" to "annual." No other notice of the change in methodology for determining premiums was given. Near the end of the policy period, Agency audited Northshore and discovered that the volume of business had grown from $300,000 to an amount exceeding $1 million. As a result, the insurance premium was retroactively recalculated and Northshore was billed an additional $4906.
Northshore refused to pay, arguing that it had contracted for a nonauditable policy and that it was not provided any notice that the terms of the renewal policy had changed from those of the original. The trial court found that the renewal policy contained a provision which permitted the insured to cancel the policy within 30 days of receipt and that Northshore failed to avail itself of that opportunity. The court ordered Northshore to pay the $4906 in additional premiums. Northshore now appeals.
ISSUE
Did the trial court err as a matter of law in holding that receipt of the renewal policy, by itself, constituted sufficient notice of the change in terms as required by Minn. Stat. § 60A.30 (1986)?
ANALYSIS
The facts are undisputed. The only issue on appeal is whether the trial court correctly interpreted Minn.Stat. § 60A.30 (1986). Interpretation of a statute is a question of law; therefore, no deference need by given to the trial court's decision. Hubred v. Control Data Corp., 442 N.W.2d 308, 310 (Minn.1989).
Minn.Stat. § 60A.30 (1986) provides in relevant part:
If an insurance company * * * offers or purports to offer to renew any commercial liability * * * policy at less favorable terms as to the dollar amount of coverage or deductibles, higher rates, and/or higher rating plan, the new terms, the new rates and/or rating plan may take effect on the renewal date of the policy if the insurer has sent to the policyholder notice of the new terms, new rates and/or rating plan at least 30 days prior to the expiration date. If the insurer has not so notified the policyholder, the policyholder may elect to cancel the renewal policy within the 30-day period after receipt of the notice.[1]
Initially, we must determine whether notice was properly given pursuant to the statute. The statute is silent concerning the type or form of notice required. Therefore, we look to analogous cases addressing *564 renewal insurance policies and changes in terms and conditions.
In Canadian Universal Ins. Co., Ltd. v. Fire Watch, Inc., 258 N.W.2d 570 (1977), the original policy was amended to remove coverage for losses arising out of negligent installation of fire protection equipment. This amendment was effectuated by substituting the word "regardless" for the word "if." The insurance company did not notify Fire Watch of this change in coverage. The supreme court held:
when an insurer by renewal of a policy or by an endorsement to an existing policy substantially reduces the prior insurance coverage provided the insured, the insurer has an affirmative duty to notify the insured in writing of the change in coverage. Failure to do so shall render the purported reduction in coverage void. Any question of an individual's insurance coverage shall then be determined in accordance with the terms of the original policy prior to the renewal or endorsement.
Id. at 575. The court concluded that since the insurance company failed to provide a written explanation of the change in coverage, the renewal endorsement was void. Id.
In Campbell v. Insurance Service Agency, 424 N.W.2d 785 (Minn.App.1988), the policyholders received a renewal policy which contained a "special notice to policyholders" identifying several revisions. The notice did not call attention to a "Special Provisions Amendment" which severely reduced coverage. The insurance company argued that because the policyholders had received a copy of the renewal policy, notice had been given. This court stated:
[T]he insurer must bring to the insured's attention all provisions and conditions that create exceptions or limitations on the coverage. The insurer who makes basic insurance coverage changes is obligated to inform the insured by cover letter or a conspicuous heading to the amendatory endorsement. Id. at 790 (citations omitted). The renewal policy was held void and the original policy was considered to be still in effect. Id.
The facts of the present case are similar to those in Campbell. The one-word change on the "Declarations" page is analogous to the change in the endorsement found to be inadequate notice of a change in coverage in Campbell. Further, a significant and fundamental change in the methodology for calculating premiums, which could significantly increase the cost of the same coverage, warrants the same type of specific notice required by Canadian Universal and Campbell. Agency failed to inform Northshore by cover letter or conspicuous heading that the policy had been amended. Receipt of the renewal policy, by itself, is not sufficient notice to satisfy Minn.Stat. § 60A.30.
Secondly, we must determine the appropriate remedy. Unlike Canadian Universal and Campbell, notice of a change in premium rates is governed by Minn.Stat. § 60A.30 (1986). The trial court relied upon the "remedy" provided therein  cancellation of the renewal policy  and found that Northshore did not avail itself of the opportunity to cancel.
Northshore cannot be said, on these facts, to have failed to act upon the opportunity to cancel. That right is afforded by the statute "within the 30-day period after receipt of the notice." Minn.Stat. § 60A.30. In this instance, there was no effective notice, and therefore no opportunity to cancel the policy. It was only much later, near the end of the policy period, that Agency conducted an audit and billed Northshore the additional premiums.
We hold that where there is no effective notice of a change of rate in a renewal policy, the change is void and the rate structure of the original policy remains in effect.
DECISION
The trial court misconstrued Minn.Stat. § 60A.30 (1986). An insurance company cannot change the terms and conditions of an insurance policy without providing notice *565 of the changes by cover letter or conspicuous heading in the renewal policy. Therefore, the trial court's order requiring Northshore to pay $4906 in additional premiums is error.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The statute was amended in 1987 to increase the notice period to 60 days.

=== CASE 2210765 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.765258+00 ===

185 Mich. App. 669 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 174
PEOPLE
v.
BOYNTON
Docket No. 119180.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided October 2, 1990.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of Research, Training, and Appeals, and Janet A. Napp, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Sasse & Reed (by Kenneth R. Sasse), for defendant.
Before: REILLY, P.J., and CYNAR and WAHLS, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
On May 17, 1988, following a bench trial, defendant was found guilty of carrying a concealed weapon in a motor vehicle. MCL 750.227; MSA 28.424. On June 13, 1988, the trial court ordered sentencing delayed under MCL 771.1(2); MSA 28.1131(2), and rescheduled it for June 13, 1989. For unexplained reasons, the sentencing hearing was not held until June 15, 1989, at which time the court found that defendant had fulfilled the conditions of his delayed sentence and granted defendant's motion to dismiss the case. The prosecution appeals as of right, arguing that the trial court was without authority to dismiss defendant's conviction since the court lost jurisdiction over the case by acting more than one year after imposition of its order delaying sentence. We reverse.
Defendant asserts that the prosecutor, who apparently was not present at the June 15 hearing, has waived this issue by failing to object below. However, jurisdictional defects may be raised at any time. People v Price, 126 Mich. App. 647, 655; 337 NW2d 614 (1983).
*671 Pursuant to MCL 771.1(2); MSA 28.1131(2), sentencing may be delayed for up to one year. Beyond that, the trial court loses jurisdiction to sentence the defendant, unless good cause is shown for the delay. People v Dubis, 158 Mich. App. 504, 506; 405 NW2d 181 (1987). We emphasize, however, that an unexcused violation of the one-year limit contained in the delayed sentencing statute affects only the court's authority to sentence the defendant, nothing more. People v Turner, 92 Mich. App. 485, 489-490; 285 NW2d 340 (1979).
Since no good cause is apparent in this case for the delay beyond the one-year statutory limit, the court did lose jurisdiction to sentence defendant. However, the prosecution's concern in this appeal is with the court's dismissal of defendant's conviction, not with the court's failure to sentence defendant further. In any event, we note that the trial court's power to dismiss or expunge a properly obtained criminal conviction is specifically set forth in MCL 780.621; MSA 28.1274 (101). People v Augustus Jones, 94 Mich. App. 516, 517; 288 NW2d 411 (1979). The statute sets forth a very detailed set of prerequisites and specific procedural steps, none of which were adhered to in this case.
Consequently, we reverse and vacate the trial court's order of dismissal. Defendant's conviction is, therefore, reinstated.

=== CASE 9737493 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:04.111438+00 ===

Sharp, J.
The Appellant, Gene Wolf, filed his Form 9 Application which was granted by the Single Hearing 'Member and denied by the Full Industrial Board. Two members of the Full Board dissented from its decision.
This case was hotly contested by able counsel who presented a wide range of evidence including medical evidence. If the evidence permitted the decision of the Full Industrial Board we will not reverse unless it is contrary to law. The Appellee asserts that such evidence permits the inference that the Appellant’s back problems were gradual and progressive.
Plaintiff was employed during the summer of 1971 by Plibrico Sales & Service, Inc., which company engaged in repair work on boilers and industrial furnaces. During a period in July of 1971 a crew of the defendant was working at Joslyn Steel in Fort Wayne, repairing a “walking beam furnace”, which is described as being approximately 20 feet long and 9 feet wide and 28 inches high. The plaintiff was required to work in the furnace on July 3 and July 9, 1971, while Joslyn Steel was shut down for two weeks in July for its annual shut-down in the course of carrying out and re*113placing the lining of the furnace with refractory material. While working in the furnace, the crew would work either in a kneeling position or bent over. Plaintiff recalled that he did work two or three days a week and experienced normal aches as did his co-workers, but on July 9, 1971, he experienced a sharp pain while working in the furnace and he reported to his foreman that his back was “killing him”, whereupon plaintiff went to his family doctor rather than the company doctor. After seeing his doctor, he returned to the job and worked several hours overtime. He worked the following week in Edgerton, Ohio, and then later was off a few days or a week until he was hospitalized by his doctor about August 10, 1971, for eleven days, and was unable to work again for defendant employer. He was diagnosed as having a severe lumbo-sacral sprain.
The description of the events by the Appellant are, in part, as follows:
“Q. When did you first notice the problem and what was the nature of the problem that you had in regard to your injury here?
A. Well, usually when you start working in this, why, your back starts hurting and you don’t think too much about it. But it just kept getting worse to the point where I couldn’t stand it. And the last day that we worked out there I told the foreman, I said, T can’t take it any longer.’ I said, ‘I’d like to go to the doctor.’ And he told me I could.
Q. And what was his name?
A. Dan Holom.
Q. And he’s the man that we have the deposition of here? A. Yes.
Q. And you went then to your family doctor?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And what’s his name?
A. Dr. Krueger.
Q. And he’s here in Fort Wayne, Indiana?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And that was approximately when, July when?
A. July the 9th.”
*114“Q. And that was the last day that you worked for Plibrico Sales & Service Company?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you go back and try to work again?
A. I went to the doctor and went back to work. He gave me some pain pills and took some x-rays and I went back to work.
Q. And how long—when did you go back to work?
A. As soon as I went home and changed my clothes and I went back to work out at Joslyn.
Q. And how long did you work again?
A. That was the last day out there. We finished up there and then was in Egerton, Ohio, the next week. And I worked over there until I couldn’t take it any longer and then I was off, I think possibly, maybe three or four days or a week. And then I went to Linton, Indiana, at General Electric down there and was down there approximately ten days and then the first of August was the last that I worked. Around the first of August, I can’t say just the exact date.”
⅜ ⅜ *
“Q. Now, would you describe again, I believe you say that July 9th is when you told your foreman that you felt so bad you were going to see your doctor, is that correct?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And would you describe that it was sometime before that—how many days before then that you first noticed the back pain being worse than usual?
A. Well, I don’t know for sure. Probably a week. Three or four days or five. Somewhere around there.
Q. That it started bothering you pretty bad?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And it finally got so bad on the 9th of July that you decided that you better go see your family doctor?
A. Yes, sir.”
* * *
“Q. Now, did you tell Dr. Krueger that your back had been bothering you for two weeks ?
A. I don’t recall just what I told him.
Q. But, at any rate, you saw Dr. Krueger on that day on July 9th and you went back to the Plibrico job at Joslyn? A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you recall working overtime that day?
A. Yes, sir.
*115Q. As a matter of fact, you worked fifteen hours that day, does that sound right to you ?
A. That’s probably close to it.
Q. And at some point of time then in August I understand Dr. Krueger put you in the hospital?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You didn’t have any surgery?
A. No, sir.
Q. No specialists saw you?
A. No, sir.
Q. And then there came a time in December where Dr. Krueger released you to go back to work?
A. Yes, sir.
* * *
“Q. I forgot what you told me when I asked if you told Dr. Krueger on July 9th that your back had been bothering you a couple of weeks, does that sound correct?
A. Like I say, it’s been a good while ago. I don’t recall. I think possibly it had been bothering me maybe a week.
Q. Do you know where you had been working a week before you went to see Dr. Krueger on July 9th?
A. Possibly, well I’d worked probably on the week ends at Joslyn, and then I was in and out. I probably was working at Goshen Rubber, just guessing. I don’t know for sure.
Q. Now, on this July the 9th, when you first told your foreman that you wanted to go see your family doctor, is it correct that there wasn’t any particular thing that you lifted, or nothing fell on you, there wasn’t anything particular that you did that caused your back to hurt?
A. Other than being in this confined area.
Q. You weren’t doing anything unusual on that particular day or that particular time that you hadn’t done in similar situations in places like that?
A. Well, normally you don’t work in a confined area like that. That’s the only one I know of.
Q. Had you worked at Joslyn before?
A. Oh, off and on. You’ll work there once a year at shutdown time.
Q. You work in the walking beam furnace?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. This was a shut-down period at Joslyn that you were rebuilding the furnace?
A. Yes, sir.
*116Q. There were several men on that job working in there?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And some of them worked there more than you did, is that right?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Now, were you having problems right from the start of your first day at that Joslyn job?
A. Well, when you crawl in a walking beam you’re not in there long until your back starts bothering you anyway. This time it just kept getting worse to the point I couldn’t take it any longer.
Q. Did I understand that at some point in time your back started bothering you and you felt it was getting progressively more painful and finally on July 9, you decided to go and see the doctor ?
A. I asked Mr. Holom if it would be all right if I’d go.
Q. If I could refresh your recollection, is it possible that you hadn’t worked at Joslyn between the 4th of July, which was a Sunday, until Friday, July the 9th, when you went to see the doctor?
A. That’s possible.
Q. And would it be possible that you hadn’t worked at Joslyn prior to that July the 4th, until back on June the 27th, the previous Sunday?
A. This, I can’t answer for sure.
Q. When did you first tell the people at Plibrico that you thought you hurt your back on the job?
A. I don’t recall. I presume probably the day that I told Mr. Holom I would like to go to the doctor.
Q. Didn’t you tell me you didn’t have any particular discussion on that day about the situation?
A. He asked me what I wanted to go for and I said, ‘My back’s a killing me.’
Q. That’s about all that was said ?
A. That’s about all that was said, and he said, ‘Okay.’
Q. How many men were working in that walking beam furnace at Joslyn for Plibrico?
A. Oh, normally I suppose there’s probably maybe three or four guys working in that, in that confined area at a time. There’s other work to be done too.
Q. No kind of accident happened on July the 9th in that walking beam furnace, did it?
A. No, sir. Ah —
Q. You were doing the same —
*117MR. WEBSTER: — Let him finish the question.
MR. EILBACHER: Oh, excuse me.
A. Other than when you just—when they hand this material for you to pound, you have to pick it up in a bucket or something and it’s heavy and you’re in this bent over position and it’s —
Q. That’s the same kind of work you did on any of the other days that you were working inside there?
A. Either that or we were tearing out. I can’t say just exactly what we were doing.
Q. The work was pretty much the same each day that you worked in there?
A. Yes, sir.”
Dr. Krueger is a general practitioner in Fort Wayne, Indiana. He first saw the Appellant in regard to the back condition on July 9, 1971. He diagnosed the condition as a lumbo-sacral strain. The Appellant had told the doctor that he had been working in a bent over position for some period of time in a 28-inch space and, after working in the confined area, his low back began paining him rather severely. The doctor testified that working under the conditions reported by Appellant could be the cause of a lumbo-sacral sprain.
On cross-examination, when asked about the onset of Appellant’s problems, Dr. Krueger testified:
“Q. Dr. Krueger, I note that in the same letter to which Mr. Webster referred, you reported a history taken from the patient that he had had a backache off and on for the previous two weeks. Do you have that recorded in your oifice notes?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Did he give you any exact date as to the onset of his symptoms ?
A. No, he didn’t.
* * *
“Q. Did he relate to you in his history any specific accident or date which initiated the onset of his symptoms ?
A. Are you talking about from the first visit?
Q. Yes, well from the time he first had symptoms with his low back.
A. The only specific date was of the tamping incident and *118I have not recorded which day that was that he performed that action.
Q. That was when he was running the sand tamper, the machine ?
A. Yes.
Q. Did he see you following that incident involving the sand tamper?
A. Yes.
Q. That was after your initial consultation with him, was it not?
A. Yes.”
An osteopath testified for the Appellant as follows:
“Q. What did you find?
A. I found upon examination of Wolf a frozen sacroiliac joint involving the left sacroiliac. We had evidenec of a sacralized fifth lumbar. He presented a chronic preformis syndrome muscle spasm or syndrome.” The pain syndrome I would call it a sacro genic telalgia.”
* * *
“Q. Did he give any history as to what he was doing and what resulted?
A. Well, he was working on a furnace and he was kneeling down and he had this acute pain that struck him in the back, in the low part of his back.
Q. All right. Now, doctor, would the injuries that he had be consistent with his history that he gave you as to what the pain that he had at that time being the cause of what you found wrong with him ?
A. Yes. I feel that this strain was the motivating factor that precipitated this pain in his back.
Q. And all the other items you itemized, the frozen sacro-illiac, the sacralized fifth lumbar, the chronic preformis syndrome as well as the sacro genic telalgia, these were definitely related to that, that type of history?
A. Yes, correct.”
* * *
“Q. The question is, do you have an opinion, assuming these facts, within a reasonable medical certainty, with the results that you found, were consistent with the history?
A. Yes. I feel this man will have a problem—that is a latent problem. And I think that I would feel that he could *119have any place from a fifteen to a twenty-five per cent disability.”
“Q. Then you are giving him fifteen to twenty-five percent permanent-partial impairment based on this?
A. Yes.”
* * *
“Q. Did this patient tell you that at the time of your examination he was employed with W. C. Grant Company as a steel metal worker?
A. No. This man—he was—he wasn’t able to work at his regular job and this was an extra little job he had manufactured or gone out and found. I don’t remember if it was night watching or some job that gave him a little bread and butter money or something, because he was hard up financially, if I recall the statement that the man made—that he couldn’t go to work or unable to go to work at his regular job and he had this industrial injury or claim and he wasn’t able to go back to work because he was supposed to be totally disabled and that was the reason he came over to me to see what could be done for him. He wanted to go to work. He is a man that had desire and ambition. I mean he wasn’t lazy. He wasn’t a welfare type individual. He was enthusiastic. He impressed me of this nature. In other words, there wasn’t in my evaluation— he didn’t impress me as one of those free loafers (sic)”
An orthopedic surgeon called by the Appellee testified:
“Q. And you feel that the back will hold up without any further problems, assuming no unusual accidents or trauma?
A. I think this is a reasonable medical certainty, but I don’t think anybody could guarantee whether a person’s back is going to bother them again soon or later on or not.”
“Q. Does normally an x-ray show a severe lumbosacral strain ?
A. No.
Q. You have no quarrel with Dr. Krueger’s diagnosis and treatment, history that you got regarding the accident?
A. Well, I didn’t receive any information from Dr. Krueger that apparently he felt he had a soft tissue injury to his back and certainly have no—
Q. Does this involve the muscles and the ligaments of the back rather than the bones of the back ?
*120A. Strains, the muscles or ligaments, yes.
Q. And with a severe strain is there a weakening of the ligaments or muscles of the back then?
A. Well, they are weak while they are painful.
Q. And with a person with this type of strain do they have acute stages where they have difficulty and other times when they will be relatively free from any symptoms ?
A. Speaking in generalities, we see patients like this.
Q. And you saw Mr. Wolf, the one time in July of 1972, is that correct?
A. That’s right.
Q. You have never seen him before or since?
A. Right.
Q. And you have never seen him while he was in an acute stage of this strain?
A. No.
Q. The only history that you got was what you took down from Mr. Wolf, is that correct ?
A. That’s right.
Q. You received no reports from Dr. Krueger or anybody else?
A. No.
Q. Could you make a better evaluation of a permanent partial impairment if you saw him during the acute stage ?
MR. EILBACHER: I am going to object to the question for the reason that it is assuming that he has a periodic acute stage and I believe that is simply not borne out by the evidence. However, under the rules the doctor can answer the question, he is entitled to.
A. Well, it is a question that doesn’t go along with his history, according to the history I received he hasn’t had any acute stages, at least up until the time I seen him since last December.
Q. At least that was your understanding of what he said, is that correct?
A. That is what he told me.
Q. You don’t remember his exact words?
A. No, I have recorded here that he had no complaints at present, that he had some discomfort when he first returned to work around December of 1971, and his back hasn’t bothered him at all since approximately the middle of December or 12th of December. This is what he told me, I didn’t record this exact terminology or what exactly he said.
*121Q. Did he indicate to you that he was doing a much lighter work than what he had done before ?
A. He said he was working with a different company than he was when he had his back problem and doing sheet metal work, which wasn’t as heavy as the previous job.
Q. Would he be less apt to have a recurrence of acute stage if he did take care not to do any heavy lifting or to take care not to—the way he handled himself in regard to his back?
A. I think in general a person is less likely to have a flare up of symptoms if they do lighter work as compared to heavier work.”
* * *
“Q. Is this history that you got and treatment of it, so forth, consistent with a severe lumbosacral sprain?
A. I think so, yes.”
The Indiana Workmen’s Compenastion Act provides that an employer must pay compensation for personal injury “by accident arising out of and in the course of the employment. . . .” Ind. Ann. Stat. § 40-1202 (Burns 1965 Repl.), IC 1971, 22-3-2-2. A compensation claimant has the burden to prove that he was injured as a result of an “accident,” and it is not necessary that the employer show that a negative award is supported by a preponderance of the evidence. Lincoln v. Whirlpool Corp. (1972), 151 Ind. App. 190, 279 N.E.2d 596. The Industrial Board specifically found that Appellant failed to carry his burden of proof as follows:
“. . . That for some time prior to July 9, 1971, plaintiff had complained of a sore back while working in the ‘walking beam furnace.’
“It is further found that on July 9, 1971, while working in the ‘walking beam furnace,’ the plaintiff did not experience any untoward event of any incident giving rise to the condition complained of; that, as heretofore found by a majority of the Board, said condition existed and pre-dated the date of July 9, 1971 and that upon the facts in the record a majority of the Board cannot find any accidental injury in the course of the plaintiff’s employment.”
*122This court is required to disregard all evidence which is unfavorable to the findings of the Board and consider only those facts and those reasonable inferences which support such findings. Pittsburgh Testing Laboratories v. Kiel (1960), 130 Ind. App. 598, 167 N.E.2d 604; Lincoln v. Whirlpool Corp., supra. Further, if the Industrial Board, in determining the ultimate facts, reaches a legitimate conclusion from the evidential facts, this court cannot disturb that conclusion, even though it might prefer another conclusion equally legitimate. Lasear, Inc. v. Anderson, et al. (1934), 99 Ind. App. 428, 433, 192 N.E. 762; C. & E. Trucking Corporation v. Stahl (1962), 135 Ind. App. 600, 181 N.E.2d 21.
The word “accident” as used in the law of workmen’s compensation must be distinguished from its meaning as used in accident insurance policies. Indian Creek Coal & Mining Co. v. Calvert (1918), 68 Ind. App. 474, 119 N.E. 519. The first Indiana case in which this court appears to have adopted a specific meaning is Haskell and Barker Car Co. v. Brown (1917), 67 Ind. App. 178, 117 N.E. 555, in which it was stated:
“The word ‘accident’ in the act in question is used in its popular sense, and means ‘any unlooked for mishap or untoward event not expected or designed.’ ”
Such definition has persisted to this date and has been cited in numerous cases, although the standard as to the type of mishap or event has been broadened. Dean Small reviews the earlier cases and says there was a time when the courts were inclined to view an accident “as some sort of sudden traumatic violence, and an injury as the result or the consequence thereof.” Small, Workmen’s Compensation Law of Indiana (1950), Section 5.2, p. 99. While the standard has been broadened, this Court has not gone so far as to adopt the rule that, if a claimant worked for the employer during the period of his life in which his disability arose, that is suffi*123cient to sustain the burden of proof as to the occurrence of the accident within the meaning of the Act. George v. Interstate Metal Products (1955), 125 Ind. App. 406, 126 N.E.2d 258. In George, this Court reviewed the earlier case of Indian Creek Coal & Mining Co. v. Calvert, supra, and stated at 126 N.E.2d 258, 260:
“We do not interpret that case as in any sense abandoning the well-known rule that in order to show an accident there must be some untoward or unexpected event.”
As Mr. Segar has correctly concluded in his 1968 Supplement to Small, there still must occur an event:
“In passing, however, it should be noted that the Court still requires some untoward or unexpected event, however unspectacular it may be. . . .” Small (Segar), Supplement, Section 5.1, p. 33.
Dean Small observed that, by far, the greater number of injuries and deaths as a result of industrial accidents are occasioned by trauma. But he further observes that internal exertion or strain can lay the basis for an accidental injury equally as well as external trauma. In his original text, at Section 5.1, Small cites two cases to support his proposition. The first, Indiana Car and Equipment Co. v. Celotto (1919), 69 Ind. App. 341, 121 N.E. 834, involved a fact situation that, between 5:00 and 6:00 in the afternoon of a date certain, the employee was lifting a car sill when he felt a sudden and violent pain in his back. The issue became whether the subsequent disability was a result of a prior “tuberculosis in the vertabrae” or whether the lifting caused a traumatism in the area of the lumbar spine. This Court held that the evidence fairly tends to support the conclusion reached by the Board in awarding compensation on the ground that the plaintiff had received an injury by accident.
In the second textbook case, Morgan Packing Co. v. Monroe (1934), 99 Ind. App. 321, 192 N.E. 320, the plaintiff, while at work, was engaged in helping to place an electric motor, *124weighing 400 pounds, upon a platform or shelf, and in lifting and pulling on the motor and sliding it over upon the shelf, he developed a sudden, sharp, and acute pain in his left hip, which caused him to limp, and gradually grew worse until it resulted in his present disability. This court approved the finding of the Board that the plaintiff had, indeed, sustained an accident.
Dean Small cites no other cases in his original text to constitute an industrial accident, and it is significant to note that in each of the two cases, the plaintiff was able to prove some specific event which occurred at a certain time and place which resulted in the strain. Again, in the Supplement to the original text, Mr. Segar observes that this court still requires an event. He then adds:
“This does not mean, however, that the Court has reverted to sudden traumatic violence as a test for accidental injury.”
All of the testimony here discloses an “event” which occurred in the course of employment and there is no permissible inference to the contrary. Mr. Segar further observes that, where the medical evidence specifically connects a back difficulty to a specific lifting incident, the reasoning of the heart cases has been applied. He cites Lock-Joint Tube Co. v. Brown (1963), 135 Ind. App. 386, 191 N.E.2d 110, in support of his interpretation of the modern rule. The Lock-Joint case directly involved a question as to whether the employee had sustained an accident. The facts of the accident considered by the court were:
“I took the side off the square machine and went to set it on the floor; when I got pretty close to the floor with it, I got a catch in my neck and then dropped it. I tried to raise up then, and I couldn’t for a minute or so.”
This court affirmed the award in favor of the employee and agreed that the employee had sustained an accident. It was pointed out that he was engaged at the moment of the onset of the sympton in heavy work and that an event occurred to *125which the employee could point as the origin of his back problems.
The Appellant premises his argument primarily on Rankin v. Industrial Contractors, Inc. (1969), 144 Ind. App. 394, 246 N.E.2d 410, 413, 414-415, where the Appellate Court, En Banc, said:
“The decision of the Hearing Member was consistent with this broad mandate. In reversing the Hearing Member and denying an award in this case the Full Industrial Board has acted contrary to the mandate of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
“We conclude that the evidence in this case was not in conflict in any real sense. It appears that this evidence, together with all reasonable inferences which could be drawn thereof, supports the conclusion that the injury to the plaintiff was in the course of his employment. In reading the Appellee’s brief, it appears that the Appellee would require the claimant in a workmen’s compensation case to negative the possibility of any other cause for claimant’s disability. We do not think this is the law.
“In the case of Steele v. Anderson Co. (1956), 126 Ind. App. 445, 451, 133 N.E.2d 896, 899, this court stated:
‘We further recognize that where an accidental injury, arising out of and in the course of the employment, aggravates, accelerates or activates a pre-existing condition of or injury to an employee, the right is compensable.’
“Considering the testimony of Dr. Fisher, supra, and favorable to the Appellee, one cannot escape the conclusion that there was an aggravation directly resulting from a condition of employment. While there could have been other causes for the Appellant’s injuries, there is absolutely no evidence of other causes in the record of this proceeding.’’
“When the undisputed facts lead to the conclusion that such injury arose out of the Appellant’s employment, it is the duty of this court to reverse the decision of the Industrial Board. See Whaley v. Steuben County REMC (1966). 139 Ind. App. 520, 221 N.E.2d 435.
“The uncontradicted facts in this case are squarely within the principles announced by this court. In American Maize Products Co. v. Nichiporchil (1940), 108 Ind. App. 502, 511. 29 N.E.2d 801, 805 this court stated:
*126‘While it is true that the appellee can point to no particular date nor to a particular blow which produced the resultant injury, yet it is not necessary that the accident occur at any particular or specific time. The series of blows to the appellee’s hands produced the injury and loss which was an unintended and unexpected occurrence.’
“The decision of the Industrial Board is contrary to the statement in Standard Cabinet Company v. Landgrave, supra.
“The Appellee relies heavily on the case of City of Anderson v. Borton (1961), 132 Ind. App. 684, 178 N.E.2d 904. The evidence in that case was that the claimant merely ‘reached over’ and experienced a back injury. The contrast between the City of Anderson case and the instant one is demonstrated at page 694 of 132 Ind. App., page 909 of 178 N.E.2d, where this court stated:
‘In view of the fact that there is no conflict in the evidence concerning the performance of the act of bending over to lift the trap door when the pain occurred, and since there was nothing unexpected nor any unusual exertion connected with this incident, and with no conflict in the evidence that appellee’s back had degenerated since his first inj ury to a point where pain and further damage might occur merely by the act of walking about as a normal person, we are of the opinion that the evidence was insufficient to prove that the injury occurred because of any increase in his work load or of any extra exertion. We are also of the opinion that there was a lack of any evidence to prove that the act of bending over to lift a trap door was anything so unusual to appellee’s customary work as to cause an aggravation of a previously existing degenerated back.’
“In this case there was precisely the type of evidence this court found wanting in the City of Anderson case, supra.
“We are not unmindful of the limited scope of review by this court of Industrial Board findings. Notwithstanding this, the Industrial Board’s decision in this case is manifestly contrary to the letter and spirit of the Workmen’s Compensation Act.”
(It should be emphasized that the writings of Dean Small and Mr. Segar were published before the advent of Rankin.)
Without further belaboring of the point we find the facts, reasoning and result of the Rankin case directly relevant and *127applicable here. A careful examination of the entire record here leads inescapably to the conclusion that the Appellant’s injury directly resulted from an “incident” or “accident” in the course of and arising out of the scope of his employment. There is no evidence whatsoever to sustain a conclusion that such injury had its origins elsewhere. This conclusion is especially sustained by the testimony of the Appellee’s medical expert.
The decision of the Full Industrial Board is hereby reversed and this cause is remanded to the Industrial Board for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Hoffman, C.J. and Staton, J., concur.
Note.—Reported at 301 N.E.2d 756.

=== CASE 9737585 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:17.310024+00 ===

JUSTICE KUEHN, specially concurring: I concur in all aspects of the majority opinion. I write to elaborate on the following comment about the competency of those attorneys who move for a directed verdict that results in the cure of an otherwise fatally flawed prosecution: “We understand defendant’s assertion that no competent defense attorney would ever move for a directed verdict if he knew that the State would then be allowed to reopen its case to present further evidence to cure the precise deficiency pointed out in the motion for directed verdict. Nevertheless, a criminal trial is not a game to win or lose, but a search for truth and justice. [Citation.] Every effort should be made to achieve justice, whether that results in the conviction or the acquittal of the defendant.” 331 Ill. App. 3d at 202. While I can readily agree with the noble pursuit of truth and justice, this passage seems to imply that an ill-timed challenge to a fatally flawed case, which results in repair after the defect is exposed, might not constitute the ineffective assistance of counsel because it serves an overriding effort to achieve justice. I trust that this implication is not intended. While a criminal trial is hardly a mere game, it proceeds under certain rules to an ultimate outcome that may belie truth and mock justice. Trials are all about winning and losing, and a criminal defense lawyer who blows the opportunity to obtain an undeserved victory for his client, even if the blunder serves a greater good by producing a deserved conviction, has provided constitutionally deficient representation. The defendant does not raise an ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim in this case. However, what happened here raises an interesting question. Is it tactically sound to voice a request for a directed verdict at the close of the State’s case when the trial judge possesses the ability to permit additional evidence to cure the defect upon which the directed verdict motion is made? Reasonably effective criminal defense lawyers should know that trial judges are guided by the platitudes set forth by my colleagues — that “a criminal trial is not a game to win or lose, but a search for the truth” in which “[e]very effort should be made to achieve justice, whether that results in the conviction or the acquittal of the defendant.” 331 Ill. App. 3d at 202. They should know that most judges will prefer truth and justice to prevail over a technical omission in proof on the State’s part. Ergo, sound legal strategy would seem to commend restraint in raising any challenge over a failure to identify the defendant, until after the jury is discharged and the trial judge no longer possesses the power to assist the prosecution in mending the error of its ways. While some might call such a tactic gamesmanship, timing the revelation of a deficiency in the State’s proofs so that it cannot be corrected would be decidedly reasonable strategy. After all, it wins the case. But for defense counsel’s motion, which brought to light the failure to prove identity, identity would never have been proven. A reasonable probability exists that the outcome of this appeal would be different. The defendant would have to prevail on his challenge to the legal sufficiency of the evidence because Thompson, the witness called after the State was permitted to reopen its case, was the only witness to place the defendant at the scene of the accident. Until the State called him, it had not established that this defendant was anywhere near the scene of the crime. Where the State has failed to present evidence to establish a necessary element of its case, like having the defendant identified, defense counsel possesses the absolute ability to champion his client’s acquittal. What professional blunder could be worse than a directed verdict motion that telegraphs the proof’s deficiency and results in a trial judge’s grant of the right to present additional evidence to cure it? It seems to me that this defendant suffers a conviction that the evidence would not have supported absent the enlightenment provided by the defendant’s attorney. Nonetheless, I concur in the majority opinion.

=== CASE 9737586 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:22.518562+00 ===

Connor T. Hansen, J.
Five issues are presented for determination on this appeal.
1. Did the interval between the date of the alleged offense and the date of arrest deprive the defendant of due process of law ?
2. Did the trial court err in not requiring a witness to disclose the identity of an informer ?
*5203. Were the facts as alleged in the complaint sufficient to permit a finding of probable cause for the issuance of a warrant of arrest ?
4. Did the unavailability of the original complaint at the time of trial constitute sufficient grounds for dismissal?
5. Did the trial court err in sentencing the defendant as a second offender pursuant to the provisions of sec. 161.28, Stats.?
1.
Interval between offense and arrest.
The record discloses that on April 14, 1966, Hector Jordan, an agent for the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, made a $20 purchase of marijuana from the defendant. Jordan was operating out of the Chicago regional office of the Bureau of Narcotics.
A warrant for the arrest of the defendant was issued April 6, 1967, and served the same day. The defendant had been confined in the Milwaukee county jail as the result of another offense from February 24, 1967, to the date of the arrest.
No claim is made that the defendant was denied a speedy trial due to the interval between the arrest (April 6, 1967) and the trial (November 29, 1967).
The issue presented by the defendant raises a due process question, fifth amendment, and art. I, sec. 8, Wisconsin Constitution. The defendant urges that he was denied due process because of the delay of nearly one year from the date of the offense to the date of arrest.
This is the first time such an application of denial of due process has been presented to this court.
On these grounds the defendant moved for a dismissal of the prosecution. The trial court conducted a pretrial hearing on this motion, and after hearing the evidence offered by both the state and the defendant, the motion was denied.
*521In situations concerning a prearrest interval of time, the statute of limitations is usually considered the primary guarantee against bringing overly stale criminal charges. United States v. Ewell (1966), 383 U. S. 116, 122, 86 Sup. Ct. 773, 15 L. Ed. 2d 627, 632. However, a substantial majority of state and federal jurisdictions confronted with this issue have recognized that a statute of limitations is not the sole standard by which delay between offense and arrest is to be measured.1
The defendant supports his position with Ross v. United States (D. C. Cir. 1965), 349 Fed. 2d 210. In reversing, the District of Columbia Court of Appeals considered the interval of seven months between the date of the offense and the date of arrest a deprivation of the defendant’s fifth amendment due process rights. Initially it can be stated that we do not consider Ross to be the law of this case. Furthermore, Ross is readily distinguishable from the facts in this case. For instance, in Ross the enforcement officers knew of the defendant’s whereabouts during the entire seven month delay.
In post-arrest cases this court has determined that the mere lapse of time is insufficient to establish a denial *522of a speedy trial. Commodore v. State (1967), 33 Wis. 2d 373, 377, 147 N. W. 2d 283. Absent the tolling of the statute of limitations we see no reason to hold that lapse of time, standing alone, should be sufficient grounds to demonstrate a denial of due process in prewarrant situations.
An examination of the record of the pretrial hearing and of the trial reveals ample justification for the interval between the offense and the arrest and fails to reflect any evidence of a denial of due process.
At the pretrial hearing Agent Jordan testified it was his intention to make more and larger purchases of marijuana from the defendant, that it is customary to make several purchases, and that the defendant told him he could get larger amounts. Defendant testified that on the day after the alleged purchase he went to Detroit. He specifically remembered certain clothing purchases he made and the time the bus left, but could not remember any of his activities of the day before. He made trips to Toledo and Minneapolis between April 14, 1966, and his incarceration on February 24, 1967. The agents were looking for him during this time. The Detroit agents were notified that he was wanted. The agents received information that the defendant might have gone to Texas. Though the defendant claims to have been in Milwaukee most of the year between the alleged offense and arrest, he testified at the pretrial hearing that he moved but did not use his own address for mail as, “I never wanted anyone to know where I lived.” Also the record reflects that the warrant was obtained within a few days after the federal narcotics agents learned that the defendant was in the Milwaukee jail.
The defendant presented absolutely no defense and in our opinion the record is barren of any demonstration of prejudice to the defendant as a result of the delay in arrest.
*523We, therefore, conclude that the trial court properly denied the motion to dismiss.
2.
Identity of an informer.
Hector Jordan testified that he made the purchase of the marijuana from the defendant. Agent Jordan was the complainant and one of the principal witnesses at the trial.
In cross-examining Jordan, counsel for the defendant sought to have him disclose the identity of an informer who told him that the defendant would be present at the time and place the offense is alleged to have taken place. Objections to this cross-examination were taken by the state and sustained by the court.
Defendant now submits that the trial court erred in not requiring Jordan to disclose the identity of such an informer.
The identity of an informer may be required where the disclosure of an informer’s identity, or of the contents of his communication, is relevant and helpful to the defense of the accused. However, in this case the identity of the informant is not even remotely relevant to the issue of guilt or innocence. Roviaro v. United States (1957), 353 U. S. 53, 60, 77 Sup. Ct. 623, 1 L. Ed. 2d 639, 645.
This court and the United States Supreme Court have recognized that the identity of an informer need not always be disclosed. Stelloh v. Liban (1963), 21 Wis. 2d 119, 126, 127, 124 N. W. 2d 101; McCray v. Illinois (1967), 386 U. S. 300, 310, 87 Sup. Ct. 1056, 18 L. Ed. 2d 62.
In this case we conclude that the trial court did not err in not requiring the witness to identify the informer.
*5243.
Sufficiency of complaint.
The defendant asserts that the allegations contained in the complaint were not sufficient to permit a finding of probable cause upon which to issue a warrant for defendant’s arrest.
The complaint and warrant were both executed on April 6, 1967. Defendant was arrested the same day. A preliminary examination was had before a county judge sitting as magistrate and the defendant was bound over to circuit court for trial.
He was arraigned in circuit court on an information on May 19, 1967, pleaded not guilty, and trial was set for July 18, 1967. July 7, 1967, on motion of defendant, the trial date was adjourned to September 19, 1967. There were further adjournments and the case was ultimately tried November 29,1967.
After arraignment in circuit court, but before trial, the defendant moved for a dismissal on the basis of the insufficiency of the complaint.
We are of the opinion that the trial court properly denied this motion.
We do not reach the alleged constitutional question raised by the appellant. Such an objection, assuming one existed, was waived because it was not raised until long after the defendant pleaded to the information in circuit court. Gaertner v. State (1967), 35 Wis. 2d 159, 150 N. W. 2d 370; State ex rel. La Follette v. Raskin (1966), 30 Wis. 2d 39, 139 N. W. 2d 667; State ex rel. La Follette v. Moser (1966), 30 Wis. 2d 56, 139 N. W. 2d 632.
In any event, we have examined the record, considered the arguments advanced by counsel and conclude that the complaint was not constitutionally defective.
*5254.
Unavailability of original complaint.
November 29, 1967, the date of the trial, the court, the prosecutor and the defendant’s attorney discovered for the first time that the original complaint was not a part of the trial court record.
Defendant thereupon moved for a dismissal and the trial court denied the motion. We are of the opinion that the decision of the trial court on this motion was correct.
Several copies of the original complaint were available and the record convinces us that an original complaint issued in this case. In fact, the defendant does not directly argue that there was none.
Furthermore, after the preliminary examination had been conducted and probable cause determined, the defendant was bound over to the circuit court for trial. Following the bindover an information was filed to which the defendant entered a plea on May 19, 1967, and was tried.
In felony cases the information is the accusatory pleading under our criminal procedure and its filing is not jurisdictionally dependent upon a valid complaint. Pillsbury v. State (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 87, 93, 142 N. W. 2d 187. At the time of the arraignment on the information no objection was made to any of the proceedings in the lower court.
The fact that the original complaint is now missing does not vitiate the conviction of the defendant.
5.
Second offender sentence.
The trial court determined that the defendant was a second offender within the purview of sec. 161.28, Stats., *526and thereupon imposed the mandatory minimum sentence of five years.
The crime which is the basis of this appeal and upon which the second offender penalty was invoked, was committed April 14, 1966. The defendant was convicted of this crime on November 29,1967.
Between these two dates the defendant committed, and was convicted of, another narcotics violation.
A review of the applicable statutes brings us to the conclusion that the defendant should not have been sentenced as a second offender for the offense that was committed April 14,1966.
Applicable Statutes.
“Sec. 161.28 Penalties; sentence; probation and parole; evidence and procedure on prior convictions. U
“ (3) The procedure for charging and determining pri- or convictions under this section shall be as provided in s. 959.12 (1).” (Emphasis added.)
“Sec. 959.12. Sentence of repeater. (1) How PRIOR Conviction Charged and Determined. Whenever a person charged with a crime will be a repeater as defined in s. 939.62 if convicted, any prior convictions may be alleged in the complaint, indictment or information or amendments so alleging at any time before or at arraignment, and before acceptance of any plea. The court may, upon motion of the district attorney, grant a reasonable time to investigate possible prior convictions before accepting a plea. If such prior convictions are admitted by the defendant or proved by the state he shall be subject to be sentenced under s. 939.62 unless he establishes that he was pardoned on grounds of innocence for any crime necessary to constitute him a repeater. . . .” (Emphasis added.)
“Sec. 939.62 Increased penalty for habitual criminality.
“(2) The actor is a repeater if he was convicted of a felony during the 5-year period immediately preceding the commission of the crime for which he presently is being sentenced, . . .” (Emphasis added.)
*527We read the language of these statutes to mean that one who is being sentenced as a second offender under a felony statute must have been convicted of a felony during the five-year period immediately preceding the commission of the crime for which he is presently being sentenced.
We recognize that sec. 161.28, Stats., in providing for enhancement of penalty, uses the words “second offense” whereas sec. 959.12 uses the word “conviction.” However, this court has previously determined that the use of the word “offense” as used in a repeater statute means conviction. Faull v. State (1922), 178 Wis. 66, 189 N. W. 274; Meyers v. State (1927), 198 Wis. 126, 213 N. W. 645.
Also such an application of the statutes is in conformance with the general and majority rule adopted in other jurisdictions.2 Regardless of the particular phraseology of repeater statutes, their inherent purpose is to serve as a warning to first offenders. The infliction of more severe punishment for a repeater is based upon his persistent violation of the law after conviction for previous infractions. Whether the word “offense” or “conviction” is used it is generally held that it is a prerequisite that the prior “conviction” or “offense” must precede the commission of the principal offense in order to enhance the punishment under a repeater statute.
Therefore, inasmuch as the defendant was sentenced as a second offender, we have determined to remand for resentencing. He should be sentenced as a first offender for his conviction of November 29, 1967. In connection with such resentencing, the trial court should give consideration to the time the defendant has already served.
By the Court. — Judgment of conviction affirmed, but the sentence is vacated. The warden of the Wisconsin state prison is ordered to remand custody of Lynn Midell *528to the sheriff of Milwaukee county preceding his resen-tence by the circuit court for Milwaukee county.
See Bond v. United States (D. C. Cir. 1967), 233 Atl. 2d 506; United States v. Hauff (7th Cir. 1968), 395 Fed. 2d 555; United States v. Feinberg (2d Cir. 1967), 383 Fed. 2d 60; Schlinsky v. United States (1st Cir. 1967), 379 Fed. 2d 735; Terlikowski v. United States (8th Cir. 1967), 379 Fed. 2d 501; United States v. Harbin (4th Cir. 1967), 377 Fed. 2d 78; Woody v. United States (D. C. Cir. 1966), 370 Fed. 2d 214; Ross v. United States (D. C. Cir. 1965), 349 Fed. 2d 210; People v. Gilmore (1965), 239 Cal. App. 2d 125, 48 Cal. Rptr. 449; People v. Hryciuk (1967), 36 Ill. 2d 500, 224 N. E. 2d 250; State v. Hodge (1966), 153 Conn. 564, 219 Atl. 2d 367. Contra, Bruce v. United States (5th Cir. 1965), 351 Fed. 2d 318, certiorari denied (1966), 384 U. S. 921, 86 Sup. Ct. 1370, 16 L. Ed. 2d 441; Harlow v. United States (5th Cir. 1962), 301 Fed. 2d 361; Foley v. United States (8th Cir. 1961), 290 Fed. 2d 562; Hoopengarner v. United States (6th Cir. 1959), 270 Fed. 2d 465; Parker v. United States (6th Cir. 1958), 252 Fed. 2d 680; D’Aquino v. United States (9th Cir. 1951), 192 Fed. 2d 338.
24 A. L. R. 2d 1247.

=== CASE 2211976 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.143326+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 294 (1990)
Wilmer "Knute" KNUDSEN and Mary Knudsen, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Ed ANDREASEN, Jean Andreasen, Calvin L. Jacobsen, George Kintner, and Frank "Rusty" Wirth, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 89-760.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
August 30, 1990.
Robert Kohorst of the Kohorst Law Firm, Harlan, for plaintiffs-appellants.
J.C. Salvo and Richard C. Schenck of Salvo, Deren, Schenck & Lauterbach, P.C., Harlan, for defendants-appellees.
*295 Considered by DONIELSON, P.J., and SCHLEGEL and SACKETT, JJ.
SCHLEGEL, Judge.
Plaintiff Wilmer "Knute" Knudsen was employed by Harlan Manufacturing Company (HMC) in 1965 as a salesman. Defendant Ed Andreasen was the majority shareholder in the corporation and he made most of the decisions. Knudsen was born in 1917 and he suffers from various physical ailments. In 1979, Knudsen informed Andreasen that he was considering retirement. The company had no regular pension plan, but had previously compensated two employees for limited employment at $250 per month and one-half of their health and life insurance costs. Knudsen was also offered limited employment status at the same rate of compensation. He retired on May 1, 1980. Knudsen received $250 per month until December 1986, when HMC dissolved as a corporation.
Knudsen and his wife brought this suit, alleging Andreasen had promised them that Knudsen would receive $250 per month for the rest of his life, and that he had retired based on this promise. The district court determined that neither HMC nor Andreasen made such a promise. The court also found that Knudsen did not rely on any statements made by Andreasen when he decided to retire. The court dismissed plaintiffs' claims.
Knudsen now appeals. The first issue in this case is whether review should be de novo or on error. Knudsen first filed his petition at law, but later amended it to a petition in equity. He asserted claims based on contractual law and promissory estoppel. The district court did not specifically state whether it was ruling in law or equity.
Knudsen contends that the court erred in its findings of fact. The court found that Andreasen was more credible than Knudsen because Knudsen seemed confused about some dates. Knudsen states that this was only a minor discrepancy, and that Andreasen was also unable to remember specific dates. He also contends that there was sufficient evidence in the record to show Andreasen's promise to him. Andreasen admitted promising to pay Knudsen for at least the life of the corporation.
Under Iowa Code section 496A.89(3), a corporation must provide for all debts and obligations before it may be dissolved. Knudsen argues that HMC violated this provision by not providing for its obligation to him before it dissolved.
Knudsen also asserts that he established a claim of promissory estoppel. He believes clearly that Andreasen promised to continue to pay him. Knudsen states that he acted to his detriment by retiring when he did, based on the company's promise.
Initially, we consider the proper scope of review. The essential character of a cause of action and the relief it seeks, as shown by the complaint, determine whether an action is at law or equity. Mosebach v. Blythe, 282 N.W.2d 755, 758 (Iowa App. 1979). Where the primary right of the plaintiff arises from nonperformance of a contract, where the remedy is money, and where the damages are full and certain, remedies are usually provided at law. Id. The present action was the result of an alleged contract between Knudsen and his employer. If such a contract was found, the damages would be reasonably certain. In addition, the action appeared to be tried at law. Our scope of review is on assigned error only. Iowa R.App.P. 4. Findings of fact in a law action are binding upon the appellate court if supported by substantial evidence. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(1).
Knudsen raises three separate issues on this appeal. All three of those issues succeed or fail based on whether there was substantial evidence to support the trial court's findings of fact. The most significant fact in this case was the trial court's finding that Andreasen was more credible than Knudsen. Even under de novo review we give the trial judge leeway to determine credibility issues. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(7). There was clearly substantial evidence to support the trial court's findings on the credibility issue. The trial court points to several errors in the memory of Knudsen. Andreasen also made *296 some errors, but the trial court found those errors to be insignificant and we will not disturb its ruling on appeal.
Based on its credibility finding, the trial court found that Andreasen had made no promise to Knudsen to extend payments to Knudsen beyond the life of the company. Therefore, Andreasen is not liable under either Iowa corporation law or the theories of promissory estoppel and detrimental reliance.
All three of the above theories of recovery require some type of obligation or promise to be actionable. Iowa Code section 496A.89(3) states that "all debts, obligations and liabilities of the corporation" must be paid or discharged before dissolution is allowed. Harlan Manufacturing Corporation cannot be liable under Iowa corporation law because no promise was made and, therefore, no obligation existed after corporate dissolution.
Likewise, there is no action available under promissory estoppel or detrimental reliance. There was no promise made that Andreasen should be estopped from denying, and also no promise that Knudsen could have relied upon to expect payments beyond the life of the corporation. We affirm the trial court.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2212178 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:16.69812+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 289 (1990)
Constance L. HOELSCHER, Lurlin L. Hoelscher, Karen L. Hayes and Leroy R. Hayes, Appellants,
v.
Duane W. SANDAGE, Individually, and Duane W. Sandage, Trustee of the Thelma L. Warman 1983 Revocable Trust, Appellees.
No. 89-436.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
August 30, 1990.
*290 Timothy M. Sweet of Beard & Sweet, Reinbeck, for appellants.
John L. Butler of Lundy, Butler & Lundy, P.C., Eldora, for appellees.
Thelma L. Warman, Alden, pro se.
Heard by OXBERGER, C.J., and DONIELSON and HABHAB, JJ.
OXBERGER, Chief Judge.
In 1950, Thelma Warman and her husband transferred the home farm, consisting of over 400 acres, to their four children with Thelma retaining a life interest. Two of the four children, Karen and Constance, as well as their husbands, are plaintiffs in this case. Thelma divorced her husband in 1950.
In the early 1980's, Thelma became concerned about estate taxes upon her death. *291 Upon the recommendation of Duane Sandage, her long-time friend and confidant, she contacted Steve Zumbach an estate planning attorney. Upon Zumbach's recommendation the Thelma L. Warman 1983 Revocable Trust (Thelma Trust) was established in June 1983, along with a pour-over will and Crummy trusts for each child. Duane and Thelma were named co-trustees of the Thelma Trust. The Thelma Trust authorized the trustee to mortgage property without notice, held trustees liable only for his or her own willful conduct, and was revocable.
In December 1983, the plaintiffs, their sibling Craig Warman, and Thelma signed several documents transferring interests in the home farm. In the transfer, the plaintiffs and Craig Warman deeded their remainder interests in the home farm to Thelma in exchange for an eleven percent fee interest in the home farm. As a result, the Thelma Trust became the owner of sixty-seven percent of the farm and each child became owner of eleven percent. The Crummy trusts were also signed at this time. Zumbach recommended the transactions for estate tax reasons.
In 1984 Thelma began negotiations for a new operating loan. To secure the loan the bank required a mortgage on all of the home farm. In May 1984, the children and Thelma executed the mortgage. The plaintiffs contend they were deceived as to what they were signing. They claim that they only saw the signature page of the document and Sandage called the document a "mortgage release".
In January 1986, a foreclosure action was filed against the trustees and the children. The bank acquired all of the home farm except the homestead. In the spring of 1986, Thelma voluntarily revoked the Thelma Trust.
In December 1986, the plaintiffs filed their petition at law against Duane Sandage, in his individual capacity and in his representative capacity as trustee, attorney Steve Zumbach and his law firm. Plaintiffs eventually dismissed their claims against the defendant lawyers. Prior to this dismissal, the court determined that Zumbach was not the trust's attorney and that Thelma properly asserted her attorney client privilege as to certain evidence.
After a bench trial, the district court entered its findings of fact and conclusions of law rejecting the plaintiffs' claims. The court found no basis for a fraud claim against Sandage nor the existence of a confidential relationship between Sandage and the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs appeal.
The standard of review for this case alleging fraud is correction of errors at law. Iowa R.App.P. 4. Since a jury was waived, the findings of fact have the effect of a special verdict. Id.
In Grefe v. Ross, 231 N.W.2d 863, 865 (Iowa 1975), the Court discussed the appellate review of a case alleging fraud:
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view it in its light most favorable to sustaining the court's judgment. We need only consider the evidence favorable to the judgment, whether or not it is contradicted. The trial court's findings of fact are binding upon us if supported by substantial evidence if the finding may reasonably be inferred from the evidence. (citation omitted).
For the plaintiffs to prove fraud, they must prove each of the following elements by a preponderance of clear, satisfactory, and convincing evidence: (1) representation, (2) falsity, (3) materiality, (4) scienter, (5) intent to deceive, (6) reliance, and (7) resulting injury and damage. Id. at 864 (citing Hall v. Wright, 261 Iowa 758, 766, 156 N.W.2d 661, 666 (1968)).
The plaintiffs contend that since Sandage acted in a fiduciary capacity during the transactions, he shouldered the burden of establishing his actions were not fraudulent and the trial court erred in placing the burden on them. Further, the plaintiffs argue that even if Sandage was not acting as a trustee, that a confidential relationship existed which placed the burden of proof on Sandage as a fiduciary. We find no merit in either of plaintiffs' contentions and uphold the trial court's findings that the plaintiffs failed to establish either fraud or *292 breach of a fiduciary duty arising from a confidential or fiduciary relationship.
The first set of transactions in which the plaintiffs allege fraud on the part of Sandage is the December 1983 transfers where the plaintiffs traded their remainder interests for fee interests in eleven percent of the home farm. The record supports the finding that the transfers were for the benefit of the plaintiffs. The purpose of the transactions was to decrease the estate taxes removed from their mother's estate after her death. The transfers did not involve trust property, but rather the transfer of the plaintiffs' remainder interests for fee interests in the home farm.
Sandage had no interest in the transfers and the record supports the trial court's finding that the transfers were done at Thelma's insistence for estate planning purposes. Sandage did not have a duty of disclosure with respect to the transfers between Thelma and her children because the transfers did not involve trust property, but rather property transferred between Thelma and her children prior to the property's placement in the Thelma Trust. Sandage did not even participate in the meeting other than to introduce Zumbach. After the introduction, Sandage left the meeting.
The transfers occurred due to Zumbach counseling Thelma about the potential benefits from the transactions with respect to her estate planning. The plaintiffs claim Zumbach acted as the trust's attorney and not Thelma's attorney and therefore had a duty to disclose to them. The record supports the trial court's finding that even though Zumbach testified that he served as the trust's attorney, he was in fact Thelma's attorney and he served in the capacity as advisor to Thelma, not the Thelma Trust. Additionally, during the meeting between Zumbach and the plaintiffs he advised them to consult with a tax advisor if they had any concerns.
With respect to the plaintiffs' claims that a confidential relationship existed between themselves and Sandage so as to create a duty to disclose, no evidence in the record supports such a claim.
The law of confidential relationships states if a person trusts another so that the other has so much influence over the person that the two are not at arm's length, equity will regard transfers between them as presumptively invalid and cast upon the dominant person the burden of upholding the transfers. First National Bank in Sioux City v. Curran, 206 N.W.2d 317, 321 (Iowa 1973). The essential ingredient in cases finding the existence of a confidential relationship is such great confidence placed in the dominant party that the subservient person is left exposed. Id. at 322. A confidential relationship arises "when one person has gained the confidence of another and purports to act or advise with the other's interest in mind." Oehler v. Hoffman, 253 Iowa 631, 635, 113 N.W.2d 254, 256 (1962).
The plaintiffs must show by clear proof that a confidential relationship existed between themselves and Sandage before any fiduciary duty of disclosure arises. Punelli v. Punelli, 364 N.W.2d 259, 261 (Iowa App.1984). The record supports the finding of no confidential relationship between the plaintiffs and Sandage. Duane Sandage, or Sandage Company, occasionally did business with Thelma's children as a realtor or assisting in commodities investments prior to 1983. The trial court found that these transactions caused the plaintiffs to have confidence in Sandage, but did not create the principal requisites of a confidential relationship. We agree with the trial court's finding that the plaintiffs also failed to prove any of the necessary elements of fraud such as false representation or intent to deceive on the part of Sandage during the December 16, 1983 meeting.
In the December 1983 meeting Sandage merely introduced Zumbach to the plaintiffs, provided them with a brief sketch of his credentials and then left the room. We find nothing in the record of any discussion between the plaintiffs and Sandage regarding the transactions. The plaintiffs failed to present any evidence that Sandage acted as their advisor with regard to the transaction *293 or presented Zumbach as his agent. The record lacks any evidence to support a confidential relationship ever existed between Sandage and the plaintiffs.
The transfers between the plaintiffs and their mother did not involve trust property. Thelma's interest in the home farm only became trust property following the transactions with the plaintiffs.
The plaintiffs allude to a confidential relationship between their mother and Sandage as the basis for a conspiracy headed by Sandage to defraud them. The trial court found Thelma headstrong, independent, and capable of making her own business dealings, facts negating the plaintiffs' argument that Sandage unduly influenced Thelma, their mother, to defraud them. We agree with the trial court that the plaintiffs failed to prove any conspiracy between Sandage, Thelma or Zumbach nor any undue influence exerted by Sandage over Thelma. The plaintiffs mortgaged their own fee interests in the home farm during the transaction. Their signatures on the mortgage affected only their own fee interests and did not relate to the interest the Thelma Trust held in the home farm. The same analysis regarding the existence of a confidential relationship between the plaintiffs and Sandage applies equally strong to this transaction.
Again, the plaintiffs failed to prove fraud on the part of Sandage in his capacity as a trustee of the Thelma Trust regardless of the placement of the burden of proof. We adopt the trial court's findings that Sandage did not assert at the meeting that the parties were signing a mortgage release and that it was apparent on the signature page that the form was a mortgage. Consequently, we also adopt the trial court's findings that no fraud or breach of fiduciary duty occurred during the transaction. If the plaintiffs failed to understand the significance of their actions they cannot hold Sandage responsible.
The evidence supports the trial court's findings of fact. The findings which the plaintiffs contend were either incorrectly stated or not found by the court are not significant with respect to the decision on the merits. Substantial evidence in the record supports the trial court's findings and we find plaintiff's claims of insufficient evidence without merit.
We also find plaintiffs' contention that even if Sandage did not breach his duty as a trustee that he is jointly and severally liable for a breach committed by his co-trustee without merit. The plaintiffs failed to show any of the necessary elements of fraud with relation to the activities of their mother in her capacity as a trustee such that Sandage could be held jointly and severally liable.
The plaintiffs also claim that the trial court erred in failing to admit certain evidence offered by them under various claims of admissibility. We find the trial court did not abuse its power by refusing to admit various documents the plaintiffs claim were admissible as business records. A trial court enjoys "broad discretion" to determine the admissibility of business records. Graen's Mens Wear v. Stille-Pierce Agency, 329 N.W.2d 295, 298 (Iowa 1983) (citations omitted). With respect to plaintiffs' contentions the trial court erred in denying their motion to compel production of various documents due to attorney client privilege, we also find no abuse of discretion. The record supports the initial finding that Steve Zumbach served as Thelma's attorney, not as attorney for the Thelma Trust.
In evaluating the balance of the plaintiffs' other claims of error with respect to admissibility, we find no abuse of discretion in the denial of any of the evidence. Ordinarily, relevancy and materiality are matters of trial court discretion. Carter v. MacMillan Oil Co., 355 N.W.2d 52, 55 (Iowa 1984). Even if the evidence was admissible, only harmless error resulted from its denial.
Lastly, we address the plaintiffs' claims that the trial court erroneously found a lack of legal interest in the plaintiff-husbands and a lack of capacity as beneficiaries in the plaintiff-wives. The interest of the plaintiff-wives closely follow the interests claimed in In re Willcockson, 368 *294 N.W.2d 198 (Iowa App.1985). Like the interest in Willcockson, Karen and Constance possessed an interest in the trust property which would vest only upon the discretionary conduct of their mother. Thelma retained discretion, under the terms of the Thelma Trust, as a co-trustee and settlor of the Thelma Trust to use her sixty-seven percent of the home farm as she pleased regardless of its inclusion in the Thelma Trust. At the time of the alleged fraud, the plaintiffs lacked standing to attack one of the trustees about his or her actions in connection with mortgaging the trust property.
The plaintiffs lacked the interest of the remaindermen in Cox v. Cox, 357 N.W.2d 304 (Iowa 1984), because the only contingency in Cox, was the death of the holder of the life estate, while in this case Thelma retained the ability to transfer the trust property so that no interest might ever vest in the plaintiffs. Since Constance and Karen did not have sufficient interest as beneficiaries of the Thelma Trust, Lurin and Leroy, with only inchoate dower interests, also had insufficient interests in the trust property to attack the co-trustees' actions in connection with the trust property.
For all of the above reasons we affirm the trial court on all issues.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9737494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:04.116994+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Per Curiam
The appellees have filed herein their Petition For Rehearing addressed to our opinion handed down on October 16, 1973. The first paragraph of appellees’ Petition alleges, in part:
“1. The Court, at page 2 of its published opinion erroneously recited the critical factual issue in the case as ‘. . . but on July 9, 1971, he experienced a sharp pain while working in the furnace
We have carefully examined the record and find that the appellees’ assertion is correct. Only in appellant’s Form 9 application and in the testimony of Dr. Biery in his recitation of the history given to him by appellant, is there any reference to the appellant experiencing any sharp pain on July 9, 1971. The appellant’s testimony concerning the matter, repeated several times through the transcript, and set out in our original opinion, can be summarized as follows: That as a result of working in a kneeling or a bent over position in a confined area my back started hurting and finally on July 9 my back was killing me and “I just couldn’t stand it any longer”. We therefore correct our original opinion by deleting *128from the second paragraph of page two the words “he experience a sharp pain while working in the furnace and”.
With this correction we re-affirm our original opinion and its reliance on the case of Rankin v. Industrial Contractors, Inc. (1969), 144 Ind. App. 394, 246 N.E.2d 410. In our view, the fact situation in Rankin supporting the determination of an accident in that case, namely the repeated jolting of the plaintiff in a forklift truck, is applicable to this case, in which the accident consisted of repeated strain to appellant’s back occasioned by his working in a kneeling or bent over position in a confined area only 28 inches high, resulting in a severe lumbosacral sprain. We therefore reassert our original statement that the testimony given leads to the conclusion that the appellant’s injury directly resulted from an “incident” or “accident” in the course of and arising out of the scope of his employment.
The appellees’ Petition For Rehearing is denied.
Note.-—Reported at 304 N.E.2d 355.

=== CASE 2210779 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:57.991663+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 497 (1990)
In re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST George E. PLOWMAN, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C1-90-1742.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 19, 1990.
ORDER
The Lawyers Professional Responsibility Board, through its director, has filed with the Court a petition alleging that respondent, George E. Plowman, misappropriated client trust account funds and committed additional professional misconduct to conceal the misappropriations. In conjunction with those proceedings, the director has filed a petition, pursuant to Rule 16, Rules of Lawyers Professional Responsibility, seeking an order temporarily suspending respondent from the practice of law pending the final determination of the disciplinary proceedings.
Since the commencement of the disciplinary proceedings, respondent has admitted the misappropriation of funds, has offered partial restitution, and has cooperated with the director's investigation. In addition, respondent has made available several supportive letters from clients and friends attesting to respondent's good character and reputation. Considering the extent and seriousness of the admitted misconduct, however, "it would be inappropriate, pending final determination of disciplinary proceedings, to hold out the Respondent as an attorney who poses no risk of injury to the public and who is entitled to the unquestioned trust and confidence of clients, judges, and lawyers." In re Okerman, 298 N.W.2d 28, 29 (Minn.1980).
The Court, having considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding this matter, the petitions of the director, and the arguments of counsel, NOW ORDERS:
1. That the respondent, George E. Plowman, is hereby temporarily suspended from the practice of law pending final determination of these disciplinary proceedings, pursuant to Rule 16, Rules of Lawyers Professional Responsibility.
2. That respondent shall, within 10 days of the date of this order, notify each of his clients of his inability to continue representation of the client and shall otherwise fully comply with the provisions of Rule 26, Rules of Lawyers Professional Responsibility.

=== CASE 9737495 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:06.509718+00 ===

I.
Statement on the Appeal
Staton, J.
Indianapolis Police Officer David Cress was employed part-time at the G. C. Murphy Company. He was told by one of the saleswomen that a crime of theft had been committed in the store. A description of the man and the automobile that he was seen getting into was given to Officer Cress. This information was immediately telephoned into the Indianapolis Police Department Dispatcher and a police car was sent to the store. Approximately ten (10) minutes later, an automobile with a passenger answering the description given to Officer Cress was observed, stopped, and the *686passenger arrested. Two adding machines with G. C. Murphy Company price tags on them were found in the rear seat. James Hubble, the passenger, was charged with possession of stolen property1 and theft.2 The trial court found Hubble not guilty of possession of stolen property but did find him guilty of theft. Hubble was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of one year at the Indiana State Farm with six months suspended.
Sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the conviction on the charge of theft is the only issue that will be discussed in this opinion.
We conclude in our opinion that the evidence was not sufficient to sustain the conviction for theft. We reverse.
II.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
David Cress, an Indianapolis Police Officer, was working his part-time job at the G. C. Murphy Company, 1043 Virginia Avenue, Indianapolis, Indiana on February 16, 1972. A saleswoman reported to Officer Cress that a crime had been committed by a male negro wearing a multi-colored red shirt and dark pants who had gotten into a black 1966 Chevrolet. Officer Cress called police headquarters, and a police car was sent to Murphy’s. Approximately ten (10) minutes after this call, the police car picked up Officer Cress who observed a black 1966 Chevrolet traveling north on Virginia Avenue. The officers stopped the car which contained two occupants and two adding machines with G. C. Murphy price tags on them in the back seat. James Hubble was in the passenger seat, and Officer Cress testified that he was wearing a multicolored red shirt and dark pants. The occupants of the *687car were taken back to Murphy’s, but the saleswoman refused to identify either James Hubble or the black Chevrolet. The assistant manager of the G. C. Murphy Company identified the adding machines as a brand sold by the store and identified the Murphy price tags. He testified that the value of the adding machines was $42.95 each.
III.
STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE
The only necessary issue to be discussed for the purpose of this opinion is:
Was there sufficient evidence to sustain a conviction of theft?
We conclude that there was insufficient evidence and reverse.
IV.
STATEMENT ON THE LAW
Theft under our statute, IC 1971, 35-17-5-3; Ind. Ann. Stat. §10-3030 (Burns 1972 Supp.), requires that the State of Indiana prove: (1) that James Hubble obtained or exerted unauthorized control over the property of G. C. Murphy Company, and (2) with the intent to deprive the G. C. Murphy Company of the use and benefit of such property.
When this court is considering the sufficiency of the evidence, we will consider only that evidence most favorable to the State with all reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom. The conviction will be affirmed if, from that point of view, there is substantial evidence of probative value from which the trier of fact could reasonably infer that the defendant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Rogers v. State (1972), 154 Ind. App. 445, 290 N.E.2d 135; Taylor v. State (1972), 259 Ind. *68825, 284 N.E.2d 775. We will not weigh the evidence nor resolve questions of credibility of witnesses. Walker v. State (1973), 155 Ind. App. 404, 293 N.E.2d 35; Smith v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 401, 260 N.E.2d 558.
Our function on appeal is: “. . . to insure that the State has sustained its burden of proof on the material elements of the crime charged, and that these elements are supported by substantial evidence.” Phillips v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 321, 295 N.E.2d 592, 594.
The hearsay testimony of Officer Cress, which was based upon what a saleswoman at G. C. Murphy Company had told him prior to Hubble’s arrest, is not evidence of Hubble’s guilt. The saleswoman did not testify. Officer Cress’ testimony was admitted for the sole purpose of showing corpus delicti, a crime had been committed by someone. It explains Officer Cress’ actions and the probable cause for stopping and arresting Hubble. Here, its evidenitary significance stops.
Neither the driver or Hubble acted suspiciously before being arrested. The adding machines were not concealed. They were in the backseat and easily discovered by Officer Cress. The only statement made to Officer Cress was “. . . they just wanted to know why they were arrested, was all.” There is no circumstantial evidence connecting Hubble with the initial corpus delicti. The only evidence of Hubble’s guilt is that he was a passenger in an automobile which had two adding machines in the backseat. The State failed to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the adding machines found in the backseat were stolen prop-perty. The assistant manager of G. C. Murphy Company testified:
“Q. Did you see those adding machines ?
“A. Yes sir.
“Q. And, whose adding machines were they?
“A. G. C. Murphy Company.
*689“Q. And, you identified these, how did you identify them?
“A. Uh, for the brand name and for the sales tickets that was on the machines.
“Q. Now, can you tell the Court, how much these two adding machines were worth, what is the value of them?
“A. At the time, I believe the value of the adding machines was forty-two, ninety-five, a piece, if I can remember.
“Q. That would be forty-two, ninety-five a piece?
“A. Yes sir.”
This testimony does not establish that these two Smith-Corona adding machines were the property of G. C. Murphy Company on the 16th day of February, 1972, and were being offered for sale in the store where the crime is alleged to have been committed. The price tag is some evidence of value. Green v. State (1973), 156 Ind. App. 446, 296 N.E.2d 925. The price tag does not establish title and location.
The State has further failed to establish the necessary element of control. Williams, Spegal v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 316, 253 N.E.2d 242;3 Holtel v. State (1972), 155 Ind. App. 1, 290 N.E.2d 775. There is no evidence in the record from which it can be inferred that *690Hubble had control of the two adding machines. He was a passenger in the front seat of an automobile. There is no circumstantial evidence in the record which tends to establish any vestiges of control by Hubble.
The facts in the record before us come squarely within and are controlled by Melvin v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 351, 232 N.E.2d 606; Hopkins v. State (1973), 155 Ind. App. 195, 291 N.E.2d 914; and Holtel v. State, supra. In Melvin v. State, supra, the defendant was seen standing three (3) feet from a cash register in an alley where a shoe store had one of the windows broken. In Hopkins v. State, supra, the defendant was standing in front of an automobile with a raised hood which had been parked along the highway. The battery cables had been disengaged from the terminals. In the present case, the evidence merely shows that Hubble was a passenger in the front seat of an automobile which had two adding machines in the backseat with G. C. Murphy Company price tags on them. If the evidence merely tends to establish a suspicion of guilt, it is not sufficient to sustain a conviction. Phillips v. State, supra; Dunn v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 142, 293 N.E.2d 32.
*691The judgment of the trial court should be and the same hereby is reversed with instructions to grant James Hubble a new trial.
Hoffman, C.J., concurs in result with separation opinion, in which Sharp, J., concurs.
. IC 1971, 35-17-5-3(1) (f); Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3030(1) (f) (Burns 1972 Supp.).
. IC 1971, 35-17-5-3(1) (a); Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3030(1) (a) (Burns 1972 Supp.).
. In Williams, Spegal v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 316, 321-322, 253 N.E.2d 242, the Supreme Court of Indiana defined control and possession as follows:
“The terms control and possession are not precisely synonymous although they do have common elements in their meanings. Webster’s International Dictionary gives the legal definition of possession as ‘one who has physical control of the things and holds it for himself.’ All the definitions contained in recognized law dictionaries indicate that the element of custody and control is involved in the term possession. State v. Virdure (Mo. 1963), 371 S.W.2d 196. Possession of a thing means having it under one control or under one’s dominion. U.S. v. Malfi (3rd Cir. 1959), 264 F.2d 147. A person who is in possession of a chattel is one who has physical control with the intent to exercise such control on his own behalf, New England Box Co. v. C & R Const. Co. (1943), 313 Mass. 696, 49 N.E.2d 121, 150 A.L.R. 152. Possession involves a present or, in case of constructive possession, a past ability to control the thing possessed plus an intent to exclude others from such control. State ex rel. Edie v. Shain (1941), 348 Mo. 119, 152 *690S.W.2d 174. For additional definitions of the word possession see, 72 C.J.S., p. 233; also see ‘Possession’ (control, care or custody), 33 Words and Phrases, p. 80; and ‘Custody’ (charge control or possession) 10A Words and Phrases, p. 500. “By contrast the word control means the power or authority to manage, superintend, restrict, regulate, direct, govern, administer or oversee. Black’s Law Dictionary, Fourth Edition. It is the power or authority to manage . . . restrict. State v. First Bank of Jud (1924), 52 N.D. 231, 202 N.W. 391.
‘Ordinarily control means . . . power or authority to check or restrain; regulating power; restraining or directing influence . . . so to it may imply, or not imply possession, depending on the circumstances ...’ 18 C.J.S., p. 28 (our emphasis)
“See also the varying definitions of ‘Control’ in 9A Words and Phrases, p. 4 and following.
“Our conclusion based on a meticulous examination of the meanings of these two words is this: that to prove control over a chattel or over other property, one does not need in all cases to show conduct which amounts to possession. Although control is a necessary element in proving possession, the converse is not true. Our analysis is supported by the wording of the statute [10-3040, supra] which states that the definition of ‘exert control over property’ includes but is not limited to possession.”

=== CASE 2210783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.032416+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 349 (1973)
Millicent R. LOEB, Appellant (Plaintiff below),
v.
Edward Samuel LOEB et al., Appellees (Defendants below).
No. 171S18.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 26, 1973.
*350 Thomas W. Munger, George E. Weigle, Lafayette, for appellant.
Louis Pearlman, Jr., Lafayette, for appellees.
HUNTER, Justice.[*]
This is an appeal from the trial court's decree awarding a divorce, custody of minor children, and certain property to the plaintiff-appellant in a divorce action. This Court entertains jurisdiction pursuant to Ind. Ann. Stat. § 4-214 (Burns 1968 Repl.). [Note: Burns § 4-214 was repealed effective January 1, 1972.] The appellant raises the following issues for our review:
(1) Whether the trial court awarded the plaintiff an adequate property settlement award.
(2) Whether the trial court erred in evaluating certain corporate stock owned by defendant.
(3) Whether the trial court adequately provided for the support of minor children.
(4) Whether the trial court erred in waiving and forgiving support payments accrued but unpaid under a pendente lite support order.
Defendant-appellee filed a motion to dismiss this appeal on February 22, 1969. Omitting formal parts and attached exhibits, said motion reads as follows:
"APPELLEES' MOTION TO DISMISS APPEAL OR TO AFFIRM ORDER
"The appellees respectfully move the court to dismiss appellant's appeal or, in the alternative, to affirm the order of the court below from which this appeal is taken, and for grounds of this motion respectfully show to the court the following:
"1. That this is an appeal from a judgment of the Montgomery Circuit Court entered on the 25th day of September, 1970 (Tr. p. 130, 1. 4 to p. 134, 1. 14), a copy of which is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked `EXHIBIT A', wherein appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, was granted an absolute divorce, and certain financial benefits.
"2. That appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, prosecuted an appeal to this court, which has jurisdiction pursuant to Clause 15 of Section 4-214 Burns' Indiana Statutes, 1968 Replacement.
"3. That since judgment was entered, appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, remarried on the 11th day of September, 1971. A certified copy of the Certificate of Marriage is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked `EXHIBIT B.'
"4. That appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, withdrew, on the 19th day of August, 1971, installments of alimony totaling $4,000.00 from the Clerk of the Montgomery Circuit Court. Said payments had been made by appellee Edward Samuel Loeb, pursuant to the judgment as follows: $2,000.00 on July 1, 1970, and $2,000.00 on July 1, 1971, as set forth in the Affidavit of Louis Pearlman, Jr. which is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked `EXHIBIT C.'
"5. That on the 4th day of September, 1971, appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, obtained *351 a new mortgage on the real estate awarded to her in the Montgomery Circuit Court judgment. A certified copy of said mortgage is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked `EXHIBIT D.'
"6. That appellant, Millicent R. Loeb, has accepted all of the benefits of said decree of divorce, both financial and marital.
"WHEREFORE, appellees pray that this appeal be dismissed or, in the alternative, that the order appealed from be affirmed... ."
In light of this Court's recent decision in Alderson v. Alderson (1972), Ind., 281 N.E.2d 82, the above motion must be overruled. Alderson abrogated the outdated doctrine of indivisibility as it relates to appeals from divorce decrees. We stated in Alderson:
"... Therefore, this Court concludes that the general rule set forth in Sidebottom v. Sidebottom, supra [249 Ind. 572, 233 N.E.2d 667], calling for summary application of the doctrine of estoppel when the appellant has remarried pending appeal, even though the appellant raises no question on appeal concerning the validity of the marital dissolution, should no longer be the law. To the extent Sidebottom v. Sidebottom, supra, and all other cases are in conflict herewith, they are to such extent overruled.
"It follows that the doctrine of indivisibility as applied to the trial court's judgment in a divorce proceeding is no longer viable law. It should also be noted that the doctrine was in direct conflict with TR. 59(G), IC 1971, 34-5-1-1 which provides that only those issues raised in a Motion to Correct Errors can be considered on appeal." 281 N.E.2d at 84.
Overruling the motion to dismiss, we shall now treat this appeal on its merits. The parties were married on June 21, 1952. On June 1, 1966, the plaintiff filed a petition for separate maintenance, charging the defendant with habitual cruelty. The plaintiff sought custody of the minor children, alimony in the sum of $400,000, and child support. Also the plaintiff filed a petition for suit and support money pendente lite wherein she prayed for an order requiring defendant to pay a reasonable sum for her and the children's support and for a reasonable sum to prosecute said suit along with attorney fees. On October 17, 1967, defendant filed a cross-complaint for divorce and then, on December 12, 1967, moved for a change of venue. The cause was venued to Montgomery Circuit Court on February 7, 1968. On March 7, 1969, the plaintiff filed an amended complaint seeking divorce.
The defendant is the general manager of Loeb's, Inc., a close corporation owned by defendant's family, of which the defendant's mother is president. On January 27, 1955, the defendant's mother executed a trust agreement which reads in pertinent part as follows:
"(A) WHEREAS, the GRANTOR is the owner and registered holder of Six Thousand Nine Hundred Ten (6,910) shares of the common capital stock of Loeb's Loeb & Hene Company, Inc., a corporation organized and existing pursuant to the laws of the State of Indiana, which stock was acquired by her by bequest from her late husband, Samuel M. Loeb; and
"(B) WHEREAS, the GRANTOR desires to enjoy the income from said stock during her lifetime but also desires to make certain that from and after her death said stock shall become the property, in equal shares, of the three children born to her and Samuel M. Loeb; now, therefore,
"(C) In consideration of the premises hereof, and in consideration of the promises of the TRUSTEES herein on *352 their part to be performed, and in consideration of the transfer to the TRUSTEES by the grantor of the property as hereinafter provided, it is hereby mutually agreed and understood by and between the GRANTOR and the TRUSTEES, as follows:
"1. Said GRANTOR, simultaneously with the execution of this Declaration and Agreement, and subject to all of the terms, provisions, and conditions hereof, hereby assigns, transfers, and delivers to said TRUSTEES, and said TRUSTEES hereby accept, Six Thousand Nine Hundred Ten (6,910) shares of the common capital stock of Loeb's Loeb & Hene Company, Inc., for the following uses and purposes, and subject to all the following terms, conditions, and provisions:
"(a) The TRUSTEES shall collect and receive for this Trust all of the cash dividends paid upon said shares of stock, or other income, and after paying any taxes of any kind that may be assessed against said Trust or the property thereof and any necessary expenses of said Trust, shall pay the net income of this Trust quarterly to Gertrude Loeb so long as the said Gertrude Loeb shall live.
"(b) The TRUSTEES shall also collect and receive any and all dividends paid in stock of Loeb's Loeb & Hene Company, Inc. as the result of the shares owned and held by this Trust, but in the event of the declaration of any stock dividend and the receipt thereof by the TRUSTEES, said stock received as such dividend shall be added to and shall become a part of the corpus of this Trust and thereafter held as such by said TRUSTEES.
"(c) This Trust shall continue until the death of the said Gertrude Loeb, at which time it shall cease and terminate, and the surviving Trustee or Trustees shall promptly pay over, assign, transfer, and deliver all the principal, and any undistributed income, in equal shares, and in kind, to Barbara Loeb Alexander, Carol Loeb Wallach, and Edward S. Loeb.
"In the event any of said principal beneficiaries does not survive the said Gertrude Loeb, then the share of such deceased principal beneficiary shall be paid over, assigned, transferred and delivered to the issue, if any, of such deceased principal beneficiary per stirpes; and in the event such deceased principal beneficiary does not leave issue him or her surviving, then such share shall go in equal portions to the remaining principal beneficiaries... ." (Emphasis added.)
The plaintiff contends that the defendant's beneficial interest under the trust has a pecuniary value that should have been included in the property settlement award. She argues that a vested remainder was created in favor of the defendant. The defendant, in turn, maintains that his interest is "contingent" only. Both parties in addressing this issue have overlooked the critical scope of inquiry. The central question is not whether the interest is "vested" or "contingent," but, rather, the issue is whether the future interest is so remote that it should not have been included in the property settlement award. Nevertheless, we shall begin by answering the arguments posed.
Nearly one hundred years ago, this Court held that a remainder may be created in personal property as well as in realty. Owen et al. v. Cooper (1874), 46 Ind. 524. Simes and Smith, The Law of Future Interests, § 147, p. 153 (2nd ed. 1956), lends the following discussion on the classification of remainders:
"Where a remainder is limited to an ascertained person, but there are words of condition, it may be either vested or contingent, and this group of cases is perhaps the most difficult to reconcile. Whether it is vested or contingent is said to depend upon whether the condition *353 is construed as a condition precedent or as a condition subsequent. If there is an express condition precedent which must be fulfilled before the remainderman is entitled to take possession, the remainder is clearly contingent. Words of condition, however, may be construed to create a condition subsequent, or to add nothing to the legal effect of the instrument.
"In determining whether the condition is `precedent' or `subsequent,' the form of the limitation plays a significant role. Professor Gray, in a frequently quoted passage which is directed at this problem, has expressed the distinction thus: `Whether a remainder is vested or contingent depends upon the language employed. If the conditional element is incorporated into the description of, or into the gift to, the remainderman, then the remainder is contingent; but if after words giving a vested interest, a clause is added divesting it, the remainder is vested.'" (Emphasis added.)
In Howard v. Batchelder (1956), 143 Conn. 328, 122 A.2d 307, 310, the court states the rule as follows:
"It is often difficult to determine whether a given remainder is vested subject to complete defeasance or is contingent. The form of the limitation is of primary importance in solving the difficulty. If the form indicates that the condition is to happen before the remainderman is to take, the remainder is ordinarily held to be contingent. 1 American Law of Property, p. 470. If the form is that of an unconditional gift followed by language to the effect that the remainder is to be taken away from the remainderman if a condition happens, then the remainder is generally construed as vested subject to complete defeasance."
Applying the foregoing rules to the facts of the case at bar, we find that the defendant was granted a vested remainder subject to a condition subsequent, i.e., his interest is subject to complete defeasance if he should predecease the settlor. That conclusion, of course, does not end our inquiry. The real issue is whether the remainder should have been included in the property settlement award. We hold that it should not have been so included.
The amount of alimony to be allowed in a divorce suit is a matter within the trial court's discretion and its decision will not be reversed on appeal unless an abuse of discretion is shown. Heckman v. Heckman (1956), 235 Ind. 472, 134 N.E.2d 695; Shula v. Shula (1956), 235 Ind. 210, 132 N.E.2d 612; Dissette v. Dissette (1935), 208 Ind. 567, 196 N.E. 684; Van Natta v. Van Natta (1919), 188 Ind. 75, 121 N.E. 825. Under the terms of the trust agreement, it should be noted that the defendant has no present interest of possessory value. If he should predecease his mother, he takes nothing under the trust. Further, the trustees have no authority to invade the corpus during the settlor's lifetime. The beneficiaries reap no income while their mother is living. Likewise, the defendant husband is not presently possessed of any pecuniary vlaue which could have been before the trial court for disposition. The trial court correctly refused to include the remote interest in the property settlement award. We reach the foregoing conclusion after an exhaustive analysis of persuasive authority from outside the State of Indiana as this is a case of first impression in our jurisdiction.
We find unanimous agreement with the proposition that a wife's interest under a trust where she is not a beneficiary can never be greater than her beneficiary-husband's interest. She cannot reach his beneficial interest to satisfy a claim for alimony or support unless and until he has rights to the trust funds. Sefton v. San Diego Trust & Savings Bank (1940), Cal. App., 106 P.2d 974; In re Watts (1945), 160 Kan. 377, 162 P.2d 82; Slaff v. Slaff (1959), 9 App.Div.2d 80, 191 N.Y.S.2d 636; Shelley v. Shelley (1960), 223 Or. 328, 354 P.2d 282.
*354 In Shelley v. Shelley, supra, the Oregon Supreme Court faced the issue as to whether a husband's interest under a discretionary trust could be applied to the wife's alimony and support claims. The husband, unlike the instant case, had the right to receive the trust income during his lifetime. The court held that such income was reachable under a claim for alimony. However, the court carefully distinguished the husband's right to the income from his non-existent access to the corpus of the trust fund:
"The question of the claimants' rights to reach the corpus of the trust involves other consideration. For the reasons heretofore stated, the beneficiary's interest in the corpus is not made immune from these claims. But, by the terms of the trust, the disbursement of the corpus is within the discretion of the trustee (or, in some instances subject to the approval of others), and, therefore, Grant Shelley's right to receive any part of the corpus does not arise until the trustee has exercised his discretion and has decided to invade the corpus. Until that time, the plaintiff and Patricia Shelley cannot reach the corpus of the trust because the beneficiary has no realizable interest in it. Mattison v. Mattison, 1909, 53 Or. 254, 100 P. 4, 133 Am.St. Rep. 829. It has been held that a discretionary trust for the `sole benefit' of the testator's son was enforceable by the son's destitute wife and children on the ground that the support of the son's family fell within the terms of the trust. Gardner v. O'Loughlin, 1912, 76 N.H. 481, 84 A. 935, 936. But, assuming without deciding that such an interpretation is reasonable, it has not been extended to a case where there has been a divorce and the wife has ceased to be a member of the family and, therefore, has ceased to be a beneficiary of the trust. Eaton v. Eaton, supra [82 N.H. 216, 132 A. 10]. There is nothing in the trust before us which would indicate the testator's intent to make the plaintiff, either directly or indirectly, the beneficiary of the trust. Patricia Shelley could not be regarded as a benficiary because the decree under which she claims called only for the payment of support money for the children and not alimony. In some jurisdictions a creditor of the beneficiary of a discretionary trust may attach the potential interest of the beneficiary. Sand v. Beach, supra [270 N.Y. 281, 200 N.E. 821]; Hamilton v. Drogo, 1926, 241 N.Y. 401, 150 N.E. 496; 214 A.D. 819, 210 N.Y.S. 859, commented upon in 26 Colum.L.Rev. 776 (1926). See Griswold, Spendthrift Trusts (2d Ed.), §§ 367, 368, 357; 2 Scott on Trusts, § 155.1. There is no such procedure in Oregon available to the creditor. And at least with respect to the corpus, ORS 29.175(2) makes the interest constituting the subject matter of the trust free from attachment. It follows that the decree of the lower court in making the corpus of the Shelley Trust subject to the plaintiff's claim for alimony was erroneous." 354 P.2d at 289.
In Storm v. Storm (1970), Wyo., 470 P.2d 367, the Supreme Court of Wyoming held that where a husband had an expectancy of inheriting a one-half (1/2) interest in his father's ranch if he survived until the trust holding the property ended, the wife was not entitled to an award based on such expectancy. We find the court's reasoning both logical and just:
"[1] Equitably speaking, it is reasonable to consider the inheritance under consideration the same as future property. With respect to future property, we think the rule must be that, when a court divides property incidental to the granting of a divorce, the court is limited by the amount of property in its hands for division and a mere expectancy is not subject to division. Hill v. Hill, 82 Cal. App. 2d 682, 187 P.2d 28, 36.
"[2] Inasmuch as the divorce in this case was sought several months before defendant's expectancy matured; and inasmuch *355 as trial was had and the decision of the court announced before defendant inherited a half interest in his father's ranch, the inheritance must, in equity, be considered the same as future property regardless of the exact date of the entry of the final decree. It would not be `just and equitable' to consider such property a part of the marital estate and in the hands of the court for disposition." 470 P.2d at 370.
The following is an excerpt from a Georgia Supreme Court syllabus opinion dealing with expectancies outside the present pecuniary estate of the divorced husband, (of course, in the instant case we are concerned with a future interest and not a mere expectancy, but we find the reasoning analogous):
"This is a claim case in which Lucille Meeks sought to assert against the administrator of the estate of Tillman Meeks a one-half interest in a described tract of land located in Coffee County. It appears that Lucille Meeks was formerly the wife of Tillman Meeks. She was divorced from him by a decree entered in the Superior Court of Fulton County on July 19, 1960. At that time, Tillman Meeks' father was in life. He died sometime in 1968. The divorce decree undertook to award to plaintiff one-half of any interest that the defendant, Tillman Meeks, would receive and have out of the real and personal property in his father's Georgia estate, either under his father's will, or, if his father should die intestate, one-half of the interest defendant would inherit as an heir at law in property of which his father dies seized and possessed. Tillman Meeks died in 1970 in Fulton County seized and possessed of a tract of land consisting of 68 acres located in Coffee County, Georgia, the same having been acquired from his father under the provisions of his father's will. The claim was transferred by the Ordinary of Fulton County to the Superior Court of Coffee County to be there tried as provided by law. The defendant Kirkland filed a motion to dismiss which was sustained, and the claimant appealed. Held:
"1. The decree relied upon by the claimant, insofar as it purported to vest in her any interest in property to be derived from the `estate' of the then living C.J. Meeks dealt with a bare expectancy or possibility in which at the time the said Tillman Meeks had no interest. It was utterly void and ineffectual to vest in her any interest in property acquired by him in the future as such expectation or interest could not be a part of his estate out of which an allowance of alimony could be made." Meeks v. Kirkland (1972) 228 Ga. 607, 187 S.E.2d 296.
Plaintiff cites McDaniel v. McDaniel (1964), 245 Ind. 551, 201 N.E.2d 215 for the proposition that property held in trust for the husband's benefit is not exempt from consideration on questions of alimony. The cited case is not on point. In McDaniel an action for divorce was brought by the husband, and the appellant-wife filed a cross-claim for divorce, alleging that she was entitled to alimony as part of a spendthrift trust which the husband had created in himself. The corpus of the trust fund was created from the balance paid in settlement for personal injuries suffered in an accident which occurred during the marriage. This Court was persuaded by the fact that the husband was constructively attempting to preclude his wife from reaching the trust res in the event of divorce:
"The parties in their briefs and in argument before this court gave primary consideration to the contention that the spendthrift trust in controversy was created by appellee for the fraudulent purpose of removing the res thereof from the reach of appellant in event of a divorce, which action appellee's conduct was designed to force upon appellant. The evidence in support of this contention is persuasive.
*356 "However, our decision need not rest upon actual fraudulent design. Under the circumstances here presented, such a conveyance is said to be constructively fraudulent if not actually fraudulent. Upon this issue it has been stated:
"`... Where, by terms of the conveyance, the husband retains the use of the property transferred, or the grantee agrees to support him [the husband] for life, ... such conveyance is fraudulent and may be set aside where its effect is to defeat the wife's decree for alimony... .' 26 Am.Jur. § 197, p. 816.
"Furthermore, as previously noted, appellant had an equitable, if not a legal, interest in the res of said estate because of the fact that payment thereof to the appellee was made, at least in part, as compensation for the support of both the appellant and the appellee. Furthermore, the estate was of such a nature that, upon the death of appellee, the res thereof would enure to the appellee's estate, of which appellant would have received no less than a one-third (dower) interest had she survived appellee as his wife." 245 Ind. at 560-561, 201 N.E.2d at 219.
The Supreme Court of Kansas has treated the question of whether a beneficiary's interest under a discretionary trust is subject to a claim for alimony:
"There is a conflict of authority on the question of whether the interest of a beneficiary under such a trust may be reached to satisfy a judgment for alimony. Griswold on Spendthrift Trusts, par. 339. But in any event and whatever the name given to the trust, the beneficiary's interest must be a present and determinable one. We are here dealing only with the corpus of the estate. Clearly in that feature, at least, the instant trust falls within the general class of `discretionary trusts.' As to such trusts it is said in Restatement, Trusts, Sec. 155:
"`If by the terms of a trust it is provided that the trustee shall pay to or apply for a beneficiary only so much of the income and principal or either as the trustee in his uncontrolled discretion shall see fit to pay or apply, a transferee or creditor of the beneficiary cannot compel the trustee to pay any part of the income or principal. * * *'.
"`A trust containing such a provision as is stated in this Section is a "discretionary trust" and is to be distinguished from a spendthrift trust, and from a trust for support. In a discretionary trust it is the nature of the beneficiary's interest rather than a provision forbidding alienation which prevents the transfer of the beneficiary's interest. The rule stated in this Section is not dependent upon a prohibition of alienation by the settlor; but the transferee or creditor cannot compel the trustee to pay anything to him because the beneficiary could not compel payment to himself or application for his own benefit.'
"To the same effect, it is said in Vol. 1, Scott on Trusts, p. 774: `Where by the terms of the trust a beneficiary is entitled only to so much of the income or principal as the trustee in his uncontrolled discretion shall see fit to give him, he cannot compel the trustee to pay to him or to apply for his use any part of the trust property. In such a case, an assignee of the interest of the beneficiary cannot compel the trustee to pay any part of the trust property, nor can creditors of the beneficiary reach any part of the trust property. This is true even in jurisdictions where spendthrift trusts are not permitted. If the beneficiary himself cannot compel the trustee to pay over any part of the trust fund, his assignee and his creditors are in no better position. It is the character of the beneficiary's interest, rather than the settlor's intention to impose a restraint on its alienation, which prevents its *357 being reached.' (Italics supplied.) Also see 26 R.C.L. 1268; 65 C.J. 557. Certainly the instant trust is purely discretionary as to the principal, since  in the absence of abuse of discretion  the trustee may withhold it altogether from the beneficiary if in his judgment the beneficiary is not capable of handling it. The trustee's testimony as to lack of capacity was not controverted and no showing made that the trustee had abused his discretion.
"The beneficiary has no right, as a matter of law, to require the trustee to turn over to him the principal of the estate or any part of it. It follows that the appellant  who married the beneficiary long after the trust had come into existence  cannot reach it.
"The Kansas decisions  including all which have been called to our attention by the parties  have been examined and we find none inconsistent with the conclusion here reached. It would unduly extend this opinion to review them." In re Watts (1945), 160 Kan. 377, 162 P.2d 82, 87-88.
Finally, in an action by a divorced wife brought against her husband in which she joined the trustee as a party defendant, the South Carolina Supreme Court stated:
"The trust instrument, after directing that the trustee hold and invest the entire net income of the trust during the minority of the cestui, goes on to provide, as quoted in the complaint:
"`After Charles Andrew Collins attains age twenty-one years the trustee is authorized in her sole discretion to pay to the said Charles Andrew Collins, or to apply for his benefit or to pay over and deliver to him discharged of all trust the whole or any part of either the income or principal of the trust estate to the extent that she shall determine that he has habits of sobriety, thrift and economy and the trustee is satisfied as to his ability to manage and control such property at the time of payment or distribution.'
"It further provides that after Charles Andrew Collins shall have attained the age of twenty-eight years he shall receive one-half of the net income and that the trustee shall have discretionary power to make additional payments to him upon the same conditions as were applicable prior to his attaining that age. It further provides that when Charles Andrew Collins shall attain the age of thirty-three years the trust shall terminate and the entire trust estate remaining shall be paid over to him discharged of all trust. It further provides for the handling and ultimate distribution of the trust assets in the event of the death of Charles Andrew Collins prior to the termination of the trust.
"Charles A. Collins, the beneficiary, is now twenty-two years old. During the next six years, if he live so long, he will by the express terms of the trust be entitled only to so much of the income or principal as the trustees in their sole discretion shall see fit to give him. During that period he cannot compel the trustees to pay any part of the trust fund; and his creditors, who are in no better position, cannot reach it. Restatement of the Law of Trusts, 2nd, Section 155.1; Scott on Trusts (2nd Ed.), Section 155, p. 1083; Kiffner v. Kiffner, 1919, 185 Iowa 1064, 171 N.W. 590. Cf. Albergotti v. Summers, 203 S.C. 137, 26 S.E.2d 395.
"The complaint here showed on its face that by the express provisions of the trust instrument the defendant Collins would have no legal right, prior to his attaining the age of twenty-eight years, to compel payment of any part of the trust fund. There being no allegation that he had reached that age, it failed to state a cause of action with respect to the trustees. On its first ground before mentioned, the demurrer of the defendant Williams should have been sustained. *358 We need not explore the others." Collins v. Collins (1961), 239 S.C. 170, 122 S.E.2d 1, 7-8.
We find that the weight of the best reasoned authority supports the position of the trial court in the case at bar. Therefore, we shall not disturb his judgment here.
As to whether the trial court erred in evaluating the defendant's stock in Loeb's, Loeb and Hene, Inc. at $70.00 per share, we find there was sufficient evidence before the court to support its finding as to the stock's value. The plaintiff's expert testified that the book value of the stock, after depreciation, was $244.14 per share. The defendant offered evidence that the stock had a fair market value of $36.45 per share. This Court cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in assigning such a value to the stock in question. The trial court has broad discretion in ascertaining the amount of property settlement. Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1217 (1968 Repl.); IC 1971, XX-X-XX-XX provides in pertinent part:
"3-1217. Alimony.  The court shall make such decree for alimony, in all cases contemplated by this act, as the circumstances of the case shall render just and proper, and such decree for alimony, heretofore made or hereafter made, shall be valid against the husband, whether asked for in the petition or given by the judge on default. [Acts 1873, ch. 43, § 20, p. 107.]"
Considering the evidence that was before the trial court and observing that on cross-examination the plaintiff's expert admitted that the value of $244.14 did not reflect a true market value, this Court finds no abuse of trial court discretion upon this issue.
Contrary to plaintiff's contention, the lower court did not err in the amount it granted for child support. The court allowed $200.00 per month for support of the two minor children. The plaintiff's argument is that because the defendant held a remainder interest in the trust fund his assets were greater than the trial court had considered them to be, and, therefore, the child support award should have been greater. However, the plaintiff overlooks the fact that the defendant has no present possessory interest in the trust fund nor any present income interest from it. Further, it should be noted that the defendant's children are provided for by the trust agreement in that their remainder will vest if their father predeceases the settlor. The trial court had before it the statement of the defendant's financial position. Based on the evidence before the trial court, the child support award was adequate. The trial court has reached an award which it found to be just and proper taking into consideration the father's earnings and the station in life to which the children and parents were accustomed. It acted entirely in accordance with IC, 1971, XX-X-XX-XX; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1219. We will not disturb its judgment here.
Plaintiff assigns error in that the trial court had waived and forgiven a deficit due under a support order pendente lite. The plaintiff mentions this assignment of error at page 40 of her brief, but fails to offer any cogent argument and cited authority upon this issue. In Hitch v. State (1972), Ind., 284 N.E.2d 783, 786, we said:
"It is unrealistic to think that counsel may, by a mere suggestion of error, thrust upon the court the burden of independently exhausting the possibilities that he may correct. Reasons and authorities are the lawyers' work product and become the tools of the court, without which it cannot function."
In Wright v. State (1958), 237 Ind. 593, 147 N.E.2d 551, this Court said:
"It is incumbent upon the appellant on appeal, whether the cause be civil or criminal, to affirmatively show harmful error by argument and citation of authorities." *359 237 Ind. at 595, 147 N.E.2d at 552.
We, therefore, do not reach an examination of plaintiff's argument and accordingly reject her unsupported contention.
For all of the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is hereby affirmed.
ARTERBURN, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[*]  This case was transferred and re-assigned to this office June 27, 1973.

=== CASE 9737497 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:08.736686+00 ===

Givan, J.
The relator has filed a petition for a writ of mandate and prohibition in forma pauperis wherein he seeks to prohibit respondents from trying him and seeks a mandate and asks that respondents be mandated to discharge him from the cause captioned State of Indiana v. Robert L. Johnson, cause number CR 72 801C.
The parties have agreed to a stipulation of facts which reveals the following:
Since August, 1972, relator has been incarcerated in the Johnson County Jail under charges of violation of the Offenses Against Property Act and for unlawful use of a corporate name.
On September 26, 1972, relator was indicted by the Marion County Grand Jury for theft in the cause from which he herein seeks relief. A capias was issued in the cause in question and served on the relator in the Johnson County Jail by the Sheriff of Johnson County. No return of the capias was filed until *245May 16, 1973. One month earlier, on April 16, 1973, relator filed a verified motion for discharge pursuant to Ind. Rules of Proc., Rule CR. 4 (A).
On May 7, 1973, respondent overruled relator’s motion and set arraignment for May 16, 1973. On that date relator moved respondent to reconsider his ruling on the motion to discharge. On June 1, 1973, the motion to reconsider was overruled and the cause was set for trial.
Relator argues that he should be discharged in cause number CR 72 801C in respondent court for the reason that he was incarcerated for more than six months without trial through no fault of his own.
Rule CR. 4 (A) reads as follows:
“ (A) Defendant in jail. No defendant shall be detained in jail on a charge, without a trial, for a continuous period embracing more than six [6] months from the date the criminal charge against such defendant is filed, or from the date of his arrest on such charge (which ever is later) ; except where a continuance was had on his motion, or the delay was caused by his act, or where there was not sufficient time to try him during such period because of congestion of the court calendar; provided, however, that in the last-mentioned circumstance, the prosecuting attorney shall make such statement in a motion for continuance not later than ten [10] days prior to the date set for trial, or if such motion is filed less than ten [10] days prior to .trial, the prosecuting attorney shall show additionally that the delay in filing the motion was not the fault of the prosecutor.”
This rule has been interpreted by this Court to be applicable only when the defendant is incarcerated or under recognizance on the charge in question. Napiwocki v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 32, 272 N. E. 2d 865, 26 Ind. Dec. 497; Finton v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 396, 193 N. E. 2d 134, 2 Ind. Dec. 214.
In the case at bar relator’s incarceration related solely to charges against him in the Johnson Circuit Court and had no connection with the indictment filed in Marion County.
The facts in this case disclose that the cause in question *246was set for trial well within six months after relator was brought to Marion County. Thus, relator is not entitled to discharge under Rule CR. 4(A).
Petition for writ of mandate and prohibition is, therefore, denied.
Arterburn, C.J., and Hunter and Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., dissents with statement.

=== CASE 9737499 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:08.743595+00 ===

On Petition For Rehearing
Givan, J.
Relator has filed a petition for rehearing in this cause in which he urges that this Court is in error in holding that relator’s incarceration in Johnson County was unrelated to the indictment filed in Marion County. In an attempt to support his position, the relator has set forth two hypotheticals in his petition for rehearing.
In his first hypothetical the relator cites a situation in which a warrant was issued in one county and an arrest made in another county on said warrant. The relator assumes that even though no charge was pending in the county in which the arrest took place, the arrested person could be left in that county for an indefinite period of time before being returned to the charging county.
. In his second hypothetical, relator asks if three distinct ■crimes are charged in one county would he not be permitted a discharge after seven months of incarceration on each of the three charges.
The relator has misconstrued the law in this case. In the first hypothetical the person charged would be held to answer to the charge from another county, that being the only charge *247against the arrested person. The State would be required to comply with Rule CR. 4(A).
In his second hypothetical all three charges being in the same county, each charge would be governed by Rule CR. 4(A), and the State would be required in each case to either bring the accused person to trial during the period required or to state why such could not be accomplished as set forth in the rule.
In the case at bar neither of these situations prevails. The relator had been arrested by the authorities of Johnson County pursuant to a warrant issued in that jurisdiction. The service of a capias issued by Marion County subsequent to the arrest in Johnson County served only as a “hold” for Marion County. The Supreme Court of the United States has noted that where a person is charged with more than one crime he cannot be tried for all at the same time. His rights to a speedy trial must be considered with regard to the practical administration of justice. Beavers v. Haubert (1905), 198 U.S. 77, 86, 49 L. Ed. 950, 954, 25 S. Ct. 573.
The authorities of Johnson County were entitled to carry out their duties pursuant to the warrant issued in that county before surrendering the relator to Marion County. This would be true even if the Sheriff of Johnson County had immediately made return on the capias issued by the Judge in Marion County and the Marion County Judge had been fully aware of the fact that relator was being held in Johnson County. In the case at bar, however, we have the additional fact that the Sheriff of Johnson County did not, in fact, make a return on the capias issued by Marion County and, as a result, the issuing judge in Marion County did not have the situation called to his attention.
In a situation somewhat different in fact, but with reasoning which applies equally to the case at bar, the Supreme Court of the United States has stated that where a situation was unknown to the trial judge, even though known to the accused (in the case at bar the accused knew he had been *248served with the capias; the respondent did not know relator had been served with the capias), any delay caused by such an error was not purposeful or oppressive and should not effect the release of the accused. See Pollard v. United States (1957), 352 U.S. 354, 1 L. Ed. 2d 393, 77 S. Ct. 481.
We, therefore, reiterate that under the facts in this case Rule CR. 4(A) became operative as to relator’s case when he was returned to Marion County under the authority of the capias issued by the respondent court.
Petition for rehearing is, therefore, denied.
Arterburn, C.J., and Hunter and Prentice, JJ., concur; De-Bruler, J., votes to grant rehearing.
Note. — Reported in 301 N. E. 2d 518.

=== CASE 2210787 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.083265+00 ===

260 Cal. App. 2d 705 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
DENNIS RAY BOLINSKI, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 2781.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. Two.
Apr. 1, 1968.
James L. Kellam for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Richard Tanzer, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
TAMURA, J.
Following a jury trial defendant was found guilty of first degree murder and the penalty was fixed at life imprisonment. Defendant appeals from the judgment of conviction, order denying new trial and order denying a motion for reduction of sentence. The latter two orders being nonappealable, the appeals therefrom must be dismissed.  [fn. 1]
The charge arose out of the disappearance on August 20, 1965, of one Paul Morrow Taylor, a relief manager for Western Union, who was then stationed at Palm Springs. No one has seen him or heard from him since and, according to the record and evidence before us, his body has never been found.
Defendant contends that corpus delicti was not established and that certain extrajudicial statements were received in evidence in violation of the rules enunciated in Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 486 [16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R. 3d 974]. We have concluded that prima facie proof of corpus delicti was established but that certain extrajudicial statements made by defendant should have been excluded and that the judgment should therefore be reversed.
Paul Morrow Taylor was a 51-year-old bachelor who was described as heavy- set with reddish hair and weighing about *710 185 pounds. He had a sister, Mrs. Maude Gruber, who resided in Pacific Grove, California. Mr. Taylor used his sister's address as his permanent address and received all of his mail there. As a relief manager he was assigned to various Western Union offices throughout the state and spent little time at his sister's home. However, she did see him at least once every four or five months. Mrs. Gruber last saw him in June 1965 and has not heard from him since August 20, 1965.
For the month of August, 1965, Mr. Taylor had been assigned to the Western Union office in Palm Springs. He had taken a room at a Palm Springs motel and had paid a month's rent in advance.
On August 20, 1965, at about 4:30 p.m., as he left the office, he remarked to Mrs. Eastman, a clerk, "Well, I guess I'll go." Mrs. Eastman said, "Yes, have fun," to which Mr. Taylor replied, "Well, you're the one who should have fun, you're off this weekend, I have to work." He was in a good mood and did not appear to be upset in any way. When he failed to appear for work the following morning efforts were made to locate him but they proved fruitless. Neither his sister nor any of his associates or friends have seen him or heard from him since that afternoon.
An examination of the office cash and records revealed that everything was in order. His weekly pay voucher was found in the office uncashed. Company records revealed that on the date of his disappearance he was only twelve days short of qualifying for a company retirement pension of $130.50 per month. His motel room was found to be undisturbed and in order; his shaving gear, toilet articles, personal effects and clothing were still in the room.
Mr. Taylor owned a 1964 Oldsmobile. He was a numismatologist and collector of $2 bills.
A check of service stations in the area revealed that between 9:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. of August 20 a credit card purchase for Mr. Taylor's automobile was made in Indio and that sometime between 10 p.m. and 8 a.m. of August 21 a purchase was made in Needles. A handwriting expert testified that the signature "Paul Taylor" on the invoice for the Indio purchase was Mr. Taylor's signature but that the signature "Paul Taylor" on the Needles invoice was not his signature.
Defendant was 18 years of age at the time of the alleged offense. On August 4, 1965, he called Mrs. Gloria Myers who lived in Costa Mesa and who had known defendant for approximately 6 years and stated that he was in Costa Mesa with his wife and had no money or place to stay. Mrs. Myers *711 permitted defendant and his female companion, whom he introduced as his wife, to remain at her home for approximately two weeks. During that period defendant on several occasions displayed a revolver which he possessed.
On August 12 or 13, at Mrs. Myers' request, defendant left the Myers home leaving the girl behind. When Mrs. Myers learned that she was a juvenile and not his wife, she called the police and had her taken to juvenile hall. Mrs. Myers had several telephone conversations with defendant after his departure concerning the girl and the fact that the police were seeking an interview with him.
After leaving Mrs. Myers' residence defendant called a friend, Timothy McVicar, whom he had known for approximately 10 or 11 years and who lived in Orange, California. Defendant stayed at the McVicar home until August 20. During that period he displayed the revolver which, according to McVicar, defendant kept in an attache case.
On his way to work on August 20 at about 1 or 1:30 p.m. McVicar dropped defendant off at the Riverside Freeway on-ramp in Orange. Defendant said he was going back to Illinois. He was wearing a shoulder holster and carrying a piece of luggage.
On August 21, 1965, between 12:30 and 2 a.m. David Gerberding was hitchhiking at the outskirts of Kingman, Arizona. Defendant, driving Mr. Taylor's Oldsmobile, stopped and gave Gerberding a ride. Defendant stated that he was going to the east coast and that the car belonged to his father who was in a San Diego hospital. Gerberding noted that whenever they stopped to purchase gasoline defendant used a credit card and that defendant paid for his meals with $2 bills. The signatures on the invoices for gasoline purchases for the Taylor automobile made on the route taken by defendant were the same as the signature on the invoice for the purchase made in Needles.
On Sunday, August 22, at about 10 a.m. defendant and Gerberding arrived in Vandalia, Illinois, pulled into a combination gas station and restaurant and parked by the gas pumps. Defendant, as he had done during the entire trip, attempted to pump his own gas but the pump was locked. The two went into the restaurant where they were told that the station would not be open for about an hour. They decided to have lunch and placed their orders. Meanwhile State Trooper Morton who had been observing the pair pulled up in his patrol car and entered the restaurant. Upon seeing the trooper *712 defendant became nervous, insisted on cancelling their orders and leaving the restaurant. Upon defendant's insistence, they cancelled their order and left, entered the car, and defendant "took off like a bat out of Hades." Trooper Morton overtook them and stopped them. As Morton approached the vehicle defendant told Gerberding to put the credit cards into the glove compartment. Morton asked for and received defendant's driver's license and upon noting that the name on his license did not correspond with that shown on the registration certificate asked defendant to explain the discrepancy. Defendant said the car belonged to his uncle. Morton then escorted defendant and Gerberding to the county courthouse, radioed California authorities for a stolen vehicle check on the vehicle and upon receiving a "no stolen report," released the two. Meanwhile, however, Morton telephoned the police department in Pacific Grove and requested that it check at the address shown on the registration certificate to determine whether the vehicle had been stolen. Upon receiving a report that Mr. Taylor's sister had been contacted and that she had stated that Mr. Taylor had not reported to work for two days and that she had never heard of defendant Bolinski, Morton radioed ahead and defendant was stopped and taken into custody. Gerberding testified that upon their initial release, defendant drove at speeds ranging from 80 to 100 miles per hour.
Morton examined the Taylor vehicle and found that the trunk was filled to capacity. It contained among other items several suitcases under one of which he found a billfold containing approximately $500 in bills, consisting mostly of $20's and $2's. He also found $25 or $26 in the glove compartment, mostly in $2 bills. A search of defendant's person and of the car failed to reveal any revolver.
Charles R. Wood, an F.B.I. agent, interviewed defendant on August 22 and 23 in the county jail in Vandalia, Illinois and obtained from him a signed statement which was received in evidence and read to the jury. In the written statement defendant stated in substance: On the evening of August 18 while he was hitchhiking he was picked up by one Paul Taylor who was driving a 1964 Oldsmobile. They went to Las Vegas where defendant obtained some $2 bills and drove around the Boulder Dam area several times. Taylor said he was from Pacific Grove and that he worked for the government and did considerable travelling. Defendant told Taylor he was trying to get back to Ohio, that he and his wife lived in California, that she became pregnant, "got mixed up" and *713 returned to her parents. Taylor offered him the use of his car and credit cards to enable him to get back to Ohio. Defendant dropped Mr. Taylor off at a housing development in Pacific Grove with the understanding that he would return the vehicle to the address shown on the registration certificate on the completion of his mission. In trying to reach Route 66, defendant lost his way, travelled north of Las Vegas and into Kingman, Arizona, where he picked up Gerberding. They drove straight through to Vandalia, Illinois, stopping only for gas and meals. During the entire trip he used Mr. Taylor's credit cards.
Although there is no direct evidence as to what transpired between August 24, 1965, and March 4, 1966, remarks by counsel during the trial indicate that extradition proceedings were being held during that period and that defendant had remained in custody.
On March 4, 1966, Donald Bender, Deputy Sheriff of Riverside County and Paul Lewis of the Riverside County District Attorney's office took custody of defendant in Illinois for his return by automobile to Riverside California. They spent the night of March 4 in Oklahoma City and the next night in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Bender interviewed defendant at the city jail in Albuquerque and asked him to reveal the whereabouts of the body and the gun. Bender told defendant that they knew that he had a gun while he was in the Santa Ana area to which defendant replied, "Oh, that gun. I sold the gun to a friend, but the gun didn't have anything to do with it." When Bender asked defendant whether the gun was "out here or back east" defendant replied, "Back east." Bender also told defendant that since they would probably be taking the same route defendant had taken they would like to know if defendant would be willing to point out where the body might be located, assuring him that he would not be taken right up to the body. Defendant replied, "That won't bother me. I've seen dead people before."
After another overnight stop at Flagstaff, Arizona, they arrived in Riverside on March 7 and defendant was booked into the county jail.
On March 17, pursuant to defendant's request and with the approval of the public defender who was then representing him, Deputy Bender accompanied by an investigator from the public defender's office drove defendant along the route he claimed to have taken while hitchhiking and after he met Mr. Taylor. He pointed out where he commenced hitchhiking and *714 where he met Mr. Taylor. He remembered stopping in Indio with Mr. Taylor. He stated that he and Mr. Taylor went to Las Vegas and thereafter drove back to Orange County where he let Mr. Taylor off at the latter's home. He stated that Mr. Taylor had permitted him to take the car to go back east to straighten out his personal affairs, that from Orange County he drove towards Las Vegas, and that he lost his way and came to Kingman, Arizona, where he picked up a hitchhiker. He described Mr. Taylor as being about 30 years of age, dark haired and about 5 feet 9 inches tall.
On another occasion defendant asked Bender for permission to make a telephone call to his family in Maryland indicating that he would like to make the call where he could have some privacy. Bender permitted defendant to make the call from his office rather than from the jail telephone where most calls are made by prisoners. Defendant made a collect call to his sister in Maryland and the conversation was, unknown to defendant, recorded. He told his sister that the police wanted to know what he had done with the gun, that he told them he had sent it to her, and that she must testify in his behalf confirming that fact. She stated that she did not wish to commit perjury but would discuss the matter with their mother. In the course of the conversation she stated that she still had his shoulder holster, that there was no proof of defendant's guilt and "they can't say you killed someone without evidence." Defendant stated that "they" had no witnesses and didn't even have evidence that a crime had been committed.
Defendant did not take the stand. The only witnesses for the defense were an investigator and defendant's trial counsel who testified that during an interview with Mrs. Gruber she responded to an inquiry concerning her knowledge of homosexual activity on the part of Mr. Taylor, by saying, "Well, there's been some talk, a great deal of talk, and I don't know what to believe."
I
[1] The corpus delicti of murder consists of two elements: the death of the alleged victim and the existence of some criminal agency as the cause, either or both of which may be proved circumstantially or inferentially. (People v. Jacobson, 63 Cal. 2d 319, 326 [46 Cal. Rptr. 515, 405 P.2d 555]; People v. Amaya, 40 Cal. 2d 70, 75 [251 P.2d 324]; People v. Cullen, 37 Cal. 2d 614, 624 [234 P.2d 1]; People v. Mehaffey, 32 Cal. 2d 535, 545 [197 P.2d 12]; People v. Scott, 176 Cal. App. 2d 458, 489 [1 Cal. Rptr. 600]; People v. Ogg, 159 Cal. App. 2d 38, 47 [323 P.2d 117]; People v. Misquez, 152 Cal. App. 2d 471, 477 *715 [313 P.2d 206]; People v. Williams, 151 Cal. App. 2d 173, 177 [311 P.2d 117].) [2] The elements must be established independently of admissions or confessions of the defendant (People v. Amaya, supra; People v. Cullen, supra), but as a basis for introduction of the defendant's confession or admission, the prosecution is not required to establish corpus delicti by proof as clear and convincing as is necessary to establish guilt; a slight or prima facie showing is sufficient. (People v. Mehaffey, supra, at p. 545; People v. Amaya, supra, at p. 76; People v. Cullen, supra, at p. 624.) [3] Once corpus delicti is shown by independent evidence, the degree of the crime not being a part of the corpus delicti, the circumstances of the murder and its degree may be shown by extrajudicial statements of the accused. (People v. Cooper, 53 Cal. 2d 755, 765 [3 Cal. Rptr. 148, 349 P.2d 964]; People v. Miller, 37 Cal. 2d 801, 806 [236 P.2d 137]; People v. Williams, supra.) [4] It is for the trial court to determine whether a prima facie showing has been made. (People v. Cullen, supra, at p. 626; People v. Scott, supra, at pp. 464, 489-490.)
[5] Production of the body of the missing person or of evidence of the means used to produce death are not essential to the establishment of corpus delicti or to sustain a murder conviction. (People v. Cullen, supra, 37 Cal. 2d 614, 624; People v. McMonigle, 29 Cal. 2d 730 [177 P.2d 745]; People v. Scott, 176 Cal. App. 2d 458 [1 Cal. Rptr. 600]; People v. Clark, 70 Cal. App. 531 [233 P. 980].)
[6] The evidence in the present case, exclusive of admissions of the defendant, was sufficient to permit a reasonable inference to be drawn that Mr. Taylor died and that his death was caused by a criminal agency.
Death may be inferred from the following facts: Mr. Taylor had been missing for a year; neither his sister with whom he communicated at intervals of not more than four or five months, his business associates, nor his friends have ever seen him or heard from him since August 20, 1965. The evidence is inconsistent with his voluntary departure or self-concealment. He apparently enjoyed good physical and mental health, no irregularities were found in his handling of office finances or records, his pay voucher was found uncashed at the office, he would have been entitled to a retirement pension in a few days, he had not been in the habit of failing to report for duty and his toilet articles, clothing and personal effects were still in his room at the motel where he resided. *716
That a criminal agency was the cause of death may be inferred from the following facts:
Defendant was known to have been armed with a revolver when he began hitchhiking on the Riverside Freeway on August 20. Mr. Taylor's friends testified he frequently picked up hitchhikers. Invoices for credit card purchases of gasoline for Mr. Taylor's vehicle showed that he made a purchase in Indio on August 20 and that either late the same night or early next morning a purchase was made by someone else in Needles using Mr. Taylor's credit card. The person who signed the invoice in Needles was the same person who signed the invoices for gas purchases on the route taken by defendant. Defendant was apprehended in Illinois on August 22 driving Mr. Taylor's automobile. En route defendant used Mr. Taylor's credit card for gasoline purchases and paid for his meals with $2 bills, a denomination which Mr. Taylor had been in the habit of collecting. When he saw Trooper Morton in the restaurant, defendant became nervous, insisted on leaving, cancelled a meal he had ordered, and drove off at high speed. The foregoing evidence coupled with Mr. Taylor's disappearance on August 20 was sufficient to give rise to a reasonable inference that Mr. Taylor met his death through a criminal agency.
Defendant seeks to distinguish People v. Cullen, supra, 37 Cal. 2d 614, and People v. Scott, supra, 176 Cal. App. 2d 458. He urges that in Cullen human blood stains were found on the floor and walls of the house where the victims and defendant resided and there was evidence of an attempt to sand the floor and to wash off the blood, and that in Scott the victim's dentures and eye glasses were found in an area adjacent to the premises of the family home. The presence or absence of a particular item of evidence is not controlling. The question is whether from all of the evidence it can reasonably be inferred that death occurred and that it was caused by a criminal agency.
[7] Defendant argues that Mr. Taylor's disappearance is consistent with either amnesia or a heart attack suffered by him while strolling in the desert. However, the foundational evidence necessary to establish a corpus delicti need not eliminate possible non-criminal explanation of the victim's disappearance. "... [T]he foundation may be laid by the introduction of evidence which creates a reasonable inference that the death could have been caused by a criminal agency [citations], even in the presence of an equally plausible non-criminal *717 explanation of the event. [Citations]" (People v. Jacobson, supra, 63 Cal. 2d 319, 327.)
The evidence was sufficient to constitute prima facie proof of corpus delicti.
II
We next consider defendant's contention that statements made to Trooper Morton, F.B.I. Agent Wood and Deputy Sheriff Bender were received in violation of the rules enunciated in Miranda v. Arizona, supra, 384 U.S. 486 [16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R. 3d 974];. Since the trial of the present action commenced on September 2, 1966, Miranda rules govern (People v. Rollins, 65 Cal. 2d 681 [56 Cal. Rptr. 293, 423 P.2d 221]) even though defendant's extrajudicial statements may have been admissible under Escobedo and Dorado standards. (People v. Doherty, 67 Cal. 2d 9, 20-21 [59 Cal. Rptr. 857, 429 P.2d 177].)
A. Statements to Trooper Morton:
[8] Defendant contends that the statement that the car belonged to his uncle, made in response to Trooper Morton's request to explain the discrepancy between the name on the driver's license and the name on the registration certificate, should have been excluded.
Although the officer testified that in his opinion the defendant was then under "technical arrest" for tampering with the gas pumps and for a traffic violation in failing to give proper signals on entering the highway, the inquiry was not designed to elicit incriminating statements concerning the "offenses" for which he was under "technical arrest," but to determine whether or not a different crime--auto theft--had been committed. This is demonstrated by the fact that when a "no stolen report" was received, defendant was immediately released. Considering the totality of the situation (People v. Stewart, 62 Cal. 2d 571, 579 [43 Cal. Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]) the inquiry had not reached the accusatory stage. (People v. Graves, 64 Cal. 2d 208, 210 [49 Cal. Rptr. 386, 411 P.2d 114]; People v. Cotter, 63 Cal. 2d 386, 393 [46 Cal. Rptr. 622, 405 P.2d 862]; People v. Ford, 234 Cal. App. 2d 480, 492-493 [44 Cal. Rptr. 556].) The statement was properly received in evidence.
[9] Defendant contends that the following testimony by Trooper Morton concerning the examination of the vehicle following defendant's arrest should have been excluded:
"Q. Did you observe an attache case in the car?"
"A. Yes, sir. *718"
"Q. Did anyone make any claim to that?"
"A. Yes, sir, Mr. Bolinski."
There was no Miranda violation. The exclusionary rules of Miranda pertain to statements and not to conduct.
B. Statements to F.B.I. Agent Wood:
Agent Wood testified that he first saw defendant in the county jail in Vandalia, Illinois, at 10 p.m. on August 22. He talked to him about an hour during which he asked defendant about the vehicle but, it being late in the evening, defendant declined to discuss the matter. At about 3:25 the following afternoon Wood again interviewed defendant and at 6:45 p.m. secured from him a written statement. Wood's testimony concerning the advisement he gave defendant at the commencement of the second interview was as follows:
"A. I told him that were [sic] investigating the possibility of a Federal violation in this eminating [sic] from the fact that this automobile had been transported across State lines; that he was under no obligation to tell me anything, and that he was entitled to the counsel of an attorney, and there would be no threats or promises made to him for information, and that if he was charged that he would be appointed counsel and competent counsel for his own use."
"Q. And would you relate, please, the basis or the gist of the conversation you had with him?"
"Mr. Fahres: May I ask one question on voir dire, Your Honor."
"The Court: You may."
"Voir dire examination by Mr. Fahres:"
"Q. Did you advise him in the event he was unable to afford private counsel, that he would be provided at no cost to him?"
"A. Yes."
On cross-examination Wood testified that on the night of August 22 defendant declined to discuss how he came into possession of the vehicle and stated that he wanted a lawyer.  [fn. 2]*719 No effort was made to obtain an attorney for him although he was told that he was free to make a telephone call.  [fn. 3] The fact that defendant expressed the desire to obtain the services of an attorney was corroborated by Trooper Morton who testified that prior to the interview by Agent Wood defendant told Morton that he wanted a lawyer.  [fn. 4]
The attorney general argues that the statements elicited by F.B.I. Agent Wood were properly received in evidence because (1) the interrogation was investigatory; (2) the advisements were in substantial compliance with Miranda requirements; and (3) defendant failed to object and is thereby precluded from raising the issue of admissibility on appeal.
[10] The contention that the interrogation was investigatory *720 is without substance. Defendant had been arrested and was in custody in the county jail. The arrests followed receipt of a report that Mr. Taylor was missing and that his sister had never heard of defendant. When a defendant has been arrested and is questioned about the offense which occasioned the arrest, the interrogation is no longer investigatory. (People v. Luker, 63 Cal. 2d 464, 474 [47 Cal. Rptr. 209, 407 P.2d 9].) The People have not met the burden of showing that the purpose of the inquiry was other than for the purpose of eliciting incriminating statements. (People v. Stockman, 63 Cal. 2d 494, 499 [47 Cal. Rptr. 365, 407 P.2d 277].)
[11a] While the warnings given by Agent Wood may have met the Escobedo and Dorado standards, they failed to meet Miranda requirements. In addition to the Escobedo and Dorado warnings, Miranda requires an advisement that a suspect has the right to the presence of an attorney, either retained or appointed. It is necessary to warn "not only that he has the right to consult with an attorney, but also if he is indigent, a lawyer will be appointed to represent him." (Miranda v. Arizona, supra, 384 U.S. 436, 473 [16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 722, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R. 3d 974].) The advisement that "if he was charged" counsel would be appointed is not a substantial equivalent of an advisement that if he is indigent he is entitled to have appointed counsel present at the interrogation. Agent Wood's affirmative answer to the question propounded on cross-examination, "Did you advise him that in the event he was unable to afford counsel, he would be provided counsel at no cost to him?" did not remedy the deficiency. In the context in which the answer was given, it is apparent that Wood was referring to the time "when charges are filed." [12] As a foundational requirement for the introduction of extrajudicial statements made by a defendant to an officer under circumstances requiring proper warnings, the burden is on the prosecution to show that the required warnings were given. (People v. Davis, 66 Cal. 2d 175, 180 [57 Cal. Rptr. 130, 424 P.2d 682]; People v. Stewart, supra, 62 Cal. 2d 571, 579.) Understandably, in light of the fact that the interview occurred before Miranda, the prosecution failed to meet that burden. [11b] The Attorney General cites People v. Valencia, 249 Cal. App. 2d 370 [57 Cal. Rptr. 567]; People v. Lewis, 244 Cal. App. 2d 325 [53 Cal. Rptr. 108], for the proposition that there was a substantial compliance with the requirements of Miranda. However, those cases are not controlling. Valencia held that an advisement that defendant "could have the services of an attorney" was sufficient to satisfy *721 the requirements of Escobedo and Dorado and that defendant need not have been advised of a right to have counsel appointed to represent him at the interrogation because the trial occurred before Miranda. In Lewis the court merely held that the advice, "You don't have to talk to me now unless you want to," was a sufficient warning that the suspect had a right to remain silent.
Not having been properly advised, defendant could not have been deemed to have knowingly and intelligently waived his rights. (People v. Powell, 67 Cal. 2d 32, 50 [59 Cal. Rptr. 817, 429 P.2d 137].)
[13] In addition to the inadequacies of the warnings, the continuance of the interrogation after defendant's expressed desire for the services of an attorney rendered his statements inadmissible. "If the individual states that he wants an attorney, the interrogation must cease until an attorney is present." (Miranda v. Arizona, supra, p. 474 [16 L.Ed.2d at p. 723]; People v. Luker, supra, 63 Cal. 2d 464, 474.) "The denial of the right to counsel by evasion or neglect of the suspect's request for counsel constitutes no less a constitutional violation than a denial by explicit rejection." (People v. Anderson, 63 Cal. 2d 351, 362 [46 Cal. Rptr. 763, 406 P.2d 43]; People v. Luker, supra.) On the night of August 22 defendant refused to discuss how he came into possession of Taylor's car and said he wanted a lawyer. While the record is unclear whether he continued to express the same desire the following afternoon, the burden was on the People to show that he waived his right. In the light of the record, the People failed to meet that burden.
The Attorney General refers to the fact that defendant did see a lawyer. However, the record reveals that the lawyer whom he saw on the night of August 22 was the state attorney who was investigating the possibility of charging defendant with forging an invoice for a gasoline purchase in Illinois. The record does indicate that defendant did see an attorney on August 24, but this was after he had given his written statement to Agent Wood.
[14a] We turn to the People's contention that defendant is precluded from raising the issue on appeal by reason of his failure to object to the introduction of the written statement.
Although the statement was initially introduced without objections, the record shows that during the direct examination of Deputy Bender, the next witness, defendant objected *722 to Bender's testimony relating his conversations with the defendant and at the same time interposed a general objection "to any other statements made by defendant to law enforcement officers on the ground that corpus delicti had not been established." At this point defendant's trial counsel was permitted to associate Mr. Kellam, defendant's counsel on appeal, and the trial was recessed to afford the newly associated counsel time to prepare arguments on the objections. Mr. Kellam represented to the court that he had not had an adequate opportunity to review Miranda v. Arizona, supra, and to explore its implications. The court recessed the case to the following day but refused an extended continuance, observing that "additional motions could be made as trial progresses." The judge remarked that he had also been studying Miranda and the related cases since the inception of the trial.
On the following day Mr. Kellam presented a lengthy argument contending that defendant's extrajudicial statements were inadmissible both under Miranda and by reason of the prosecution's failure to establish corpus delicti. His argument was not specifically directed to the inadequacy of the warnings but rather to the contention that defendant was interrogated by Agent Wood when he was exhausted after a long, sleepless trip from California to Illinois and that his statements to Deputy Bender on the return trip were obtained by subtle coercion. In response, the district attorney addressed himself specifically to the admissibility under Miranda of each of the statements made by defendant to Agent Wood and Deputy Bender.
In the foregoing circumstances it cannot be said that defendant failed to preserve his rights to raise the Miranda issue on appeal. Although denominated "objections," it is apparent that defendant's trial counsel as well as the prosecution and the court treated the "objections" as a motion to strike.
[15] While as a general rule a failure to object precludes a review of the admissibility of evidence (People v. Robinson, 62 Cal. 2d 889, 894 [44 Cal. Rptr. 762, 402 P.2d 834]; People v. Richardson, 51 Cal. 2d 445, 447 [334 P.2d 573]), " 'technicialities should be liberally viewed when urged against a defendant in a criminal case.' " (People v. Bob, 29 Cal. 2d 321, 325-326 [175 P.2d 12]; People v. Briggs, 58 Cal. 2d 385, 410 [24 Cal. Rptr. 417, 374 P.2d 257].) [14b] Although the "objections" should have been stated as a motion to strike and defendant's arguments should have been more specifically directed to the inadequacy of the warnings, *723 a review of the record reveals that both parties as well as the court were concerned with the admissibility of the statements in the light of Miranda v. Arizona, supra. We conclude that defendant did not waive his right to raise the Miranda issue on appeal.
C. Statements to Deputy Sheriff Bender.
[16] Deputy Sheriff Bender testified that prior to the commencement of the trip from Illinois to California, he asked defendant if he had been advised of his rights and whether he understood them, that defendant said that he did understand them, and that he "again informed him of his constitutional rights to remain silent; that he might have an attorney present at any time that or during any interviews, and also the statement or a statement was made somewhat to the effect that 'his attorney was here,' and I advised him that the court would appoint one in Riverside County." When asked whether he advised defendant that if he were unable to afford private counsel that one would be appointed at no cost, Bender testified that he told him that "a public defender would be furnished for him by the court."  [fn. 5]
The warnings did not meet Miranda standards. An advisement that counsel would be appointed by the court is not the equivalent of an advisement that counsel would be provided to be present at the interrogation. Nor can defendant's statement at the prearraignment stage that he had been advised of his rights and understood them constitute a knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights where the interrogation occurred prior to Miranda. (People v. Powell, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 32, 50.) The People failed to meet its burden of laying a proper foundation for the introduction *724 of the statements purportedly made by defendant to Deputy Bender in the Albuquerque, New Mexico, city jail.
[17] Defendant also contends that the statements he made while retracing the route he allegedly took were received in violation of Miranda.
The statements were not obtained in violation of Miranda. The request to be taken on the trip was initiated by defendant, he was then represented by the public defender, and he was accompanied by a representative of the public defender's office. A defendant who, having benefit of legal advice and while being represented by counsel, volunteers information to officers cannot complain that the information was elicited in violation of his constitutional rights. (See People v. Alesi, 67 Cal. 2d 856, 861 [64 Cal. Rptr. 104, 434 P.2d 360].)
[18] The question remains whether the failure to exclude the statements taken by Agent Wood and the statements elicited by Deputy Bender on the return trip from Illinois requires reversal. The statements were not confessions but admissions, hence, it is necessary that we weigh their prejudicial effect in the light of the applicable "harmless error" rule. (People v. Powell, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 32, 51-52.)
The statements were clearly prejudicial. They admitted that defendant and Mr. Taylor were together; they gave a highly improbable explanation for defendant's possession of the car and the use of the credit cards; the statement that defendant met Mr. Taylor on August 18th was inconsistent with other evidence showing that defendant began hitchhiking on August 20; the statement to Agent Wood that he let Mr. Taylor off at his residence in Pacific Grove was inconsistent with his later statement that he dropped him off at his home in Orange County; and his description to Agent Wood of the route he had taken rendered it highly improbable that he would have been able to be in Kingman, Arizona, at the hour testified to by Mr. Gerberding. The prosecution relied heavily upon the foregoing improbabilities and inconsistencies in arguing the case to the jury. The People have failed to demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that the extrajudicial statements were nonprejudicial. (Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 24 [17 L. Ed. 2d 705, 710-711, 87 S. Ct. 824]; People v. Caruso, 68 Cal. 2d 183, 184 [65 Cal. Rptr. 336, 436 P.2d 336]; People v. Powell, supra, 67 Cal. 2d 32, 55-56.) The judgment must, therefore, be reversed.
In view of the foregoing it is unnecessary to pass upon other issues raised by the defendant, including the admissibility of *725 the recorded telephone conversation between him and his sister.
Attempted appeals from the order denying new trial and the order denying motion for reduction of sentence are dismissed. Judgment reversed.
McCabe, P. J., and Kerrigan, J., concurred.
"A Yes, sir."
"Q You spoke with him again from 3:25 in the afternoon until sometime after 6:00 in the evening?"
"A Yes, sir."
"Q And can you give me an idea, during that period of time, who was doing most of the talking? That is, were you talking more, or was Mr. Bolinski?"
"A We had a--this was a conversation type of thing. We talked of Bolinski's family, his background, where he had gone to school; particularly, of course, how he came into possession of this automobile, and on the previous day, it was, of course, late in the evening, he didn't want to discuss this. He said he wouldn't mention how he came into possession of the car."
"Q Did he say he wanted a lawyer?"
"A Did he want a lawyer?"
"Q Yes."
"A Yes, he asked for a lawyer."
"* * *"
"Q During that period of time, from August 22, to 24, did Mr. Bolinski ever talk to a lawyer?"
"A. Yes."
"Q When?"
"A On August 24."
"Q That is after you had his statement?"
"A Yes, sir."
"A I did not. I told him he was perfectly welcome to talk to an attorney at any time he wanted to; he was sitting within two feet of the telephone."
"Q Did he have the right to make telephone calls?"
"A Certainly."
"Q Did you tell him that?"
"A Yes."
"Q Do your notes reflect you telling him that?"
"A No."
"A At Vandalia, no, sir; at Clark County, yes, sir."
"Q Was that before he talked to Agent Wood of the F.B.I.?"
"A Yes."
"Q Did he get one?"
"A When he left Clark County, en route back to Vandalia, I called the State's attorney at--"
"Q State's Attorney?"
"A Yes, sir, which would be our District Attorney."
"Q Prosecuting--"
"A Yes, sir."
"Q-- Attorney; right?"
"A Yes sir."
"Q Did you also tell him that in the event that he was unable to afford private counsel, that he would be afforded a counsel at no cost to him?"
"A Basically, that is what I told him. I told him--I told him that a public defender would be furnished for him by the court."
"Q Did you tell him the public defender would be furnished at no cost to him?"
"A Yes sir, yes sir, I did."
"Q In what words?"
"A I don't remember the exact words, but there was a short conversation, based on his statement to the fact that his lawyer was in Illinois, his present lawyer, at that time, was in Illinois, and I told him that the court would appoint--we have public defender's office, that the county pays, and they represent you--the court would appoint a lawyer, and they are regular lawyers."
"Q And he told you that he had an attorney at that time?"
"A He stated that his attorney was in Illinois."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Penal Code, section 1237; People v. King, 60 Cal. 2d 308, 309 [32 Cal. Rptr. 825, 384 P.2d 153]; People v. Hawkins, 249 Cal. App. 2d 379, 381 [57 Cal. Rptr. 522]; People v. Cantrell, 197 Cal. App. 2d 40, 43 [16 Cal. Rptr. 905]; People v. Peter, 125 Cal. App. 657, 659 [14 P.2d 166].
[fn. 2]  2. "Q Then you went back the next day, on August 23?
[fn. 3]  3. "Q After he had made known his wishes to talk to an attorney, did you, yourself, or anyone to your knowledge make any effort to secure an attorney for him?
[fn. 4]  4. "Q Did Dennis Bolinski tell you he wanted a lawyer when you were talking to him?
[fn. 5]  5. "Q On the first day you had told him that he had a right to a lawyer?

=== CASE 9737500 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:10.077414+00 ===

OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
Appellant alleges that imposition of a double durational departure and consecutive sentences based on his conviction for first and second degree assault was an abuse of discretion and effectively negated the jury’s verdict. Appellant also alleges that the trial court erred in not granting him a downward departure. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant, Randy Anderson, worked as a security guard and had obtained a permit to carry a weapon while working. On the night of June 13, 1989, appellant and his fiancee entertained another couple and their child. When the couple left at about 10:00 p.m., appellant left with them, saying he had to go to work for an hour. In fact, he did not have to go to work; however, he took his weapon with him. He went to a local pool hall and bar which he frequented several times a week. Shortly after appellant arrived at the pool hall, two teenagers arrived looking for him, as they knew he frequented the pool hall. They apparently sought him out because he worked as a security guard.
The girlfriend of one of the teenagers had reported over her CB radio that she was being followed by some Asians with a gun. One of the teenagers was organizing a posse or “calling out the cavalry” via the CB radio to track down the Asians and sought out appellant to assist in confronting them. Appellant joined the group of eight or more teenagers which proceeded to a house next to a local gas station. A ear had been located there which was thought to belong to the Asians reportedly carrying the gun.
Two Asians were confronted regarding the car. Several others were in the vicinity or came out of the house during the incident. Some epithets were exchanged and someone yelled out that someone had a gun.1 Most of the teenagers immediately fled to their cars and left. Appellant headed for some bushes, then fired 13 shots in rapid succession, hitting two Asians who had come out of the house during these events. As a result of the shooting, one of the victims lost a kidney and part of his large intestine. The other victim was shot in the leg but was not seriously injured.
Appellant was convicted of first degree assault as to one victim and second degree assault as to the other. The first degree assault sentence of 43 months was doubled. The sentence for second degree assault *553was the 36 month minimum sentence for an offense involving a firearm. The sentences were to run consecutively.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in making an upward durational departure from the presumptive sentence?
2. Did the trial court err in imposing consecutive sentences where there were multiple victims?
3. Did the trial court err in denying a downward dispositional departure from the presumptive sentence?
ANALYSIS
The standard of review of sentencing departures is whether the trial court committed an abuse of discretion. State v. Schantzen, 308 N.W.2d 484, 487 (Minn.1981).
I.
Appellant argues that the trial court abused its discretion in doubling the sentence for first degree assault.
The purpose of the sentencing guidelines is to establish rational and consistent standards which reduce sentencing disparity and ensure that sanctions .following conviction of a felony are proportional to the severity of the offense of conviction and the extent of the offender’s criminal history.
Minn. Sent. Guidelines and Commentary, I.
Since the sentencing guidelines became effective, there has been a continuous stream of sentencing departures presented to the courts for review. The number of affirmances in these cases may be viewed as an ever increasing willingness by the appellate courts of Minnesota to accept substantial and significant upward departures.
In order to depart durationally, the trial court must decide whether a “defendant’s conduct was significantly more or less serious than that typically involved in the commission of the crime in question.” State v. Cox, 343 N.W.2d 641, 643 (Minn.1984). If defendant’s conduct is more serious, a court may depart from the presumptive sentence “only when substantial and compelling circumstances exist.” Minn. Sent. Guidelines 1.4. The supreme court has established a general rule for sentencing departures as follows:
[GJenerally in a ease in which an upward departure in sentence length is justified, the upper limit will be double the presumptive sentence length.
State v. Evans, 311 N.W.2d 481, 483 (Minn.1981) (emphasis added).
This case involves both first and second degree assault. First degree assault is one which “inflicts great bodily harm.” Minn. Stat. § 609.221 (1988). Second degree assault is an assault “-with a dangerous weapon.” Minn.Stat. § 609.222 (1988). Appellant shot a gun 13 times in a mixed residential and commercial area. There were at least six people in the immediate area and two of them were injured; one person seriously and permanently. Because of the large number of people in the area and the number of shots fired, we find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s determination that appellant’s conduct was “particularly serious and represented a greater than normal danger to the safety of other people.” State v. McClay, 310 N.W.2d 683, 685 (Minn.1981). In addition, serious and permanent injury such as suffered by one of the victims here has been found sufficient to support a durational departure. See State v. Van Gorden, 326 N.W.2d 633, 634-35 (Minn.1982).
In finding no abuse of discretion by the trial court in this doubling of the presumptive sentence, we reemphasize the standard set out by the supreme court in Evans, that double the presumptive sentence is generally intended to be an upper limit and that:
we do not intend to suggest that trial courts should automatically double the presumptive length in all cases in which upward departure is justified nor do we suggest that we will automatically approve all departures of this magnitude.
Id., 311 N.W.2d at 483.
II.
Minnesota Statutes § 609.035 (1988) bars multiple sentencing for the same be*554havioral incident except where there are multiple victims.
Under the multiple-victim exception to the rule of Minn.Stat. § 609.035 (1980) * * *, the trial court may impose one sentence per victim in multiple victim cases so long as the multiple sentences do not unfairly exaggerate the criminality of the defendant’s conduct.
State v. Montalvo, 324 N.W.2d 650, 652 (Minn.1982).
Appellant argues that imposition of consecutive sentences was an abuse of discretion because it exaggerates the criminality of appellant’s conduct.2 We do not agree. In a case involving second degree manslaughter and aggravated assault, the Minnesota Supreme Court stated:
In a number of cases, * * * we have upheld multiple sentences for multiple crimes arising from the same behavioral incident when there were multiple victims to the crimes. See, e.g., State v. Briggs, 256 N.W.2d 305 (Minn.1977), where we upheld three consecutive prison terms imposed on a defendant who was found guilty of three counts of aggravated assault for firing, twenty rounds of ammunition at three people on a porch.
State v. Marquardt, 294 N.W.2d 849, 850-51 (Minn.1980).
The Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines provide for three instances where consecutive sentences are proper, including “[w]hen the offender is convicted of multiple current felony convictions for crimes against different persons, and when the sentence for the most severe current conviction is executed according to the guidelines.” Minn. Sent. Guidelines II.F.2. That is the situation in this case. Appellant has been convicted of first degree assault of one victim and second degree assault of a second victim. The sentence for first degree assault has been “executed according to the guidelines,” as that phrase is interpreted in State v. Lindsey, 314 N.W.2d 823, 825 (1982).3
Further, section II.F.3 provides in part that:
For persons given consecutive sentences, the sentence durations for each separate offense sentenced consecutively shall be aggregated into a single presumptive sentence.
Under this provision, the aggregate presumptive sentence would be 79 months (43 plus 36). Therefore, the 122 months to which appellant was sentenced represents, in actuality, an upward departure of just over one-and-a-half times the presumptive sentence. See State v. Bicek, 429 N.W.2d 289, 292 (Minn.App.1988), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Nov. 23, 1988).
There is no evidence that appellant’s sentence unfairly exaggerates the criminality of his conduct. Consequently, we hold that the trial court did not err in imposing consecutive sentences.
Appellant also argues that the trial court effectively negated the jury’s verdict by imposing a total sentence in the same range as one for attempted first and second degree murder. Unlike the situation in State v. Schmit, 329 N.W.2d 56 (Minn.1983), which is relied on by the appellant, there is no indication that the trial court intended to negate the jury’s verdict. More important, there was sufficient justification here for the durational departure and for the consecutive sentencing, which determined the length of the sentence. Even in Schmit, the supreme court found support for a durational departure and only reduced the sentence from the maximum allowed by law (more than a triple departure) to a double departure. Id. at 58.
*555III.
Appellant argues that the trial court erred in refusing to depart downward. Appellant cites State v. Kindem, 313 N.W.2d 6 (Minn. 1981) as support for his argument that his case is one of the “rare cases” in which such departure would be appropriate. We cannot agree. The supreme court in Kindem stated:
[W]hen substantial and compelling circumstances are present, the judge ‘may’ depart. This means that the trial court has broad discretion and that we generally will not interfere with the exercise of that discretion.
In this case, there were valid reasons for adhering to the presumptive sentence. * * * ipjjUSj whjie there may have been arguments for departing downward, there were also reasons for not doing so. That being so, the determination whether or not to depart was clearly a discretionary decision for the trial court to make.
Jd. at 7-8. We find no abuse of trial court discretion here in refusal to depart downward.
DECISION
The trial court was within its discretion in imposing a double durational departure in sentencing appellant as his conduct was particularly serious and constituted a greater than usual danger to the safety of others. The trial court did not err in imposing sentences consecutively where there were multiple victims and in not departing downward.
Affirmed.
. The evidence indicates that appellant was the only person carrying a gun.
. To the extent it may be argued that the reason given by the trial court for its durational departure duplicates the bases upon which consecutive sentences may be imposed, we note that the latter addresses the two actual victims while the former makes reference to the large number of people who were in the area and therefore at risk from the shots fired.
. In Lindsey, defendant argued that compliance with section II.F.2 requires that the presumptive guideline sentence must be imposed. The supreme court disagreed, however, and ruled that section II.F.2 means "when the sentence for the most severe current conviction is, according to the guidelines, required to be executed and not stayed.” Id.

=== CASE 9737501 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:10.082239+00 ===

DAVIES, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Appellant was 21 years old, had no criminal history, and worked as a security guard. He apparently has no alcohol or drug problem. He was drawn to the scene by others. He discharged a handgun, bought for use on his job, a dozen times in less than a minute. The shots were in the open, directed pointlessly at scattered strangers. He testified that he stopped firing when “I came around to my senses until I finally realized * * * what actually I had done.”
A sentence of ten years is clearly disproportionate measured by his conduct alone. The trial court may have been led to depart because of the racial overtones of the incident. That has not been recognized as a basis for departure and it would be ironic beyond acceptance were it to be approved as a reason for departure against this young black man.
Unfortunately, appellant hit two people, injuring one seriously, changing his actions into a first degree assault as to that person. He was convicted of that crime, and second degree assault as to another person.1 The jury acquitted appellant of attempted murder, thus negating any intention to cause death. Absent death or an intent to cause death, appellant was convicted of the most serious possible charges.
The Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines were instituted to ensure consistency and equity in sentencing. Minn. Sent. Guidelines I.2 To achieve these purposes, it is necessary that those convicted of similar actions receive similar sentences and that only “felons substantially different from a typical case” receive longer sentences. Id. (emphasis added). Nearly any extreme behavior can support a departure from the sentencing guidelines,3 but nothing here *556was extreme — except the aura of unreality. None of the usual criteria for durational departures exist.
An element of a crime may not be used as an aggravating factor. State v. Pierson, 368 N.W.2d 427, 435 (Minn.App.1985). The trial court claimed unusual cruelty. But all cruelty here arose from the severe and permanent injuries — and that was an element of the crime. The trial court also referred to greater than normal danger to the safety of others. Appellant shot a dozen times in succession. Appellant hit two of the six people in the general area and was given consecutive sentences as a result. Had he not created “greater than normal danger,” he could not have committed the two crimes of which he was convicted.
The underlying principles of the sentencing guidelines are severity of the offense and criminal history. This appellant had no criminal history. He was deprived of the opportunity to show remorse by his reliance on the defense of self defense. Primarily because one person was seriously and permanently injured, which is an element of first degree assault, a double dura-tional departure was imposed. Because two people were injured, consecutive sentences were imposed. Cumulatively, these decisions result in a 122-month (ten-year) sentence, which is in the same range as the presumptive sentences for first and second degree attempted murder. He was found innocent of those crimes. Durational departures in cases such as this reduce the utility of the guidelines. I would reverse the durational departure.
.Minn.Stat. §§ 609.221-.222 (1988). Second degree assault is an assault “with a dangerous weapon” and first degree assault is an assault which “inflicts great bodily harm." Id. Great bodily harm is:
bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent * * * impairment of the function of any bodi ly member or organ or other serious bodily harm.
Minn.Stat. § 609.02, subd. 8 (1988) (emphasis added).
. It is worth remembering also that the guidelines were part of a reform that took responsibility for sentence dur ' i away from a state parole board and returned it to the judicial system. The judiciary must exercise that responsibility with care.
. See, e.g., State v. Gartland, 330 N.W.2d 881, 883 (Minn.1983) (extreme negligence); State v. Schmit, 329 N.W.2d 56, 58 (Minn.1983) (violation of trust and authority); State v. Vogelpohl, 326 N.W.2d 635, 636 (Minn.1982) (cruelty to victim); State v. Van Gorden, 326 N.W.2d 633, *556635 (Minn.1982) (invasion of a person’s zone of privacy); State v. Profit, 323 N.W.2d 34, 36 (Minn.1982) (cruelty to other than victim); State v. Stumm, 312 N.W.2d 248, 249 (Minn. 1981) (vulnerability of victim); State v. McClay, 310 N.W.2d 683, 685 (Minn.1981) (greater than normal danger to the safety of others).

=== CASE 2210792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.143521+00 ===

186 Mich. App. 350 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 491
PEOPLE
v.
BROWN
Docket No. 124364.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 20, 1990, at 9:03 A.M.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, Richard Thompson, Prosecuting Attorney, Michael J. Modelski, Chief, Appellate Division, and Richard H. Browne, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
State Appellate Defender (by Jennifer A. Pilette), for the defendant on appeal.
Before: MAHER, P.J., and SULLIVAN and BRENNAN, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
On October 19, 1989, defendant pled guilty in the Oakland Circuit Court of first-degree retail fraud, MCL 750.356c(2); MSA 28.588(3)(2), and of being a fourth-felony habitual offender, MCL 769.12; MSA 28.1084. Defendant was sentenced to three years' probation, with the first year to be served in the county jail. Defendant appeals as of right, challenging both his habitual-offender conviction and the propriety of his sentence. We affirm.
I
Defendant, who had prior felony convictions for larceny from a building, attempted larceny from a building, and larceny from a motor vehicle, was charged with shoplifting two bottles of cologne from an F & M Distributors store. Although this normally would be a second-degree retail-fraud offense, MCL 750.356d; MSA 28.588(4)(1), defendant was charged and convicted under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute, MCL 750.356c(2); MSA 28.588(3)(2), which provides:
*352 A person who violates section 356d [second-degree retail fraud] and has 1 or more prior convictions under this section, section 218 [false pretenses], 356 [larceny over $100], 356d [second-degree retail fraud], or 360 [larceny from a building], or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section or section 218, 356, 356d, or 360 is guilty or retail fraud in the first degree.
As noted above, two of defendant's three prior felony convictions were for offenses enumerated in subsection 2.[1] On appeal, defendant contends that these convictions, having been used to establish his conviction under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute, cannot also be used as prior felonies under the habitual offender statutes. We disagree.
In People v Eilola, 179 Mich. App. 315; 445 NW2d 490 (1989), a panel of this Court was called upon to decide whether a defendant convicted under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute could also be convicted of being an habitual offender. Although the Court concluded that an habitual-offender conviction was permissible where the prior felony conviction was for an offense not enumerated in subsection 2, id., p 325, the Court left open the question whether an habitual-offender conviction could properly be based upon a prior conviction for an offense enumerated in subsection 2 that was also used to establish the subsection 2 conviction:
We do note that an interesting question arises in light of [People v] Franklin, [102 Mich. App. 591; 302 NW2d 246 (1980)]. Specifically, whether a prior conviction for one of the enumerated offenses under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud *353 statute which is used to raise the second-degree retail-fraud offense to first-degree retail fraud can also be used as a prior felony under the habitual-offender statute. The implication of Franklin, supra, is that it could not be. That is, since under Franklin only nondrug-related offenses could be used to support a habitual-offender charge in a drug case, only "non-retail fraud" offenses could be used to justify a habitual-offender charge where the underlying conviction is for first-degree retail fraud under subsection 2 of the statute.
However, we need not address that issue in the case at bar since defendant's habitual-offender conviction was based upon a driving under the influence of liquor (third offense) conviction and a prison escape conviction, neither of which is an enumerated offense under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute. A different conclusion might be reached if a prior conviction was called upon to do "double duty" to establish a basis both for the first-degree retail fraud conviction and the defendant's status as a habitual offender. We leave that issue, however, for determination in the appropriate case. [Eilola, pp 324-325.]
Before us now is the "appropriate case." In deciding whether it is proper to use a prior conviction for an offense enumerated in subsection 2 to establish a basis for a conviction under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute as well as a basis for determining defendant's status as an habitual offender, we begin by reviewing the statutory language.
The habitual-offender statutes, MCL 769.10769.14; MSA 28.1082-28.1086, expressly are made applicable to enhance the punishment for felony convictions by persons possessing one or more prior felony convictions. Pursuant to subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute, the Legislature has specifically provided that a person who commits a second-degree retail-fraud offense, and *354 who previously was convicted of a subsection 2 enumerated offense, is guilty of a felony. Neither the habitual-offender statutes, nor the first-degree retail-fraud statute except application of the habitual-offender statutes' sentence-enhancement provisions for a conviction under MCL 750.356c(2); MSA 28.588(3)(2); nor do these statutes expressly preclude a prior felony conviction for a subsection 2 offense from serving as the prior conviction under the habitual-offender statutes. Thus, absent an absurd or unjust result, or one clearly inconsistent with the purposes and policies of the statutes involved, we would not be justified in concluding that the statutes' respective mutual use of a prior conviction for a subsection 2 offense is prohibited. See Salas v Clements, 399 Mich. 103, 109; 247 NW2d 889 (1976).
In questioning whether it would be proper to use a subsection 2 offense to establish both a subsection 2 conviction as well as a person's status as an habitual offender, the Eilola Court cited Franklin, as the primary basis for its concern. Franklin dealt with the applicability of the general habitual-offender statutes to a defendant convicted under the controlled substances act for delivery of less than fifty grams of heroin. Although the defendant possessed several prior felony convictions, none were drug-related. Relying on People v Edmonds, 93 Mich. App. 129; 285 NW2d 802 (1979), lv den 408 Mich. 918 (1980), the defendant argued that the general habitual-offender statutes could not be used to enhance her controlled-substance conviction, inasmuch as the controlled substances act contained its own sentence-augmentation provisions.[2] Reasoning that the controlled substances *355 act was adopted as this state's comprehensive policy toward the use of controlled substances, the Edmonds Court found the act to be controlling over the general habitual-offender statutes, to the extent that a sentence on a second or subsequent drug offense was under the exclusive purview of the specific-enhancement provisions of the controlled substances act. Id., p 135. The Franklin Court, however, distinguished Edmonds, holding that, where a defendant is convicted of a controlled-substance offense, but has no prior convictions under the controlled substances act, the sentence-enhancement provisions of that act are not applicable and, thus, enhancement under the general habitual-offender statutes is permissible. Franklin, supra, p 591.
As noted by the Eilola Court, the implication of Franklin is that, had the defendant in fact possessed prior drug-related convictions, thereby bringing the sentence-augmentation provisions of the controlled substances act into play, the habitual-offender statutes could not have been used. Eilola, supra, p 324. By analogy, therefore, the Eilola Court questions whether a prior conviction for a subsection 2 offense, that has been used to establish a subsection 2 conviction, may also be used as a prior felony under the general habitual-offender statutes.
We believe that, with respect to the applicability of the habitual-offender statutes, there are a number of important distinctions between a conviction under the controlled substances act and a conviction under subsection 2 of the first-degree retail-fraud statute that dispel the concern expressed in Eilola.
First, it must be noted that the determination in *356 Edmonds, supra, that the sentence-augmentation provisions of the controlled substances act govern over those of the general habitual-offender statutes, was premised upon the fact that the controlled substances act represents this state's comprehensive policy toward the use of controlled substances. Edmonds, supra, p 135. The offense of first-degree retail fraud, however, is but one criminal offense under the general penal code; it is not part of a comprehensive state policy relating to larcenous offenses. Thus, unlike the application of the habitual-offender statutes to a repeat controlled-substance offender, there is no comprehensive policy that will be disturbed from the use of a prior felony conviction for a subsection 2 offense in order to establish both a subsection 2 conviction, as well as an habitual-offender charge.
More importantly, however, is that, while the controlled substances act contains sentence-enhancement characteristics similar to the habitual-offender statutes, the first-degree retail-fraud statute does not. That is, the sentencing provisions of both the controlled substances act and the habitual-offender statutes provide for gradations of punishment upon subsequent convictions. Thus, any attempt to apply the general habitual-offender statutes to a repeat controlled-substance offender would result in a direct conflict between similar sentencing schemes. Where there is a conflict, the specific enhancement statute will prevail to the exclusion of the general one. See People v Thornsbury, 148 Mich. App. 92, 97-98; 384 NW2d 88 (1985).
The first-degree retail-fraud statute on the other hand does not provide for gradations of punishment. Rather, it punishes the commission of a second-degree retail-fraud offense by a person with a prior conviction for a subsection 2 offense as a separate substantive offense. In other words, while *357 both the controlled substances act and the general habitual-offender statutes use prior convictions to establish the severity of punishment for the repeat commission of criminal acts, the first-degree retail-fraud statute uses prior convictions to establish the severity of the offense. Thus, because different statutory schemes are involved, a conflict does not arise from the mutual application of the two statutes to the same prior conviction.
Therefore, in light of the differences between the controlled substances act and the first-degree retail-fraud statute, we believe that Franklin, supra, neither requires nor supports the conclusion that a felony conviction used to establish a subsection 2 offense may not also be used to support an habitual-offender charge. Accordingly, we conclude that a prior conviction for a subsection 2 offense may properly be used to establish a basis for both a first-degree retail-fraud conviction under MCL 750.356c(2); MSA 28.588(3)(2), as well as a defendant's status as an habitual offender under the general habitual-offender statutes, MCL 769.10-769.14; MSA 28.1082-28.1086.
II
Defendant raises three additional sentencing issues. First, defendant argues that he is entitled to resentencing because the trial court failed to articulate on the record the reasons for the sentence imposed. We disagree. In this case, the focus of the discussion at sentencing centered on defendant's admitted substance abuse problem. In addressing the trial court at sentencing, defense counsel stated:
We would just ask the Court that any sentence that you would impose upon Mr. Brown as far as *358 incarceration is concerned  that as an alternative to incarceration, that Mr. Brown be permitted or at least the Court would make a recommendation that Mr. Brown would be put in some type of RAP program. He does acknowledge a drug problem and does wish to deal with it.
During allocution, defendant also attributed the commission of the instant offense to his drug problem and expressed his desire for rehabilitation. The trial court then imposed sentence, stating:
I'm going to put you on probation for three years. I'll require that the first year be spent in the Oakland County Jail. This sentence will be consecutive to the time you're now serving in any parole flop that you get.... [Y]ou must not use any controlled substances and submit to urinalysis. .. . And I will release you from the County jail to go to RAP if you have not completed a substance abuse program before that time. If you have, then we'll review the situation regarding jail.... If you don't go into the RAP program, then you have to sit in jail for a year.
The purpose of the articulation requirement is to aid appellate review of sentencing and to avoid injustice on the basis of error at sentencing. People v Fleming, 428 Mich. 408, 428; 410 NW2d 266 (1987). In this case, it is clear, not only from the court's comments, but also from a review of the entire sentencing proceeding, that defendant's sentence was premised on the circumstances surrounding his substance abuse problem. Defendant's sentence was clearly an individualized one, not only accommodating the requests of defense counsel, but, in effect, leaving the issue of jail time *359 largely in defendant's own hands. There has been no claim that the sentence was an excessive one. Under these circumstances, we fail to see how a remand for a more specific statement by the trial court would serve any purpose. Accordingly, we find that relief is not warranted. Compare People v Willhite, 155 Mich. App. 124, 127; 399 NW2d 57 (1986), lv den 429 Mich. 854 (1987).
Next, defendant argues that the inclusion of his expunged juvenile record in the presentence report requires resentencing. However, where it is apparent, as it is in this case, that the court's sentence was not premised, even in part, on the inclusion of a juvenile conviction in the presentence report, and where defendant never objected to the inclusion of his juvenile record either at sentencing or in a subsequent trial court motion, resentencing is not required. See People v Bentley, 434 Mich. 880, 881; 452 NW2d 207 (1990).
Finally, defendant argues that he is entitled to sixty-one days credit for time served prior to the imposition of sentence for his retail-fraud conviction. We disagree. Defendant was on parole at the time he committed the instant offense. Therefore, the sentence for his retail-fraud conviction was required to run consecutive to the remaining term imposed for the paroled offense. MCL 768.7a(2); MSA 28.1030(1)(2). The record reveals that the trial court correctly held that credit for time spent in jail prior to defendant's retail-fraud sentencing was to be applied against the remaining portion of defendant's sentence for the paroled offense, rather than his sentence for retail fraud. MCL 791.238; MSA 28.2308; People v Beal, 182 Mich. App. 184, 186-187; 452 NW2d 214 (1989).
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Larceny from a building and attempted larceny from a building, MCL 750.360; MSA 28.592.
[2]  At the time Edmonds was decided, the sentence augmentation provisions for controlled substance offenses were contained in MCL 335.348; MSA 18.1070(48). The statutes have been subsequently amended and the new provisions are now codified, in similar form, under MCL 333.7413; MSA 14.15(7413).

=== CASE 9737502 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:12.856521+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: Petitioner, Alvis Creel, appeals from the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County confirming the decision of the Industrial Commission which had affirmed the decision of the arbitrator dismissing petitioner’s application for adjustment of claim for the reason that it was not filed within one year of the date of the accident out of which his claim arose. The record shows that on January 14, 1964, while petitioner was employed by respondent, Lipsett Steel Company, a piece of steel fell from a crane and struck him on the head. He was rendered unconscious, and was taken to a hospital where a wound on his head was sutured, and he was released. Approximately six months later he “blacked out” and continued to have intermittent “blackouts” until he was hospitalized on December 7, 1967. He had continued to work for respondent until October 1967, was off until July 1968, when he worked for three weeks, and has not worked since. During the period from 1964 to 1968 he had seen various physicians and at the time of the hearing was still suffering the symptoms described in his testimony. When petitioner received a bill from the hospital where he was confined in December 1967, he took it to respondent’s plant superintendent and was told that if he would “pay up” his half of the premium due under a group insurance policy which covered respondent’s employees, the superintendent would attempt to have the insurance company pay the hospital bill. The premiums for the group insurance were paid one half by respondent and one half by the individual employees. The hospital bill was paid by the insurance carrier on January 30, 1968. It is the petitioner’s contention that under the provisions of section 8(j) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.), the time for the filing of an application of adjustment of claim was extended to one year from the date of the payment of the hospital bill and that his application was timely filed. At all times pertinent to this case section 6(c) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act provided: “In any case, other than one where the injury was caused by exposure to radiological materials or equipment unless application for compensation is filed with the Commission within 1 year after the date of the accident, where no compensation has been paid, or within 1 year after the date of the last payment of compensation, where any has been paid, the right to file such application shall be barred.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.6(c). At all pertinent times section 8(j) provided: “(j) 1. In the event the injured employee shall receive benefits, including medical, surgical or hospital benefits under any group plan covering non-occupational disabilities contributed to wholly or partially by the employer, which benefits should not have been payable if any rights of recovery existed under this Act, then such amounts so paid to said employee from any such group plan as shall be consistent with, and limited to, the provisions of Paragraph 2 hereof, shall be credited to or against any compensation payment for temporary total incapacity for work or any medical, surgical or hospital benefits made or to be made under this Act. In such event, the period of time for giving notice of accidental injury and filing application for adjustment of claim shall not commence to run until the termination of such payments. This paragraph shall not apply to payments made under any group plan which would have been payable irrespective of an accidental injury under this Act. Any employer receiving such credit shall keep such employee safe and harmless from any and all claims or liabilities that may be made against him by reason of having received such payments only to the extent of such credit.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8(j). The parties are in agreement that the group insurance program under which petitioner’s hospital bill was paid was a benefit which “should not have been payable if any rights of recovery existed” under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, and there is no question that petitioner’s application for adjustment of claim was filed within one year of the date of payment of the hospital bill. In support of his contention petitioner cites Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Com., 33 Ill.2d 78. In Caterpillar the employee was injured on September 23, 1957, and lost no time from work until four years later, when he developed difficulties. At that time he was off work for approximately four months and “during that time received payments under a group insurance plan covering nonoccupational disabilities.” (33 Ill.2d 78, 80.) He filed an application for adjustment of claim, the Industrial Commission awarded compensation, and the circuit court confirmed the decision of the Commission. In rejecting the employer’s contention that section 8(j) was not intended to revive claims which had been barred by section 6(c) prior to the payment of benefits, the court in Caterpillar said: “Despite the plausibility of the company’s argument we find no warrant for its position in the language of the statute. It is true that the presumed policy or purpose of the legislature may well be to restrict the operation of the provision to cases where the one-year period has not yet expired when the payments are begun. But the statute does not say so. Its language is plain that the period for filing claims ‘shall not commence to run until the termination of such payments.’ This all-inclusive language is similar to that in section 6, which says a claim may be made ‘within 1 year after the date of the last payment of compensation, where any has been paid.’ *** The legislative language is clear and unequivocal, and in such cases the intent must be ascertained from the language itself. There is no room to read into it a qualification or proviso that payments of non-occupational benefits be started within the one-year period prescribed by section 6.” 33 III 2d 78, 81-82. Respondent contends that this case is distinguishable from Caterpillar because in that case the group benefits which the employee received included weekly indemnity benefits. Assuming, arguendo, that the employee in Caterpillar did receive weekly benefits, it is clear from the statute that “benefits” included payment of hospital bills and the distinction which respondent draws does not improve its position. Respondent points out that in 1969 (Laws of 1969, p. 546, 564) the General Assembly amended section 8(j) by adding the following provision: “3. The extension of time for the filing of an Application for Adjustment of Claim as provided in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to those cases where the time for such filing had expired prior to the date on which payments or benefits enumerated herein have been initiated or resumed. Provided however that this paragraph 3 shall apply only to cases wherein the payments or benefits herein-above enumerated shall be received after the effective date of this amendatory paragraph.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 48, par. 138.8(j).) It argues, “The prevailing rule in Illinois is that an amendment of a statute after its judicial construction, evincing an intent to correct and override such construction is entitled to great weight. A reasonable presumption exists that the court’s construction in Caterpillar was not in accord with the original intent of the legislature contrary to the Appellant’s argument ***. (Modern Dairy Co. v. Department of Revenue, 413 Ill. 55; People ex rel. Spitzer v. County of La Salle, 20 Ill.2d 18, and People ex rel. Clark v. Village of Wheeling, 24 Ill.2d 267.)” Upon review of the authorities cited, we find more apposite here the following language from Western National Bank of Cicero v. Village of Kildeer, 19 Ill.2d 342, 353-354, “The interpretation placed upon a statute by the legislative department may go far to remove doubt as to its meaning, and it is proper for us to consider the subsequent amendment to a statute in determining the intent and meaning of the statute prior to amendment. [Citations.] The addition of a new provision in a statute by amendment is an indication of the absence of its implied or prior existence.” We note further that in the amendment enacted in 1969, the General Assembly left unchanged the language “*** benefits including *** hospital benefits.” We conclude that petitioner’s application for adjustment of claim, having been filed within one year of the payment of hospital benefits was timely filed, and accordingly the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is reversed, and the cause is remanded with directions to set aside the decision of the Industrial Commission and for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9737503 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:12.861277+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE DAVIS, dissenting: The crux of the majority opinion is that when the General Assembly amended section 8(j) by the addition of paragraph 3 in 1969, it was admitting the correctness of this court’s decision in Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Com. (1965), 33 Ill.2d 78, on the theory that “The addition of a new provision in a statute by amendment is an indication of the absence of its implied or prior existence.” However, when the statute is viewed in its entirety, I believe that the proper interpretation of legislative intent in enacting section 80)3 to be that this court had, in the view of the legislature, wrongfully construed section 80) in Caterpillar. The majority has considered only two sections of the Act, sections 6(c)(3) and 80)1, 2. Those portions of the Act read as follows: “6(c)(3) *** In any case, other than one where the injury was caused by exposure to radiological materials or equipment unless application for compensation is filed with the Commission within 1 year after the date of the accident, where no compensation has been paid, or within 1 year after the date of the last payment of compensation, where any has been paid, the right to file such application shall be barred.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.6. 8(j) 1. In the event the injured employee shall receive benefits, including medical, surgical or hospital benefits under any group plan covering non-occupational disabilities contributed to wholly or partially by the employer, which benefits should not have been payable if any rights of recovery existed under this Act, then such amounts so paid to said employee from any such group plan as shall be consistent with, and limited to, the provisions of Paragraph 2 hereof, shall be credited to or against any compensation payment for temporary total incapacity for work or any medical, surgical or hospital benefits made or to be made under this Act. In such event, the period of time for giving notice of accidental injury and filing application for adjustment of claim shall not commence to run until the termination of such payments. This paragraph shall not apply to payments made under any group plan which would have been payable irrespective of an accidental injury under this Act. Any employer receiving such credit shall keep such employee safe and harmless from any and all claims or liabilities that may be made against him by reason of having received such payments only to the extent of such credit. 2. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to give the employer or the insurance carrier the right to credit for any benefits or payments received by the employee other than compensation payments provided by this Act, and where the employee receives payments other than compensation payments, whether as full or partial salary, group insurance benefits, bonuses, annuities or any other payments, the employer or insurance carrier shall receive credit for each such payment only to the extent of the compensation that would have been payable during the period covered by such payment.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8(j). Section 8(j)3, which is the section relied upon by the appellee to show that the intent of the legislature is contrary to Caterpillar reads: “3. The extension of time for the filing of an Application for Adjustment of Claim as provided in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to those cases where the time for such filing had expired prior to the date on which payments or benefits enumerated herein have been initiated or resumed. Provided however that this paragraph 3 shall apply only to cases wherein the payments or benefits hereinabove enumerated shall be received after the effective date of this amendatory paragraph.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 48, par. 138.8(j). The search for legislative intent in this case should also include the introductory sentence of section 6(c), and the language of section 8(a), neither of which was considered by the majority. The introductory sentence of section 6(c) must be considered in the analysis of any of the subsequent paragraphs of that section. It reads: “No proceedings for compensation under this Act shall be maintained unless notice of the accident has been given to the employer as soon as practicable, but not later than 45 days after the accident.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.6. Section 8(a) sets forth the medical services which shall be paid by the employer, and specifically states that the gratuitous payment of such bills shall not toll the running of the statute of limitations. It reads: “(a) The employer shall provide the necessary first aid medical and surgical services, and all necessary medical, surgical and hospital services thereafter, limited, however, to that which is reasonably required to cure or relieve from the effects of the accidental injury. The employee may elect to secure his own physician, surgeon and hospital services at his own expense. When an employer and employee so agree in writing, nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent an employee whose injury or disability has been established in accordance with the provisions of this Act, from relying in good faith, on treatment by prayer or spiritual means alone, in accordance with the tenets and practice of a recognized church or religious denomination, by a duly accredited practitioner thereof, and having nursing services appropriate therewith, without suffering loss or diminution of the compensation benefits under this Act; provided, the employee shall submit to all physical examinations required by this Act. The cost of such treatment and nursing care shall be paid by the employee; unless, the employer agrees to make such payment. Where the accidental injury results in the amputation of an arm, hand, leg or foot, or the enucleation of an eye, or the loss of any of the natural teeth, the employer shall furnish an artificial of any such members lost or damaged in accidental injury arising out of and in the course of employment, and shall also furnish the necessary braces in all proper and necessary cases. The employer shall, when necessary, refit or replace artificial limbs during a period of 30 months following the first application of any artificial limb. Where the accidental injury accompanied by physical injury results in damage to a denture or where the" accidental injury results in damage to an artificial member, the employer shall replace or repair such denture or artificial member. The furnishing by the employer of any such services or appliances shall not be construed to admit liability on the part of the employer to pay compensation. The furnishing of any such services or appliances by the employer shall not be construed as the payment of compensation.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8(a). The clear intent of these sections is to (1) provide timely notice of the accident to the employer so that he may investigate into the compensability of the injury, (2) encourage employers to provide prompt medical care without the necessity of confessing liability for temporary or permanent losses caused by the accident, and (3) provide the employer with protection against stale claims by requiring that an application for adjustment of claim be filed within one year of the accident or last payment of “compensation.” The reason for the notice provision of the Act has been set forth by this court in United States Steel Corp. v. Industrial Com. (1964), 32 Ill.2d 68, where we said at page 75: “It is generally recognized that the purpose of such a notice provision is both to protect the employer against fraudulent claims by giving him an opportunity to investigate promptly and ascertain the facts of the alleged accident and to allow him to minimize his liability by affording the injured employee immediate medical treatment. Republic Steel Corp. v. Industrial Com. 26 Ill.2d 32, 41; Larson, Workmen’s Compensation, par. 78.32.” We have held the notice requirement to be jurisdictional and a prerequisite to a right to maintain proceedings under the Act. Ristow v. Industrial Com. (1968), 39 Ill.2d 410. The 1-year-limitation provision had been construed by this court prior to our holding in Caterpillar to be jurisdictional and a condition precedent to a right to maintain a proceeding under the Act. Black v. Industrial Com. (1946), 393 Ill. 187. It is clear, then, that the construction of section 8(j) used by this court in Caterpillar impliedly made inoperative several provisions of the Act which had previously been held to be jurisdictional, for that decision had the effect that (1) the employer need never be informed of the occurrence of the accident before the employee files with the Industrial Commission, and (2) the employer is liable forever. These results occur whenever an employer funds in any part a nonoccupational health insurance fund for his employees. The employee in such a case could wait for any length of time before filing his claim with the Industrial Commission, and revive his claim merely by telling the employer that the bill he is submitting for payment is not work related and then “changing his mind” as soon as that bill has been paid by the insurance carrier. When viewed from this perspective, it appears that the holding of this court in Caterpillar was not in accord with the original intent of the legislature, for it would mean the legislature intended that the Industrial Commission may lose jurisdiction completely, due to the failure of a party to proceed, and then regain jurisdiction by the unilateral act of the very party who allowed the original jurisdiction of the Commission to be lost. Upon consideration of the entire scope of the Act as described above, I believe that the addition of paragraph 3 to section 8(j) evinced an intent of the legislature to correct a construction of the section by this court which the legislature regarded as erroneous. The holding of the Industrial Commission should be affirmed.

=== CASE 2210804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.331536+00 ===

158 Wis. 2d 486 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 364
Myron F. YORK and Judith A. York, Plaintiffs-Respondents-Cross Appellants,
v.
NATIONAL CONTINENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY, a foreign insurance corporation, J.H. Ware Trucking, Inc., a foreign corporation, and Darrell T. Coffey, Defendants-Appellants-Cross Respondents.[]
No. 90-0184.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs September 18, 1990.
Decided October 2, 1990.
*489 On behalf of the defendants-appellants-cross respondents, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Robert H. Magie, III of Crasweller, Magie, Andresen, Haag & Paciotti of Duluth, Minnesota.
On behalf of the plaintiffs-respondents-cross appellants, the cause was submitted on the brief of DeBardeleben & Associates of Park Falls.
Before Cane, P.J., Myse and Dykman, JJ.
*490 CANE, P.J.
National Continental Insurance Company, J.H. Ware Trucking, Inc., and Darrell T. Coffey (collectively National) appeal a judgment based on a finding of negligence in the death of Craig York and an order denying a motion for reconsideration. National contends that the jury's finding of causal negligence was not supported by credible evidence, that the trial court erred by allowing an expert witness to testify to his speculations regarding the manner in which the accident occurred and that the trial court erred by not submitting to the jury the issue of the comparative negligence of two non-parties. Myron and Judith York, Craig York's parents, cross-appeal and contend that the trial court erred by limiting the jury award for loss of society and companionship to a total of $50,000 for both parents.
We conclude that the testimony of the expert witness was admissible and that the jury's finding of causal negligence was supported by credible evidence. We further conclude that National was not prejudiced by the court's refusal to submit the issue of the non-parties' negligence to the jury, and that the sec. 895.04(4), Stats., limit of $50,000 for loss of society and companionship in a wrongful death action was properly imposed on the class of beneficiaries described as "parents of the deceased." We therefore affirm the judgment and order. We deny the Yorks' request that we deem National's appeal frivolous under sec. 809.25(3)(a), Stats.
Craig York, an employee of Capitol Polymers, was unloading a semi-trailer containing large bales of plastic weighing approximately 940 pounds each when he was killed. The truck belonged to J.H. Ware Trucking, Inc., and Darrell Coffey was the driver who made the delivery to Capitol Polymers. Coffey took on a load of plastic in North Carolina, signing a bill of lading indicating that the cargo had been properly loaded by the shipper. Coffely *491 then drove to Madison, Wisconsin, to make the delivery to Capitol Polymers.
Craig York was on duty to unload the truck for Capitol Polymers. York's employer testified that Coffey had no contractual responsibility to assist York in unloading the truck. The J.H. Ware driver's manual, introduced into evidence at trial, indicated that Coffey was responsible for ensuring that the truck was clean before it was loaded and for noting any shortages or damaged freight when delivered.
Coffey was not checking the delivery for damage or shortage at the time of the accident. Instead, he was resting in the tractor portion of the truck. He later found York face down in the trailer, crushed under several large bales. There was no witness to the accident.
Trial testimony revealed that Coffey had driven a truck for J.H. Ware for only a few months before the accident and that the load of plastic was the first load of that type he had transported. The trailer on Coffey's truck was refrigerated, with metal floors. There was disputed testimony that the interior of the truck and at least one of the bales removed was wet.
Coffey instructed the shipper in North Carolina to load the trailer in stacks of three bales toward the front, two bales at the center, and three bales at the back. Most of the weight was distributed over the axles, rather than in a uniform configuration two bales high throughout the trailer, with any extra bales placed on top. Coffey's trailer was equipped with portable load locks designed to keep loads from shifting in transit, but he did not use those locks on the plastic bales.
The Yorks' expert testified at trial that, in his opinion, York unloaded three bales of plastic with the forklift, and then entered the trailer to check the position of the remaining bales. The accident occurred because the *492 unsecured bales, which had shifted in transit, fell over when he entered the trailer. The wet floor of the refrigerated trailer caused York to slip, so he could not avoid the falling bales.
National's witness, a special investigator with the Madison Police Department, stated that the floor of the trailer was not slippery or wet at the time he inspected it, but that one of the bales that had been removed had moisture on it. In his opinion, the bales had shifted only slightly in transit. The investigator further testified that the trailer was 9.5 inches higher than the loading dock and that the dock plate connecting the two required the forklift to approach the trailer at an angle, which meant that it could not reach under the bales near the rear of the trailer.
The investigator stated that, in his opinion, York had unloaded only one bale from the trailer before the accident. He further testified that co-employees reported York's past practice of pulling bales off the top of stacks and onto the trailer beds by hand, rather than using a forklift. The investigator observed employees unloading the truck in this fashion after the accident.
The jury's verdict found Craig York not at fault for the accident and apportioned 25% of the causal negligence to Coffey and 75% to J.H. Ware. The jury was not asked to evaluate the negligence of the North Carolina shipper or Capitol Polymers, Craig York's employer.
National first contends that the jury's finding of causal negligence was not supported by credible evidence. In National's view, Craig York's presence in the trailer at the time he was crushed by the falling bales could as easily have been explained by his past practice of unloading bales by hand as by some unexplained purpose to check the location of the remaining bales after he had completed a partial unloading via forklift.
*493 [1-3]
A jury verdict will not be upset if there is any credible evidence to support it. The evidence will be viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict. This is especially true where the verdict has the approval of the trial court. Meurer v. ITT General Controls, 90 Wis. 2d 438, 450-51, 280 N.W.2d 156, 162 (1979). The credibility of witnesses and the weight given to their testimony are left to the judgment of the jury, and where more than one reasonable inference can be drawn from the evidence, we accept the inference drawn by the jury. Id. On appeal, the obligation of this court is to search for credible evidence that will sustain the verdict, not for evidence to sustain a verdict the jury could have but did not reach. Id.
[4]
Here, a reasonable jury could have believed the Yorks' expert's version of the accident, or that of the investigator, and still have found National negligent. There was evidence that Coffey was inexperienced in handling this type of load, that he failed to use available load locks, and that he directed that his trailer be loaded in a non-uniform configuration. The jury could infer that this loading pattern, when the bales were unsecured, caused the bales to shift in transit. The J.H. Ware refrigerated trailer could be viewed as inappropriate for this type of shipment, and the jury was entitled to infer from the evidence of the metal floor and the one damp bale that the floor was slippery at the time York was unloading the trailer. The question of York's comparative negligence was squarely before the jury, and it determined that York was not negligent. The jury's verdict is supported by credible evidence.
[5]
National's second contention, that the trial court erred by allowing an expert witness to testify, over objection, *494 to his speculations regarding the manner in which the accident occurred, is related to its first argument that the jury's finding is not supported by credible evidence. National argues that the expert's opinion was at best conjectural. Speculation alone is an insufficient basis for a finding of causal negligence. Anello v. Savignac, 116 Wis. 2d 246, 251, 342 N.W.2d 440, 442 (Ct. App. 1983).
[6]
We reject National's argument. National's own expert, the police investigator, testified to the moisture on one bale of the shipment. The forklift was found ten feet from the scene of the accident, and it was still running. James Bodi, the Yorks' expert, is a registered professional engineer with a specialty in industrial engineering. A witness qualified as an expert may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise. Section 907.02, Stats. The Yorks' expert's opinion that the load had shifted in transit and the resulting tension caused three bales to fall forward and crush York is a plausible explanation of physical facts. We conclude that the testimony of the Yorks' expert was more than mere speculation; rather, it was a qualified opinion based upon his expertise, first-hand observations and investigation of the accident.
[7, 8]
Third, National contends that the trial court erred by not submitting to the jury the issue of the comparative negligence of the North Carolina shipper or of Craig York's employer, Capitol Polymers. If there is evidence of conduct that, if believed by the jury, would constitute negligence on the part of an actor, then that actor should be included in the special verdict. See Connar v. West Shore Equip., 68 Wis. 2d 42, 45, 227 N.W.2d 660, 662 (1975). Evidence at trial demonstrated that Coffey directed the loading of his truck in North Carolina, and *495 then signed a receipt indicating that the truck had been properly loaded. We conclude that the trial court did not err in determining that there was no evidence of tortious conduct by the shipper supporting the submission of this issue to the jury. We do not reach the issue of whether there was sufficient evidence introduced at trial to support the inclusion of the employer in the special verdict because National has demonstrated no prejudice stemming from the trial court's decision.
We distinguish this case from Connar because in Connar, the employee whose widow was pursuing a wrongful death action was found to be 34% causally negligent. The distributor of the faulty equipment was found to be 25% causally negligent, while the manufacturer of the equipment was found to be 41% causally negligent. The distributor was dismissed from the lawsuit because its causal negligence was less than the deceased employee's. The Connar court recognized that, had the employer been included in the special verdict form, the causal negligence of the manufacturer could also have ended up to be less than 34%, which would have resulted in its dismissal from the suit as well. Id. at 46, 227 N.W.2d at 663.
In the case before us, worker's compensation death benefits were the Yorks' sole remedy against Capitol Polymers, and Coffey and J.H. Ware, as third-party tortfeasors, could not require contribution or indemnity from the employer, even if Capitol Polymers were substantially more at fault than they. See Mulder v. Acme Cleveland Corp., 95 Wis. 2d 173, 177, 290 N.W.2d 276, 278 (1980).
[9]
Where, as here, the deceased employee is found not to be causally negligent, there is no prejudice from failure to include his employer in the special verdict question.
*496 The jury determined that Coffey and J.H. Ware were causally negligent, so the only effect of adding a question as to the employer's negligence would be to potentially change the apportionment of negligence between the tortfeasors. A jury that has found causal negligence by an actor does not change that determination to one of no equation. On appeal, National is not entitled to relief unless the error complained of has affected its substantial rights. See sec. 805.18(2), Stats. Coffey and J.H. Ware would remain jointly and severally liable to the Yorks regardless of the proportion of negligence assigned to Capitol Polymers.
On cross-appeal, Myron and Judith York, Craig York's parents, contend that the trial court erred by limiting the jury award of $100,000 for loss of society and companionship to a total of $50,000 for both parents. They argue that the statutory limit of damages for loss of society and companionship in a wrongful death action applies to each party entitled to bring an action under the statute. We do not agree.
[10]
Statutory construction presents a question of law that we decide without deference to the trial court's determination. Suburban State Bank v. Squires, 145 Wis. 2d 445, 448, 427 N.W.2d 393, 394 (Ct. App. 1988).
Section 895.04(4), Stats., provides:
Judgment for damages for pecuniary injury from wrongful death may be awarded to any person entitled to bring a wrongful death action. Additional damages not to exceed $50,000 for loss of society and companionship may be awarded to the spouse, children or parents of the deceased. (Emphasis added.)
*497 In 1962, the supreme court interpreted the similar language of the predecessor statute, sec. 331.04(4), Stats. (1961),[1] as requiring the reduction of a jury award of $8,000 to two parents of a deceased child to the statutory limit of $3,000. Fox v. Pettis, 16 Wis. 2d 397, 402, 114 N.W.2d 836, 839 (1962).
[11]
Where a legislative act has been construed by the supreme court, the legislature is presumed to know that, in the absence of a change in the law, the court's construction of the statute will remain unchanged. Reiter v. Dyken, 95 Wis. 2d 461, 470-71, 290 N.W.2d 510, 515 (1980). This presumption of legislative adoption or ratification of a judicial statutory construction is entitled to less weight when the court's construction is followed by nearly complete inaction on the part of the legislature. Id. at 471, 290 N.W.2d at 515-16. Where the legislature has made amendments to the statutory section in question and has not corrected the court's interpretation, the presumption of adoption or ratification is strengthened. Id. at 471-72, 290 N.W.2d at 516.
Since the supreme court's decision in Fox, the legislature has acted to change the language of sec. 895.04(4), Stats., at least nine times.[2] On four occasions, the legislature *498 specifically focused on the language of the sentence at issue, raising the statutory limit each time without changing its description of the parties who could recover that limit.[3] The presumption is that the legislature has adopted or ratified the Fox court's interpretation of the statutory limit.
The Yorks contend, however, that our decision in Boles v. Milwaukee County, 150 Wis. 2d 801, 443 N.W.2d 679 (Ct. App. 1989), interpreting the language of sec. 893.80(3), Stats., supports a construction of the wrongful death statute allowing recovery by each parent up to the statutory limit. Section 893.80(3) provides, in pertinent part: "The amount recoverable by any person for any damages, injuries or death in any action founded on tort against . . . [a] political corporation, governmental subdivision or agency thereof . . . shall not exceed $50,000." In Boles, we held that each of three children was entitled to recover up to the sec. 893.80(3) maximum for the death of their mother. Id. at 815, 443 N.W.2d at 684.
In Boles, we interpreted a different statute from the one at issue here. The language of sec. 893.80(3), Stats., is demonstrably different from that of sec. 895.04(4), Stats., in that recovery under the former is allowed to "any person," while the latter provides for damages recoverable by "the spouse, children or parents of the deceased." In addition, our analysis in Boles makes clear that this construction was not meant to be extended to portions of the wrongful death statute that act to limit recovery:
The County argues that a wrongful death action, unknown to the common law, was created and *499 defined by statute. Section 895.04(2), Stats., provides that if no spouse survives, the amount recovered shall vest in the deceased's lineal heirs as determined by sec. 852.01, Stats. Section 852.01 defines intestate succession. Therefore, the County concludes that the maximum recovery goes to the class limited by intestate succession.
We reject this argument because secs. 895.04(2) and 852.01, Stats., define who shall recover rather than the amount of recovery.
Id. at 814, 443 N.W.2d at 684 (emphasis added). It is obvious that the sec. 895.04(4) limitation on recovery for loss of society and companionship in a wrongful death action does define the amount of recovery, and so Boles does not apply. The county's argument advanced in Boles is persuasive here, where we are dealing with a statute that limits the amount of recovery available to three classes of persons.
[12]
We hold that the sec. 895.04(4), Stats., limit of $50,000 for loss of society and companionship in a wrongful death action is recoverable by the spouse of the person deceased, or if no spouse is living by the class of children of the person deceased as defined in sec. 895.04(2), or if no children are living by the class of parents of the person deceased.
We deny the Yorks' request that we deem National's appeal frivolous and award costs, fees and attorney's fees under sec. 809.25(3)(a), Stats. The judgment and order of the trial court is affirmed.
By the Court.Judgment and order affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  Section 331.04(4) provided, in pertinent part: "Judgment for damages for pecuniary injury from wrongful death shall not exceed $22,500. Additional damages not to exceed $3,000 for loss of society and companionship may be awarded to spouse, unemancipated or dependent children or parents of deceased." Section 331.04(4) was renumbered sec. 895.04(4), Stats., in 1965. Sec. 2, Ch. 66, Laws of 1965.
[2]  See 1985 Wis. Act 130; 1983 Wis. Act 315; ch. 166, Laws of 1979; ch. 287, Laws of 1975; ch. 166, Laws of 1975; sec. 5, ch. 213, Laws of 1971; ch. 59, Laws of 1971; ch. 436, Laws of 1969; and ch. 267, Laws of 1967.
[3]  See 1983 Wis. Act 315; ch. 166, Laws of 1979; ch. 287, Laws of 1975; ch. 436, Laws of 1969.