=== CASE 9739157 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:49.190811+00 ===

HARRIS, Justice.
Plaintiff Jeffrey K. Reed brought this suit against defendant Chrysler Corporation on a crashworthiness theory. At the close of Reed’s case in chief, following five days of testimony, the trial court sustained Chrysler’s motion for directed verdict. We reverse and remand.
The vehicle involved in this accident was a 1980 Jeep CJ-7, manufactured in 1979, which the driver purchased used in 1983. It came with two removable tops, a canvas top and a fiberglass top. Reed was a passenger.
Traveling east on highway 34, approximately two miles west of Albia, the Jeep’s right side tires went off the road onto the gravel-surfaced shoulder as the Jeep approached a bridge. The Jeep turned sharply back onto the paved surface, missing the bridge wall on the Jeep’s right side. It continued across both lanes of the highway, and at the far corner of the bridge the front left side of the vehicle slammed into the concrete bridge abutment. The force of the impact rapidly propelled the occupants, none of whom were wearing seat belts, out of their seats. Upon impact the driver’s door either was forced open or was torn from the vehicle. The driver was .ejected and struck a wooden support pole headfirst, dying instantly.
After the initial impact the vehicle, now driverless, began to ride up the concrete abutment to the bridge. It then continued *226riding along the guardrail attached to the abutment. After leaving the guardrail the Jeep proceeded to roll onto its fiberglass top, breaking it. The overturned vehicle slid on its roll bar more than 300 feet farther down the road. It finally came to rest, still upside down. Reed, the right-rear passenger, was held inside the vehicle by his foot, which became entangled with the right front seat. As the vehicle slid upside down, Reed’s right arm was momentarily pinched between the highway surface and the roll bar. The arm was severely fractured and is said to remain useless. Reed also fractured his right collarbone and dislocated his left hip. The other passengers received only minor injuries.
Accident investigators determined the vehicle had been speeding; one expert projected a speed of 79.47 miles per hour, another a speed in the low sixties. Blood tests showed the driver’s alcoholic content at .185 grams of alcohol and Reed’s at .168 (per 100 milliliters of blood).
I. In Iowa the doctrine of crash-worthiness was first recognized as a theory of design defect by the court of appeals in Wernimont v. International Harvestor Corporation, 309 N.W.2d 137 (Iowa App.1981). The doctrine imposes liability on manufacturers for design defects which only enhance injuries rather than cause them. Id. at 140. The doctrine is applicable when a design defect, not causally connected to the accident, results in injuries greater than those which would have resulted from the accident had there been no design defect. In other words, enhancement of injuries is the gist of crashworthiness cases, not the precipitating cause of the accident.
At the time this case was tried, Werni-mont, a court of appeals decision, was the only Iowa authority to recognize the crash-worthiness doctrine. Since then we also recognized it. Hillrichs v. Avco Corp., 478 N.W.2d 70 (Iowa 1991) (holding crashwor-thiness doctrine applicable where plaintiff was injured after becoming entangled in grain harvesting machinery designed and built without an accessible shut-off switch). We said:
The enhanced injury theory as applied to automobile manufacturers has been widely recognized. See Tafoya v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 884 F.2d 1330, 1337-38 (10th Cir.1989).
[[Image here]]
We believe that the court of appeals’ recognition of the enhanced injury doctrine in Wernimont was merely a correct application in a particular context of well-established elements of Iowa tort law that permit recovery of damages for injuries caused by the conduct of another that the law identifies as tortious. These principles mandate that an injured party’s right of recovery extend to all injury or degree of injury that would have been prevented through the tortfeasor’s exercise of the proper standard of care.
Hillrichs, 478 N.W.2d at 74-75.
To prevail on a claim of crashwor-thiness a plaintiff at the threshold must establish the existence of a design defect. This showing must include proof that the product was unreasonably dangerous. Wernimont, 309 N.W.2d at 140 (citing Chown v. USM Corp., 297 N.W.2d 218, 220 (Iowa 1980)). To prevail, after making the threshold showing, a plaintiff must then establish the following three elements:
(1) proof of an alternative safer design, practicable under the circumstances; (2) what injuries would have resulted had the alternative safer design been used; and (3) the extent of enhanced injuries attributable to the defective design.
Wernimont, 309 N.W.2d at 140-41.
II. In Hillrichs we did not consider whether expert testimony is required to establish the first element (“proof of an alternative safer design, practicable under the circumstances”). Hillrichs happened to present both expert and nonexpert testimony. Wernimont did discuss the issue, the court concluding that: “[wjhether expert testimony is required ultimately depends on whether it is a fact issue upon which the jury needs assistance to reach an intelligent or correct decision.” Wernimont, 309 N.W.2d at 141. The Wernimont court explained that
*227design defect cases sometimes involve technical, scientific issues which cannot be fully understood by the average juror without some expert assistance. In such cases, expert testimony as to the defective nature of defendant’s design will be an indispensable element of plaintiffs case. However, when the issues presented relate to matters which require only common knowledge and experience to understand them, the testimony of experts is not essential.
Id. (Quoting Lynd v. Rockwell Mfg. Co., 276 Or. 341, 349, 554 P.2d 1000, 1005 (1976).)
In Hillrichs we did explore the second (“what injuries would have resulted had the alternative safer design been used”) and third (“the extent of enhanced injuries attributable to the defective design”) elements of the crashworthiness doctrine, and said how the two prongs are to be applied:
[Rjecovery should be denied when it is uncertain or speculative that any damage has actually occurred. Damages may be awarded, however, when the only dispute is the amount of damages and the evidence affords a reasonable basis for estimating the loss. In determining a just and reasonable estimate of damages based on relevant data, a jury may act on probable and inferential, as well as direct and positive proof.
Hillrichs, 478 N.W.2d at 75 (citations omitted). Thus, although the extent of the enhanced injury in Hillrichs was not definitively fixed, we said that “the degree of uncertainty [was not] so great as to preclude the jury from quantifying the enhanced loss with a reasonable margin of error.” Id. at 75.
III. Reed’s crashworthiness claim centers on two components of the Jeep CJ-7, its windshield frame and its removable hardtop. We can assume Reed developed sufficient evidence regarding design defect.1 If Reed has tendered sufficient proof on the three additional elements of crashworthiness, the case should have been submitted to the jury and directed verdict was improper. Reed believes it was neither the law nor the evidence which kept the case from the jury, but rather the trial judge’s personal bias.2
The trial court’s stated ground for sustaining the motion for directed verdict was a perceived lack of evidence of the first postthreshold element: “an alternative safer design, practicable under the circumstances.” We of course view the evidence in the light most favorable to Reed. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(2). We think a jury question was made out on this element.
Company rollover test reports demonstrated that a removable steel top, sold in three versions by Chrysler as an option in at least one other Jeep model, may have prevented the injury to Reed’s arm. Thus, the safer alternative introduced into evidence was familiar to Chrysler, indeed such an alternative had been designed, tested and sold for twenty years prior to the accident.
Reed’s safety expert indicated that fiberglass tops shattered or came apart in most rollover accidents and thus were not crash-worthy. Another expert said that fiberglass was a brittle material with little structural integrity and “not a material that you would use if you [were] interested in safety.” Available metal tops, alone or in conjunction with struts between the windshield and rollbar, were much safer. This lent credence to Reed’s insistence that safer alternatives were available to the manufacturer.
According to Reed’s evidence, at the time of its manufacture, this Jeep CJ-7 was the only such model sold to the American pub-*228lie still utilizing a fiberglass hardtop. The industry standard by 1980 was steel tops. The vehicle in which Reed was injured had the only plastic top sold in North America. This is significant because we have long recognized “custom and practice of the industry,” as well as “state of the art,” as a part of tort law. Chown, 297 N.W.2d at 222.
There is more evidence that Chrysler was aware of industry practice. The Jeep CJ-5, a shorter version of the CJ-7, had an optional steel top while the Jeep CJ-7 had only a fiberglass top. According to the manufacturer’s 1980 accessories catalog, CJ-5 Jeep purchasers had the option of three metal tops. A Chrysler engineer acknowledged that the general public would perceive a metal top to be safer than a plastic top. Although the Jeep CJ-7 was not available to the general public with a metal top, this model, so equipped, was sold to the Alaskan post office.
We think a prima facie showing was made on the first element. We think this is true even in the absence of further expert testimony indicating whether an alternative safer design was practicable and feasible in terms of cost, economy of operation, maintenance requirements, and other safety factors. These questions were not so technologically sophisticated as to require expert testimony. The only difference in design between the fiberglass top and the metal top is the material involved. These matters were not beyond the understanding of an average juror.
IV. Although the trial court based its decision on the first post-threshold element of a crashworthiness claim, the case can be affirmed if Reed failed to produce sufficient evidence for a prima facie showing regarding the other two additional elements. The parties dispute the sufficiency of evidence on both the second and third elements: “(2) what injuries would have resulted had the alternative safer design been used; and (3) the extent of enhanced injuries attributable to the defective design.”
A showing on these elements can be satisfied under the liberal requirements, previously mentioned, we established in Hillrichs. 478 N.W.2d at 75 (holding jury’s just and reasonable estimate of damages may be based on relevant data derived from “probable and inferential, as well as direct and positive proof”).
V. The present case differs from Wemimont where the alternative design would have lessened the injury. It is likely that a metal top would have changed the nature of Reed’s injury, a matter that leads to more speculation. We nevertheless think a jury question was presented on the second element (“what injuries would have resulted had the alternative safer design been used”). Reed contends the “but for— causation” showing (but for the fiberglass top, his arm would not have been injured) is sufficient for this element. In other words, although Reed cannot show the injuries that would have occurred with a metal top, he contends he satisfied this element by showing the injury to his arm would not even have occurred with a metal top. We agree.
Chrysler also contends that Reed’s inability to establish the precise injuries he would have suffered with a metal top is fatal to making a showing of the second element. We are not persuaded. The situation is akin to a general rule of damages. Where some damages appear, recovery should not be denied merely because of difficulty in fixing an exact amount. Bangert v. Osceola County, 456 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Iowa 1990).
Reed’s expert testified that, had the Jeep been designed with a metal top, and had the top stayed attached, Reed would not have suffered his crushing arm injury. The arm injury is shown to be wholly attributable to the fiberglass top. Reed himself testified that $248,000 of the stipulated $258,000 in total damages is attributable to his arm injury. This evidence, taken together, made out a jury question on both the second and third elements.
VI. Even if our review of this case had led to an affirmance, a directed verdict would have been a very bad idea. This is because of what veteran Iowa judges often refer to as the Uhlenhopp rule. As a dis*229trict judge the Honorable Harvey Uhlen-hopp, later a distinguished member of this court, faced a familiar situation. A defendant moved for a directed verdict which Judge Uhlenhopp overruled. A verdict was returned for the plaintiff, after which the defendant filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the same ground urged in the motion for directed verdict. Judge Uhlenhopp sustained the motion, saying:
At the close of the evidence the court was clear that [the defendant was entitled to a judgment as a matter of law]. But to avoid the necessity of another trial in the event of error, although it seemed a nonsuit had to be, the case was submitted to the jury.
Florke v. Peterson, 245 Iowa 1031, 1033, 65 N.W.2d 372, 373 (1954). On appeal we said:
We approve the trial court’s procedure. A verdict for defendant might entirely avert appeal; and the verdict for plaintiff serves to avoid the necessity of retrial in the event of reversal. The procedure conforms to the spirit of rule -243(b) [Iowa R.Civ.P.]_ It is in line with the purpose of the legislation under which the rules were conceived — “promoting the speedy determination of litigation upon its merits.”
Id. (Citations omitted.)
Justice Uhlenhopp’s approach has been encouraged in many of our cases. Recently we said:
[W]e note trial court acted appropriately when it allowed the case to go to the jury rather than [granting the] motion for a directed verdict. By allowing the case to go to the jury, trial court gave the jury an opportunity to consider the evidence, return a verdict, and potentially reach the same conclusion the court tentatively had reached. More importantly, this court, assuming no other prejudicial error is found, may now reinstate that verdict rather than being required to remand [the] claim for new trial.
Johnson v. Junkmann, 395 N.W.2d 862, 866 (Iowa 1986) (citations omitted).
We again emphasize that much is wasted by granting directed verdicts in routine cases, or in eases that are at all close. Considerable time and expense have usually been invested in the trial at that point. Submission to a jury is generally not far off. The so-called Uhlenhopp rule is decidedly in the public interest and should normally be followed.
VII. Because the question is likely to recur on retrial, we address Reed’s claim for punitive damages. Because of the directed verdict, the appropriateness of this claim was not reached, although the trial court did offer its view that a claim for punitive damages was not made out.
On the basis of the showing made in this trial, we agree. Chrysler’s conduct was not shown to be willful or wanton. In order to support such a claim, a plaintiff must show actual or legal malice. We reviewed the controlling principles in Coster v. Crookham, 468 N.W.2d 802, 810-11 (Iowa 1991).
VIII. Another issue apt to recur involved Reed’s failure to use a seat belt. The court overruled Reed’s motion in li-mine to exclude evidence of this failure. The motion should have been sustained. Iowa Code section 321.445(4)(a) (1991) provides:
The nonuse of a safety belt or safety harness by a person is not admissible or material as evidence in a civil action brought for damages in a cause of action arising prior to July 1, 1986.
The accident occurred August 18,1985, and is therefore subject to the quoted language.
Chrysler contends this prohibition is modified by language in Iowa Code section 321.445(4)(b). We think not. The legislature, for reasons it chose, enacted a flat prohibition of seat belt evidence in cases arising prior to the time seat belt use was required in Iowa. We are obliged to follow this clear mandate.
IX. Another issue almost certain to reappear on retrial concerns the admissibility of evidence of the driver’s and Reed’s *230intoxication. Reed urges the trial court ruling, admitting this evidence, was error.
In former times comparative negligence was inapplicable to strict liability claims. Speck v. Unit Handling Div., Litton Sys., 366 N.W.2d 543, 546 (Iowa 1985) (reaffirmed in Duggan v. Hallmark Pool Mfg. Co., Inc., 398 N.W.2d 175, 180 (Iowa 1986)). This holding was consistent with the prevailing view. See Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 402A, 524. Both Speck and Dug-gan were decided before the advent of our comparative fault Act3 and were therefore not subject to its provisions.
This view of comparative negligence, as it relates to general strict liability claims, was undone by statute. Under the comparative fault Act, Iowa Code § 668.1(1), fault includes acts or omissions that subject a person to strict liability. A plaintiffs fault, under Iowa Code section 668.3, does not bar recovery; it serves only to diminish it. Iowa Code section 668.1(2) leaves intact existing “legal requirements of cause in fact and proximate cause.”
X. The crashworthiness doctrine is a step removed from ordinary strict liability cases. The crashworthiness doctrine proceeds from the belief that a manufacturer has a duty to minimize the injurious effect of a crash, no matter how the crash is caused. Larsen v. General Motors Corp., 391 F.2d 495, 502 (8th Cir.1968) (holding manufacturer liable for “so-called 'second collision’ of the passenger with the interior part of the automobile” because accidents and enhanced injuries are foreseeable). See Harris, Enhanced Injury Theory: An Analytic Framework, 62 N.C.Law Rev. 643, 673-75 (1984).
The theory, which presupposes the occurrence of accidents precipitated for myriad reasons, focuses alone on the enhancement of resulting injuries. The rule does not pretend that the design defect had anything to do with causing the accident. It is enough if the design defect increased the damages. So any participation by the plaintiff in bringing the accident about is quite beside the point.
In adopting the crashworthiness doctrine in Hillrichs, we indicated a contrary view, stating that the plaintiffs comparative fault could be assessed against him in a claim for enhanced injuries. 478 N.W.2d at 76. On reconsideration, for the reasons just stated, we think a plaintiffs comparative fault should not be so assessed in a crashworthiness case unless it is shown to be a proximate cause of the enhanced injury-
Chrysler points to no way, and the record suggests none, in which the driver’s or Reed’s intoxication could bear on how Reed’s injuries were enhanced by the construction of the Jeep’s roof. Any negligence by Reed’s driver, or even by Reed himself, in connection with the original crash cannot be used by the manufacturer in defending against Reed’s enhancement claim. Evidence of intoxication should have been excluded.
Other arguments relate to issues either not preserved or not likely to recur on retrial.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.
All Justices concur except CARTER, J., and McGIVERIN, C.J., and SCHULTZ and SNELL, JJ., who concur in part and dissent in part.
. There is no dispute that Reed presented sufficient evidence for jury submission of the threshold question (design defect).
. In chambers, while considering the crashwor-thiness doctrine, the trial judge for some inexplicable reason made disparaging personal references to the former member of the court of appeals who authored the Wernimont decision. For reasons we deem sufficient, those remarks will not be quoted here. It is enough for us to note that they went far beyond the sort of criticism that must be expected in our calling. We consider the judge’s insulting remarks to be an affront to the entire judiciary and strongly condemn them.
. We adopted the comparative negligence doctrine in Goetzman v. Wichern, 327 N.W.2d 742, 754 (Iowa 1982). The comparative fault Act was adopted as Iowa Code chapter 668. 1984 Iowa Acts ch. 1293. It applies to all cases filed on or after July 1, 1984. 1984 Iowa Acts ch. 1293 § 15.

=== CASE 9739158 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:49.195187+00 ===

CARTER, Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I concur in all of the majority opinion except the conclusions expressed in Division X, from which I dissent.
We recognized in Hillrichs v. Avco Corp., 478 N.W.2d 70 (Iowa 1991):
[T]he enhanced injury doctrine [is] merely a correct application in a particular context of well-established elements of Iowa tort law that permit recovery of damages for injuries caused by the conduct of another that the law identifies as tortious. These principles mandate that *231an injured party’s right of recovery extend to all injury or degree of injury that would have been prevented through the tortfeasor’s exercise of the proper standard of care.
Id. at 75. Actions seeking recovery for injuries caused by another’s tort are triable in accordance with the comparative fault concepts embraced in Iowa Code chapter 668 if the theory of the tort involved constitutes fault as defined in Iowa Code section 668.1(1) (1991). The tort theories of strict liability and negligence involved in the present action fall within that definition. Iowa Code § 668.1(1).
In cases in which chapter 668 applies, the statutory requirement that fault is to be compared has reference to “fault resulting in death or in injury to person or property.” Iowa Code § 668.3(1). These statutes further provide that “[t]he legal requirements of cause in fact and proximate cause apply both to fault as the basis for liability and to contributory fault.” Iowa Code § 668.1(2). As a result of these statutes, the question of whether a claimant’s fault may be considered in enhanced injury litigation depends on whether that fault is a proximate cause of the injuries for which the claimant is seeking to recover.
The rules that determine the causal relationship between a claimant’s negligent conduct and the injury for which recovery is sought are the same as those that apply in determining the defendant’s liability. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 465(2) (1965). Conduct that, in natural and continuous sequence, unbroken by any efficient intervening cause, produces the result complained of and without which the result would not have occurred, is a proximate cause of the event. Nachazel v. Miraco Mfg., 432 N.W.2d 158, 160 (Iowa 1988); Cronk v. Iowa Power & Light Co., 258 Iowa 603, 613, 138 N.W.2d 843, 848 (1965).
Negligent conduct of an actor, which only increases the foreseeable risk of harm produced by another person’s negligence, is not an intervening cause unless it varies the risk in kind rather than degree. Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 442A, 442B (1965). The . situation presented in enhanced injury claims does not differ substantially from other situations in which the defendant’s fault is premised on a failure to protect other persons from the consequences of their own negligent acts. Consequently, there is no logical reason to use different rules for fault comparison in enhanced injury claims than would be used in claims involving negligent failure to warn or negligent failure to install safety devices.
Because under settled principles of proximate cause a claimant’s fault that produces an injury-producing occurrence will also be a proximate cause of the enhanced injuries sustained, the usual rules for fault comparison should apply to the enhanced injury portion of the claim. Our recognition of that proposition in Hillrichs, 478 N.W.2d at 76, should not be abandoned.
McGIVERIN, C.J., SCHULTZ and SNELL, JJ., join this concurrence in part and dissent in part.

=== CASE 9739159 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:50.394899+00 ===

Doctoroff, C.J.
The Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board ordered an open award of benefits for plaintiff after finding that he was mentally disabled, that he received personal injuries in the course of his employment, and that his employment significantly aggravated his mental condi*267tion. We find error requiring reversal in the wcab’s reasoning pertaining to plaintiff’s personal injuries and their causation.
Plaintiff worked as a custodian for defendant from February 1978 until June 4, 1984. He worked at a high school from 1978 until the summer of 1981. He then worked at the South Junior High School until December of 1983. During the summer of 1983, plaintiff worked at the North Junior High School, but he returned to the South Junior High School in September 1983 and continued to work there until his last day of work in June 1984. The evidence was almost overwhelming that plaintiff was an unpleasant, and probably threatening, person, as well as a poor employee. Plaintiff had at least four supervisors, and they all complained about plaintiff’s work performance. Fellow employees complained about plaintiff’s conduct. The wcab found plaintiff was a "poor employee” and recognized that the testimony indicated that plaintiff was "a volatile, profane person who was a poor employee.”
Plaintiff’s petition alleged constant harassment leading to a psychiatric disability. He alleged numerous events or incidents in support of his claim. These included plaintiff’s fellow employees being jealous of his expensive home, supervisors and other employees making false accusations about plaintiff threatening people, plaintiff at times being given conflicting instructions by his supervisor and the school principal at the South Junior High School between the summers of 1981 and 1983, and the head supervisor offering employees paid days off in exchange for helping to get rid of plaintiff. Many of plaintiff’s specific claims of harassment were flatly denied by those involved; other claims were explained as something less than what plaintiff perceived. The wcab did not *268find that plaintiff was harassed and it did not make specific findings (one way or the other) regarding most of plaintiff’s allegations. The allegations of harassment and of an "elaborate” plot or scheme to fire him that he repeatedly mentions in his brief were never substantiated by the wcab.
Rather, the wcab found two "occasions” involving "incidents” that significantly affected plaintiff’s psychiatric disability. The wcab found plaintiff was injured by "the fact that plaintiff was required to be subjected to a grievance hearing in regard to excess work and the fact that plaintiff was checked up on by his superiors.” With regard to the grievance hearing, which occurred in the winter of 1983, the wcab found that it was held at plaintiff’s request and that it resulted in a reduction in plaintiff’s assigned duties. The "excess” work involved was due to increased work loads assigned to all employees as the result of layoffs.
With regard to "checking up on” plaintiff, the wcab found the head supervisor, Ed Randolph, requested plaintiff’s supervisor during the summer of 1983, Hattie Owens, to find plaintiff’s license plate number, that Owens requested another employee, Dan Daily, to help her, and that Randolph promised to "take care of’ Owens if she helped Randolph. Randolph testified that he wanted to check whether plaintiff was working another job because of rumors Randolph had heard and because plaintiff had accumulated numerous unexplained absences. Randolph further testified that by "taking care of’ Owens he had in mind letting her arrive late or leave early when she needed to. But Daily testified that he told plaintiff that he had been asked to "keep an eye on” plaintiff and that he had been offered paid time off if he could get plaintiff’s license plate number. The "investiga*269tion” apparently never occurred once Daily informed plaintiff of what Owens had asked.
The wcab additionally found that plaintiff received an injury when he was "checked up on” in the form of Randolph ordering plaintiff’s first supervisor at South Junior High School to keep a record of plaintiff’s work performance. There is no evidence in the record that plaintiff was aware of this order, and plaintiff never mentioned it at trial or to either of the doctors that testified.
On the basis of the testimony of psychiatrist Richard Feldstein, the wcab found that these injuries significantly aggravated plaintiff’s mental condition. Dr. Feldstein opined that there was a significant cáusal relationship between the stresses plaintiff experienced at work and plaintiff’s mental disability. The doctor’s opinion was given in answer to a hypothetical question in which the doctor was asked to assume the accuracy of the history plaintiff had previously given the doctor and to assume, among other things, that one of plaintiff’s supervisors was "resentful of’ plaintiff and gave plaintiff "additional work loads beyond that which was the norm.” No specific mention was made in the hypothetical of the incident involving Dan Daily and plaintiff’s license plate number, but plaintiff did mention the incident as one of several examples of harassment when he gave Dr. Feldstein a history. The excess work load incident was not mentioned by plaintiff in the history he gave to Dr. Feldstein. Dr. Feldstein believed plaintiff’s claims of what happened at work were all true, and the doctor said that plaintiff had described suffering "abuse” at work.
The issues for the wcab in this case were whether plaintiff suffered a personal injury in the nature of an actual, precipitating, work-related trauma or event and whether such injury contrib*270uted to, aggravated, or accelerated his mental disability in a significant manner. MCL 418.301(1) (2); MSA 17.237(301X1), (2), MCL 418.401(2)(b); MSA 17.237(401)(2)(b), Iloyan v General Motors Corp, 187 Mich App 595, 600; 468 NW2d 302 (1991). Defendant conceded that plaintiff was disabled. The issues of personal injury and causation were both issues of fact for the wcab. Dressler v Grand Rapids Die Casting Corp, 402 Mich 243, 250; 262 NW2d 629 (1978); Harris v Checker Cab Mfg Corp, 333 Mich 66; 52 NW2d 599 (1952); Lizut v Peerless Novelty Co, 74 Mich App 199; 255 NW2d 637 (1977). Factual determinations of the wcab are conclusive, absent fraud, if supported by any competent evidence in the record. MCL 418.861; MSA 17.237(861), Aquilina v General Motors Corp, 403 Mich 206, 213; 267 NW2d 923 (1978). Bearing in mind our lack of fact-finding authority, we nevertheless find error requiring reversal in the standard used by the wcab in finding that plaintiff suffered personal injuries and in the wcab’s finding regarding causation.
An objective analysis is used to determine whether a personal injury (usually in the form of a precipitating work-related event in mental disability cases) significantly affected an employee’s mental condition. Boyle v Detroit Bd of Ed, 197 Mich App 255; — NW2d — (1992); Sobh v Frederick & Herrud, Inc, 189 Mich App 24, 28; 472 NW2d 8 (1991). As in Sobh, in this case the wcab did not indicate why an objective person would find significant the two incidents that the wcab found satisfied the requirement of a personal injury.
The first incident found by the wcab involved plaintiff’s claim of being given excess work. The claimed excess work load was due to layoffs of employees that required all remaining employees to do more work than before. There was no finding *271by the wcab that the work load represented harassment or part of a scheme to fire plaintiff, as plaintiff continues to allege. The grievance hearing occurred at plaintiff’s request, and it concluded favorably to plaintiff. It also occurred many months before the last day that plaintiff worked (five or six months to a year or more, the record is not clear) and laid-off employees were being recalled by the time of plaintiff’s last day of work. Plaintiff never mentioned to his own examining doctor that he had a problem with an excess work load.
Reduced to its accurate essentials, and as found by the wcab, plaintiff received additional work because of layoffs, he complained about his work load, and his duties were "cut accordingly.” It cannot be stated objectively that this incident aggravated plaintiff’s mental condition in a significant manner. Indeed, it is doubtful whether this event constituted an injury. See Boyle, supra. To the extent that plaintiff’s mental condition was affected by this event, the effect must have been due to perceptions of the event (e.g., part of a scheme to harass plaintiff) that the wcab never found to be accurate. Mental disabilities are not compensable unless they arise out of actual events of employment rather than unfounded perceptions thereof. MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301) (2). See Greenwood v Pontiac Bd of Ed, 186 Mich App 389, 396-397; 465 NW2d 362 (1990), for another case where the wcab found certain specific incidents but not the actual "harassment” claimed by the plaintiff.
The second incident relied upon by the wcab in finding a personal injury was that "plaintiff was checked up on by his superiors.” The wcab relied on its finding that in the summer of 1983 plaintiff’s supervisor was ordered to ascertain plaintiff’s *272license plate number and the supervisor requested assistance from a fellow employee. The wcab also relied on its finding that plaintiffs first supervisor at the South Junior High School was ordered to keep a record of plaintiff’s work performance. With regard to this last finding, it does not support the wcab’s determination because there was no evidence that plaintiff was ever aware of it. A mental disability claim cannot be supported by an event or injury the employee never even perceives.
Again, it cannot be objectively stated that the "checking up on” incident actually found by the wcab — which incident never culminated in any actual investigation and which occurred a year before plaintiffs last day of work — would affect an employee in a significant manner. To have one’s employer check on one’s license plate number (even if the reason is unknown) is not particularly stressful, and there is no evidence that this incident, in itself, significantly affected plaintiff. Similarly, a supervisor checking on an employee’s work performance or activities during work hours is something done to virtually all employees at one time or another and cannot constitute a personal injury. Plaintiffs theory was that this incident was one example of a pattern or scheme of harassment to get rid of him. But the wcab only found as fact the example, not the scheme or the harassment.
In light of the facts found by the wcab and our application of an objective standard, the decision of the wcab is reversed. A remand is not necessary because the facts as found by the wcab cannot support plaintiffs claim.
The wcab also erred in relying on Dr. Feldstein’s opinion to support its finding of causation. Although Dr. Feldstein’s opinion was the only evidence specifically relied upon by the wcab to find causation, this error alone would usually war*273rant a remand because it is the wcab’s function to determine causation, and evidence other than a medical opinion can be relied upon. Kostamo v Marquette Iron Mining Co, 405 Mich 105, 120-121; 274 NW2d 411 (1979). But in light of our foregoing conclusion, a remand is not appropriate in this case.
In order to rely on an opinion given in answer to a hypothetical question, the factual assumptions in the hypothetical must be in substantial accord with the evidence accepted at trial. Alexander v Covel Mfg Co, 336 Mich 140, 146; 57 NW2d 324 (1953); Osantowski v Pigeon Mfg Co, 131 Mich App 728, 738; 346 NW2d 867 (1984) (at least "reasonably accurate”). And see Sutinen v Sussex House, Inc, 412 Mich 915; 315 NW2d 129 (1982). Dr. Feldstein’s opinion regarding causation was based upon factual assumptions that were a far cry from the facts as found by the wcab. The hypothetical was so defective that Dr. Feldstein’s opinion with regard to causation cannot be considered competent evidence.
Dr. Feldstein believed that plaintiff was assigned a work load beyond the norm because of a supervisor’s resentment. In contrast, the wcab found plaintiff received excess work as a result of layoffs, something Dr. Feldstein was never informed of, and there was no evidence plaintiff received more work than anyone else. This is significant because the claim of excess work was one of the two alleged instances the wcab found as fact, and it was not accurately represented to Dr. Feldstein. The other instance found by the wcab regarded checking up on plaintiff and discovering his license plate number. This event was not even mentioned in the hypothetical question, other than by a general remark that the doctor should assume that everything plaintiff ever told the doctor was *274"essentially correct.” This leads to perhaps the greatest deficiency in the doctor’s opinion: It was based on the assumption that all plaintiffs factual allegations and his claim of harassment were true. The vast majority of plaintiffs allegations, as well as his theories of harassment and a scheme to get rid of him, were never found as fact by the wcab. Thus, the doctor’s opinion was based upon significant facts never found by the wcab and upon inaccurate characterizations of some of the facts that were found.
Because of our decision, it is unnecessary to address defendant’s second issue, which pertains to the correct rate of compensation. However, we note plaintiff concedes the issue.
Reversed.
Corrigan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2218924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:57.828662+00 ===

633 N.E.2d 1380 (1994)
261 Ill. App. 3d 63
199 Ill. Dec. 389
Helen CALLOWAY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Arthur KINKELAAR and County of Effingham, a Municipal Corporation, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 5-92-0652.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
May 11, 1994.
*1381 Robert E. Brown, Ronald Tulin, Ltd., Charleston, for plaintiff-appellant.
Brad K. Bleyer, Bleyer and Bleyer, Marion, for defendants-appellees.
Justice GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Helen Calloway, appeals from an order of the circuit court of Effingham County granting the motions of defendants, Arthur Kinkelaar, as sheriff of Effingham County (hereinafter sheriff), and the county of Effingham (hereinafter county), to dismiss plaintiff's complaint for failure to state a cause of action. The trial court followed the general rule that law enforcement officials have no duty to protect individual citizens from crime, only a duty to protect the general citizenry. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I
Plaintiff brought a four-count complaint against the sheriff and the county for damages she sustained after she was abducted by her estranged husband. Count I, a wilful and wanton count, and count II, a negligence count, are directed against the sheriff for his failure to fulfill an alleged duty to plaintiff by virtue of an order of protection which was previously entered with the express purpose of preventing such abuse and harassment by her estranged husband. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2312-1 (now 750 ILCS 60/201 (West 1992)); ch. 38, par. 112A-4(i) (now 725 ILCS 5/112A-4(a)(i) (West 1992)).) Counts III and IV mirror counts I and II but are directed against the county under a theory of respondeat superior. Plaintiffs complaint alleges that during her marriage, her husband engaged in a course of physically and mentally abusive conduct toward her and her two children, including physical attacks and death threats to plaintiff and threats of her husband to commit suicide. As a result of her husband's violent and abusive conduct, plaintiff was granted an emergency order of protection on March 13, 1991, which prohibited her husband from:
"(a) Harassing, physically abusing, or interfering with the personal liberty of Plaintiff or her children;
(b) Entering or remaining at the home of Plaintiffs parents;
(c) Entering Plaintiffs place of employment at Garden's Restaurant in Effingham, Illinois; [or]
(d) Making telephone calls to Plaintiffs place of employment."
On March 13, 1991, the sheriff personally served the emergency order of protection on *1382 the husband, and on March 20,1991, plaintiff was granted a plenary order of protection. The plenary order of protection was personally served on her husband by the sheriff on the same day it was granted, and thus, the sheriff "knew or should have known of the prohibitions contained therein."
At approximately 5:30 a.m., on April 4, 1991, contrary to the provisions of the order of protection, the husband began making telephone calls to plaintiff at her place of employment. The calls were threatening in nature and included, among other threats, a threat by the husband to kill himself in the presence of plaintiff and their five-year-old daughter if plaintiff did not go to the marital home to pick up their daughter. In response to such threats, plaintiff called her father and asked him to go to the marital home and pick up her daughter. Immediately after calling her father, plaintiff received another call from her estranged husband at which time she advised him that her father was coming to pick up their daughter. The husband responded that he would kill plaintiffs father if he entered the marital home. At approximately 5:50 a.m., plaintiff telephoned the Effingham County Sheriffs Department and advised the dispatcher of the telephone calls she was receiving from her estranged husband, including his threats to kill plaintiffs father. Plaintiff further advised the dispatcher that her husband was armed with a gun and that their minor daughter was with him. Plaintiff provided the dispatcher with the location of the marital home and also told the dispatcher she was going to the marital home herself to ensure the safety of her daughter.
At approximately 6 a.m., the sheriff was notified by his office of the telephone calls and threats made by plaintiffs husband. In response, the sheriff drove to the marital residence and briefly observed it from his squad car. The sheriff left without further investigation. Upon her arrival, plaintiff determined that her daughter and father were not at the marital home. She then returned to the restaurant where she was employed. Shortly after her return, plaintiff received more threatening telephone calls from her estranged husband who told her he saw the sheriff in front of his home. At approximately 7:30 a.m., plaintiff received a telephone call from the sheriffs department dispatcher who asked plaintiff whether she had gone to the marital home. Plaintiff told her she had, and her daughter was safe, but her estranged husband was continuing to make harassing telephone calls to her. Plaintiff "advised and emphasized" to the dispatcher that her estranged husband was in violation of the order of protection. The dispatcher replied that she was aware of the order and had a copy of it in front of her. At 7:50 a.m., the dispatcher again called plaintiff and told her that officers with the sheriffs department recommended that plaintiff call her attorney and seek advice as to how to proceed.
At approximately 8 a.m., plaintiffs husband, armed with a pistol, entered plaintiffs place of employment, grabbed plaintiff by the hair, and forced her at gunpoint to leave with him. At approximately 8:39 a.m., a sergeant with the sheriffs department observed a pickup truck occupied by plaintiff and her estranged husband. The sergeant followed the truck. At approximately 8:47 a.m., two State troopers blocked the road on which the truck was traveling. At approximately 8:50 a.m., the pickup truck stopped at the roadblock, and plaintiff, who was forced by her estranged husband to drive the pickup truck, exited the vehicle and took cover behind one of the squad cars. Law enforcement officials at the scene told plaintiffs husband to place his hands on top of his head and exit the pickup truck. When plaintiffs husband did not respond, the officers discovered that plaintiffs husband had shot himself in the chest.
Plaintiff alleges in her complaint that at all times the sheriff had probable cause to believe plaintiffs husband was in violation of the order of protection and that the sheriff had a duty to prevent further abuses and harassment, including but not limited to providing or arranging transportation for plaintiff to a place of safety and/or arresting her estranged husband. Plaintiff alleges that as a direct and proximate result of several wilful and wanton and/or negligent acts or omissions of defendants, her life was threatened and she was forced to suffer and endure extreme emotional distress and trauma which *1383 continues to the present day. Plaintiff was forced to seek psychological counseling and was compelled and will be compelled to spend large sums of money for her psychological care. As a further result, plaintiff was and will be prevented from attending to her usual affairs and duties and has lost and will lose large sums of money which otherwise would have accrued.
The sheriff and the county moved to dismiss plaintiffs complaint for failure to state a cause of action. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 2-619 (now 735 ILCS 5/2-619 (West 1992)).) In dismissing the complaint, the trial court found that the facts alleged in each count did not give rise to a duty. Specifically, the trial court stated:
"The Court specifically finds that the Complaint herein fails to allege (nor could it if the allegations pled are true) that the Plaintiff was under the immediate and direct control of the defendants thereby bringing this action within the exception of the public duty doctrine. Absent a clear expression of legislative intent in the Domestic Violence Act to carve out a further exception to that doctrine for persons protected by Order of Protection, which this Court fails to find in said Act or its legislative history (insofar as available)[,] this Court is compelled to follow existing case law requiring that element to be pled."
II
Plaintiff contends that the public duty doctrine is inapplicable under the facts of the instant case because plaintiff was, by virtue of the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1968 (the Act) (ID.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2311-1 et seq. (now 750 ILCS 60/101 et seq. (West 1992))) and article 112A of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 112A-1 et seq. (now 725 ILCS 5/112A-1 et seq. (West 1992))), removed from the community at large and elevated to a class of persons requiring special protection or, alternatively, that the General Assembly has statutorily extended the parameters of the common law "special duty" exception to the public-duty doctrine through the Act. Defendant replies that there is no clear indication the General Assembly intended to extend the parameters of the common law "special duty" exception to the public-duty doctrine and urges us to affirm the trial court's order.
It is well settled that the duty of law enforcement officers to preserve a community's well-being is generally not owed to specific individuals but rather to the community at large. (Fessler v. R.E.J., Inc. (1987), 161 Ill.App.3d 290, 112 Ill. Dec. 852, 514 N.E.2d 515; Santy v. Bresee (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 658, 84 Ill. Dec. 853, 473 N.E.2d 69; Porter v. City of Urbana (1980), 88 Ill.App.3d 443, 43 Ill. Dec. 610, 410 N.E.2d 610.)
"The rule that law enforcement agencies and officers are not liable to third parties for the failure to prevent crime reflects the judgment that to hold otherwise would impose an impossible burden on law enforcement agencies and officers, requiring them to carry out a myriad of difficult and frequently conflicting duties and guaranteeing the safety of every individual citizen." (Santy, 129 Ill.App.3d at 662, 84 Ill. Dec. at 856, 473 N.E.2d at 72.)
This general public-duty rule "embodies the conclusion that a police department's negligenceits oversights, blunders, omissions is not the proximate or legal cause of harms committed by others." (Porter, 88 Ill.App.3d at 445, 43 Ill. Dec. at 612, 410 N.E.2d at 612.) An exception to the public-duty rule arises when the police have assumed a special relationship or are under a special duty to an individual which elevates his status beyond that of a member of the general public. (VasconceUes v. City of Springfield (1988), 170 Ill.App.3d 404, 120 Ill. Dec. 690, 524 N.E.2d 720; Huey v. Town of Cicero (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 361, 363, 243 N.E.2d 214, 215-16.) In order to fit within this exception it is generally required that the following four elements be alleged by plaintiff:
"(1) [T]he municipahty must be uniquely aware of the particular danger or risk to which the plaintiff is exposed [citation]; (2) there must be allegations of specific acts or omissions on the part of the municipality [citation]; (3) the specific acts or omissions on the part of the municipal employees must be either affirmative or wilful in nature [citation]; and (4) the injury must *1384 occur while the plaintiff is under the direct and immediate control of employees or agents of the municipality [citation]." Bell v. Village of Midlothian (1980), 90 Ill. App. 3d 967, 970, 46 Ill. Dec. 382, 384, 414 N.E.2d 104, 106.
Here, the trial court found that while plaintiff may have alleged facts sufficient to establish the first three requirements of the exception, plaintiff could not show that she was injured while under the direct and immediate control of the sheriff and the county. However, we find that the Act, which is to be construed together with article 112A (Ill.Eev. Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 112A-1 (now 725 ILCS 5/112A-1 (West 1992))), does indeed carve out an exception to the public-duty doctrine and elevates the holder of an order of protection to a status above that of other members of the general public.
Up until this point, New York has been the only other State to recognize that a "special duty" is owed to persons under a court order of protection. In Baker v. City of New York (1966), 25 A.D.2d 770, 269 N.Y.S.2d 515, the plaintiff was shot by her estranged husband and seriously injured while in the waiting room of the former domestic relations court of the city. An order of protection had been issued some five months earlier directing the husband "not to strike, molest, threaten or annoy" the plaintiff. The order of protection provided that upon its presentation by the plaintiff to any peace officer, the officer would be authorized to arrest the husband for a violation. There was evidence that the husband had created a disturbance at the family home some months after the issuance of the order of protection and that a police officer was summoned to the home but refused to take action against the husband even after the plaintiff presented the officer with the order. On the day of the shooting, the plaintiff went to see a probation officer assigned to the domestic relations court. The probation officer told the plaintiff her estranged husband was ill and could not come to court. While making a telephone call in the corridor, the plaintiff saw her husband enter the building. The plaintiff informed the probation officer that her husband was present and asked the officer if she could wait in his office because she was frightened. The probation officer instead told her to go to the waiting room. No guards were in the waiting room, even though some were assigned to the court. The plaintiff was shot 15 to 20 minutes after the probation officer told her to go to the waiting room. The Baker court reasoned:
"Plaintiff, we think, was a person recognized by the order of protection as one to whom a special duty was owed. The order of protection was issued by the court pursuant to statute (former Domestic Relations Ct. Act, § 92, subd. (7)); and the certificate with which plaintiff was furnished constituted authority to a peace officer, when presented by the plaintiff, to arrest the husband when charged with a violation of the terms of the order (former Domestic Relations Ct. Act, § 126). The order of protection, though a relatively new invention in the law (note, 15 Albany L.Rev. 172), was intended both as a remedial and preventive arm of the former Domestic Relations Court (`Use of Protection Orders in Family Court Disputes', 2 Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems, No. 3, p. 1). Plaintiff was thus singled out by judicial process as a person in need of special protection and peace officers had a duty to supply protection to her." Baker, 25 A.D.2d at 771-72, 269 N.Y.S.2d at 517; see also Sorichetti v. City of New York (1978), 95 Misc. 2d 451, 408 N.Y.S.2d 219, aff'd (App.Div.1979), 70 A.D.2d 573, 417 N.Y.S.2d 202.
The Illinois Act singles out those who are victims of domestic violence as persons in need of special protection by law enforcement officials. It allows those who are victims of domestic violence to receive orders of protection prohibiting such abuse. Section 214(b)(1) prohibits a "respondent's harassment, interference with personal liberty, intimidation of a dependent, or physical abuse * * *." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2312-14(b)(1) (now 750 ILCS 60/214 (West 1992)).) Section 214(b)(3) prohibits a respondent from entering or remaining at a petitioner's place of employment. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2312-14(b)(3) (now 750 ILCS 60/214(b)(3) (West 1992)).) When a law enforcement official is presented with an order *1385 of protection or has knowledge of its existence, the official is allowed to make an arrest without a warrant if the official has reason to believe that the respondent has violated the order. Article III of the Act requires law enforcement officials to act and assist a victim who presents an order of protection to an officer. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2313-1 et seq. (now 750 ILCS 60/301 et seq. (West 1992)).) Plaintiff herein obtained an order of protection and, thus, was singled out by the judicial process as a person in need of special protection. The sheriff had a duty to provide her with such protection.
The Act itself points out that one of its purposes is to "expand civil * * * remedies for victims of domestic violence * * *." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2311-2(6) (now 750 ILCS 60/102(6) (West 1992)).) The Act further provides for law enforcement hability on a limited basis. Section 305 of the Act states:
"§ 305. Limited law enforcement liability. Any act of omission or commission by any law enforcement officer acting in good faith in rendering emergency assistance or otherwise enforcing this Act shall not impose civil liability upon the law enforcement officer or his or her supervisor or employer, unless the act is a result of willful or wanton misconduct." (Ill.Rev. Stat.1991, ch. 40, par. 2313-5 (now 750 ILCS 60/305 (West 1992)).)
By this express language the General Assembly carved out an exception to the publicduty doctrine. We find that the General Assembly intended to make a law enforcement officer and/or his employer (e.g., the county) liable, but only for wilful and wanton acts of misfeasance or nonfeasance in the exercise of police power with respect to the enforcement of the Act. Both New York cases previously cited (Baker v. City of New York (1966), 25 A.D.2d 770, 269 N.Y.S.2d 515; Sorichetti v. City of New York (1978), 95 Misc. 2d 451, 408 N.Y.S.2d 219) found that complaints sounding in negligence were sufficient to constitute a cause of action against the law enforcement official and his or her employer. Our General Assembly clearly did not intend such a result. Only actions alleging wilful and wanton misconduct can survive a motion to dismiss.
As to plaintiffs complaint, we find that those counts alleging wilful and wanton misconduct are sufficient to take this case out of the general rule denying liability, since a "special relationship" existed between the sheriff and plaintiff by virtue of the order of protection. We, therefore, agree with the trial court that counts II and IV fail to state a cause of action, as those were negligence counts. We do, however, believe that count I stated a viable cause of action against the sheriff and count III stated a viable cause of action against the county, as those counts alleged wilful and wanton misconduct. The trial court therefore erred in dismissing counts I and III.
For the foregoing reasons, that portion of the order of the circuit court of Effingham County dismissing counts II and IV is affirmed, that portion of the order dismissing counts I and III is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part and remanded.
RARICK and MAAG, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739161 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:51.962393+00 ===

JUSTICE BARRY delivered the opinion of the court: The plaintiff, Morgan J. Ordman filed a negligence action for personal injuries to and the wrongful death of plaintiff’s decedent, Maurice Ordman, against the defendants, Dacon Management Corporation and Dacon Bolingbrook Limited Partnership, d/b/a Brentwood Apartments. The circuit court of Will County granted the defendants’ motion for summary judgment and plaintiff appeals. I. FACTS The complaint alleged that on February 2, 1991, the plaintiff’s decedent resided at the Brentwood Apartments at 302 Woodcreek Road in Bolingbrook, Illinois, and that the defendants owned the apartment complex. The complaint further alleged that the plaintiffs decedent had parked his car in the garage at the apartment complex and had started to leave his garage and walk back toward the entranceway of the complex when he slipped on an accumulation of ice and snow and fell to the ground. The ice and snow were allegedly immediately adjacent to the decedent’s garage door. Count I of the complaint, brought pursuant to the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 70, par. 1 et seq.), alleged the following negligent acts or omissions: "(a) carelessly and negligently placed and permitted mounds of snow and ice adjacent to the doors of the garages at the complex; (b) carelessly and negligently failed to maintain the premises in a reasonable safe condition; (c) carelessly and negligently failed to remove ice and snow from the pavement of the parking lot even after it had accumulated to such an extent as to form a dangerous condition; (d) carelessly and negligently failed to maintain an adequate maintenance program to ensure that the premises were reasonably free of unnatural conditions of ice and snow accumulations; (e) carelessly and negligently failed to place gutters and downspouts on the garages of the complex; and (f) carelessly and negligently failed to warn the plaintiff of the hazardous nature of the premises.” Count I of the complaint further alleged that the defendants owed to the plaintiffs decedent the duty to exercise ordinary care to maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition, and that the defendants’ breach of that duty was the direct and proximate cause of plaintiff s decedent’s fall resulting in the injuries causing his death. Count II of the complaint, brought under Illinois’ Survival Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110½, par. 27—6), alleged the same negligent acts as alleged in count I. Count II further alleged that during the 35 days following the accident, the plaintiffs decedent experienced great pain and suffering, underwent extensive medical care and suffered significant personal and pecuniary injuries prior to his death. The defendants filed a motion for summary judgment arguing that they owed no duty to the plaintiffs decedent (Mr. Ordman), contending that the accumulation of ice was not "unnatural” and alleging that they had no notice of the accumulation. In response to the defendants’ motion for summary judgment, plaintiff alleged that the defendant had assumed a duty toward Mr. Ordman by undertaking to remove snow and ice from the Brentwood Apartments by contracting with the Kenneth Company to do so. The plaintiff further argued that the defendants were under a duty to provide Mr. Ordman a reasonably safe means of ingress and egress, which they breached by allowing an unnatural accumulation of ice in front of Mr. Ordman’s garage and failing to warn Mr. Ordman of the ice. The plaintiff attached excerpts from the discovery deposition of Coy Hatch, the maintenance superintendent at Brentwood Apartments. Mr. Hatch testified that it was the custom and practice of the Dacon Management maintenance staff to shovel and spread salt any place it would be hazardous to anyone. Mr. Hátch also testified that the snow-plowing company would plow the parking lot in front of the garages, leaving a strip of snow approximately one foot wide along the front of the garage. He testified that Dacon Management would usually then remove the snow in front of the garage to the side of the garage or the middle of the parking lot in order to get the cars in and out of the garage. According to the National Climatic Data Center’s Local Climatological Data Monthly Summaries for January and February of 1991, there had been only traces of snow or ice on the ground between January 19, 1991, and the accident on February 2, 1991. Willie Anderson was in the parking lot at the time of the accident. According to the excerpts from Mr. Anderson’s deposition, he was in the parking lot working on his car when he heard an "uh” sound and heard Mr. Ordman’s body hit the ground. Mr. Anderson turned around and saw Mr. Ordman lying on his back in front of the garage. Mr. Anderson testified that when the parking lot was plowed, snow was left in certain areas, including the area in front of the garage doors. Mr. Anderson stated that he noticed water dripping from the garage roof as a result of snow melting on the roof, and that this water resulted in the ice that allegedly caused Mr. Ordman to fall. The excerpts from the deposition of Deola Anderson reveal that she saw Mr. Ordman lying flat on his back 5 to 10 feet in front of his garage on top of a patch of ice which was about 10 feet wide. She testified that she could not see the ice at first because it was clear and that she slipped and fell on the ice as she approached Mr. Ordman, as did the paramedics. II. ANALYSIS The issue presented in this appeal is whether the trial court erred by finding that the defendants owed no duty to plaintiff’s decedent and granting the defendants’ motion for summary judgement. On appeal, we review the summary judgement de novo to decide whether the trial court properly determined that there were no material questions of fact and that judgement for the movant was correct as a matter of law. (Jacob v. Greve (1993), 251 Ill. App. 3d 529, 534, 622 N.E.2d 81, 84.) The question of whether a duty exists is a question of law, and where no duty exists, summary judgement is proper because there is no possible recovery for plaintiff as a matter of law. (Watson v. J.C. Penney Co. (1992), 237 Ill. App. 3d 976, 981, 605 N.E.2d 723, 726.) However, "[s]ummary judgement is a drastic means of disposing of litigation” and "the evidence is to be construed strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the opponent.” (Graf v. St. Luke’s Evangelical Lutheran Church (1993), 253 Ill. App. 3d 588, 591, 625 N.E.2d 851, 854.) We find that the plaintiff has alleged facts sufficient to establish a duty owed by the defendants to the plaintiff’s decedent. One is generally not liable for injuries caused by natural accumulations of ice or snow, and there is no duty to remove natural accumulations of ice or snow. (Graham v. City of Chicago (1931), 346 Ill. 638, 641, 178 N.E. 911, 912.) However, a duty may arise on the part of the defendant-premises owner, if the defendant voluntarily undertook the task of removing natural accumulations of ice or snow and did so negligently or if the defendant was responsible for an unnatural accumulation of ice or snow. Liability will be imposed on a defendant where the plaintiff shows an injury that was caused by such an unnatural accumulation of ice or snow. Graf, 253 Ill. App. 3d at 591, 625 N.E.2d at 854. A. Voluntary Undertaking In situations in which a duty would not otherwise arise, a duty to act reasonably may be imposed when a defendant negligently performs a voluntary undertaking. (Pippin v. Chicago Housing Authority (1979), 78 Ill. 2d 204, 210, 399 N.E.2d 596, 599; Eichler v. Plitt Theatres, Inc. (1988), 167 Ill. App. 3d 685, 691, 521 N.E.2d 1196, 1201.) Section 323 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts states: "One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other person’s person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if (a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm, or (b) the harm is suffered because of the other person’s reliance upon the undertaking.” (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 323, at 135 (1965).) The extent of the duty imposed on one who voluntarily undertakes to perform an act is limited to the extent of the undertaking. Pippin, 78 Ill. 2d at 210, 399 N.E.2d at 599.  We believe that the defendants in the present case voluntarily undertook the task of removing all snow from the parking lot and were under a duty to perform that task with reasonable care. (See Sims v. Block (1968), 94 Ill. App. 2d 215, 236 N.E.2d 572 (affirming verdict for tenant when tenant slipped and fell on ridge of ice created from defendant plowing its parking lot); Fitzsimons v. National Tea Co. (1961), 29 Ill. App. 2d 306, 173 N.E.2d 534 (affirming verdict for plaintiff who slipped on patch of ice created by thawing and freezing of snow which was piled at end of parking lot by snow plow).) As previously mentioned, the record indicates that the defendants contracted with the Kenneth Company to "[r]emove all snow on drive areas including fire lanes, streets and stalls.” Further, the defendants’ own employee, Wayne Hatch, testified that the defendants’ maintenance staff would shovel snow and spread salt "anyplace that it snowed in the sidewalk areas *** [ajnyplace that would be hazardous to anybody.” The maintenance staff would also spread salt on ice "[a]nywhere on the property.” Mr. Hatch also testified that the contractors would plow to within about a foot of the garage and leave the snow remaining within a foot in front of the garage and that the defendants’ maintenance staff would generally shovel that snow to the side of the garage or use a snow blower to blow it out toward the middle of the parking lot. According to Willie Anderson, ice patches were left in front of the garage doors because patches of snow were left from the plows in the parking lot which then melted and refroze. Plaintiff has pled facts indicating that the defendants undertook to remove the snow and ice from the parking lot, yet left piles of snow from the plowing in front of the garage area, an area over which Mr. Ordman was required to tread in order to get to his apartment. We believe that the defendants should have recognized that proper removal of the snow from the area in question was necessary to protect Mr. Ordman from physical harm. (See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 323, at 135 (1965).) Accordingly, we find that the defendants were under a duty to use reasonable care in clearing the area and that the plaintiff pled facts from which a trier of fact could conclude that the defendants breached that duty. We acknowledge that the gratuitous performance of removing snow and spreading salt does not alone create a continuing duty to perform those tasks. (Burke v. City of Chicago (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 953, 957, 513 N.E.2d 984, 987.) In Burke the plaintiff slipped and fell at Midway Airport in Chicago on a day during which more than two inches of snow fell. Pursuant to its lease with Northwest Airlines, the defendant had assumed the duty to remove snow "as reasonably may be done.” (Burke, 160 Ill. App. 3d at 957, 513 N.E.2d at 987.) The area in which the plaintiff fell had been plowed earlier that day and additional snow had fallen. The Burke court found that because no facts indicated that the defendant negligently plowed the area or that there was an unnatural accumulation of snow or ice, summary judgement for the defendants was proper. The present case is distinguishable from Burke in several aspects. First, we do not believe that snow removal was a gratuitous undertaking, as it is reasonable to assume that the tenants of the Brentwood Apartments paid for snow removal as an expense included in their rent payments. The defendants contracted with the Kenneth Company for "[r]emoval of all snow on drive areas.” Further, in Burke the snow continually fell the day of the accident after the defendant had plowed. It is unreasonable to require a defendant to ensure that an area is clear of all snow and ice under the circumstances in Burke. In the present case, the defendants’ snow removal contractor had last been on the property to spread salt 12 days before Mr. Ordman’s fall and little or no snow had fallen in the days before the accident. Finally, as previously discussed, the plaintiff has alleged facts in the case at hand which may establish that the defendants were negligent in removing the snow from the parking lot, and as is discussed next, the plaintiff has alleged that the ice patch on which Mr. Ordman fell was an unnatural accumulation of ice. Thus, Burke is inapplicable to the case at hand. B. Natural/Unnatural Accumulation We first note that the general rule is that one is not liable for injuries caused by natural accumulations of ice or snow. This rule is due to the fact that it is unrealistic to expect property owners to keep all areas where people may walk clear from ice and snow at all times during the winter months. (Graham, 346 Ill. at 643, 178 N.E. at 913.) However, when a defendant causes an unnatural accumulation of ice or snow by the defendant’s use or maintenance of the area, and the accumulation exists on the premises long enough to charge the defendant with knowledge, the defendant is under a duty to make the premises reasonably safe. (Graham, 346 Ill. at 643-44, 178 N.E. at 913; Sims, 94 Ill. App. 2d at 222, 236 N.E.2d at 575.) Plaintiff must allege some facts to show that the accumulation of ice was unnatural or caused by the defendant. Wells v. Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. (1988), 171 Ill. App. 3d 1012, 1018, 525 N.E.2d 1127, 1129. The plaintiff has alleged facts from which a jury could conclude that water dripped from the melting snow on the roof of Mr. Ordman’s Garage onto the ground and refroze in front of the garage door. The plaintiff also alleged facts from which a jury could conclude that when the parking lot was plowed the plows left behind patches of snow in the lot, including the area in front of Mr. Ordman’s garage, and that these areas of snow would melt and refreeze. We believe that there were sufficient facts pled to raise a question to be presented to the jury as to whether the ice on which Mr. Ordman allegedly slipped was an unnatural accumulation. In Lapidus v. Hahn (1983), 115 Ill. App. 3d 795, 450 N.E.2d 824, water dripped from a roof onto plaintiiFs porch, where it collected in a depression on the porch and froze. Plaintiff slipped and fell sustaining injuries to her left arm. The appellate court affirmed the jury verdict for the plaintiff finding that the jury could reasonably have concluded that the accumulation of ice "was caused by the defective nature and construction of the roof and abetted by the depression in the platform and thus was not a natural accumulation.” (Lapidus, 115 Ill. App. 3d at 801, 450 N.E.2d at 828.) Lapidus is applicable to the case at hand. Although there was no allegation of a depression in the parking lot which trapped the water, there were sufficient facts alleged for a jury to conclude that the ice was an unnatural accumulation. In sum, when a landowner maintains a building or structure in a manner which causes water runoff in an area over which the landowner should know people will walk, and the water freezes for a period of time sufficient to give the landowner notice of the dangerous condition, it is not unreasonable to hold the landowner liable for injuries caused by such unnatural accumulations of ice. See Graham, 346 Ill. 638, 178 N.E. 911. In Sims, the plaintiff-tenant slipped and fell on a ridge of ice in a parking lot after the landlord had cleared the lot. In that case, the appellate court stated that "it is a fair inference from the record that the spillover of the snow as the plow skirted the parked car would have increased the depth of the snow at that location.” (Sims, 94 Ill. App. 2d at 219, 236 N.E.2d at 574.) The court also noted that the parking lot had last been plowed 10 days before the plaintiff’s fall. The court then affirmed the jury verdict for the plaintiff stating that "[u]nder these circumstances the question of defendants’ negligence in creating an unnatural condition was properly one of fact for the jury to decide.” Sims, 94 Ill. App. 2d at 223, 236 N.E.2d at 576. See also Graf, 253 Ill. App. 3d 588, 625 N.E.2d 851 (reversing summary judgement for defendant where defendant’s agents created an unnatural accumulation of snow by partially clearing one side of steps and piling snow on other half); Carroll v. Lily Cache Builders, Inc. (1979), 74 Ill. App. 3d 264, 392 N.E.2d 986 (finding that question of whether condition was unnatural was properly submitted to the jury where defendant’s trucks caused ruts in surface of unfinished cul-de-sac); Fitzsimons, 29 Ill. App. 2d 306, 173 N.E.2d 534 (affirming verdict for plaintiff that slipped on patch of ice created by thawing and freezing of snow which was piled at end of parking lot by snow plow). It is also important that there had been only traces of snow or ice on the ground during the 14 days preceding Mr. Ordman’s fall. This fact supports the plaintiff’s contention that the ice was an unnatural accumulation because there had been little or no precipitation to create a "natural” accumulation in two weeks. We find that plaintiff alleged sufficient facts from which a jury could conclude that the defendants had notice of the dangerous condition. Fourteen days had past since the last significant snowfall, and according to the depositions of Willie and Deola Anderson, water dripped off the roof "a lot of times” and the ice patch was a "big thick piece of ice.” In sum, we find that the plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts to establish a duty owed by the defendants to Mr. Ordman. First, the defendants undertook to remove the snow from the tenants’ parking lot and, as a result, were under a duty to do so with ordinary care. Further, the plaintiff alleged facts from which a jury could conclude that the ice patch on which Mr. Ordman allegedly slipped was caused by either the defendants’ snow removal activities, water dripping from the roof of the garage or a combination of the two. Consequently, plaintiff properly alleged that the defendants were under a duty to remove such an unnatural accumulation of ice. We hold that the trial court erroneously granted the defendants’ motion for summary judgement because the plaintiff properly alleged a duty owed by the defendants and questions of material fact remained for a jury to decide. Because we find that the defendants owed a duty to Mr. Ordman, we need not discuss plaintiff’s additional theories for establishing a duty. C. Proximate Cause The defendants contend that we should, affirm the summary judgement because there were no eyewitnesses who actually saw Mr. Ordman fall, and due to Mr. Ordman’s injuries and subsequent death, he could not testify as to what caused him to fall. The defendants’ position is that, therefore, it is impossible for plaintiff to prove that the patch of ice proximately caused Mr. Ordman’s fall. Proximate cause is a question of fact for the jury and becomes a question of law only when all material facts are undisputed and reasonable jurors could not differ as to the inferences to be drawn form them. (Bickerman v. Wosik (1993), 245 Ill. App. 3d 436, 614 N.E.2d 551.) We first note that the defendants failed to raise this issue at the circuit court and, thus, this issue has not been fully litigated below. The defendants cite several cases in which Illinois courts have found insufficient facts to support the plaintiff’s contention that the alleged defect proximately caused the injury. However, these cases are distinguishable from the case at bar. In Kellman v. Twin Orchard Country Club (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 968, 560 N.E.2d 888, a witness testified that the decedent, who had fallen in a locker room shower stall, had been unsteady on his feet and required assistance to reach the shower. There is no such testimony in the present case as to an alternative cause of Mr. Ordman’s fall making the defect on the premises an unlikely cause. In Snell v. Village of University Park (1989), 185 Ill. App. 3d 973, 542 N.E.2d 49, the plaintiff’s decedent died after falling from her bicycle, and plaintiff alleged that she fell due to the defective condition of a street curb. However, three witnesses stated that it did not appear that the decedent or her bicycle came into contact with the curb before she fell. There is no such testimony disclaiming the probability that Mr. Ordman slipped on the ice patch in the present case.  The plaintiff in Brett v. F. W. Woolworth Co. (1972), 8 Ill. App. 3d 334, 290 N.E.2d 712, claimed that she tripped and fell due to a depression created by the adjoining edges of two rugs. The Brett court noted that the only evidence of the depression was the testimony of an investigator who inspected the rug two weeks after the incident and found that "[n]o evidence was introduced showing that a depression existed at the time.” (8 Ill. App. 3d at 336.) The plaintiff stated that she did not know what there was about the rug that caused the fall. In the case at bar, testimony clearly establishes that the ice patch existed at the time of Mr. Ordman’s fall and that Mr. Ordman was lying on top of that ice when he landed. There is also testimony that persons coming to the aid of Mr. Ordman slipped on the same patch of ice. We also believe that a jury would find a large clear patch of ice more likely to cause someone to fall than the edges of two adjoining rugs. In this court’s recent decision in Bickerman, we affirmed the summary judgement order granted to the defendants. In Bickerman the plaintiff fell down a stairway on the defendants’ property but could not remember what caused the fall and there were no eyewitnesses. The plaintiff alleged that the defendants were negligent in violating certain building codes. This court found that "[tjhere was no evidence in this case to indicate that a building code violation caused the decedent’s injuries.” (Bickerman, 245 Ill. App. 3d at 439, 614 N.E.2d at 553.) We believe that the facts alleged in the present case more strongly link the dangerous condition to Mr. Ordman’s injuries than in the cases cited by the defendants. We believe the facts presented in this case are more akin to the facts in Wright v. Stech (1972), 7 Ill. App. 3d 1068, 288 N.E.2d 648, in which the appellate court reversed a directed verdict for the defendant. The Wright court found a question of fact for the jury as to whether the defendant’s negligence caused plaintiff’s injuries and death where plaintiff fell down a dark stairway that was littered with debris. As in the present case, there were no eyewitnesses to the fall, and the court stated that "it is not essential that causation be shown by direct evidence; it may be shown by facts and circumstances which, in light of ordinary experience, reasonably suggest that the defendant’s negligence operated to produce the injury.” Wright, 7 Ill. App. 3d at 1070, 288 N.E.2d at 650. III. Conclusion In conclusion, we find that where the plaintiff alleges that a witness hears the decedent fall, seconds later the witness sees the decedent lying on a large patch of ice and persons approaching the decedent slip and fall on the same patch of ice, there is a question of fact to submit to a jury as to whether the ice caused the decedent to fall. Since we find that defendants owed a duty to plaintiff’s decedent and plaintiff alleged facts sufficient to raise questions for a jury regarding the breach of that duty and proximate cause, summary judgment was improper. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Will County is reversed and the cause is remanded for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. LYTTON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739285 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:44.181073+00 ===

JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM delivered the opinion of the court: The United States Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit, pursuant to Circuit Rule 52 (Fed. R. App. P. 52), certified the following question of Illinois law to this court: “Does Illinois law require insurers to offer underinsured motorist coverage (and, if so, in what amount) to automobile purchasers who opt for uninsured motorist coverage at the minimum statutory level?” DeGrand v. Motors Insurance Corp. (7th Cir. 1990), 903 F.2d 1100, 1104. We accept jurisdiction to answer this question pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 20 (134 Ill. 2d R. 20). . On February 8, 1986, Luke DeGrand and Karen Kies DeGrand purchased a 1986 Chevrolet Nova from Ruby Chevrolet in Chicago. They financed the vehicle through General Motors Acceptance Corporation (GMAC), a subsidiary of General Motors, engaged in the business of financing motor vehicles. The DeGrands applied for, and received, automobile insurance from Motors Insurance Corporation (MIC), a subsidiary of GMAC, engaged in the business of insuring motor-vehicle-related risks. All of this was accomplished before the DeGrands drove their new car from the Ruby Chevrolet lot. On March 12, 1986, Karen Kies DeGrand was involved in an automobile accident. Karen sustained a severe and permanent ankle injury as a result of the two-car collision. The DeGrands sued the driver of the other car. Unfortunately, that driver carried only minimal bodily injury liability coverage ($50,000), which was insufficient to compensate Karen. The DeGrands turned to their own automobile insurance policy to determine whether their policy covered excess damages. When they discovered it did not, they sued their insurer, MIC, in State court for reformation of their insurance contract, claiming MIC had violated Illinois law by failing to offer them underinsured motorist coverage in an amount equal to their bodily injury liability coverage. The DeGrands filed a declaratory judgment action against MIC in the circuit court of Cook County (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2—701). Plaintiffs alleged that MIC failed to offer them an opportunity to purchase underinsured motorist coverage up to the limits of their bodily injury liability coverage in violation of section 143a—2 of the Illinois Insurance Code (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 73, par. 755a—2). The DeGrands also requested a judgment reforming their MIC policy to increase their underinsured coverage up to their bodily injury liability coverage ($100,000 per person/$300,000 per occurrence). MIC removed the action to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois based on diversity, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §1332 (1988). Both the DeGrands and MIC filed cross-motions for summary judgment. On June 14, 1989, the district court granted MIC summary judgment on the entire complaint because the policy of insurance was issued after July 1, 1983, and MIC was under no statutory duty to make an offer of underinsured motorist coverage. The DeGrands filed a notice of appeal. On May 30, 1990, the 7th Circuit rendered its opinion (903 F.2d 1100), certifying to this court the question of law. The 7th Circuit recognized that “[t]he language of the statute does not seem to require insurers to issue or offer any underinsurance to drivers who elect minimum uninsured motorist coverage.” (Emphasis in original.) (903 F.2d at 1103 n.2.) The 7th Circuit noted that there was a split of authority in the districts of the appellate court of Illinois. The DeGrand’s insurance policy provided bodily injury and property damage coverage of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. The policy also provided uninsured motorist coverage of $15,000 per person and $30,000 per occurrence, and although allegedly unknown to the DeGrands, underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount as uninsured. The DeGrands claimed they never knew about the underinsured motorist coverage until after the accident. The only dispute between the DeGrands and MIC is relative to underinsured motorist coverage. There is no question, however, that the DeGrands had sufficient knowledge of their uninsured motorist coverage. Luke DeGrand’s signature appears underneath the text referring to an opportunity to purchase coverage up to the bodily injury limits. In a blocked section above the signature block, the word “underinsurance” appears in the MIC printed insurance application which refers to the amount of coverage for uninsured/underinsured liability. All of the printing on the insurance application is the same size. The application provides, in part: “I apply for the following liability limits: Bodily injury and property damages — limit %100 300,000 Uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage _ A equal to liability limits selected above x B other (specify) 15/30. Limits for uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage may not exceed limits for bodily injury and property damage coverages. * * * I acknowledge that I have been provided an opportunity to purchase uninsured motorist coverage up to the limits of my bodily injury limits. s/Luke DeGrand” (Emphasis added.) Although the policy application provides coverage for underinsurance in the same amount as uninsured coverage, plaintiffs argue that MIC’s failure to offer them underinsurance coverage constitutes a breach of its legal responsibilities under the Code. MIC argues that recent amendments to the Code make such an offer unnecessary because when an individual elects uninsured motorist coverage, the individual automatically receives under-insurance in the equivalent amount, so long as the policy contains such provisions. The policy application in this cause contained such a provision. The district court, in reiterating MIC’s position, stated: “Because plaintiffs’ insurance policy provided uninsured motorist coverage at the minimum limit, MIC was under no statutory duty to make an offer of underinsured motorist coverage. As of July 1, 1983, an insurer’s obligation to include — not merely offer — underinsured motorist coverage turns on whether the policy provides for uninsured motorist coverage in excess of the statutory minimum. Since plaintiffs’ policy was issued after July 1, 1983, and provided uninsured motorist coverage only at the statutory minimum level, their claim against MIC must fail.” In conclusion, the district court held that the Code did not require insurers to offer additional underinsured motorist coverage when individuals elect uninsured motorist coverage at the statutory minimum. In light of the certified question, this court finds that the focus of this matter is one of statutory interpretation. Since this is a diversity case, such focus is proper. (Cf. United States v. Thirty-Seven (37) Photographs (1971), 402 U.S. 363, 369, 28 L. Ed. 2d 822, 829-30, 91 S. Ct. 1400, 1404-05.) Only a State court can authoritatively interpret its own State’s statutes and ordinances. Waldron v. McAtee (7th Cir. 1983), 723 F.2d 1348, 1352. It is well established that in construing a statute, the court should give effect to the legislative intent. (State v. Mikusch (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 242.) “In seeking to ascertain legislative intent, courts consider the statutes in their entirety, noting the subject they address and the legislature’s apparent objective in enacting them. [Citation.] It is presumed that the legislature, in enacting various statutes, acts rationally and with full knowledge of all previous enactments. [Citation.]” (Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 247-48.) The court stated further: “Generally, a material change in the language of an unambiguous statute creates a presumption, although it can be rebutted by evidence of a contrary legislative intent, that the amendment was intended to change the law. [Citations.]” 138 Ill. 2d at 252. Prior to August 16, 1982, section 143a—2 stated, in part: “(1) Required offer of additional uninsured motor vehicle coverage. No policy insuring against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in State with respect to any motor vehicle registered or principally garaged in this State unless uninsured motorist coverage as required in Section 143(a) of this Act is offered in an amount wp to the insured’s bodily injury liability limits. * * * (3) Required offer of underinsured motorist coverage. Any offer made under subsection (1) of this Section shall also include an offer of underinsured coverage.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 73, par. 755a—2. Under the 1981 statutory scheme, the insurer was required to make a meaningful offer of underinsured motorist coverage that could then be accepted or rejected by each insured individual. Cloninger v. National General Insurance Co. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 419, 429. In 1982, the legislature altered that scheme by amending the 1981 statute in Public Act 82 — 920, effective August 16, 1982, which provided, in part: “(1) Required offer of additional uninsured motor vehicle coverage. No policy insuring against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall he renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in State with respect to any motor vehicle registered or principally garaged in this State unless uninsured motorist coverage as required in Section 143a of this Act is offered in an amount up to the insured’s bodily injury liability limits. * * * (3) Required offer of underinsured motorist coverage. Until July 1, 1983, any offer made under subsection (1) of this Section shall also include an offer of underinsured motorist coverage. *** * * * (5) On or after July 1, 1983, no policy insuring against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in this State with respect to any motor vehicle registered or principally garaged in this State unless underinsured motorist coverage is included in such policy in an amount at least equal to the total amount of uninsured motorist coverage provided in that policy where such uninsured motorist coverage exceeds the limits set forth in Section 7—203 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, pars. 755a—2(1), (3), (5). These 1982 amendments were in effect until the legislature changed that scheme in Public Act 86—1156, section 4, effective August 10, 1990, and Public Act 86—1155, section 1, effective July 1, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the 1990 statute). The 1990 statute provides in part, with emphasis added to the new language: “(1) Additional uninsured motor vehicle coverage. No policy insuring against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in this State with respect to any motor vehicle designed for use on public highways and required to be registered in this State unless uninsured motorist coverage as required in Section 143a of this Code is included in an amount equal to the insured’s bodily injury liability limits unless specifically rejected by the insured. Each insurance company providing the coverage must provide applicants with a brief description of the coverage and advise them of their right to reject the coverage in excess of the limits set forth in Section 7—208 of The Illinois Vehicle Code. The provisions of this amendatory Act of 1990 apply to policies of insurance applied for after June 80, 1991. * * * (3) The original application indicating the applicant’s selection of uninsured motorist coverage limits shall constitute sufficient evidence of the applicant’s selection of uninsured motorist coverage limits and shall be binding on all persons insured under the policy. *** ^ * * * On or after July 1, 1983, no policy insuring against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in this State with respect to any motor vehicle designed for use on public highways and required to be registered in this State unless underinsured motorist coverage is included in such policy in an amount equal to the total amount of uninsured motorist coverage provided in that policy where such uninsured motorist coverage exceeds the limits set forth in Section 7—203 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, pars. 755a—2(1), (3), (4). We now turn to the interpretation of those amendments. In the 1981 statute, the insurer was required to make a meaningful offer of underinsured motorist coverage that could be accepted or rejected by each insured individual. However, the legislature substantially altered that scheme with the 1982 statute. The 1982 statute provided that whenever an individual purchased uninsured motorist coverage in an amount greater than the statutory minimum, the insurer must also provide underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount. The 1982 statute also provided that after July 1, 1983, the insurer must provide and the insured must accept the underinsured motorist coverage. The new statute did not permit the insurer or insured to reject this coverage. The 1982 statute provided additional coverage for many individuals purchasing automobile insurance after July 1, 1983. If the insured purchased uninsured motorist coverage in an amount above the statutory minimum, the insured must also purchase underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount. The 1982 statutory scheme is consistent with the legislature’s purpose in enacting the 1981 statute as stated by this court in Cloninger v. National General Insurance Co. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 419: “[T]he legislature recognized that soaring medical costs often left injured parties only partially compensated for their injuries. The legislature was obviously concerned with adequately compensating injured parties.” Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 424. According to the 1982 statutory scheme, an automobile owner who purchases the minimum amount of uninsured motorist coverage after July 1, 1983, was entitled neither to an offer of underinsured motorist coverage nor to automatic inclusion of such coverage in an amount commensurate with uninsured motorist coverage provided the uninsured motorist coverage exceeded the statutory minimum. The policy had to contain underinsured motorist coverage in an amount at least equal to the total amount of uninsured motorist coverage. Only those policies issued prior to July 1, 1983, were entitled to an offer of underinsurance. The legislative history does not shed light on the reasons for the change. Furthermore, we agree with the district court that the parties to this appeal do not offer cogent reasons why the legislature would have adopted this course. By 1990, the legislature had again changed the statutory scheme. In the amended statute, the legislature deleted the required offer of additional uninsured motor vehicle coverage. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, par. 755a—2(1).) The 1990 statutory scheme provides that uninsured motor vehicle coverage must be in an amount equal to the insured’s bodily injury liability; whereas, the 1981 version required only an offer of uninsured motorist coverage in an amount up to the insured’s bodily injury liability limits. The 1982 statute provided only for a required offer for policies issued before July 1, 1983. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(3).) The 1982 statutory scheme also provided that the underinsured motorist coverage be in an amount at least equal to the total amount of uninsured motorist coverage. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(5). The 1990 statute adds a new element to the policies. The new provision provides that the insurer describe the coverage and advise the insured of his or her right to reject the coverage in excess of $20,000 per person/ $40,000 per occurrence. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, par. 755a—2(1).) The statute also provides that the original or a copy of the policy shall constitute sufficient evidence of the insured’s selection of uninsured motorist coverage limits. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, par. 755a—2(3).) The new scheme further provides that the underinsurance motorist coverage be in an amount equal to the total of uninsured motorist coverage as long as that coverage exceeds $20,000 per person/$40,000 per occurrence. See Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, par. 755a—2(4). In reading the statute and its amendments, this court finds that when the legislature enacted the change to the 1981 statutory scheme in 1982, the legislature acted rationally with full knowledge of all previous enactments as well as decisions. Furthermore, this court finds that the material change in the 1982 statute created a presumption that the amendment was intended to change the law regarding “required offer.” The 1990 statute supports that presumption. We hold that the insurer in this case was not required to make a specific offer of underinsured motorist coverage. We note that the policy did contain the words “underinsured and uninsured” in a section above the section which contained the insured’s signature. Although the print is small, the words are nonetheless in the application. This court also notes that the blocked section containing the words “uninsured/ underinsured” motorist coverage reveals that the minimum statutory coverage was specifically chosen because the box for “other” type coverage is marked with an X and the amount chosen, 15/30, is handwritten. Plaintiffs argue that the policy behind the statute is that consumers must be made aware of this important type of coverage. In their argument, they state that the meaningful offer has been relocated. However, our reading of the statute and its subsequent amendments does not permit this interpretation. The 1990 statute provides proof that the insured must be made aware of the coverage but the “meaningful offer” requirement has intentionally been removed. The 1990 statute significantly coincides with the legislative scheme to protect the insured/consumer by making uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage equal and mandatory. We cannot find where the meaningful offer requirement has been “relocated.” Plaintiffs cite Cloninger v. National General Insurance Co. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 419, for support of their argument that the amount of coverage for underinsured motorist coverage should equal the insured’s bodily injury liability limits. However, we find Cloninger distinguishable. In Cloninger, the policy was issued prior to the 1982 statute and as such the governing statute was the 1981 version. More importantly, the issue before the Cloninger court was not whether an offer must be made but rather whether an offer was made and whether that offer was made in a commercially reasonable manner. The Cloninger court found: “The legislature not only required that underinsuredmotorist coverage be offered but also provided that the insured had a right to elect or reject such coverage. [Citation.] The right to elect or reject such coverage requires that the insured have information regarding the coverage. [Citation.] Therefore, we believe that the legislature intended that the ‘offer’ mandated in section 143a—2(3) provide the insured with enough information regarding underinsured-motorist coverage to allow the insured to make an intelligent decision of whether such coverage should be elected or rejected. Such an intelligent decision cannot be made unless an explanation of the coverage is supplied. [Citation.]” Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 424-25. When this court held in Cloninger that the insurer must explain the coverage, we adopted the four-point test for commercial reasonableness of an offer established by the Minnesota Supreme Court in Hastings v. United Pacific Insurance Co. (Minn. 1982), 318 N.W.2d 849. Although the holding in Cloninger dealt with the 1981 version of the statute, part of that holding is still viable, but not the meaningful offer test. The 1990 statute provides an explanation of coverage by the insurer as follows: “Each insurance company providing the coverage must provide applicants with a brief description of the coverage and advise them of their right to reject the coverage in excess of the limits set forth in Section 7—203 of The Illinois Vehicle Code.” Ill. Rev. Stat., 1990 Supp., ch. 73, par. 755a—2(1). We note that since Cloninger, the legislature has avoided the use of the term “required offer” in the statute. In fact, we find that the 1990 statute places the burden on the insured to reject and subsequently to reduce the uninsured motorist coverage which is automatically set at an amount equal to the bodily injury liability. No longer is the insurer responsible to make an offer, but rather it is the insured’s duty to reduce the uninsured motorist coverage. Furthermore, whatever uninsured motorist coverage the insured elects, underinsured motorist coverage will be set, mandatorily, at the uninsured motorist coverage level. At that point, it is the duty of the insurer to explain the coverage and nothing more. The 1990 statute eliminated the need for the Hastings four-point test for determining whether the offer was made in a commercially reasonable manner, as adopted in Cloninger. The dissent asserts that the opinion of this court did not adequately address the certified question and that this court did not accurately interpret the statutory intent. We do not agree. This court notes that, first, the parties failed to provide adequate reasons for their interpretation of the statute and second, we, like the Federal court, did not find that the legislative history, i.e., hearings and debate, did not provide any assistance. Therefore, this court reviewed the next best source of information. This court took into account all of the numerous and drastic statutory changes which took place over a very short period of time. Those changes provide the best source of information and evidence regarding statutory intent. It is from that entire history that we reached the result in this opinion. We did not focus on one senator’s remarks or one statutory change but a series of drastic changes to one section of the Insurance Code over a short period of time. It is through those observations that this court concluded that the meaningful offer test is not applicable. Furthermore, this court reviewed those changes to the statute in light of the entire insurance application at issue. We did not focus on only one section of the application. The dissent, however, focuses on the fact that the car salesperson filled out the application and as such asserts that the majority has failed to protect the consumer by finding that the meaningful offer test is not applicable. However, this court finds otherwise. This court recognizes that the consumer in this instance unfortunately may have been placed at a disadvantage; nevertheless, it does not circumvent our duty to interpret the statute as reflected in the statutory changes. Thus, this court cannot increase the protection of a statute without more evidence of such intent. Furthermore, this court notes that the legislature had taken notice of the unfortunate situation and incorporated changes to the statute to reflect those concerns. Consequently, the legislature enacted the present statute. Thus, we find that the 1982 statute did not require insurers to offer underinsured motorist coverage to automobile purchasers who opted for uninsured motorist coverage at the minimum statutory level. Certified question answered.

=== CASE 9739286 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:44.187287+00 ===

JUSTICE BILANDIC, dissenting: The United States Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit (7th circuit court) certified the following question of Illinois law to this court: “Does Illinois law require insurers to offer underinsured motorist coverage (and, if so, in what amount) to automobile purchasers who opt for uninsured motorist coverage at the minimum statutory level?” (Fed. R. App. P. 52.) The majority’s decision to answer this certified question in the negative completely undermines the legislative intent in enacting section 143a—2 of the Illinois Insurance Code (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2). For this reason, I respectfully dissent. I. The Certified Question To bolster its interpretation of the 1982 version of section 143a — 2 (amended section 143a — 2), the majority erroneously asserts that: “The 7th Circuit recognized that ‘[t]he language of the statute does not seem to require insurers to issue or offer any [emphasis omitted] underinsurance to drivers who elect minimum uninsured motorist coverage.’ *** (903 F.2d at 1103 n.2.)” (Emphasis added.) (146 Ill. 2d at 524.) In fact, this statement appears in a footnote to the 7th circuit court’s opinion which discusses another Illinois case, Glazewski v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 243. The 7th circuit court noted that “Glazewski, however, does not directly resolve our question.” (DeGrand v. Motors Insurance Corp. (1990), 903 F.2d at 1102 n.2.) Far from recognizing that the majority’s interpretation of amended section 143a—2 is proper, the 7th circuit court stated: “We cannot discern any reason why Illinois lawmakers left this apparent window of underinsured motorist non-coverage for owners of automobiles who have the least amount of uninsured motorist coverage. * * * We are left, then, with a number of plausible (yet, in many ways, contradictory) interpretations of the same statute from Illinois appellate courts without a controlling precedent from the state supreme court. Our lack of guidance is exacerbated by the fact that we can discern no policy reasons for the passage of a statute that, despite being enacted to increase motorist awareness of underinsurance, may undermine that goal by arguably removing the meaningful offer requirement.” DeGrand, 903 F.2d at 1102-04. Clearly, the 7th circuit court recognized the consumer protection aspects of the statute and the “meaningful offer” requirement. However, it deferred final judgment to this court, because of the need to determine the intent of the Illinois legislature in the enactment of the statute. The proper focus in this case must be on the legislative intent behind the enactment of and subsequent amendments to section 143a — 2 of the Code. Justice Clark, writing for the majority in Cloninger v. National General Insurance Co. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 419, recognized that: “ ‘[T]he primary purpose of statutory construction is to ascertain the legislature’s intention, not only from the language which it has used, but also from the reason and necessity for the act, the evils sought to be remedied, and the objects and purposes sought to be obtained.’ ” (Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 425, quoting Lincoln National Life Insurance Co. v. McCarthy (1957), 10 Ill. 2d 489, 494.) Obviously, the legislature intended section 143a — 2 to protect the general public in their auto insurance purchases. Simply stated, this is consumer protection legislation. Referring to the 1981 version of section 143a — 2 of the Code, Justice Clark wrote: “[T]he legislature recognized that soaring medical costs often left injured parties only partially compensated for their injuries. The legislature was obviously concerned with adequately compensating injured parties. As stated by Representative Epton during a House debate on what would later be codified as section 143a—2(3): ‘[T]his Bill is in behalf of the consumer.’ ” Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 424, quoting 81st Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, June 20, 1980, at 48. In Cloninger, this court held that the 1981 version of section 143a—2 mandated, inter alia, that the insurer provide the insured with a “meaningful offer” of both uninsured motorist coverage and underinsured motorist coverage. (Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 425.) We adopted the following four-part test to determine whether a proper offer was made: “(1) notification must be commercially reasonable if the offer is made in other than face-to-face negotiations; (2) the limits of the optional coverage must be specified and not set forth in general terms; (3) the insured must be intelligibly advised by the insurer of the nature of the option; and (4) the insurer must advise the insured that the optional coverage is available for relatively modest premium increases.” (Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 425-26.) Under the 1981 version of section 143a—2, the consumer was entitled to make an informed, intelligent decision regarding both uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage. Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 425. The amendments at issue were added to the 1981 version of section 143a — 2 and incorporated into the 1982 Code. The 1982 Code provided, in part: “§143a — 2. (1) Required offer of additional uninsured motor vehicle coverage. No policy *** shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in State *** unless uninsured motorist coverage *** is offered in an amount up to the insured’s bodily injury liability limits. * * * (3) Required offer of underinsured motorist coverage. Until July 1, 1983, any offer made under subsection (1) of this Section shall also include an offer of underinsured motorist coverage. *** * * * (5) On or after July 1, 1983, no policy *** shall be renewed or delivered or issued for delivery in this State *** unless underinsured motorist coverage is included in such policy in an amount at least equal to the total amount of uninsured motorist coverage provided in that policy where such uninsured motorist coverage exceeds the limits set forth in Section 7—203 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, pars. 755a—2(1), (3), (5).) The legislative intent in enacting the 1981 version of section 143a — 2 was clearly to fully inform consumers of both uninsured motorist coverage and underinsured motorist coverage. The legislative history of the 1982 amendment at issue unequivocally demonstrates that the legislature intended to provide additional protection to the consumer. In the words of Senator D’Arco, a sponsor of the amendment: “Part of the problem is people are not aware that there is underinsurance [coverage] *** and this obviously is going to make them aware of it ***.” 82d Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, June 22, 1982, at 4 (statement of Senator D’Arco). In spite of this clear and unambiguous assertion of legislative intent, the majority has decided that: “[A]n automobile owner who purchases the minimum amount of uninsured motorist coverage after July 1, 1983, was entitled neither to an offer of underinsured motorist coverage nor to automatic inclusion of such coverage in an amount commensurate with uninsured motorist coverage ***. *** Only those policies issued prior to July 1, 1983, were entitled to an offer of underinsurance.” (146 Ill. 2d at 530.) The majority’s holding defies logic and completely undermines the intent of the legislature and the purpose of these consumer protection provisions of the Code. In construing this statute, it is the duty of this court to view the Code in its entirety, to give effect to the language used, and above all, to give effect to the legislature’s intended purpose. This the majority has failed to do. In the first instance, the majority has failed in interpreting the language of the amendment itself. The majority writes: “The 1982 statute provided that whenever an individual purchased uninsured motorist coverage in an amount greater than the statutory minimum, the insurer must also provide underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount. *** [T]he insured must *** purchase underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount.” (Emphasis added.) (146 Ill. 2d at 529.) This construction of the 1982 version of section 143a — 2 contains a glaring omission: the majority has failed to give effect to two significant words contained in the amendment. The statute provides that, where the consumer has selected uninsured motorist coverage in excess of the statutory minimum, the policy must include underinsured motorist coverage “in an amount at least equal to” the uninsured motorist coverage limits. (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(5). The language of the amendment itself makes it clear that amended section 143a — 2 does not simply require an automatic inclusion of underinsured motorist coverage in the same amount as the selected uninsured motorist coverage limits. The words “at least” establish a minimum amount of. underinsured coverage that must be included in the policy if the consumer elects uninsured coverage above the statutory minimum. The consumer, however, may purchase and the insurer may provide underinsured coverage in an amount greater than the uninsured coverage limits. But, to do so, the consumer must be aware of this type of insurance and the fact that he may purchase more underinsurance coverage than that which is automatically included in the policy. The majority’s construction of amended section 143a — 2, however, eliminates the pre-1982 “meaningful offer” requirement from the statutory scheme. In light of Senator D’Arco’s observation that “the problem is people are not aware that there is underinsurance [coverage],” it is difficult to comprehend how the legislative purpose will be served under the majority’s construction of amended section 143a—2. The statutory language makes no sense unless the pre-1982 “meaningful offer” requirement is still viable. Nor do the evils of the majority’s decision end here. The majority has failed in its duty to view the Code in its entirety and give effect to its purpose of protecting consumers. The majority decision has left a gaping hole in underinsured motorist coverage with respect to consumers who elect uninsured coverage at the minimum statutory level. Incredibly, the majority holds that this particular class of unwitting consumers are not even entitled to be made aware of the nature and availability of underinsured motorist coverage simply because they purchased the minimum uninsured motorist coverage. This class of consumers are put in great peril and will be completely unaware of the fact that they are unprotected when they could have been protected if a “meaningful offer” was made by the insurer. It is obvious that this result flies in the face of the intent of the legislature. In order to give effect to the legislative purpose, amended section 143a—2 must be viewed in its entirety. This section first requires insurers to make a “meaningful offer” of uninsured motorist coverage up to the consumer’s bodily liability limits. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(1).) Until July 1, 1983, any offer of uninsured motorist coverage must be accompanied by an offer of underinsured motorist coverage. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(3).) On or after July 1, 1983, if the consumer purchases uninsured coverage which exceeds the statutory minimum, underinsured coverage at least equal to the chosen uninsured coverage limits must be automatically included in the policy. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 73, par. 755a—2(5). The majority utilizes the following rules of statutory construction to arrive at its interpretation of amended section 143a — 2: “ ‘In seeking to ascertain legislative intent, courts consider the statutes in their entirety, noting the subject they address and the legislature’s apparent objective in enacting them. [Citation.] It is presumed that the legislature, in enacting various statutes, acts rationally and with full knowledge of all previous enactments. [Citation.]’ ” (146 Ill. 2d at 526, quoting State v. Mikusch (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 242, 247-48.) And: “ ‘Generally, a material change in the language of an unambiguous statute creates a presumption *** that the amendment was intended to change the law.’ ” (146 Ill. 2d at 526, quoting Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 252.) Clearly, the legislature did intend to change the law, but not in the way that the majority has concluded. The amendment, section 143a — 2(5) of the Code, applies only to a limited class of consumers, i.e., those who purchase uninsured motorist coverage above the statutory minimum. It is only rational for the legislature to have limited the application of this provision to this class of consumers. At the time of the amendment’s enactment, Illinois’ financial responsibility law imposed mandatory insurance coverage on Illinois drivers in the amount of $15,000 per person and $30,000 per occurrence (15/30). (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 95½, par. 7—203.) Uninsured motorist coverage protects the insured from the possibility that the at-fault driver has failed to insure himself as required by law. Often, the at-fault driver’s insurance coverage is not enough to compensate the injured party. For these reasons, the injured party’s underinsured motorist coverage is the crucial coverage because it will provide, up to its limits, the excess compensation needed by the victim. If the amendment applied to consumers who purchased the statutory minimum uninsured coverage (15/30), it would require the insurer to automatically include (and the consumer to pay for) underinsured coverage of at least the same limit (15/30). However, this underinsured motorist coverage would be “virtually worthless” (see Glazewski v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 243, 248-49), because the at-fault driver presumably already has at least that much bodily liability coverage. Under these circumstances, the underinsured motorist coverage would never kick in. Therefore, consistent with rationality, the legislature limited the application of this amendment to the class of consumers who purchase uninsured coverage above the 15/30 limit. This provision, however, was never intended to eliminate the statutory protection already afforded to those consumers who choose uninsured motorist coverage at the statutory minimum level. The legislative history makes this crystal clear. Armed with its knowledge that its previous enactments already required insurers to inform consumers about the nature and availability of underinsured motorist coverage, the legislature obviously intended the amendment to provide additional protection to consumers rather than to eliminate any protection for an entire consumer class. In light of both the legislative history and the language of the amendment itself, it is apparent that the 1982 amendment must be read in conjunction with the pre-1982 “meaningful offer” requirement as additional protection to consumers. To hold otherwise is to encourage consumer deception rather than consumer protection practices. II. The DeGrands The facts in this case highlight the tragedy of the majority’s holding. Briefly, General Motors Corporation is a manufacturer of motor vehicles. GMAC, a subsidiary of General Motors, is engaged in the business of financing motor vehicles. Motors Insurance Corporation (MIC), a subsidiary of GMAC, is an insurance company engaged in the business of insuring motor-vehicle-related risks. Ruby Chevrolet is an authorized dealer of General Motors vehicles. It has a showroom and office in Chicago, Illinois. At the same location, Ruby operates as an agent for GMAC to provide financing of motor vehicles. As a condition of financing, consumers are required to obtain auto insurance coverage. Ruby also operates, from the same location, as an insurance agency for MIC. This provides consumers with a one-stop facility at which they can purchase, finance, and insure motor vehicles. On February 8, 1986, the DeGrands completed a series of related transactions on the premises of Ruby Chevrolet in Chicago. This resulted in the purchase of a car from Ruby, financed by GMAC, and insured by MIC. The effective date of the policy was February 8, 1986, and provided bodily injury liability coverage of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. The policy also included a combination of uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage of $15,000 per person and $30,000 per occurrence. Thus, in order to obtain financing for their auto purchase through GMAC, the DeGrands unwittingly purchased an automobile insurance policy from defendant MIC which provided them with virtually worthless underinsured motorist coverage. Upon discovering that their underinsured coverage was worthless, the DeGrands instituted the instant declaratory judgment action. In their depositions, both plaintiffs testified that MIC agent Michael O’Donnell took their order for automobile insurance by asking pertinent questions needed to complete MIC’s printed application form. Then he requested Luke DeGrand to sign the application form in two places. : Both plaintiffs also testified that agent O’Donnell never mentioned the phrase “underinsured motorist coverage.” As a result, they walked away from the MIC office on February 8, 1986, unaware of even the concept of underinsured motorist coverage, much less its availability to them. MIC, through agent O’Donnell, did not offer to sell plaintiffs underinsured coverage in any amount. Agent O’Donnell testified in his deposition that he did not recall making a specific offer of underinsured motorist coverage to the plaintiffs. However, he makes such an offer as a matter of course to all applicants. Curiously, agent O’Donnell also testified that he had no reason to advise the applicants to purchase uninsured motorist coverage up to their bodily liability limits because “we weren’t there really to sell insurance” and, further, “we essentially only try to move the car out and get the required [minimum] insurance.” It is undisputed that the following text and signature appears in the body of the MIC application form: “I acknowledge that I have been provided an opportunity to purchase uninsured motorists coverage up to the limits of my bodily liability limits. [Luke DeGrand’s signature]” Based on this text and signature, plaintiffs concede that defendant MIC offered to sell them uninsured motorist coverage up to the limits of their bodily injury limits of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. Based on this clause, plaintiffs also concede that they rejected MIC’s offer of additional uninsured coverage. It is also undisputed that the phrase “underinsured motorist coverage” does not appear in this exculpatory clause of MIC’s printed insurance application. The majority, however, finds solace in the fact that the application contained the clause “uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage” and that “the minimum statutory coverage was specifically chosen because the box for ‘other’ type coverage is marked with an X and the amount chosen, 15/30, is handwritten.” (146 Ill. 2d at 531-32.) The majority fails to reveal, however, that it was agent O’Donnell who filled out the insurance application and it is Ms handwriting to which the majority refers. The majority also fails to indicate that agent O’Donnell, with the DeGrands’ application in front of Mm, offered them uninsured motorist coverage but never mentioned underinsured motorist coverage to them. It is difficult to comprehend how an offer of underinsured motorist coverage can be made to the consumer when that phrase is not used in either the face-to-face discussion with the insurance agent or in the printed, standard-form exculpatory clause drafted by the insurer which the consumer is required to sign. Insurance policies are not considered to be light reading material. “Some cases *** emphasize the *** point that the policies are rarely understood by the insured and that under such circumstances he should be protected from his own ignorance ***.” (R. Anderson, Couch on Insurance §15:79 (2d ed. 1984).) Furthermore, in this case, the DeGrands, eager to get their new car off the lot, probably never even saw the “uninsured/ underinsured motorist coverage” clause since agent O’Donnell is the one who filled out their insurance application. Illinois law does not allow for such a silent offer of underinsured motorist coverage. As Justice Clark wrote in Cloninger: “[W]e believe that the legislature intended that the ‘offer’ mandated in section 143a — 2(3) provide the insured with enough information regarding underinsured-motorist coverage to allow the insured to make an intelligent decision of whether such coverage should be elected or rejected. Such an intelligent decision cannot be made unless an explanation of the coverage is supplied. [Citation.]” (Cloninger, 109 Ill. 2d at 425.) Contrary to the majority, I would hold that the facts of this case lead to the conclusion that indeed no “meaningful offer” of underinsured motorist coverage was made by MIC to plaintiffs. Nor can the exculpatory clause signed by Luke DeGrand constitute a waiver of underinsured motorist coverage. This clause does not contain the phrase “underinsured motorist coverage” or even allude to this type of coverage. DeGrand was asked to expressly admit only that he was offered uninsured motorist coverage. Since the application and policy of insurance are MIC’s work product, Illinois law requires that its own words should be construed most strongly against it. (International Minerals & Chemical Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 361, 371.) Therefore, the majority errs in its decision to construe this clause as a waiver of underinsured motorist coverage. For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent. JUSTICES CLARK and FREEMAN join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2220116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:33.898347+00 ===

188 Ill. App.3d 768 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 825
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JEFFREY L. CREST, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-88-0493.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed September 25, 1989.
*769 G. Joseph Weller, of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Elgin, and Robert Agostinelli and Verlin R. Meinz, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Ottawa, for appellant.
James E. Ryan, State's Attorney, of Wheaton (William L. Browers, John X. Breslin, and William P. Gibbs, all of State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor's Office, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE REINHARD delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Jeffrey L. Crest, was found guilty, following a bench trial in the circuit court of Du Page County, of burglary (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 19-1(a)) and was sentenced to an eight-year term of imprisonment.
Defendant raises two issues on appeal relating to the denial of his motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence: (1) whether the police had articulable facts to justify a stop of the vehicle in which he was a passenger; and (2) whether the police had probable cause to arrest him after searching the trunk of the vehicle.
The facts relevant to deciding the issues raised on appeal were adduced at the hearing on defendant's motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence and at his trial. According to Marshall Gauer, a police *770 officer for the City of Aurora, he read a burglary report on September 1, 1987, which indicated that electrical wire had been reported stolen earlier that day from a construction trailer owned by Scheffler Electric Company and located near the intersection of Middlebury and 83d Streets in Aurora, Illinois. The report indicates that 30 boxes of No. 14 T.H.N.N. solid wire and one spool of No. 4 T.H.N.N solid wire were taken in the burglary. Later, during the early evening hours on September 1, 1987, Officer Gauer read a printed report of an anonymous telephone call received at the police station. According to the report, the caller indicated that Randy Crest and someone named "Sid" were trying to sell wire, a snowblower, and other stolen property stored in the basement of 60 South Spencer Street in Aurora to raise money to bond defendant, Jeffrey Crest, Randy's brother, out of jail. The typed summation of the telephone tip indicates that the caller had been contacted by Randy Crest and someone named "Sid" who wanted to sell some copper wire. The report states that the caller observed about 500 pounds of copper wire coated with black plastic.
On September 2, 1987, at about 9 to 9:30 a.m., Gauer received a telephone call from the anonymous informer, who told Gauer that the electrical wire was stored at the Crest home on Spencer Street and that it was going to be moved that day and sold to help get Jeff out of jail. At approximately 11:30 a.m., on September 2, Gauer received another call from the anonymous informer. The caller indicated that Jeff was out of jail and that the items would be moved from the Crest residence within the next couple of hours.
During his tour of duty on September 2, 1987, Gauer periodically monitored the Crest home, which he knew to be at 60 Spencer Street. On one such occasion, at about 2 p.m., Gauer observed an Oldsmobile backed into the driveway of the Crest residence with the trunk lid open and three males standing behind it. Gauer positioned his unmarked police car about 80 to 100 feet south of the Crest home on a cross street. From that position he recognized one of the males as defendant and one as Ronald Carty, both of whom he knew. He then observed the trio carrying several boxes approximately 15 to 18 inches square by 5 to 6 inches deep from the Crest home and placing them into the trunk of the Oldsmobile. Defendant carried one or two of the boxes. One of the boxes was open, and it had electrical wire protruding from it. The trio also placed a wooden stick with red wire wrapped around it and a white bucket into the trunk. All three males got into the Oldsmobile and, with a fourth person driving, left the Crest residence.
*771 Gauer then radioed a marked squad car for assistance as he followed the Oldsmobile in his unmarked car. Gauer then requested the marked squad car to stop the Oldsmobile, which it did.
Gauer and Officer Danny Hornback of the Aurora police department approached the vehicle and ascertained that the driver was Brenda Goggins and that the front seat passenger was Ronald Carty. Defendant and Sidney Carty were seated in the rear of the Oldsmobile. It was subsequently learned that Goggins' driver's license was revoked.
Gauer then explained to Goggins that he had observed the three passengers placing wire that he believed was stolen in a burglary into the trunk. Gauer then advised Goggins of her right to refuse consent to a search of the trunk, and she indicated the vehicle belonged to her fiance. Goggins then told Gauer she would like to talk to Ronald Carty before deciding whether to consent to the search of the trunk.
Following her conversation with Ronald Carty, Goggins asked Gauer what would happen to the vehicle if she refused to consent to the search, and Gauer responded that he would tow and impound the vehicle and obtain a search warrant. Goggins responded that she did not want the car towed, that she would not go to jail for anyone, and that Gauer could search the trunk.
Gauer obtained the keys, but could not locate the trunk key on the key ring. Goggins then examined the key ring and indicated that one of the passengers in the Oldsmobile must have it. Defendant and Sidney Carty were then removed from the vehicle and told to empty their pockets on the trunk. The trunk key was not among the contents. Officer Hornback then observed that Ronald Carty's shoes were untied and, after requesting that he remove his shoes, the trunk key was discovered in one of Ronald Carty's shoes.
Upon opening the trunk, the officers discovered 10 boxes of T.H.N.N. No. 14 electrical wire, the same type taken in the burglary of the Scheffler Construction Company trailer. Defendant and the other two passengers were placed under arrest for possession of stolen property at that time. Defendant subsequently admitted his involvement in the burglary.
Defendant presented no witnesses at his trial.
Defendant contends on appeal that the initial stop of the Oldsmobile in which he was a passenger was unconstitutional because it was based on an uncorroborated, anonymous telephone tip. He further maintains that even if the subsequent search of the trunk was valid under the fourth amendment, the police did not have probable cause to arrest him after searching the trunk.
*772 The State initially responds that defendant, as a passenger in the vehicle, lacked standing to challenge the constitutionality of the stop of the vehicle. Alternatively, the State, in arguing that the initial stop of the Oldsmobile was constitutional, maintains that the police had probable cause to arrest defendant based on the information known to them prior to the search of the trunk, or, at the very least, the police had articulable suspicion to stop the vehicle for investigatory purposes.
 1 It is well established that a passenger of a vehicle has standing to challenge the stop of the vehicle. (People v. LaGrone (1984), 124 Ill. App.3d 301, 302-03, 464 N.E.2d 712; People v. Kunath (1981), 99 Ill. App.3d 201, 203-06, 425 N.E.2d 486; see also People v. Manke (1989), 181 Ill. App.3d 374, 378-79, 537 N.E.2d 13.) Accordingly, defendant has standing to raise the constitutionality of the initial stop of the vehicle in this case.
 2 The burden of proof, in a motion to suppress evidence, is on the defendant to establish that the search and seizure were unreasonable. (People v. Neal (1985), 109 Ill.2d 216, 218, 486 N.E.2d 898, 899.) A reviewing court will not reverse the trial court's finding on a motion to suppress evidence unless the finding is manifestly erroneous. People v. Galvin (1989), 127 Ill.2d 153, 162, 535 N.E.2d 837.
Although the State argues on appeal that the police had probable cause to arrest defendant prior to stopping the vehicle, we need not reach that issue as we find that the police had articulable suspicion to stop the vehicle. Section 107-14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 provides that a peace officer may stop a person in a public place for a reasonable period of time when the officer reasonably infers from the circumstances that the person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit an offense. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 107-14.) This statute codifies the principles established in Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 88 S.Ct. 1868. People v. Long (1983), 99 Ill.2d 219, 228, 457 N.E.2d 1252.
 3 It must be noted that the necessary inquiry in any Terry-type situation is whether the police officer's conduct was reasonable under the circumstances known to the officer at the time he initiated the stop. (Terry, 392 U.S. at 27, 20 L.Ed.2d at 909, 88 S.Ct. at 1883; see also Adams v. Williams (1972), 407 U.S. 143, 148, 32 L.Ed.2d 612, 618, 92 S.Ct. 1921, 1924; People v. Long (1983), 99 Ill.2d 219, 227-28, 457 N.E.2d 1252.) To be considered reasonable, an officer's inferences must be based on more substantial facts than would support a mere hunch. For the police to justify a temporary detention, they must point to specific, articulable facts which, when taken together *773 with natural inferences, make the intrusion reasonable. (People v. Smithers (1980), 83 Ill.2d 430, 435-36, 415 N.E.2d 327, 331.) Facts and circumstances, which if viewed separately might constitute innocent behavior, may provide reasonable suspicion justifying a Terry stop when considered in their entirety. United States v. Sokolow (1989), 490 U.S. ___, ___, 104 L.Ed.2d 1, 11-12, 109 S.Ct. 1581, 1586-87.
In the present case, we must consider all of the facts and circumstances known to the officer prior to his stopping the vehicle in which defendant was a passenger, and any reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, in determining the reasonableness of the stop. Such an inquiry necessarily includes the information supplied to Officer Gauer by the anonymous telephone informant.
 4 This court, in a different factual context, recently addressed the propriety of a police officer's reliance on an informant's tip in conducting a Terry stop in In re J.J. (1989), 183 Ill. App.3d 381, 384-85, 539 N.E.2d 764. In In re J.J., we applied the reasoning of the United States Supreme Court in Adams v. Williams (1972), 407 U.S. 143, 32 L.Ed.2d 612, 92 S.Ct. 1921. In Adams, the Supreme Court, recognizing that informants' tips vary greatly in their value and reliability, acknowledged that articulable suspicion for a stop may be based not only on an officer's personal observation but also on information supplied by another person. (Adams, 407 U.S. at 147, 32 L.Ed.2d at 617, 92 S.Ct. at 1924.) The key determination in deciding whether a stop based on an informant's tip is reasonable is the reliability of the information. (Adams, 407 U.S. at 147, 32 L.Ed.2d at 617-18, 92 S.Ct. at 1924.) Where some tips completely lacking in indicia of reliability would warrant either no police response or require further investigation before a stop would be justified, other situations, such as when a victim of a crime seeks immediate police aid and describes his assailant or when a credible informant warns of a specific impending crime, would justify the police making an appropriate response. (Adams, 407 U.S. at 147, 32 L.Ed.2d at 617-18, 92 S.Ct. at 1924.) The fourth amendment does not require a police officer who lacks the precise level of information necessary to establish probable cause to simply shrug his shoulders and allow a crime to occur or a criminal to escape. Adams, 407 U.S. at 145, 32 L.Ed.2d at 616, 92 S.Ct. at 1923.
 5 In assessing the reasonableness of the stop in this case, we must necessarily consider the reliability of the information provided by the anonymous telephone caller. While it is true that Officer Gauer possessed certain information regarding the theft of wire and saw defendant and others loading what appeared to be wire in the trunk *774 of an automobile at his home a day after the theft, we do not perceive that information alone to be sufficient to justify Gauer's stopping of the vehicle. It is the information provided by the telephone caller which significantly contributes to Gauer's suspicion that certain persons at defendant's residence were involved in criminal activity. Thus, we first determine the reliability of that information.
Gauer received information from three separate telephone calls, all apparently made by the same person. While there is no direct connection between the informer and defendant, it is reasonable to infer that the informer had personal, or at least inside, information of the activities of the other persons involved. He was able to identify two of the individuals involved; he knew that the wire and other stolen property were stored at defendant's home; he knew about when it would be moved; and he also knew that defendant had been in jail and had been bonded out. Such detail indicates that the informer had at least some very close connection with or intimate knowledge regarding the imminent sale of wire and other stolen property.
More importantly, however, Officer Gauer did not stop the vehicle based only on the information provided by the informer. Rather, he took steps to corroborate what the informer told him about the wire and other stolen property. He went to the vicinity of where the informer indicated the wire was being stored and observed defendant loading boxes into the trunk of an automobile. One box was open, and the officer observed what appeared to be electrical wire protruding from it. Additionally, one of the three men loaded a wooden stick of electrical wire into the trunk. It is also important to consider that the informer's last call was at 11:30 a.m., and indicated that the wire would be moved from its location at defendant's home on Spencer Street within the next few hours. Officer Gauer observed defendant and his companions moving the wire at approximately 1:55 p.m. Because the officer corroborated many of the details provided by the informer and because the nature of the information provided was such that only someone with knowledge of the criminal activity could have provided it, we find it has the indicia of reliability necessary to provide a basis for Officer Gauer's articulable suspicion that the persons at defendant's home were about to transport stolen property.
 6 In assessing the reasonableness of Officer Gauer's stop of the Oldsmobile, we are not limited to considering, however, only the information provided by the informer. Rather, we must consider all of the facts and circumstances in their entirety in determining whether Gauer had a reasonable suspicion justifying a Terry stop. See Sokolow, 490 U.S. at ___, 104 L.Ed.2d at 11-12, 109 S.Ct. at 1586-87.
*775 In addition to what the informer indicated, that wire and other stolen property were to be sold, Gauer also knew that numerous boxes and one spool of electrical wire had been taken in a recent local burglary. Not only that, but Gauer observed defendant and his companions loading boxes, at least one of which contained electrical wire, and a stick with electrical wire, into the trunk of the Oldsmobile. It was reasonable for Gauer to conclude that this wire might be the same wire stolen from the construction site as the theft was just one day previous; the wire was stolen from a location in the same city as defendant's residence; several boxes of wire were reported stolen; and defendant and the other two persons were observed carrying several boxes, one of which had wire protruding. These facts, although insufficient standing alone to justify stopping the vehicle, when viewed along with the information provided by the telephone tipster and considered with the reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, gave Gauer an articulable suspicion that the persons in the vehicle were involved in criminal activity which justified his stopping the vehicle for investigatory purposes.
 7 We address next defendant's contention that Gauer lacked probable cause to arrest him even after the stop and the subsequent search of the Oldsmobile's trunk. A warrantless arrest is valid only if supported by probable cause. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 107-2(c); People v. Montgomery (1986), 112 Ill.2d 517, 525, 494 N.E.2d 475.) Probable cause exists when the totality of the facts and circumstances known to the arresting officer is such that a reasonably prudent person would believe that the suspect is committing or has committed a crime (Montgomery, 112 Ill.2d at 525, 494 N.E.2d at 477), and it need not be based on evidence sufficient to convict. (People v. Neal (1985), 111 Ill.2d 180, 193, 489 N.E.2d 845.) Whether probable cause exists is governed by commonsense considerations, and the calculation concerns the probability of criminal activity and not proof beyond a reasonable doubt. (Montgomery, 112 Ill.2d at 525, 494 N.E.2d at 477-78.) The information relied upon to establish probable cause to arrest, however, must be supported by some indicia of reliability. People v. James (1987), 118 Ill.2d 214, 222, 514 N.E.2d 998; People v. Tisler (1984), 103 Ill.2d 226, 237, 469 N.E.2d 147.
 8 If facts supplied by an informant's tip are essential to a finding of probable cause, the tip must meet standards of reliability before it can be considered in determining probable cause. (Tisler, 103 Ill.2d at 237, 469 N.E.2d at 153.) Our supreme court has adopted the totality-of-the-circumstances test for probable cause to make a warrantless arrest set forth in Illinois v. Gates (1983), 462 U.S. 213, 76 *776 L.Ed.2d 527, 103 S.Ct. 2317, based, in part, on information supplied by an anonymous informer. (Tisler, 103 Ill.2d at 237-41, 469 N.E.2d at 152-55.) Accordingly, we will apply the Gates approach in determining whether Gauer had probable cause to arrest defendant. This necessarily involves reexamination of the informer's tips which we discussed in finding articulable circumstances to justify a Terry stop.
The Court in Gates began its analysis by noting that probable cause is a fluid concept depending on the assessment of probabilities in particular factual contexts and cannot be reduced usefully to a neat set of legal rules. (Gates, 462 U.S. at 232, 76 L.Ed.2d at 544, 103 S.Ct. at 2329.) Informers' tips, like other evidence available to a police officer, vary greatly in their value and reliability and, as such, should not be assessed by a rigid set of rules. (Gates, 462 U.S. at 232, 76 L.Ed.2d at 544, 103 S.Ct. at 2329.) Rather, a court should look to various indicia of reliability, in their totality, in assessing the overall reliability of an informer's tip. Gates, 462 U.S. at 232-34, 76 L.Ed.2d at 544-45, 103 S.Ct. at 2329-30.
While concluding that an assessment of probable cause should be considered in light of the totality of the circumstances, the Court reiterated the need to consider such factors as the veracity, reliability, and basis of knowledge of the informer, along with any other indicia of reliability in determining the overall reliability of a tip. (Gates, 462 U.S. at 233, 76 L.Ed.2d at 545, 103 S.Ct. at 2329.) Furthermore, the Gates Court emphasized the importance of corroboration of details of an informant's tip by independent police work. (Gates, 462 U.S. at 241-45, 76 L.Ed.2d at 550-52, 103 S.Ct. at 2333-36.) We will, therefore, consider such factors, in their totality, in assessing the reliability of the informer's tip in this case.
 9 Here, the nature of the information provided by the informer contained numerous details indicative of intimate and future actions of third parties ordinarily not easily predicted. (See Gates, 462 U.S. at 245, 76 L.Ed.2d at 552, 103 S.Ct. at 2335-36.) The informer indicated that Randy Crest and someone named "Sid" had contacted him in an attempt to sell copper wire to raise money for defendant's bond, and that the informer had observed about 500 pounds of copper wire coated with black plastic. The informer further stated that Randy Crest was attempting to sell other stolen items stored in the basement of 60 South Spencer Street. The informer also knew that defendant had been arrested and had been bonded out. Additionally, the informer knew about when the wire would be moved from its Spencer Street location. We believe these facts indicate an intimate, *777 possibly firsthand, knowledge of criminal conduct which would not be known or readily ascertainable by the general public. Such intimate knowledge tends to support the reliability of the information and the informant.
We note that defendant argues that the information provided by the informer was not entirely accurate because Randy Crest was not one of the three men observed loading the boxes of wire into the Oldsmobile and because the informer had mentioned a green Ford LTD as a possible vehicle involved, but that no such vehicle was observed at the Spencer Street location. We are unpersuaded by this argument, however, as it is not necessary, in the context of a probable cause determination, that informers be infallible or that their information be perfect. (Gates, 462 U.S. at 245 n. 14, 76 L.Ed.2d at 553 n. 14, 103 S.Ct. 2336 n. 14.) It is only necessary that the overall content of an informer's tip be accurate.
Secondly, we emphasize that Gauer did not base his probable cause to arrest defendant entirely on the information provided by the informer. Rather, Gauer took investigative steps in attempting to corroborate the tip. On several occasions he drove by the 60 South Spencer Street location until he observed an Oldsmobile backed into the driveway of that location. He further observed three men, two who were known to him and one being defendant, loading boxes, at least one of which contained wire, into the trunk. He also saw the men place a wooden stick with electrical wire wrapped around it into the trunk. Additionally, he was aware that, as the informer had indicated, the wire was being moved within a couple of hours of his last call.
After completing his observations of the men loading the trunk, Gauer continued his efforts at corroboration by stopping the vehicle and obtaining consent to search the trunk. At that point, he ascertained that the boxes, two of which he had seen defendant carry and place in the trunk, did in fact contain No. 14 T.H.N.N. electrical wire, the type reported to have been taken in the burglary. It was at this point Gauer arrested defendant for possession of stolen property.
Gauer's investigation, conducted subsequent to the informer's calls, provided a substantial basis for crediting the information supplied by the caller and reduced the likelihood that the information was given recklessly or prevaricatingly. (See Gates, 462 U.S. at 244-45, 76 L.Ed.2d at 552, 103 S.Ct. at 2335.) Thus, Gauer's reliance on the information provided by the caller in developing probable cause to arrest defendant was appropriate under these circumstances.
Gauer was not limited, however, in his assessment of probable *778 cause to the information provided by the telephone tipster. He also knew that numerous boxes and one spool of No. 14 T.H.N.N. electrical wire had been taken in a recent, local burglary. He also observed defendant taking wire from his home and loading it into the Oldsmobile, and he subsequently viewed the boxes of wire in the Oldsmobile which he could readily identify as wire of the same type taken in the burglary.
This additional information, combined with that provided by the informer, clearly gave Gauer probable cause to arrest defendant. Such facts and circumstances need not be sufficient to convict; rather, they need only establish the probability of criminal conduct. (Montgomery, 112 Ill.2d at 525, 494 N.E.2d at 477-78.) It was reasonable based on the facts and circumstances known to Gauer, and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, that defendant was involved in the theft of the wire. The warrantless arrest of defendant at the scene of the stop following the search of the automobile trunk did not violate the fourth amendment.
The judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
LINDBERG and McLAREN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739162 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:51.968079+00 ===

JUSTICE BRESLIN, dissenting: The plaintiff has not produced enough evidence of proximate cause to survive a motion for summary judgment in this matter. The only evidence regarding causation is the testimony of Willie Anderson that he heard an "uh” sound and then heard the decedent’s body hit the ground and the testimony of Deola Anderson that the decedent’s body was found lying on a patch of ice. In Roberts v. Allstate Life Insurance Co. (1993), 243 Ill. App. 3d 658, 612 N.E.2d 103, Roberts, a railroad employee, fell from a train and sustained injuries which resulted in his death. While working on the train with Roberts, a co-employee heard a "thud.” Upon investigating, he found Roberts lying on the ground near the train. The plaintiff argued that since an autopsy had ruled out heart attack or stroke, the only explanation for Roberts’ fall was that he had been struck by the train. The Roberts court held that no theory of causation can be established by circumstantial evidence unless the facts relied upon are of such a nature and so related to each other that it is the only conclusion that can reasonably be drawn from them. It found that there was a complete absence of probative facts to support the plaintiff’s theory of the case and thus summary judgment was correctly granted to the defendant. The case at bar encompasses almost exactly the facts in Roberts. In each case, the only witness merely heard a sound; no one actually witnessed the fall. The bodies of both decedents were found lying near the object believed to have caused the fall. However, in Roberts, the plaintiff was able to rule out heart attack and stroke as possible causes. The plaintiff at bar has not produced any such evidence. Just as the plaintiff in Roberts failed to show that the only probable cause of Roberts’ fall was his being struck by the train, so too, the plaintiff in the case at bar has failed to prove that the only probable cause of the decedent’s fall was the ice upon which his body was found. By relying on a lack of evidence to disprove causation instead of the production of positive evidence to establish it, the majority has shifted the burden of proof from the plaintiff to the defendants. Such a shift is contrary to our entire adversarial system of justice. Therefore, I cannot agree with the majority on the issue of proximate cause and respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9739163 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:52.229459+00 ===

KEITH, Chief Justice.
We granted the state’s petition for review of a decision of the court of appeals granting a new trial to defendant, King Buachee Lee, a leader in the Hmong-American immigrant community in St. Paul convicted of three counts of criminal sexual conduct in the third degree for three separate acts of rape of two different Hmong-American immigrant women. The court of appeals ruled the trial court prejudicially erred (a) in upholding the invocation of the marital privilege to exclude certain evidence the defense claims would have been favorable to defendant, and (b) in allowing the state on rebuttal to present evidence of a similar rape by a different Hmong immigrant for the purpose of countering expert testimony by the president of defendant’s “clan” as to “Hmong ways” which gave the jury the impression that he did not believe complainants were telling the truth. State v. Lee, 480 N.W.2d 668 (Minn.App.1992). After addressing these and other issues raised by defendant, we conclude that defendant received a fair trial and was properly convicted of and sentenced for the crimes in question. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the court of appeals and reinstate the convictions.
Defendant was one of the early Hmong immigrants, coming to the United States in 1976. He is both educated and acculturated. At the time of the events in question he had three jobs, working as a Hmong technical tutor at St. Paul Technical Vocational Institute (TVI), coordinating a program called the Language Project (which provides instruction in English as a second language and assistance to those seeking a high school equivalency degree), and selling real estate. Complainants, “A” and “B,” are uneducated and relatively unaccul-turated. One of them, A, came to the United States in 1981, was 34 years old at the time of trial, is married, and is the mother of seven children. The other, B, is younger, only 22 at the time of trial, and had been in the United States only two years; she is married and is the mother of two children.
*477In the fall of 1989 the two women, who had not previously known each other enrolled in an electronics assembly class at TVI designed to train them and others, mostly Hmong men and women, for jobs in electronics assembly.
In March of 1990, after the two' women had completed the course, Blong Vang, an “Educational Assistant” at TVI, told defendant, who also worked there, that he should call the students and take them to a plant in New Brighton and help them fill out job applications. The group went in a caravan, with defendant, accompanied by A and B, leading the way in his pickup truck. After the interview, defendant had to go to the language class he taught in Minneapolis; therefore, he drove with the women to Minneapolis, then gave the keys to A and told her to drive back with B to TVI and leave the keys with Blong Vang.
According to A, defendant called her at home a couple days later and told her to meet him in the TVI parking lot the following morning because he was going to take her to apply for another job. After A met him and got into his car, defendant drove to Premier Bank in Maplewood and cashed a check. He then drove her to the Emerald Inn, a four-story motel. Because she was unfamiliar with many things in America,’ she did not know it was a motel or what a motel was. It was not until defendant took her into a room and she saw a bed that she became suspicious that she was not going to a job interview. She testified that defendant then attacked her and raped her, threatening to kill her if she screamed or scratched him. Afterwards, he threatened to kill her family if she told anyone. She testified that she did not tell her husband or anyone else because she believed defendant’s threats.
She testified that the following day defendant called Her and told her to meet him in the TVI lot that evening after her language class or he would follow through on his threats against her family. She testified that she got through at 10:00 p.m. and that defendant, telling her he was going to give her his child, entered her ear and proceeded to rape her again. She testified that defendant bruised her on the leg in the process.
This second rape allegedly occurred on a Wednesday night. The following Monday morning B, who does not drive, arrived early for her language class, a class A also was taking. A was sitting in her car in the parking lot and invited B to sit with her and wait for the class to start. While they were waiting, defendant, who apparently knew their schedules, drove up and said he wanted to take them to look for jobs. Because of what had happened, A did not want to ride with defendant so she said that they would follow him. Defendant then drove to a park and stopped. Defendant said that they would have to get in his car to fill out the application papers. When defendant turned on the car stereo and just talked about the weather, A fled, leaving her purse behind, and drove off in her car. B testified that defendant then drove her to what he said was his house (in fact it was) and into the garage. She testified that when she refused to go into the house, defendant attacked her in the car, hitting her on the thighs and shoulders and raping her. Afterwards he said if she told her husband or anyone else he would kill her family. B testified that as she grabbed A’s purse and left, defendant’s wife drove up.
B walked to a neighbor’s house and asked Peter Heywood, who was working on his car, for help in finding a bus. Heywood testified that B was obviously extremely upset but that he did not notice her limping, as she claimed she was in her testimony. Defendant and his wife then drove up and talked with her in Hmong. Heywood testified that she did not seem to want to have anything to do with them. B testified that defendant’s wife offered to give her a ride but that she said no. Heywood and his wife then gave B a ride to the bus stop.
Both women testified that they felt ashamed, soiled, and depressed and did not know what to do. It is not clear from the record exactly what events led to the commencement of the prosecution, but B was the first to tell police in early May she had been raped. Police apparently questioned *478A, and she eventually told them that defendant also had raped her. It appears that before the police learned of any of this the women had told their families and that the elders, following the traditional Hmong way, had tried to have the matter arbitrated, with defendant paying compensation. Defendant refused to pay compensation, and the matter thereafter came to police attention.
The testimony of A corroborated the testimony of B, and the testimony of B corroborated parts of the testimony of A. Additionally, the state was able to produce a number of other items of corroboration: (a) A’s ripped pants were placed in evidence; (b) a doctor who examined B on May 2 testified that he found a large old bruise on B’s left hip that was consistent with her testimony about being thrown violently onto her hip on March 26 (but that it was also possible the bruise was inflicted later); (c) driving around with a police officer, A and B were able to use certain landmarks to help the police locate the bank, the motel and the home; (d) A was able to describe the interior of the motel room before the police entered it; (e) the state was able to establish that defendant cashed a check at the bank at 10:42 a.m. the day that A said they stopped at the bank on the way to the motel; (f) the state was able to establish that defendant registered in the motel using the name of a relative living in Des Moines; and (g) Heywood provided corroborating testimony about B’s demeanor when she asked for help.
Defendant claimed that he had once courted A back in Laos but had forgotten it and that A brought it up when he was driving the two of them to the job interview. (A denied this, and both A and B denied that any conversation whatever occurred during the trip.) Defendant testified that she began calling him at home and at his place of employment. He testified that A told him that she had loved him all the years of separation and insisted on meeting him in the TVI lot the following day. He testified that it was she who suggested they sleep together, saying, “I’d like to have you once, and that would be enough in my life.” Later defendant testified that she verbally forced him to do it. He testified that he said he would do it if that would satisfy her and if she insisted. He testified that she suggested going to his house but that he would not do that because his wife would be there. He denied beating her or threatening her, saying that in his culture “we don’t do that.” He claimed he saw a bruise on her leg and that she said it was a result of her husband beating her.
Defendant testified that the second act of intercourse was again at A’s insistence, that she begged him to do it, saying she wanted his baby. He testified he agreed by saying he would do it but he wanted to get it over with quickly because he had an appointment.
Regarding the incident with B, defendant testified that B asked him to show her his house and that he took her there because his wife had left him that very day. He testified that he wanted to go into the house but that B insisted on staying in the car.
He testified that later the women began harassing him, saying that they wanted him to marry them, taking them as his second and third wives; that they asked for money; that B gave him a cassette recording of her singing Hmong love songs (the tape was played to the jury, but B denied it was her voice and denied giving him the tape). In short, defendant testified that the women were furious at being scorned and were lying when they claimed rape. He testified that B told him that her husband was the one who had beaten her badly, which explained the bruises.
1. The first issue we address is the •issue relating to the trial court’s exclusion of evidence based on the marital privilege. Defendant contends that the effect of the exclusion of this evidence was to deny him his right of compulsory process guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.
One of the witnesses called by the defense was St. Paul Police Officer Gnia Kong, a Hmong-American. It appears that Officer Kong would have testified that he responded to a report of a domestic *479dispute on May 16, 1990, at the hous.e of A and her husband, and that the husband, with tears in his eyes, told him he did not want A in his house any more because he had “just found out” that she “committed adultery.” The trial court excluded the evidence, ruling it inadmissible under the marital privilege. Similarly, again relying on the marital privilege, the trial court refused to allow defendant to call the husbands and refused to allow defendant to present a tape-recorded conversation defendant had with B’s husband in which the husband admitted beating B and asked defendant why he and B were having an affair.
The state concedes that the trial court’s reliance on the marital privilege was error under State v. Leecy, 294 N.W.2d 280 (Minn.1980), but argues that the record on appeal does not justify the conclusion either (a) that the testimony of the husbands was otherwise admissible under the rules relating to foundation and relevance or (b) that any error in the exclusion of the evidence was prejudicial.
The evidence in question apparently was offered in the hope that it would establish (a) that the complainants admitted having affairs with defendant; (b) that the husbands believed their wives had affairs with defendant; or (c) that the husbands hit or beat the wives and caused any bruises observed on them.
What the husbands believed was irrelevant and clearly inadmissible under Minn. R.Evid. 401 and 403, particularly given the high likelihood such evidence would cause unfair prejudice to the state’s case. Similarly, that the husbands may have said to other people they believed their wives had been having affairs was clearly inadmissible.
However, evidence that the wives admitted to their husbands, with third parties present, they had had affairs with defendant would have been admissible without violating the marital privilege if there was such evidence. Similarly, evidence the husbands hit or beat the wives and caused the bruises attributable to defendant would have been admissible if there was such evidence. The court of appeals’ opinion assumes there was such evidence.1 An appellate court, however, can only base a determination that error occurred on the record. The record on appeal fails to establish that the defense had such evidence. Stated differently, defendant did not properly preserve the claimed errors for review by making an offer of proof showing the nature of the evidence excluded so that courts on appeal could determine if it was error to exclude the evidence and whether the error, if any, was prejudicial. The fact the trial court believed the marital privilege was applicable did not preclude the defense from making an adequate record. Defendant could have asked the trial court to make an in camera record of an examination by the court of the husbands. See Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 61, 107 S.Ct. 989, 1003, 94 L.Ed.2d 40 (1987), and Robert Weisberg, Note, Defendant v. Witness: Measuring Confrontation and Compulsory Process Rights Against Statutory Communications Privileges, 30 Stan.L.Rev. 935, 976-78 (1978). Defendant did not do so.
In summary, the record that we have simply does not support defendant’s contention that the trial court committed prejudicial error in excluding defense evidence, and we cannot rely on defendant’s speculation as to what the record might have shown if he had made an adequate offer of proof.
2. The other issue on which the court of appeals based the award of a new trial relates to the trial court’s allowing the state on rebuttal to present evidence of a similar rape by a different Hmong immigrant for the purpose of countering expert testimony by the president of defendant’s “clan” casting doubt on the credibility of the complainants.
*480It is evident from the record that defendant’s witness, Nhia Vang Lee, tried to acquaint the jury with Hmong ways in a manner that would help convince the jury the women were lying. He testified that Hmong men can only date or court unmarried women; that a married Hmong woman cannot see other men; that a Hmong man would not commit adultery with a Hmong woman unless she encouraged him; that if they were caught, the Hmong community would take care of the matter through arbitration; that rape is very rare in Hmong culture; that if it occurred the woman would not be believed unless she were bleeding, battered, wearing torn clothes, etc., and unless she had witnesses; that if a rape occurred without a woman’s encouragement, the Hmong community would make the perpetrator pay and the woman would suffer no losses. On cross-examination he articulated his point even more clearly, stating that “we don’t totally believe” it if a woman claims she refuses and yet was raped, that adultery is presumed unless the woman has taken her body to a Hmong judge or elder immediately after the incident for evidence’s sake, that a rape victim would tell at all costs if raped and would not wait a couple of days, and that in his experience there were no cases where a rape victim waited as long as two or three days to complain.
On rebuttal the state called the two complainants, who denied the testimony of defendant that they had begged him to have sex with them, and also called two experts, one a professor from the University of Washington (whose testimony we are not concerned with directly but whose testimony helped the jury understand the testimony of the two women in the context of Hmong culture and helped establish that Hmong women do not necessarily report rape immediately, as defendant’s expert said) and the other Jean Schleh, an Assistant Ramsey County Attorney. Ms. Schleh testified without objection that there were similarities between the facts in this case and the facts in another prosecution based on the rape of a Hmong married woman by. a different Hmong man that occurred on March 14, 1990. When the prosecutor asked what the similarities were, defense counsel objected. It was then the trial court ruled the defense had “opened the door” by its expert testimony. Witness Schleh proceeded to testify as to the similarities between the two cases, including the fact that the complainant in the other case waited 48 hours before reporting the rape, doing so only after talking with her husband, who consulted his male elders. Defense counsel elicited testimony on cross-examination that there had been a handful of other Hmong rape cases that did not go to trial.
The court of appeals’ opinion presents the issue of the admission of this evidence in a vacuum, leaving out the fact that the trial court based admission on the theory that defense counsel “opened the door” by eliciting the expert testimony suggesting that the two complainants were lying. See State v. Lee, 480 N.W.2d 668, 672-73 (Minn.App.1992).
In State v. Myers, 359 N.W.2d 604, 611 (Minn.1984), a criminal sexual conduct prosecution, the defense sought to discredit the complainant by showing that the complainant’s mother, the “ultimate ‘expert’ with respect to the complainant,” did not believe her for several months. The trial court ruled that that evidence “opened the door” to the admission of opinion testimony by another expert that complainant’s allegations were truthful. We said that as a general rule we would reject such expert testimony but that defendant could not complain about the admission of the evidence, which was merely responsive to defendant’s “expert” testimony regarding complainant’s truthfulness. Id. at 611-12.
In the instant case the clear purpose of the testimony of defendant’s expert was to convey the impression that in the Hmong community the complaints by A and B were not considered credible because Hmong women who have been raped do not act, post-rape, as these complainants did. We agree with the defense that the testimony of Ms. Schleh was highly unusual, but we also believe that under the unique circumstances of this case the trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the testimo*481ny on rebuttal for the purpose of counteracting the arguably misleading testimony of defendant’s witness.
Defendant, of course, could have obtained a cautionary instruction limiting the jury’s consideration of this evidence. However, as we have held in the context of other-crime evidence admitted under Minn. R.Evid. 404(b), it is not plain error for the trial court to fail to give such a cautionary instruction. State v. Frisinger, 484 N.W.2d 27, 31 (Minn.1992) (holding that it was not reversible error for trial court to fail to give cautionary instruction concerning use of other-crime evidence). •
In any event, we are satisfied that even if the trial court erred in admitting the evidence or in not giving a cautionary instruction, any error was not prejudicial because (a) it is unlikely the jury used the evidence for an improper purpose; (b) there were two victims, each corroborating the other in significant ways; (c) there was independent corroboration of much of the complainants’ testimony; (d) the testimony of defendant stretched credulity and arguably helped the state more , than it helped defendant; and (e) the jury obviously was not an impassioned jury, since it acquitted defendant of three more serious charges of criminal sexual conduct in the first degree.2
3. Other issues raised by defendant do not merit detailed discussion.
(a) Defendant claims he was prejudiced by inaccurate translations at the trial. It appears from the record, however, that the trial court was cognizant of the risks of inaccurate translations and took reasonable steps to insure that the translations were fair and accurate. In State v. Mitjans, 408 N.W.2d 824, 832 (Minn.1987), we said:
Translation is an art more than a science, and there is no such thing as a perfect translation * * *. Indeed, in every case there will be room for disagreement among expert translators over some aspects of the translation. Defense counsel, with the assistance of the defendant’s own interpreter, is always free to object contemporaneously if counsel believes that the court-appointed interpreter has significantly misinterpreted or omitted parts of * * * testimony.
Defendant apparently has worked in the capacity of a translator himself. He therefore had every opportunity to bring any problems to the trial court’s attention and to make specific offers of proof as problems arose. The trial court appeared to recognize the potential translation difficulties and adequately addressed the problems when they developed. Defendant has failed to establish any prejudice to himself by the interpreters used at trial.
(b) Defendant has not met his burden of establishing ineffective assistance by trial counsel. He has failed to demonstrate that trial counsel’s choices were anything other than trial strategy. In order toxprevail on an ineffective assistance claim, defendant has to establish not only that counsel’s performance was deficient but that the deficient performance prejudiced him. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984); Gates v. State, 398 N.W.2d 558, 561 (Minn.1987). Defendant has done neither.
(c) Finally, defendant claims the sentence imposed by the trial court was improper. Using the Hernandez method of computing the defendant’s criminal history score, the trial court, without having to point to any aggravating circumstances, *482could have imposed concurrent sentences of 48 (44-52) months for count I (rape of A), a concurrent sentence of 58 (54-62) months for count II (second rape of A) and, (using a zero criminal history score for any offense sentenced consecutively) a consecutive term of 48 (44-52) months for count III (rape of B) — in other words, a maximum aggregate term of 114 (62 + 52) months. The trial court doubled the median presumptive sentence for each of the offenses, obtaining concurrent sentences of 96 months for count I and 116 months for count II, and a consecutive term of 96 months for count III — i.e., an aggregate term of 212 months (116 + 96).
The use of consecutive sentencing was, as we said, proper even without the presence of aggravating circumstances. Under Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines II. F.2. the trial court may use consecutive sentencing “(2) [w]hen the offender is convicted of multiple current felony convictions for crimes against different persons, and when the sentence for the most severe current conviction is executed according to the guidelines.” The only real question is whether aggravating circumstances were present justifying the doubling of the presumptive sentences. The trial court found aggravating circumstances present in defendant’s abuse of his position of trust and authority. In this the case is not unlike State v. Carpenter, 459 N.W.2d 121 (Minn.1990), where we upheld an upward dura-tional departure on the ground the defendant, an adult working in a youth program at a church, abused his position of trust and authority in persuading a teenager not of the age of consent to have sexual intercourse with him. Here the defendant clearly abused his position of authority at TVI and his position as a leader in the Hmong community to maneuver the complainants into situations where he could sexually assault them. Moreover, it appears that defendant’s conduct has had a clearly foreseeable devastating impact on the lives of both complainants. We conclude that aggravating circumstances were present and that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in departing on the basis of those circumstances. State v. Best, 449 N.W.2d 426, 427 (Minn.1989).
In summary, we are satisfied: (a) that defendant received a fair trial; (b) that the jury was justified in crediting, as it obviously did, the testimony of the two complainants that they were raped and in rejecting the testimony of defendant that they consented; and (c) that the trial court did not err in sentencing defendant as it did.
Reversed and convictions reinstated.
. It is, in fact, quite possible that there was no such evidence; post-trial affidavits of the husbands indicate that their testimony would not have helped establish defendant’s claim that the complainants admitted having consensual intercourse with defendant or that the husbands caused any bruises attributable to defendant.
. It also is worth noting, from reading the 12-volume trial transcript, that defendant and his supporters did their best to prevent the case from ever coming to trial and did their best to make things difficult for complainants during the trial (defendant's wife had to be cautioned for harassing a witness; defendant had to be cautioned for his hostile body language during the testimony of one of the complainants; and a courtroom supporter of defendant called one of the complainants a "fuck face” in the Hmong language when the witness was leaving the stand and walking out of the courtroom). The jury was exposed to some of this behavior (e.g., defendant’s inappropriate body language when one of the complainants testified). While not necessarily relevant to the issues raised on appeal, this is arguably relevant in part to the issue of whether there is a reasonable possibility that any error by the trial court in its evidentia-ry rulings had an impact on the verdicts. We, however, base our conclusion that any error was harmless on the factors recited in the main text of this opinion.

=== CASE 9739164 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:52.234747+00 ===

TOMUANOVICH, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Unlike the majority, I believe that the trial court’s erroneous application of the marital privilege and inclusion of the testimony by Jean Schleh constitute reversible error. Thus I would affirm the court of appeals.
Lee alleged that the complainants fabricated their claims that he had raped them. To demonstrate this, he wanted to call the complainants’ husbands; he asserted that the husbands would testify that the wives did not initially claim that they had been raped but had originally said they were having affairs with him. Both husbands have reportedly made statements that they believed their wives were indeed having affairs with Lee. The defense should have been able to question the husbands on this point, specifically as to what the husbands saw or were told by their wives. What the husbands knew regarding their wives relationships with Lee was critical to the defense. Yet the defense was not allowed to question these men at all because of the trial court’s erroneous interpretation of the marital privilege.
Lee also asserted that he did not inflict the bruises on the complainants, but rather that they were caused by the complainants’ husbands. At the very least, he should have been allowed to put the husbands on the stand 'and ask them if they beat their wives and had caused the bruises.
The majority avoids these issues and instead rests its decision on the defendant’s alleged failure to make offers of proof as to them. I believe that a review of the trial transcript makes it clear why the defense *483wanted to call the husbands. Although it is preferable to make a formal offer of proof, defense counsel made it clear that he wanted to use the husband’s testimony to impeach the complainants and to build the defenses of consent and fabrication.
I also believe it was inappropriate to admit Schleh’s testimony regarding a similar but unrelated criminal prosecution. In State v. Blasus, 445 N.W.2d 535 (Minn.1989),- this court held that questioning an expert witness about participation in notorious cases required reversal in a close case because of the danger that the jury might have been prejudiced by the facts of the other cases. I do not find this case distinguishable from Blasus. In this case, as in that case, I believe “the prosecution intended the jury to mentally link [the accused] with [the facts] of other cases.” Id. at 540. Schleh’s testimony clearly could have prejudiced the jury. As the court of appeals noted:
The prejudice resulting from this testimony is even greater than the prejudice found in Blasus because the notorious prosecution taints the defendant himself, not just a defense witness.
Lee, 480 N.W.2d at 673. I agree.
The majority says the admission of the testimony is acceptable because the defendant “opened the door” by claiming that the complainants were lying. Although part of the defense was that the women were not telling the truth, I do not believe this should open the door to highly prejudicial expert testimony regarding other rapes in the Hmong community, especially when this testimony was made by an Assistant Ramsey County Attorney who worked on the charging phase of this case. A defendant does not consent to the admission of prejudicial testimony by mounting a defense.
Once a defendant establishes a constitutional violation, the burden of proof shifts to the state to prove that the violation is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Conklin, 444 N.W.2d 268, 275 (Minn.1989) (citing Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 1§, 23-24, 87 S.Ct. 824, 827-28, 17 L.Ed.2d 705 (1967)). My review of the record indicates that this was a close case; some evidence and some witnesses went each way. The state has not demonstrated on appeal that the jury would have reached the same result if the husbands had been required to testify and Schleh had not been allowed to testify in the fashion she did. Therefore, I must dissent.

=== CASE 9739166 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:52.507881+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Justice.
On August 28, 1991 a jury convieted Jason Buie of Murder,1 Conspiracy to Commit Murder,2 and Arson 3 in the Randolph Cireuit Court.4 On September 25, 1991, Judge Stoh-ler sentenced Mr. Buie to sixty years on the murder count, twenty years on the conspiracy count, and twenty years on the arson count. He also ordered that the sentences be served consecutively for a total term of imprisonment of one hundred years. Mr. Buie now appeals all three convictions.
The Supreme Court of Indiana has exclusive jurisdiction of this direct appeal because the longest single sentence imposed on any count was greater than fifty years.5
Facts
The facts in the record most favorable to sustaining the convictions show that during 1989 Buie and John Sheets had been committing burglaries and fencing the proceeds with Seott McCord. MeCord at some point told Buie that he wanted a woman killed and that he would pay $4000 to have it done. On the evening of January 25, 1990, Buie and Sheets visited McCord. McCord gave Buie a twelve-gauge shot gun, after which Buie and Sheets together drove to Etta Alexander's trailer. Buie entered the trailer and shot Etta Alexander twice. Buie and Sheets returned to McCord's house, where McCord took the gun and paid Buie part of the money owed for the killing. After they had left McCord's house, Buie gave Sheets some of the money.
It was Buie's defense at trial that 1) MceCord had approached him in early January of 1990 with the murder proposal but that he had refused; 2) it was Sheets whom McCord had hired to kill Etta Alexander; and 3) Buie thought that Sheets and he were going to burglarize the trailer and knew nothing about the planned murder until Sheets came into the trailer with a gun and shot Alexander. We shall recite additional facts as necessary.
On appeal, Buie raises issues concerning instructions given and refused, the admission of testimony that he argues is hearsay, and the admission of a statement he gave police after being arrested. He also raises a double jeopardy claim.
I.
This case presents several issues involving the principle that we read jury instructions not in isolation, but as a whole and in reference to one another. Daniel v. State (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 364, 370, reh'g denied, cert. denied, -- U.S. --, 113 S.Ct. 116, 121 L.Ed.2d 72 (1992); Bieghler v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 78, 96; Richey v. State (1981), Ind., 426 N.E.2d 389.
A. -Murder Instructions
In this case, the jury was given two distinct instructions on the elements of Murder (Instructions Nos. 6 and 11). Whether Buie's conviction for Murder need be set *253aside depends on the way in which these instructions are read.
Those instructions read as follows:
Instruction No. 6
To convict the defendant of the erime of Murder as charged in Count I of the information in this case, the State must prove each of the following elements:
That the defendant
1. knowingly or intentionally
2. either
(a) himself killed, or
(b) aided, induced, or caused another person to kill
3. Etta Alexander.
(R. 964.)
Instruction No. 11
If you find that the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant:
1. agreed with Seott McCord and John C. Sheets to commit the crime of Murder
2. with the intent to commit the crime of Murder
8. and that either John C. Sheets or the defendant, Jason R. Buie, killed Etta Alexander in furtherance of such agreement,
you should return a verdict finding the defendant guilty of Murder, a felony, as charged in Count I of the information.
(R. 969.)
We conclude that Instruction No. 11 improperly confuses the elements of Murder with the elements of Conspiracy to Commit Murder. While correctly stating the elements of Conspiracy to Commit Murder,6 Instruction No. 11 did not correctly state the elements of Murder.7
In particular, Instruction No. 11 permitted the jury to find Buie guilty of Murder without finding the requisite mens rea, i.e., without finding beyond a reasonable doubt that Buie knowingly or intentionally either killed the victim or aided Sheets in the killing.8 A mens rea of either knowledge or intent is an essential element constituting the crime of Murder in Indiana. Vance v. State, 620 N.E.2d 687, 690; Abdul-Wadood v. State (1988), Ind., 521 N.E.2d 1299, 1300. Due Process Clause [of the Fourteenth Amendment] protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is charged." In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1072, 25 L.Ed.2d 368 (1970). See also Bellmore v. State (1992), Ind., 602 N.E.2d 111, 126; Smith v. State (1984), Ind., 459 N.E.2d 355, 357. When an instruction relieves the government of its burden of proof with respect to an element of the crime charged,9 that instruction is constitutionally defective. Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. *254510, 521, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 2458, 61 LEd.2d 39 (1979).
Instruction No. 6, however, correctly states the law under our murder statute,10 including the mens rea element. Can, as the State argues, Instruction No. 6 be read in conjunction with Instruction No. 11 so as to provide the missing mens rea element in Instruction No. 11? We conclude that it cannot.
Because each- of the two murder instructions stood alone as a separate instruction to the jury on the elements of murder, there were two independent ways for the jury to find Buie guilty of Murder. From the language of the two murder instructions, a juror might reasonably have understood a guilty verdict to be justified by satisfaction of either all the elements in Instruction No. 6 or all the elements in Instruction No. 11., but not necessarily all the elements contained in both Instructions No. 6 and No. 11. Because Instruction No. 11 lacked the required mens rea element, and because a reasonable juror could have found Buie guilty on the basis of Instruction No. 11 alone, a conviction based on Instruction No. 11 alone would have violated Buie's right not to be deprived of liberty without due process of law. U.S8.Const. amend. XIV, § 1. "'[WJlhen a case is submitted to the jury on alternative theories[,] the unconstitutionality of any of the theories requires that the conviction be set aside.'" Sandstrom, 442 U.S. at 526, 99 S.Ct. at 2460 (quoting Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6, 31-32, 89 S.Ct. 1532, 1545-46, 23 L.Ed.2d 57 (1969)) (citations omitted). The theory that Buie was guilty of Murder because he was guilty of conspiracy was unconstitutional. We therefore reverse Buie's conviction for Murder.
B. Other Instructions
At trial, Buie objected to Instruction No. 16, which read:
Criminal intent, being a mental state of the actor, is not susceptible to direct proof. In deciding the issue of criminal intent, the jury must resort to reasonable inferences from the evidence. In deciding the question of criminal intent, the jury should consider all of the evidence given in the case.
(R. 974.) Buie objected that this instruction was mandatory in nature. (R. 2219.) Buie urges the same argument on appeal: that the instruction was mandatory and invaded the province of the jury by unduly emphasizing certain evidence. As authority for this argument, Buie relies on Tawney v. State (1982), Ind., 439 N.E.2d 582. In Tawney, we held that it was proper for the trial court to have refused an instruction proposed by the defendant. Id. at 587. That instruction would have directed the jury to consider specific factors such as age, training, sex, and education in determining whether a pretrial statement had been made knowingly. Id. There we said, "Instructions that single out particular evidence and exhorts [sic] the jury to receive it with caution or indicate an opinion of credibility or weight invade the province of the jury and should be refused." Id.
Unlike the disapproved instruction in Tawney, Instruction No. 16 did not single out any specific kind or piece of evidence. It did quite the opposite by specifically telling the jury to consider all the evidence. We cannot agree either that the instruction was or would have been understood as mandatory. The use of "must" in the instruction merely recognized certain epistemological limitations inherent in every attempt to divine human intent after the fact and from without. The giving of Instruction No. 16 was not error.
Buie also argues on appeal that it was reversible error for the trial court to refuse his tendered Instruction No. 8. That proposed instruction read:
The informations name several Defendants. In reaching a verdict, however, you must bear in mind that guilt is individual. Your verdict as to the Defendant, Jason R. Buie, must be determined separately with respect to him, solely on the evidence, or lack of evidence, presented against him without regard to the guilt or innocence of anyone else.
(R. 954.). Although the giving of jury instructions is largely within the discretion of *255the trial court, Nichols v. State (1992), Ind., 591 N.E.2d 134, 139, when we review a trial court's refusal of tendered final instruction, we employ a three part analysis. We determine 1) whether the instruction correctly stated the law; 2) whether there is evidence in the record that would have made the tendered instruction relevant to the issues tried; and 3) whether other instructions actually given cover the subject matter of the tendered instruction. Williams v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 1319, 1322.
We agree with Buie that his tendered Instruction No. 3 is at least arguably a correct statement of the law. See Inptan4 Pattern JURY INSTRUCTIONS (CRIMINAL) # 1.28 (2d ed. 1991); Wilson v. State (1988), Ind.App., 525 N.E.2d 619, 624. But even if we go on to assume that there was evidence in the record which made the tendered instruction relevant to an issue tried, other instructions covered the substance of Buie's tendered Instruction No. 8.
In particular, the trial court's Instruction No. 4 read:
The trial only involves the issues formed upon said information between the State of . Indiana and the defendant, Jason R. Buie.
The defendant, Jason R. Buie, has entered pleas of not guilty to the crimes charged in the information.
The burden rests upon the State of Indiana to prove to each of you, beyond a reasonable doubt, every essential element of the crimes charged in the information in this case.
The charges which have been filed are the formal method of bringing a defendant to trial. The fact that charges have been filed, or that the defendant has been arrested and brought to trial, is not to be considered by you as any evidence of guilt.
(R. 962.) This instruction, together with the trial court's correct instructions on the elements of Conspiracy to Commit Murder and Arson adequately conveyed to the jury that culpability is individual. It was not error for the trial court to refuse Buie's tendered Instruction No. 8.
IL.
Buie objected on hearsay grounds to a portion of testimony offered by Pam Res-ler, who was living with McCord at the time of the murder. Resler testified that Buie was at her house on the evening of January 24, 1990. (R. 1587.) The record shows the following exchange between the prosecutor and her:
Q: And would you describe what happened or the circumstances when you saw him on January 24, 1990.
A: He came in. Him and Scott talked for a minute. And Seott said
(R. 1587.) Buie objected that what was to follow would be hearsay. (R. 1587.) The trial court overruled the objection. (R. 1587-88.) Resler continued:
A: Ok. Seott said that they was going to go out to the car and talk and they went out to the car.
(R. 1588.)
Hearsay is an out-of-court statement offered to prove the truth of the facts asserted by the statement. Miller v. State (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 272, 275, MeCord did not testify at Buie's trial; but McCord's statement was not offered to prove the truth of any fact asserted by the statement. That McCord intended to go out to the car to talk with Buie was relevant to the State's conspiracy case regardless of whether Buie and he did in fact talk. It was not error for the trial court to admit Resler's testimony about MceCord's statement.
IIL.
At trial, Buie objected to the introduction into evidence of two drawings that he had made of the crime seene as well as of a videotaped statement that he had given to the police. Before trial, Buie moved to suppress the drawings and the statement on either of two grounds: 1) he did not voluntarily and knowingly waive his Miranda rights; or 2) the police did not serupulously honor his right to cut off questioning as required by Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 96 S.Ct. 321, 46 L.Ed.2d 313 (1975).
*256We stated the law governing the admissibility of confessions in Ortiz v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 549, 356 N.E.2d 1188:
A statement by an accused is not admissible against him if it is not voluntarily given. A statement made under civreum-stances requiring the giving of Miranda warnings is not admissible unless such warnings are given and a knowing and intelligent waiver of the rights involved is made.
In determining whether a statement was voluntarily given, we look to all the cireum-stances surrounding its giving to determine whether it was "induced by any violence, threats, promises, or other improper influence." The same test determines whether a waiver of the Miranda rights has occurred.
Id. at 553, 356 N.BE.2d at 1191 (citations omitted); Accord, Woods v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 772, 787.
In reviewing a motion to suppress, we do not reweigh the evidence, Woods, 547 N.E.2d at 787, but consider all uncontroverted evidence together with the conflicting evidence that supports the trial court's decision. Smith v. State (1989), Ind., 543 N.E.2d 634, 637 (per curiam). In Indiana, the burden is on the State to show beyond a reasonable doubt11 that a defendant knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived his rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966). Smith, 543 N.E.2d at 637.
The uncontroverted evidence and the conflicting evidence that supports the trial court show that on the evening of March 21, 1990, Buie learned from his mother that the police were looking for him. At about 11 p.m. Buie voluntarily appeared at the Delaware County Jail in Muncie, where Deputy Sheriff Michael Gibbs immediately arrested him for murder. Gibbs advised Buie of his Miranda rights, reading from a card. He did not have Buie sign a waiver of those rights. According to Gibbs, Buie did not ask for a lawyer, nor did he refuse to answer questions. Gibbs said at the suppression hearing that Buie told him he wanted to get things straightened out. (R. 409-18). Gibbs booked Buie into the jail. At about 11:80 p.m. Gibbs took Buie to a room in the detectives trailer behind the jail where there were approximately five police officers waiting. Deputy Sheriff Robert Pyle, at the instruction of Delaware County Sheriff Captain Jerry Cook, again read Buie his Miranda rights from a card. He also had Buie read the card himself. At 11:50 p.m. Buie signed two forms: one indicating that he had read and understood his Mi-ramnda rights; and another waiving those rights.
At the suppression hearing, five officers testified that Buie never asked for a lawyer during the two and a half hours that he was in the detectives trailer. They also testified that he did not refuse to answer questions. To repeated questions about the murder of a woman in Randolph County, Buie insisted that he had nothing to say because he did not know anything about it. He claimed that he did not even know where Randolph County was.
Randolph County Sheriff Captain Drew Wright arrived at the detectives trailer at about midnight. He had just returned from New Castle, where John Sheets had given a statement implicating Buie in the murder of Etta Alexander. At the suppression hearing, Wright also testified that Buie did not ask for a lawyer or refuse to answer questions while in the trailer. Wright recalled that he might have mentioned that Sheets had implicated Buie and that he might have told Buie that it would be to his advantage to tell his side of the story. Buie again said that he did not know anything about the murder or even where Randolph County was. Wright asked Buie if he would take a "stress test" in New Castle to determine whether he was telling the truth. Buie said that he would.
At about 2:00 a.m. on March 22nd, Wright and Major Jay Harris drove Buie from Mun-cie to the Randolph County jail They booked him into the jail at about 3:00 a.m.
*257At half past noon on the twenty-second, Wright talked to Buie at the Randolph County jail. Wright testified at the suppression hearing that he read Buie a Miranda warning from a card. Wright asked Buie if he wanted to make a statement. Buie said, "No." Wright then asked Buie if he still wanted to take the stress test. Buie said, "Yes."
At about 2:00 p.m. on the twenty-second, Wright and Harris drove Buie to New Castle, where Henry County Sheriff Sergeant Kim Cronk was to administer the "stress test." During the drive to New Castle, Buie asked if it would help him if he gave them some information about some burglaries. Harris immediately stopped Buie and read him a Miranda warning. Neither the police nor Buie said anything more.
At this point the police had provided Buie with Miranda warnings no less than four times: three times with respect to the murder; once when Buie offered information about past burglaries.
Before beginning the "stress test," Sergeant Cronk read to Buie an Advice of Rights form that included the usual points in a Miranda warning. Buie said that he understood the form and signed a Waiver of Rights form at 2:42 p.m. Cronk also read to Buie a Henry County Sheriff's Department Psychological Stress Evaluator Release form. Buie signed that form and agreed to take the test at 2:57 p.m. Cronk testified that Buie did not ask to speak with a lawyer or indicate that he did not wish to make a statement.
Cronk ran the "stress test" on Buie twice before 5:00 pm. Sometime between 4:30 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., Buie made the first statement admitting knowledge of facts surrounding the murder.
After a break of an hour, during which some food was brought in for Buie, Cronk began interrogating Buie again at about 6:00 p.m. Before running the "stress test" again, Cronk had Buie draw a diagram of the crime scene. Cronk then ran the "stress test" three more times, finishing at about 7:15 p.m. Cronk then made arrangements to take a video-taped statement.
At 8:08 p.m. Cronk began the video-taped statement with Officers Wright and Harris in the room. Cronk again asked Buie if he understood his rights and asked also if Buie was aware that he was being video-taped. Buie said that he was aware of his rights and that he gave his permission to take the videotaped statement. The video-taped statement under questioning lasted approximately forty minutes.
By the end of the interrogation process, Buie had been given Miranda warnings no less than six times. Twice he had signed waiver forms.
The record also shows that Buie was arrested without a warrant on March 21, 1990. He was not provided an initial hearing until March 29, 1990.
A. Voluntariness
Buie's claims that his drawings and statement were not given voluntarily because they were the products of promises of leniency, mental coercion, not allowing him to make a phone call, and delay in taking him to trial for his initial hearing. Although Buie testified that he was promised his release if he agreed to take the "stress test," none of the officers testified that they offered Buie anything in exchange for his taking the test. The evidence is thus at most conflicting. As Buie argues, it is hard to understand why anyone claiming their innocence would agree to take such a test without some promise in return. But while we may view with suspicion the three hour interrogation on the evening of March 21 and into the morning of March 22, when the evidence is merely conflicting, we will not disturb the finding of the trial court. Smith, 548 N.E.2d at 6837.
The general claim of mental coercion is unsupported by the record. The record does not reflect that Buie was threatened, deprived of sleep or food, or otherwise mistreated. Buie appeared voluntarily at the police station at about 11:00 p.m. At about 2:00 am. the first round of interrogation ended. Investigators did not disturb him again until well past noon the next day; and the subsequent interrogation did not begin until 3:00 p.m. There was a break in the afternoon session at 5:00 p.m., during which *258food and drink were brought to Buie. The third session, including the taking of the video-taped statement lasted approximately two and a half hours. Because there is no evidence that Buie was physically abused or subjected to prolonged interrogation sessions, there is no reason on this basis to disturb the trial court's finding that Buie's waiver of his rights under Mirando was knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily made. Colorado v. Spring, 479 U.S. 564, 573-74, 107 S.Ct. 851, 856-57, 93 L.Ed.2d 954 (1987); Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U.S. 157, 169-170, 107 S.Ct. 515, 522-23, 93 L.Ed.2d 473 (1986); Woods, 547 N.E.2d at 787.
Buie claims that he repeatedly requested an opportunity to make a phone call during the first interrogation session. The police officers involved all testified that he did not. Again, the record is conflicting, and we will not disturb the trial court's finding on this basis.
Inprana Cope Ann. § 35-83-7-1 (Burns 1985) provides that "A person arrested without a warrant for a crime shall be faken promptly before a judicial officer...." At an initial hearing the court is required to inform an accused of the nature of the charges against him, the amount and conditions of bail, his right to a speedy trial, his privilege against self-incrimination, and his right to retained or appointed counsel. Anthony v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 602, 604. The purpose of the statute is to avoid unnecessary delay during which investigating officers might solicit confessions or attempt to procure other evidence. Saunders v. State (1990), Ind.App., 562 N.E.2d 729, 743, vacated on other grounds, (1992), Ind., 584 N.E.2d 1087.
A violation of § 85-83-7-1 is not an automatic ground to suppress a statement obtained in the time between a defendant's arrest and his initial hearing. Frith v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 100, 110, 325 N.E.2d 186, 192;12 Corvelli v. State (1991), Ind.App., 579 N.E.2d 466, 474. Delay in bringing a defendant before a judge for an initial hearing is, however, a factor in determining the volun-tariness of a statement. Id. The normal remedy for the violation of a statute such as § 85-88-7-1 is suppression of the evidence obtained during the unreasonable delay, Saunders, 562 N.E.2d at 748; but the burden is on the defendant to show that the delay was both unreasonable and prejudicial. Anthony, 540 N.E.2d at 605.
Although it is true that an entire week passed between the time Buie was arrested and the time he was brought before a judge for an initial hearing, Buie gave his drawings and statement to the police within twenty-four hours of being taken into custody. Buie does not claim that the police threatened to delay his initial hearing in order to obtain his cooperation, nor does he show any other connection between the delay and the giving of his statement. So while in some cases unreasonable delay between arrest and an initial hearing may be a factor in analyzing whether a statement was given voluntarily, it was not a factor here and we need not consider it. Saunders, 562 N.E.2d at 743 (relying on United States v. Studley, 783 F.2d 934 (9th Cir.1986)).
We therefore affirm the trial court's finding that Buie's waiver of his Miranda rights was voluntary.
B. Michigan v. Mosley
Buie asserts that his right to cut off questioning was not serupulously honored as required by Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 96 S.Ct. 321, 46 LEd2d 318 (1975). In Mosley, after advising Mosley of his Mi-ramda rights, a robbery detective questioned him about some robberies. When Mosley said he did not want to answer any more questions about the robberies, the officer ceased questioning him. About two hours later, Mosley was brought to an interview with a homicide detective, who read him his Miranda rights a second time. Mosley said he understood his rights and signed a waiver form. The homicide detective proceeded to ask Mosley questions about a murder. Without asking for a lawyer or indicating that he *259did not wish to answer any more questions, Mosley proceeded to implicate himself in the murder under discussion.
The United States Supreme Court concluded that the facts in Mosley did not present a case
where the police failed to honor a decision of a person in custody to cut off questioning, either by refusing to discontinue the interrogation upon request or by persisting in repeated efforts to wear down his resistance and make him change his mind.... [The police here immediately ceased the interrogation, resumed questioning only after the passage of a significant period of time and the provision of a fresh set of warnings, and restricted the second interrogation to a crime that had not been the subject of the earlier interrogation.13
428 U.S. at 105-106, 96 S.Ct. at 327. In this case, Buie never requested that questioning cease. Indeed, during the first interrogation session following his arrest, he said he did not know anything about the murder and consented to undergo the "stress test."
It is true that at half past noon on the twenty-second, after Officer Wright had read him his rights again and asked if he wanted to make "any statement concerning why he was there," (R. 462), Buie unequivocally said "No." But in light of the consent to the "stress test" that Buie had given Officer Wright personally the evening before, we think it cannot fairly be said that Officer Wright was engaging in repeated efforts to wear down Buie's resistance and get him to change his mind. Officer Wright was, rather, merely attempting to discover if Buie had changed his mind since the evening before about taking the "stress test."
Indeed, the cireumstances of this case show that the police did in fact serupulously honor Buie's right to eut off questioning and to control the cireumstances and timing of any questioning that was to take place. Buie was given Miranda warnings at every turn. Twice he signed waiver forms. When Officer Wright asked Buie if he wanted to make a statement and Buie said "No," Officer Wright made no further attempt to obtain a statement. During the ride to New Castle, when Buie initially offered information about burglaries and then remained silent in response to a Miranda warning, the police did not press him for more information about the burglaries. Buie was warned both before taking the "stress test" and before giving the video-taped statement. Before the "stress test" he signed a waiver form. Lastly, there were significant periods of time between interrogation sessions, with an hour's pause during the afternoon "stress tests."
The trial court properly admitted Buie's drawings and video-taped statement.
IV.
Finally, Buie claims on appeal that because the State charged the intentional killing of Etta Alexander as the overt act in support of the conspiracy charge, his convie-tions and sentences for both Murder and Conspiracy to Commit Murder violated the Double Jeopardy Clauses of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, § 14 of the Indiana Constitution. Because we are reversing Buie's murder conviction, we address the issue as whether the State may retry Buie for Murder.
The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that no person shall "be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb." U.S. Const. amend. V. The Fifth Amendment to the federal constitution was made applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment in Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784, 89 S.Ct. 2056, 23 L.Ed.2d 707 (1969).
On the same day that it decided Benton, the United States Supreme Court interpreted the Double Jeopardy Clause to protect people from three things: a second prosecution for the same offense after an acquittal; a second prosecution for the same offense after a conviction; and multiple punishments *260for the same offense. North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717, 89 S.Ct. 2072, 2076, 23 LEd.2d 656 (1969). The question we need to ask in view of this case's particular posture is whether a retrial of Buie would be a second prosecution for the same offense after a conviction.
We must first analyze whether Murder and Conspiracy to Commit Murder are the "same offence." In analyzing whether two offenses are the same, we first apply the test announced in Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 52 S.Ct. 180, 76 L.Ed. 306 (1982): "Where the same act or transaction constitutes a violation of two distinet statutory provisions, the test to be applied to determine whether there are two offenses or only one is whether each provision requires proof of an additional fact which the other does not." Id. at 304, 52 S.Ct. at 182; Derado v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 181, 183; Elmore v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 532, 534, 382 N.E.2d 893, 895.
Our cases have said repeatedly that it does not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment or Article I, § 14 of the Indiana Constitution to charge and con-viet a person for both a substantive offense and a conspiracy to commit the substantive offense. E.g., Derado v. State, 622 N.E.2d at 184; Witte v. State (1990), Ind., 550 N.E.2d 68, 72; Hammers v. State (1987), Ind., 502 N.E.2d 1339, 1343; Taylor v. State (1956), 235 Ind. 126, 131 N.E.2d 297, 298.14 This is no less true for Murder and Conspiracy to Commit Murder than for any other substantive offense. Witte, 550 N.E.2d at 72.
A comparison of Indiana's murder statute with its conspiracy statute shows why, on their face, the two offenses are not the same under Blockburger. The offense of Murder requires proof that the defendant either knowingly or intentionally killed a human being; 15 the offense of Conspiracy requires proof of an agreement to commit a felony as well as proof of some overt act in furtherance of the agreement.16 Murder, then, requires proof of a killing, but not of an agreement. Chinn v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1000, 1003. Conspiracy, however, requires proof of an agreement, but not necessarily of a killing. Smith v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1105, 1124.
Although Murder and Conspiracy to Commit Murder as defined by statute are not the same offense, double jeopardy analysis does not end with an evaluation of the statutory provisions alone. We must look at the manner in which the offenses were actually charged. Derado, 622 N.E.2d at 183; Tawney, 439 N.E.2d at 588. If from the manner in which the offenses were actually charged it appears that one offense becomes a "species of lesser-included offense," then double jeopardy principles bar conviction for both offenses. United States v. Dixon, -- U.S. , --, 113 S.Ct. 2849, 2857, 125 L.Ed.2d 556 (1993) (prosecution for criminal contempt based on violation of a criminal law incorporated into a court order barred subsequent prosecution for the eriminal offense); Illinois v. Vitale, 447 U.S. 410, 420, 100 S.Ct. 2260, 2267, 65 L.Ed.2d 228 (1980) (subsequent prosecution for involuntary manslaughter after conviction for failing to reduce speed barred by Double Jeopardy Clause if "a failure to slow" was a necessary element of manslaughter by automobile under state law); Harris v. Oklahoma, 433 U.S. 682, 682, 97 S.Ct. 2912, 2912, 53 L.Ed.2d 1054 (1977) (prosecution for robbery barred by Double Jeopardy Clause when the defendant had already been convicted of felony murder based on the same robbery); Derado, 622 N.E.2d at 184 (convictions for both dealing in cocaine and conspiracy to deal in narcotics barred by Double Jeopardy Clause where "Itlhe State was required to prove no facts to obtain the conviction for dealing in cocaine in addition to those facts that it was required to *261prove to obtain the conviction for conspiracy.") 17
In double jeopardy analysis, crimes cannot be abstracted from their separate elements. Dixon, - U.S. at --, 113 S.Ct. at 2857; Vitale, 447 U.S. at 420-21, 100 S.Ct. at 2267. Therefore, where the overt act element of a conspiracy charge is the underlying offense, convictions and sentences for both would constitute multiple punishments for the same offense, which both the federal and Indiana constitutions forbid. North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717, 89 S.Ct. 2072, 2076, 23 L.Ed.2d 656 (1969); Elmore, 269 Ind. at 535, 382 N.E.2d at 895.18 Similarly, where the overt act element of a conspiracy charge is the underlying offense, and where the State has obtained a conviction for Conspiracy based on the commission of the underlying offense as the overt act, the State may not subsequently pursue a prosecution for the underlying offense. That would constitute a second prosecution for the same offense after a conviction.
-In Count II of the information alleging conspiracy to commit murder, the State charged that Buie, Sheets, and McCord agreed to kill Alexander, and that "Jason R. Buie and John Sheets did perform an overt act, to wit: knowingly and intentionally kill Etta Alexander." (R. 31.) It is apparent that to obtain Buie's conviction for Conspiracy to Commit Murder, the State proved that Buie intentionally killed Etta Alexander.
This case presents a situation analogous to that in Harris v. Oklahoma, 433 U.S. 682, 97 S.Ct. 2912. Harris involved a conviction for felony murder on the basis of a killing that occurred during a robbery. Once Oklahoma had used the robbery to obtain the felony murder conviction, the Double Jeopardy Clause barred a subsequent prosecution of Harris for the robbery. Here, the State proved an agreement and a killing to obtain a conspiracy conviction. It may not now, therefore, prosecute Buie again for the same killing. -
Conclusion
We reverse Buie's conviction for Murder. We affirm the convictions for Conspiracy to Commit Murder and Arson.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Inp.Cope Ann. § 35-42-1-1 (Burns Supp.1993).
. Inp.Cope Ann. § 35-41-5-2 (Burns 1985).
. Inp.Cope Ann § 35-43-1-1 (Burns 1985).
. This was Buie's second trial The first trial, which lasted eight days, ended in a mistrial on March 13, 1991 because of a deadlocked jury.
. Imp. Const. art. VII, § 4; Ind.Appellate Rule 4(A)(7); Wiseman v. State (1988), Ind., 521 N.E.2d 942, 943.
. Inp.Cope Aww. § 35-41-5-2 (Burns 1985) provides in relevant part:
(a) A person conspires to commit a felony when, with intent to commit the felony, he agrees with another person to commit the felony.... (b) The state must allege and prove that either the person or the person with whom he agreed performed an overt act in furtherance of the agreement.
. Inp.Cope Ann § 35-42-1i-1(1) (Burns Supp. 1993) provides in relevant part: "A person who: knowingly or intentionally kills another human being ... commits murder, a felony."
. Proof of intent to commit the felony at the time of agreement in a conspiracy charge under Inp. Cope § 35-41-5-2 cannot substitute for proof of the intent or knowledge of the defendant at the time of the killing. Proof that a defendant intended to commit murder at the time of agreement may, of course, be evidence of intent at the time of the killing. See Vance v. State (1993), Ind., 620 N.E.2d 687, 690 ("[WJhile the crime of murder does require specific intent to kill, the crime of felony murder, for which appellant herein was convicted, does not, requiring instead proof only of intent to commit the underlying felony....") (citations omitted); Jones v. State (1988), Ind., 523 NE.2d 750, 752 (the intent necessary to commit murder may be inferred from the intentional use of a deadly weapon).
. The complete removal of an element from the case is the most extreme case of the prosecution being relieved of its burden of proof on an issue to be tried.
. See note 7 supra.
. In federal prosecutions, the government need only prove by a preponderance of the evidence that a defendant knowingly and voluntarily waived his Miranda rights. Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298, 105 S.Ct. 1285, 84 L.Ed.2d 222 (1985); Lego v. Twomey, 404 U.S. 477, 92 S.Ct. 619, 30 L.Ed.2d 618 (1972).
. We decided Frith under Inp.Cone 1971, § 35-4-1-1, the predecessor statute to the current § 35-33-7-1.
. The restriction of the second interrogation to a subject other than the robberies, which had been the subject of the first interrogation, is important in Mosley because Mosley specifically refused to answer any more questions about the robberies. 423 U.S. at 105 n. 11, 96 S.Ct. at 327 n. 11.
. See also United States v. Felix, - U.S. --, --, 112 S.Ct 1377, 1384, 118 L.Ed.2d 25 (1992) (" '[Tlhe same overt acts charged in a conspiracy count may also be charged and proved and proved as substantive offenses, for the agreement to do the act is distinct from the act itself'" (Quoting United States v. Bayer, 331 U.S. 532, 542, 67 S.Ct. 1394, 1399, 91 LEd. 1654 (1947) (citations. omitted)).
. See note 7 supra.
. See note 6 supra.
. See also Wethington v. State (1990), Ind., 560 N.E.2d 496, 506 (separate sentences for robbery and criminal confinement barred by double jeopardy when the force used to effectuate taking of robbery is coextensive with force used to confine); Hall v. State (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 433, 436 (conviction for both reckless homicide and child neglect barred by double jeopardy where to obtain convictions on either count the State had only to prove the same pattern of neglect); Tawney (conviction for both robbery and battery barred by double jeopardy where stabbing constituted both the battery and the element of force used to take the money in the robbery charge).
. Because in Indiana the overt act requirement is an element of conspiracy, the flat statement in Felix v. United States, - U.S. --, --, 112 S.Ct. 1377, 1384, 118 L.Ed.2d 25 (1992) that a substantive crime and a conspiracy to commit that crime are not the same offence does not control this case. In the federal drug conspiracy context in which Felix was decided, overt acts are merely evidence of conspiracy. Felix, -- U.S. at --, 112 S.Ct. at 1386 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in result). Cf. Boles v. State (1992), Ind.App., 595 N.E.2d 272, 275 (Sullivan, J., concurring) ("[The overt acts involved in a conspiracy charge in Indiana are not merely a matter of evidence. The overt act or acts are an essential element of the crime itself. Therefore, double jeopardy implications are present when the only overt act alleged in the conspiracy charge has been the subject of a previous conviction or acquittal.").

=== CASE 9739167 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:52.513411+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion in their holding that the giving of Instruction Number 11 is reversible error. The basis for appellant's objection at trial was that the instruction was misleading and confusing in that it intermingled the elements of conspiracy to commit murder with the elements necessary to prove the offense of murder.
Assuming that the instruction was erroneous, the instructions, when taken as a whole, properly instruct the jury. We have held that the manner of instructing a jury les within the sound discretion of the trial court. Concepcion v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d *262784. Jury instructions are to be read together as a whole and not as single units. Hurt v. State (1991), Ind., 570 N.E.2d 16.
The trial court gave detailed and separate instructions regarding the elements of murder and conspiracy. The trial court also instructed the jury to consider the instructions as a whole. Under the cireumstances, it is unrealistic to believe the jury was misled by the language of Instruction 11.
I would affirm the trial court in all respects.

=== CASE 9739168 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:55.881717+00 ===

*479OPINION OF THE COURT
Levine, J.
Defendant was indicted and convicted after trial of the sale of two ounces, 33 grains of cocaine (a class A-I felony) to an undercover police officer on August 31, 1988. The trial testimony established that, in a known drug location, defendant sold the undercover officer 214 vials of cocaine for $2,000 and promised to "take care of’ him "the next time” he came. At the time of the sale she was 17 years old. Conviction of a class A-I felony carries a mandatory indeterminate prison sentence, the minimum of which is not less than 15 years and not more than 25 years, the maximum of which is life imprisonment (Penal Law § 70.00 [2] [a]; [3] [a] [i]). The trial court, however, determined that in defendant’s case, imposing even the minimum mandatory sentence of 15 years to life would constitute cruel and unusual punishment (US Const 8th Amend; NY Const, art I, § 5). The court, therefore, imposed an indeterminate sentence of eight years to life imprisonment. A divided Appellate Division affirmed (190 AD2d 162), the dissenters voting to reverse the sentence and remand the case to Supreme Court for resentencing in compliance with the Penal Law’s mandatory sentencing provisions for an A-I felony conviction. A Justice of the Appellate Division granted the People’s application for leave to appeal, and we now reverse.
In People v Broadie (37 NY2d 100, cert denied 423 US 950), this Court in an opinion by Chief Judge Breitel, albeit not without doubts expressed regarding the wisdom of the severity of the sentencing scheme for drug offenses enacted in 1973 (L 1973, ohs 276-278), upheld the facial and as applied validity of the mandatory maximum life imprisonment sentence and various mandatory minimum prison sentences in that legislation as against challenges under the cruel and unusual punishment prohibitions of the State and Federal Constitutions. In Broadie, this Court adopted the principle that a sentence may constitute cruel and unusual punishment by being " 'cruelly’ excessive, that is, grossly disproportionate to the crime for which [it is] exacted” (37 NY2d, at 125 [citations omitted]; see also, id., at 111). A majority of the Justices of the United States Supreme Court, in Harmelin v Michigan (501 US 957), reaffirmed the same principle, that gross disproportionality of a sentence of imprisonment violates the Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause (id., 501 US, at 997-998 [Kennedy, J., concurring with O’Connor *480and Souter, JJ.]; id., 501 US, at 1013-1016 [White, J., dissenting with Blackmun and Stevens, JJ.]; see also, Solem v Helm, 463 US 277, 289-290; Weems v United States, 217 US 349, 377).
In assessing the proportionality of the mandatory sentences in People v Broadie, our analysis focused on the following factors: (1) the gravity of the offense, primarily in terms of the harm it causes society, but also in comparison with punishments imposed for other crimes in this State as well as with punishments for the same or similar crimes in other jurisdictions (supra, at 112, 115); and (2) "the character of the offender and the gravity of the threat he [or she] poses to society” (id., at 113; see also, Solem v Helm, 463 US, at 290-293, supra).
In People v Broadie, we found that "[m]easured thus by the harm it inflicts upon the addict, and, through him, upon society as a whole, drug dealing in its present epidemic proportions is a grave offense of high rank” (supra, at 113 [emphasis supplied]). Although the statutory sentencing scheme at the time equated the punishment level for drug dealing with that for the most heinous crimes of violence defined in the Penal Law, this Court found such severity not to be unreasonable because "drug-related crimes may be much more prevalent, that is, have a higher and rising incidence, than other crimes comparably punished or equally grave crimes not as severely punished, requiring greater isolation and deterrence” (id., at 116).
Turning in our constitutional analysis to the character of the eight defendants whose sentences were reviewed in People v Broadie, the Court recognized that, although not all of the defendants were "hardened” criminals, each was convicted of at least "street” sales or possession of large amounts of narcotics and none was what might be described as merely an "accidental” offender; therefore, we concluded that each could reasonably be considered a serious threat to society meriting severe punishment (id., at 113-114, 117). Accordingly, in Broadie, we found none of the sentences was grossly disproportionate to the crime committed, and concluded that the mandatory imprisonment provisions for drug-related crimes withstood both the facial and as applied challenges to their constitutionality. We nonetheless cautioned that, in the future, the mandatory drug sentencing laws might present "some rare *481case on its particular facts [where it could] be found that the statutes have been unconstitutionally applied” (id., at 119).
In People v Jones (39 NY2d 694), this Court was again called upon to determine whether the imposition of the mandatory maximum sentence of life imprisonment for a drug-related offense violated the constitutional prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments. The defendant, a "millhand” in a large-scale heroin packaging and distribution operation, was arrested in a January 1970 raid and charged with joint possession (with 14 others) of over four pounds of heroin seized in the raid. She was offered (as were the other millhands) an opportunity to plead guilty to a lesser offense with a one-to-three-year sentence. She declined the offer and was found guilty after trial. A majority of this Court ruled that the mandatory sentence she received did not constitute cruel and unusual punishment. In so ruling, the majority rejected the dissent’s conclusion that the marked discrepancy between her sentence and the sentence meted out to the other millhands, who had accepted the prosecution’s plea proposal, constituted cruel and unusual punishment because it presented such a gross violation of the principle of equality of treatment for equally culpable offenders and had the effect of penalizing the defendant for exercising her right to a trial.
We last measured mandatory sentences for drug selling and possession against the constitutional proscriptions of cruel and unusual punishments in People v Donovan (59 NY2d 834, affg 89 AD2d 968). As disclosed in the dissenting memorandum of Presiding Justice Milton Mollen at the Appellate Division (89 AD2d, at 968-971, supra), the defendant was convicted of first degree criminal sale and first degree criminal possession of a controlled substance, in connection with the sale of just under four ounces of cocaine by her boyfriend, a narcotics dealer, to an undercover officer. Defendant’s involvement in the transaction was in procuring the drugs, apparently without personal profit, at her boyfriend’s behest (the presentence report stated that the offense was "out of character” for her). She rejected an offer of a one-to-three-year sentence in exchange for a plea to a lesser offense. Her conviction after trial resulted in the imposition of the minimum mandatory sentence, 15 years to life imprisonment, while her boyfriend, the principal actor in the transaction, received a sentence of lifetime probation for subsequently cooperating with the authorities. We again rejected the defendant’s cruel and unusual punishment claim (People v Donovan, 59 NY2d, at 836, supra).
*482Considered in light of the analysis developed in our own and Supreme Court precedents, we must conclude that the constitutional prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments were not transgressed on the record and facts of this case. Manifestly, the Legislature may constitutionally define criminal punishments without giving the courts any sentencing discretion (Chapman v United States, 500 US 453, 466-467). Even the most severe mandatory sentences may be fixed for sale or even possession of quantities of cocaine so large as to support the inference that they were held for purposes of sale, because of the pernicious effect of drug trafficking on society (Harmelin v Michigan, 501 US 957, 1001-1003, supra). Thus, in Harmelin, the majority of the Supreme Court upheld a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment without parole for possession of over 650 grams of cocaine. Indeed, the most salient factor cited by the dissenting Justices in voting to overturn the mandated sentence was the absence of any possibility of parole for the lifetime of the offender, a result the dissenters found only permissible if the conduct was "so atrocious that society’s interest in deterrence and retribution wholly outweighs” all other penological considerations of individualized treatment in every case (id., 501 US, at 1028 [Stevens, J., dissenting]; see, 501 US, at 1022-1023 [White, J., dissenting]). By contrast, the sentence mandated here would authorize parole after service of the minimum term of imprisonment.
Considering the first element of the Broadie cruel and unusual punishments analysis, time has not eroded this Court’s conclusion in Broadie that the selling of narcotic drugs represents a grave offense of the first magnitude. Neither has it altered our conclusion on the second element, that, in comparison to the sanctions for other crimes under our Penal Law and for the same or similar drug offenses in other jurisdictions, the mandatory sentences for drug offenses are "relatively severe, but not irrationally so, given the epidemic dimensions of the problem” (People v Broadie, 37 NY2d 100, 117, supra).
To complete our analysis to determine whether defendant established the gross disproportionality of her punishment, we examine the extent of her culpability in this cocaine sale and the threat she poses to society (see, id., at 113; Solem v Helm, 463 US 277, 293, supra). The undisputed evidence in this regard is not overly favorable to defendant. The undercover *483officer testified at the trial without contradiction that defendant made a direct sale to him, filling his order for 200 vials of cocaine for a price of $2,000 and then knowledgeably haggled with him over the amount of the customary bonus of additional vials, insisting on giving him only 14 over his claim of entitlement to 20 extra vials, but promising to "take care of’ him personally "the next time” he came. Her conduct hardly bore the earmark of an "accidental” offender (People v Broadie, supra, at 113). As the Trial Judge noted at sentencing, defendant "understood fully well what she was involved in”. It is noteworthy in this respect that in Broadie, Chief Judge Breitel expressly held that "[n]one of the present cases involve what are often called 'accidental’ offenders * * * [because each of the eight defendants] was convicted of at least 'street’ sales of heroin or cocaine, or possession of a large amount of narcotics” (id., at 113). Undeniably here, the sale of 214 vials of cocaine for $2,000 was, at the very least, at one higher level of culpability (and risk to society) than the street sales in Broadie. Moreover, defendant’s election to personally sell a requested significant quantity of drugs at the wholesale level is to be completely contrasted with the conduct of the defendant in People v Jones (39 NY2d 694, supra). In Jones, the defendant was a "millhand” at the very lowest level of the heirarchy of the illegal drug enterprise, packaging the drugs. She was convicted of joint constructive possession of the four pounds of heroin found by the police at the premises during the raid. As a minor functionary in the enterprise, obviously the defendant in Jones had no actual control over the quantity of drugs that happened to be on the premises at any one time and, in that sense, Chief Judge Breitel in dissent could well characterize her as "perhaps an accidental” (id., at 701) offender as to the commission of a level of criminal possession of a dangerous drug dependent upon the quantity of the drugs possessed. In this case, despite the Trial Judge’s expressed certainty, based upon the evidence at trial, that defendant was in fact guilty as charged, defendant never accepted any personal responsibility for her criminal behavior nor expressed any remorse.
Moreover, we find no record support in the trial transcript or the presentence report of even a claim by defendant, much less evidence, that defendant’s criminal involvement was due to the domination of or coercion by her uncle, the principal in the drug operation in which defendant’s sale took place. Indeed, it was the conclusion of the probation officer who *484performed the presentence investigation that defendant’s involvement in the offense was motivated by a desire "to obtain personal profit”. That conclusion was derived in part from the officer’s interview with defendant, which was a good "vantage point to draw inferences, characterizations and interpretations from the record” (dissenting opn, at 491), particularly since defendant did not testify at the trial.
Nor does the punishment her uncle received establish gross disproportionality. He was indicted, inter alla, for five criminal sales of a controlled substance in the first degree, and pleaded guilty to one such sale in a plea bargain under which he was sentenced to 15 years to life imprisonment. While undoubtedly his far greater culpability merited substantially more punishment than defendant received, the comparative leniency in treatment of defendant’s uncle is significantly less than that objected to in People v Jones (supra) and People v Donovan (supra). And, even in those cases, the disparity in punishment was not sufficient to establish gross disproportionality.
Although defendant’s presentence report discloses mitigating factors in her family history, they do not demonstrate such an exceptional level of childhood deprivation that would significantly excuse her behavior. Defendant informed the probation officer who conducted the presentence investigation that "she received adequate supervision and that the quality of the home was decent” during most of her formative years when she was raised by a grandmother in Jamaica, British West Indies.
All of the foregoing factors militate against finding that defendant is the rare case we envisaged in Broadie that, on its particular facts, would present an exception to the general facial constitutionality of the Penal Law’s mandatory sentencing provisions for drug-related offenses. Indeed, based on our assessment of the gravity of the offense she committed and her personal culpability, we could only find defendant’s mandated sentence cruel and unusual punishment by concluding that the constitutional prohibitions prevented mandatory imprisonment for all offenders of defendant’s age. Yet the Legislature has consciously extended the A-I felony mandatory mínimums to youths in defendant’s age category (see, CPL 720.10 [2] [a]; see also, CPL 220.10 [5]; Schwartz, Preface to Chart V, NY Sentencing Charts 1994 Edition, Pamphlet to McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 39, Penal Law, at 18-19). *485The prevalence of the employment of adolescents to market illegal drugs is now well recognized (see, Letwin, Report From, the Front Line: The Bennett Plan, Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and the Legalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L Rev 795, 813 [1990] [see, sources cited therein]). Thus, the Legislature could rationally determine that teenage drug dealers pose a serious threat to society. Clearly, defendant has not met her burden of showing any objective basis for us to conclude that contemporary standards of decency prevent imposing a sentence of 15 years to life imprisonment upon an older adolescent for a direct volitional sale of more than two ounces of cocaine for $2,000 (see, Stanford v Kentucky, 492 US 361, 380-382 [O’Connor, J., concurring], 383-384 [Brennan, J., dissenting]; Trop v Dulles, 356 US 86, 100-101; see also, Hutto v Davis, 454 US 370; Terrebonne v Butler, 848 F2d 500, cert denied 489 US 1020).
Before concluding this opinion, it is appropriate to address the principal arguments of the dissent urging affirmance. The dissent takes us to task for failing to set forth cruel and unusual punishments criteria for the guidance of sentencing and intermediate appellate courts, and for "overturning the opposite views of both prior courts, effectively rendering] a first instance judgment that an Eighth Amendment transgression and the Broadie rare case exception are not present.” (Dissenting opn, at 495.)
In reviewing the as applied constitutionality of the sentencing statute in this case, we considered the gravity of defendant’s crime, that is, the harm it causes society and its comparative seriousness in light of the punishments for other State crimes and for the same offense in other jurisdictions, as well as in comparison to the punishment of the other charged participant. We also reviewed defendant’s personal history and her role in the commission of this criminal offense, and found no strongly mitigating factors, other than her youth, which we determined was alone insufficient to establish gross disproportionality for constitutional purposes.
The foregoing factors were essentially those set forth by Chief Judge Breitel in People v Broadie (37 NY2d 100, 113, supra). They were also the same factors applied in Solem v Helm (463 US 277, 290-293, supra), the most recent case in which the Supreme Court struck down a mandatory sentencing law. And they were the factors applied in the proportionality analysis of the dissenters in Harmelin v Michigan (501 *486US 957, 1018-1027, supra [White, J., dissenting]), the most recent case in which the Supreme Court reviewed (and then uphéld) a mandatory sentencing scheme.
The Broadie-Solem analysis is designed to furnish an objective, principled basis for review of sentencing claimed to violate the cruel and unusual punishments clauses (see, Harmelin v Michigan, 501 US, at 1018-1021, supra [White, J., dissenting]). For the same reason, in Broadie, Chief Judge Breitel adopted that analysis in place of "a subjective evaluation which looks to the extent to which the conscience of the court is shocked by punishments imposed” (37 NY2d, at 111, supra [emphasis supplied]).
The Broadie-Solem criteria pay due deference to the preeminent role of the Legislature in choosing penological objectives. In Broadie, despite expressing policy misgivings, Chief Judge Breitel acknowledged that the Legislature could validly adopt deterrence — through wide severity of punishment — as the supervening objective in fashioning a statutory framework for drug crime control:
"Thus, to achieve the deterrence, so far seemingly elusive, the would-be drug trafficker had to be put on notice that, should he be caught, his fate was sealed regardless of his position in the heirarchy of distribution and regardless of the quantity of drugs in which he dealt” (id., at 115).
The dissent’s suggested alternative mode of cruel and unusual punishments review dispenses with comparative proportionality analysis as a principal means of insuring objectivity in deciding the constitutionality of sentences and restricting discretionary adjudication in this area. The dissent appears to limit the role of comparative proportionality assessment to determining "whether a sentence less than the most severe mandatory variety would deprecate the seriousness of the particular crime in general, in relation to other participants charged and uncharged, and in relation to other serious crimes of equal classification rank.” (Dissenting opn, at 497.) Apart from this nod to objective standards, the dissent’s approach would have the trial court in each case consider and weigh a lengthy list of particularized factors in a "nuanced” manner (dissenting opn, at 499) typically exercised by sentencing courts under individualized, indeterminate statutory sentencing regimes.
Undoubtedly, the dissent’s approach would enlarge the dis*487cretion of trial courts to determine that a mandated sentence in a given case was cruel and unusual punishment, based upon the sentencing court’s findings on the various particularized factors and its weighing of those factors. The dissent’s awareness of this likely effect is demonstrated in the candid statement that the suggested approach "focuses on the distribution of the power of sentencing adjudication” (dissenting opn, at 499). It, thus, impliedly rejects the proposition that indeterminate sentencing is not a constitutional imperative (see, Chapman v United States, 500 US 453, supra).
The weakening effect on the presumption of constitutionality of the dissent’s heavily discretionary system of determining challenges to the as applied constitutionality of the drug offense sentencing scheme will be far greater than is envisaged in the dissenting opinion. Inevitably, a system emphasizing the sentencing court’s findings and weighing of distinctive factors would lessen this Court’s role as the final, paramount arbiter of State constitutional issues. The dissenters’ readily understandable antipathy to the so-called "Rockefeller Drug Laws” should not becloud recognition that adoption of their proposed method of review would drastically change the role of this Court on challenges to the as applied constitutionality of legislation in general and even more radically alter the sound, principled cruel and unusual punishments jurisprudence which this Court has heretofore developed.
That is not to say that we disagree with the strongly held convictions of our dissenting colleagues and of the majority at the Appellate Division in the instant case (190 AD2d, at 166-167, supra) that the harsh mandatory treatment of drug offenders embodied in the 1973 legislation has failed to deter drug trafficking or control the epidemic of drug abuse in society, and has resulted in the incarceration of many offenders whose crimes arose out of their own addiction and for whom the cost of imprisonment would have been better spent on treatment and rehabilitation. The experience of the last two decades has clearly vindicated the doubts Chief Judge Breitel expressed in People v Broadie on the wisdom of the draconian drug sentencing laws. Nonetheless, even if the legislative choice was unwise, the central holding of Broadie still stands, namely, that the Legislature was not irrational in its view of the gravity of the offenses, the danger posed by the offenders and the penological purposes to be served and, therefore, the punishment imposed for defendant’s crime here *488"in the present state of [our] knowledge [was] not grossly disproportionate or cruel and unusual in the constitutional sense” (People v Broadie, supra, at 118-119). Reform of the penological policy choices in combatting the drug scourge lies with the legislative, not the judicial, branch (see, Rummel v Estelle, 445 US 263, 283-284; id., at 282-284, nn 27-29; People v Broadie, supra, at 117 ["That courts may believe that the Legislature is mistaken, does not lessen the legislative power”]).
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, and the matter remitted to Supreme Court, New York County, for resentencing in accordance with this opinion.

=== CASE 9739169 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:55.889997+00 ===

Bellacosa, J.
(dissenting). Judge Ciparick and I respectfully dissent and vote to affirm the order of the Appellate Division which upheld the sentence imposed on defendant by the trial court. By reversing the sentence, the Court of Appeals today compels the resentence of defendant to a mandatory minimum of 15 years to life imprisonment. The Court rules that this more severe sentence is required to effectuate the will of the Legislature, expressed more than 20 years ago as part of the frustratingly decried, yet intractably operative, Rockefeller Drug Sentencing Laws.
We agree with the courts below that this new fate visited upon Angela Thompson — a near doubling of her minimum sentence from 8 years to 15 years — is not jurisprudentially required. Indeed, when this Court facially upheld the constitutionality of this draconian sentencing scheme, it expressed the qualification that wise adjudication on an as-applied basis should deal with cases that crossed the line of cruel and unusual punishment, denominated genetically at that time as rare exceptions (see, People v Broadie [and seven other discrete cases], 37 NY2d 100, 119, cert denied 423 US 950; see also, People v Jones, 39 NY2d 694, 698 [Breitel, Ch. J., dissenting]; US Const 8th Amend; NY Const, art I, § 5).
The only issue before the Court, on the People’s appeal in this case, is whether sentencing this woman to less than the mandatory term of 15 years to life imprisonment is warranted. We conclude that the circumstances of this case support the prior courts’ rulings that the lesser period of incarceration is warranted because the mandatory sentence inflicts a grossly disproportionate penalty on defendant. This case falls within Broadie’s "rare case” exception, examined, *489understood and applied in the brighter light of contemporary standards, based on 20 years of experience and empirical data (see, Appendix). Our conclusion in no way condones or minimizes the volitional, personal responsibility of defendant for serious criminal conduct which, upon conviction, brought her, by the judgment of the sentencing court, a minimum of eight years actual imprisonment.
L
Each side in this case has argued vigorously and has added gloss, characterizations and inferences with respect to the facts. The essential and controlling features of this case, however, are essentially uncontroverted. Angela Thompson, a 17-year-old woman, was arrested in 1988 after making a single sale of cocaine to an undercover police officer at her uncle’s residence.
The presentence report shows that defendant grew up in a variety of places and under several different custodial arrangements. Her uncle, Norman Little, was running a major drug-selling operation in Harlem, and at some point he employed her in his illicit enterprise. Eventually, the uncle turned out to be Angela Thompson’s codefendant, though the police acknowledged that he was the principal target of their investigation and prosecution. In an effort to arrest the uncle and shut down this major drug operation, the police made four separate undercover drug purchases on four different days. Defendant had made one sale to an undercover officer of 214 vials of crack cocaine with a street value of $2,000. During the course of the sale, defendant’s uncle entered the room and stood between defendant and the undercover police officer for a short time. The weight was 2.13 grams over the two-ounce (56 grams) limit to qualify as a class A-I felony sale. A grain, which is the smallest unit in the system of weights used in the United States, weighs .0648 of a gram. The additional 33 grains in this case weighed 2.13 grams, which is less than one tenth of an ounce.
Following her arrest, defendant was charged with an A-I felony. The People offered her a plea bargain carrying a sentence of three years to life and, just before trial, four years to life, but she rejected both offers. She was on $1,000 bail until the trial and showed up for every court date. Having put the People to their proof at trial, she was convicted of the A-I felony.
*490Justice Bing Newton, the Trial Justice, heard all the evidence and saw all the necessary participants. She sentenced defendant to eight years to life and trenchantly commented:
"Notwithstanding the Legislative desire to create mandatory minimum sentencing guidelines for the State of New York, I think it’s still the law of this country that the punishment must fit the crime. * * * The question is whether or not the defendant is the type of person, by the facts presented in this case, such that, Constitutionally, this would be inappropriate, to serve 15 years to life. I know the defendant committed this crime when she was 17 years of age. * * * I will note that while defendant was found in the location at the time the search warrant was executed, that this indicates a single transgression of the law. * * * Her uncle, Norman Little, obviously is the person who put her in this position. * * * The problem with these [Broadie] guidelines are that they are not compelling and clear. So, the Court does not have a lot of guidance. * * * I conclude that the defendant, to be sentenced to 15 years to life, would be getting an unconstitutional sentence. * * * I make this determination * * * applying the Constitutional standards that are outlined in [Broadie] to this case, and therefore, [I] leavfe] it to the Appellate Court to * * * give guidance as to when it is appropriate to apply the [Broadie] case” (People v Thompson, Sup Ct, NY County, Dec. 11, 1989, Bing Newton, J., indictment No. 03994-89, Sentencing Minutes [emphasis added]).
On her appeal to the Appellate Division, defendant encountered the People’s cross appeal claiming that her sentence was illegal and too low on the minimum side. The prosecution’s strategy, however legally unassailable, is entitled to be viewed somewhat skeptically in view of the context of the lesser pretrial offers, the sentence it consented to for the uncle, and the initial failure to appeal the "illegality” of the sentence until defendant pursued her judgment appeal rights. Indeed, the prosecutor in oral argument of this case before this Court, with no basis in the record, declared that there is a "small group of judges applying their own black-robed predilections on this issue,” including, apparently, the Trial Justice and Associate Justices constituting the majority at the Appellate *491Division in this case. This disrespectful characterization should be rejected categorically because all the Justices and Judges in this case, and presumptively in all others, act out of a conscientious oath-driven duty to render justice ideally and in the given case to all sides equally.
The Appellate Division, in any event, rejected the People’s effort to ratchet defendant’s sentence up to 15 years to life, though it also ruled against her on her appeal. Justice Asch, for the Appellate Division majority, interpreted the record and arguments, adding this comment with respect to the sentence on this defendant, by then 22 years of age:
"A system of justice which mandates a 15-year prison sentence, as a minimum, on a 17-year-old girl, who was not cared for by parents and under the domination of her uncle * * * also mandates a lifetime of crime and imposes on the community, upon her release, a woman who may be incapable of anything but criminal activity. If we do not attempt to rehabilitate such young people, we condemn ourselves as well” (190 AD2d 162, 167 [Asch, J.] [emphasis added]).
The prior courts rightly considered Angela Thompson’s character and personal circumstances. We are convinced that they had the best vantage point to draw inferences, characterizations and interpretations from the record, a rather ordinary and traditional deference in such matters.
Notably, defendant’s uncle was arrested on 12 counts, including four separate sales on different dates. The People consented to his plea of guilty to one count of criminal sale of controlled substance in the first degree, with a sentence of 15 years to life. Defendant Thompson and at least one other similarly situated young woman (against whom charges were dismissed) were only coincidentally present at the time of the execution of the search warrant and caught in the net spread to catch Norman Little. Defendant’s conviction constitutes her entire criminal record and no other criminal activity appears in her presentence report data. On the other hand, despite his three prior felony and seven prior misdemeanor convictions, the uncle received the identical sentence now superimposed on Angela Thompson. These juxtaposed sentences are substantively and analytically no different from the kind of disproportionate sentencing condemned by former Chief Judge Breitel in his passionate dissenting opinion in People v Jones (39 *492NY2d 694, 698, supra [four pounds of heroin]; see, Brennan, Reason, Passion, and "The Progress of the Law” [Cardozo Memorial Lecture, delivered before the Association of the Bar of the City of New York], 10 Cardozo L Rev 3, 12 [1988]). Indeed, defense counsel argued, without contradiction, another aspect of disproportionality at the sentencing of Angela Thompson:
"There was also, during this arrest, the arrest of a third female, who could have been charged with an A-I felony, a young lady, I believe similar in age to the defendant. She had made or assisted in the sale, A-I weight, to Officer Dante Grey. And during the hearings it came out, I believe, her nickname was Shorty. But, my memory could be wrong, that the District Attorney’s Office decided not to prosecute her because they were afraid at that time that if they had arrested her, Mr. Little would know who the undercover officer was at that time, and this was early on in the proceedings. Now, granted, that’s a very legitimate concern, and I fully understand why the People would make that type of decision, to protect their undercover, which is, of course, a concern to everybody. But it shows how another young individual, just like Miss Thompson, doing the exact same act, because of discretion decisions by the District Attorney’s Office, is not standing here today, before the Court, facing these consequences. That she’s not being sentenced, she hasn’t even been charged. It’s alleged she did the same thing that Miss Thompson did on one occasion. The undercover testified, I believe, truthfully at trial. He never saw Angela Thompson on any other date during this investigation, before arrests were made, other than that one date that the sale was made. This was over a six week period of time, he’s back and forth to that location. It shows the type of involvement Miss Thompson had, if we accept the jury’s verdict, which, of course, Miss Thompson does not, but I have to face as her attorney. That type of disparity where individuals are not prosecuted for legitimate reasons, and because of the fear it might have that they might give information to someone else who has been arrested, and the type *493of disparity where Mr. Little receives the same sentence that this defendant faces today, although he chose to plead guilty and she chose to go to trial, maintaining her innocence, shows why this particular case is not a case where 15 to life should be given to the defendant.” (People v Thompson, Sup Ct, NY County, Dec. 11, 1989, Bing Newton, J., indictment No. 03994-89, Sentencing Minutes.)
The final outcome of this case requires no characterization, as it speaks starkly for itself. Angela Thompson must now be informed, five years after the original sentence and after having served nearly two thirds of her original minimum sentence, that a new fateful day of reckoning has arrived, as the Court of Appeals today effectuates the near doubling of her minimum sentence.
IL
The mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years with the prospect of incarceration for life represents one of the most severe penalties prescribed under New York State law. It reflects society’s and the Legislature’s high level of condemnation for the most reprehensible crimes and the most serious offenders, e.g., murder in the first and second degrees (Penal Law §§ 125.27, 125.25), kidnapping in the first degree (Penal Law § 135.25), and arson in the first degree (Penal Law § 150.20).
As noted, Angela Thompson’s sale was slightly over the required two-ounce weight to qualify as an A-I crime (compare, People v Ryan, 82 NY2d 497 [932.8 grams of mushrooms containing approximately 5,303 milligrams of controlled substance psilocybin]). The weight in this case was bumped up to A-I level by specific importuning from the undercover buyer-officer. The additional one tenth of an ounce, by the ruling of this Court today, thus adds up to seven more minimum years of imprisonment beyond that prescribed by the trial-sentencing Justice. Indeed, had those 2.13 grams not been tacked on, defendant would have been accountable for an A-II sale, whose mandatory minimum sentence is only three years (Penal Law § 70.00 [3] [a] [ii]).
By tendering this dissenting view, we intend no disrespect for the Legislature’s prerogatives in prescribing the types of criminal conduct and allocating appropriate punishment lev*494els. This Court has acknowledged, after all, the Legislature’s power to severely limit the discretion that courts may exercise in sentencing decisions (see, People v Broadie, 37 NY2d, at 123, supra; Penal Law § 70.00). Correspondingly, however, respect must be accorded the principle that "the Constitution of this state confers power upon the courts to declare void legislative acts prescribing punishments for crime, in fact cruel and unusual” (People ex rel. Kemmler v Durston, 119 NY 569, 577 [the first electrocution death sentence held not cruel and unusual because it was "immediate” and "painless”, two propositions that are surely debatable in the wake of slightly over 100 years of experience and empirical data about electrocutions], affd sub nom. In re Kemmler, 136 US 436; People v Broadie, supra, at 119; see, NY Const, art I, § 5). While courts will grant appropriate deference to the Legislature regarding its presumptively constitutional sentencing promulgations, and to the Executive in the person and office of local prosecutors for implementing those sentences, no penalty should be entirely off limits to appropriate judicial responsibility. Rather, courts are obliged to scrutinize the sentences that they impose or review against applicable constitutional principles.
Historical analysis reveals that the constitutional prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment found under the State Constitution was primarily directed at sadistic and purely degrading cruelty, including all forms of torture, barbarity or inhumane treatment (see, People v Broadie, 37 NY2d, at 124, supra; Mulligan, Cruel and Unusual Punishments: The Proportionality Rule, 47 Fordham L Rev 639, 640-645 [1979]; see also, Matter of Bayard, 25 Hun 546, 549; Ordinance of 1638, in O’Callaghan, Laws and Ordinances of New Nether-land, 1638-1674, at 10, 12 [crimes should be punished "according to the circumstance of the case”]). Courts as far back as colonial New York considered on sentencing the "baseness of the offense, the behavior and the age and standing of the defendant” (see, Goebel and Naughton, Law Enforcement in Colonial New York, at 682, 702). Moreover, the evolving nature of the protection against cruel and inhuman punishment under the United States and New York State Constitutions includes examination of proportionality under contemporary standards (see, e.g., Harmelin v Michigan, 501 US 957 [650 grams of cocaine]; Solem v Helm, 463 US 277; Robinson v California, 370 US 660; Weems v United States, 217 US 349; People v Broadie, 37 NY2d 100, supra; People v Davis, 33 *495NY2d 221, cert denied 416 US 973; Berger, Justice Brennan vs. The Constitution, 29 BC L Rev 787, 787, n 4 [1988] [citing Address by Justice Brennan, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., printed in The Great Debate: Interpreting Our Written Constitution, at 11 (Federalist Society 1986)]).
This is the first case since deciding People v Broadie (37 NY2d 100, supra) in which this Court, instead of leaving undisturbed the sentences below, substitutes the more severe, legislatively mandated minimum sentence in lieu of the sentence imposed by the prior courts in their effort to arrive at a constitutional, proportioned and appropriate sentence (see, People v McCleese, 71 NY2d 839; People v Ortiz, 64 NY2d 997; People v Donovan, 59 NY2d 834, affg 89 AD2d 968; People v Jones, 39 NY2d 694, supra; compare and contrast, People v Martinez, 191 AD2d 306 [sentence of 4 tí to 9 years for criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree reduced to 2 to 4 years]; People v Skeffery, 188 AD2d 438 [mandatory sentence of 15 years to life for criminal possession of a controlled substance in the first degree reduced to 5 years to life]; People v Andrews, 176 AD2d 530, lv denied 79 NY2d 918 [mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years to life for A-I drug felony reduced to five years to life to avoid being "cruel and unusual”]; People v Ramirez, NYLJ, Oct. 1, 1993, at 22, col 3 [17-year-old defendant given sentence of probation following conviction of criminal sale of controlled substance in the second degree]; People v Royster, 117 Misc 2d 112 [defendant sentenced to five years probation after pleading guilty to one count of criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree]).
In the instant case, the Court, by overturning the opposite views of both prior courts, effectively renders a first instance judgment that an Eighth Amendment transgression and the Broadie rare case exception are not present. The reversal of a lesser sentence binds defendant to the legislative yoke of the Rockefeller drug "solution” of the 70’s. In practical terms, it allows, ironically, no judicial sentencing discretion or departure from absolute mandates in the particular framework of this case and especially in the face of some enlightenment in the 90’s concerning the penological consequences of wholesale mandatory sentencings.
This area of the law also still lacks sufficient criteria by which the parties, the Bench and the Bar would be guided in *496how or when to appropriately request or invoke this court-decreed protection. The trial court expressed on the record the particular difficulty of sentencing under Broadie’s continued lack of specificity. If any realistic value is to be salvaged from the otherwise illusory promise of Broadie, that guidance should be forthcoming so as to justify the decision in this case and to test future ones.
In suggesting some factors as a start for the Court to build and articulate a useful and quite appropriate test in a real case setting, we by no means intend that any one or all of these factors should be determinative in a given case. While the Court cannot substitute its role for that of the Legislature and declare a comprehensive code, the Judiciary, in our respectful view, should provide some texture, context and substance beyond an exhortation that rare cases may result in departures from the mandatory sentences.
Some years ago, faced with a similar vacuum of legislative criteria for the exercise of the interests of justice dismissal power, the Judiciary filled the interstice (People v Clayton, 41 AD2d 204 [Hopkins, J.]). Spurred by that traditional common-law development (see also, People v Belge, 41 NY2d 60, 62), the Legislature eventually codified criteria for nisi prius guidance and appellate review purposes (CPL 210.40). Broadie’s atrophying rare case exception has apparently stimulated particular legislative attention in a bill that, arguably and as finally enacted, might allow an interests-of-justice consideration of a reduction in just such a case as the instant one (see, 1994 NY Assembly Bill A 7693). Angela Thompson’s sentence, if this bill were law, could be only 1 to 3 years. While legislative reform may be on the horizon, however, the courts cannot escape the obligation to decide this case under prevailing, evolving principles which might, as with Clayton and Beige, rouse appropriate legislative action.
We propose for this case, for future cases and until remedial legislation is a reality, that the analysis of a sentencing and appellate reviewing court under the rare case exception may include (1) objective criteria including, but not limited to: (i) the gravity and nature of the offense, (ii) the relative culpability of the defendant, (iii) the proportionality with other similarly situated or differentiated defendants; and (2) subjective criteria involving the history of the particular defendant. Trial courts can be counted on to competently and responsibly apply and particularize the factors and balance the enumerated objective and subjective criteria.
*497Interestingly, comparable assessments are duly entrusted for lesser liberty matters under narrow, judicially created review standards for administrative agency disciplinary determinations (see, Matter of Pell v Board of Educ., 34 NY2d 222). If a penalty "shocks the judicial conscience” in that field of law, Judges strike it down. In this different but parallel field, where the most serious liberty interests are at stake, this cruel and unusual mandatory sentence shocked the conscience of the Trial Justice, the Appellate Division, and it shocks at least two Judges at this final level of review. We respect the fact that reasonable minds might disagree on the application of available criteria, and that we and other courts could conclude differently as to whether a particular defendant and case qualifies as a rare case exception. As-applied constitutional adjudication does not, however, justify the failure to articulate and apply contemporary sentencing guidelines which would make our respective and respectable differences on application in this case more understandable.
More specifically, the pertinent factors should include any exceptional special circumstances inhering in the nature of the criminal transaction itself. Since the gravity of drug crimes is keyed to the weight of the drugs sold or possessed, the amount of the drugs in weight and dollars should be part of the exceptional sentencing appraisal. Selling pounds of an illegal drug with a value of hundreds of thousands or even millions of dollars should not be per se homogenized with relatively and significantly smaller transactions of a few hundred or thousands of dollars. Scale is key and is relevant to the proportionality analysis. There could also be an assessment of the conduct and actions of the law enforcement personnel from the time of the commission of the crime, if they are involved, through the prosecution phases. Consideration should, of course, be given to the number or length of times that a defendant participated in criminal activity and whether a sentence less than the most severe mandatory variety would deprecate the seriousness of the particular crime in general, in relation to other participants charged and uncharged, and in relation to other serious crimes of equal classification rank.
Next, a defendant’s relative pecking order, as subservient or dependent, contrasted to those with relatively higher and especially, as here, the highest hierarchical power and control, is pertinent. The degree of sophistication generally and with *498respect to the particular criminality, as well as the precipitating agent or cause of the crime, have some bearing on appropriate and proportionate sentencing. An employee-serf-like defendant who has no entrepreneurial role and financial stake, should not be treated at the same level as the kingpins and bosses (People v Jones, 39 NY2d 694, 698, supra [Breitel, Ch. J., dissenting]).
We emphasize that our view does not create or promote a per se drug millhand or courier rare case exception, nor does youth or any particular age alone justify the invocation of the rare case exception. While those features are appropriate to the over-all particular analysis, they do not constitute their own artificial, automatic entitlement to departure from the prescribed mandatory minimum.
In assessing proportionality of the punishment, traditional sentencing concepts such as the character of a defendant, personal history and special circumstances are indispensable. This facet would include the age, school record, employment history and family circumstances. This review is limited to presentencing activities. Any personal or family history, or rehabilitation following sentencing while in prison, cannot be considered on our constitutional inquiry on the direct appeal relating to the judgment of conviction but is reserved for collateral judicial review, correctional department considerations and even clemency applications (see, People’s motion to strike portions of respondent’s brief and Appendix, granted simultaneously with this decision on the People’s appeal). Included, too, would be consideration of the proportionality of the sentence between persons more seriously involved in the same offense, like the uncle codefendant here, who received the same or lesser sentence as defendant and the other young woman who apparently was not charged at all. Empirical data and analysis may even be developed or discovered from official correctional records and reports to show that these kinds of mandatory sentences fall disproportionately and exploitively on young minority recruits including, as in this case, an African-American teenage woman (see, US Dept of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does Race Matter? The Transition to Sentencing Guidelines, 1986-1990, at 10-14 [Executive Summary] [1993] [wide sentencing disparities based on race discovered in crack cocaine crime category]). Moreover, the wholesale enlistment of numerous youngsters into drug trafficking is not a reason for the Judiciary to preclude the use of the Broadie rare case exception. *499Rather, it represents a greater urgency and responsibility to apply it responsibly and appropriately, even if some additional individuals would qualify for relatively more lenient, but also more proportionate, sentencing.
Not to be overlooked either is the fact that appellate review would be available under identifiable and measurable standards as we have suggested (see, People v Belge, 41 NY2d 60, supra). In the highest judicial tradition, we urge nuanced exceptional sentence exertions justified by on-the-record explication, not some open-ended discretion. No one should forget that public officers in the other two branches of government are not inherently or presumptively wiser and more conscientious than judicial officers — or vice versa — and the other branches have not been invested with unilateral power over the liberty of individuals. To the contrary, the unique responsibility of sentencing is traditionally reposed in neutral Magistrates, not in partisan prosecutors. Ultimately, it is Judges who bear the singular, awesome duty of facing defendants in open court on the day of reckoning to declare the law’s sentencing judgment.
IIL
In sum, this case focuses on the distribution of the power of sentencing adjudication in a particular category and framework. It implicates and resolves who really exercises that momentous duty, under what circumstances, and with what respectful checks-and-balances.
We decided to dissent because we concluded the Judiciary has more power and responsibility than it is undertaking in this case and in this critical adjudicative area. The exception from the mandatory absolutes of the sentencing scheme was described generally in People v Broadie (37 NY2d 100, supra [Breitel, Ch. J.]). While that aspect was a key ingredient to Broadie’s holding, the originator of the idea ironically saw his equalizing qualification rejected when the Court first considered and ruled, 4 to 3, against invoking the reserved authority; it declined to declare a particular rare case exception in that drug factory millhand case (People v Jones, 39 NY2d 694, 698, supra [Breitel, Ch. J., dissenting]). Today, the exhortation should be animated because it is buttressed by empirical data and a record that justifies resolute, differentiated sentencing (compare, People v Bing, 76 NY2d 331, 338; see, Appendix). The Court should not be deterred by floodgate speculation. Real criteria and appellate review are sufficient guardians against runaway sentencing exercises generally and in individual cases.
*500What was not cruel and unusual in 1789 (ratification of Constitution) or 1888 (decision in Kemmler case with his execution) may well be unconstitutional in 1994. Similarly, what was not rare in the subset of the cruel and unusual punishment concept in 1975 (Broadie) and 1976 (Jones) may be ripe for such classification today. We believe that constitutional adjudication is a dynamic, evolving process, not a static set of revered relics. The genius of Chief Judge Breitel’s exception should be given life today, not be frozen in the time and meaning of 20 years ago (Brennan, The Bill of Rights and the States: The Revival of State Constitutions as Guardians of Individual Rights, 61 NYU L Rev 535, 544 [1986]; Berger, Justice Brennan vs. The Constitution, 29 BC L Rev 787, 787, n 4 [1988] [citing Address by Justice Brennan, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., printed in The Great Debate: Interpreting Our Written Constitution, at 11 (Federalist Society 1986) ("[Constitutional interpretation must account for the transformative purpose of the text”)]).
Prosecutors, as Executive Branch officers, should not enjoy the power to shackle judicial responsibility while they zealously seek to incarcerate masses of criminal drug offenders (compare, People v Roe, 74 NY2d 20, 29, 35 [Bellacosa, J., dissenting] ["Some very disproportionate miscarriages of justice — this case is one of them — will certainly ensue from this prosecutorial leverage in elevating reckless manslaughter to murder.”]). A balanced judicial role, envisioned as necessary by Broadie and exercised by prudent Trial Judges whose sentences would remain subject to the leavening, harmonizing review by the Appellate Divisions on appeal by prosecutors, is necessary. The prior courts in this case made a wise, humane, fair, bold and correct sentencing ruling, justified by the record, by their findings and by a host of the factors we have proposed. We should sustain their effort, not overturn it and stifle future efforts.
We conclude that the hardly lenient sentence of eight minimum years to life originally imposed on Angela Thompson should be upheld by affirming the prior courts as heralds of the arrival of Broadie’s promise that a rare case exception does indeed exist.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Simons and Smith concur with Judge Levine; Judge Bellacosa dissents and votes to affirm in a separate opinion in which Judge Ciparick concurs; Judge Titone taking no part.
Order reversed, etc.
*501APPENDIX OF SELECTED STATISTICS AND USEFUL SOURCES
Some measurement of the impact of this mandatory sentencing scheme is illustrated by some statistics drawn from a mass of data and official reports.
• In 1982, 63% of New York State’s correctional inmates were violent criminal offenders; by 1992, that percentage had shrunk to 34%. In 1973, the State’s prison population was 12,444 (see, 1985 Determinate Sentencing Report and Recommendations, NY St Comm on Sentencing Guidelines, at 135).
• By 1982, the prison population had doubled to 25,499 (see, 1985 Determinate Sentencing Report and Recommendations, NY St Comm on Sentencing Guidelines, at 135) and, by 1991, the total prison population exceeded 60,000 inmates, a 480% increase in 20 years.
• State prison sentencing resulting from felony indictment arising from the sale or possession of narcotics increased from 2,865 in 1985 to 13,185 in 1991 (see, 1989 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs, at 250; 1991 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs, at 193).
• In 1989, State prison sentences resulting from drug indictments accounted for 46% of the prison sentences, compared to only 18% in 1985 (1989 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs, at 249).
• The percentage of offenders in the State prison system with a mandatory determinate sentence of five years or more increased from 37% in 1974 to over 52% in 1983 and is surely still climbing (see, 1985 Determinate Sentencing Report, op. cit., at 136).
• Following the implementation of the Federal Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 and the new mandatory minimum imprisonment provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, substantial aggregate differences in sentences imposed on White, Black and Hispanic offenders have been identified. During an 18-month study beginning in January 1989, on average, Black offenders sentenced to prison had imposed sentences that were *50241% longer than Whites. This disparity is directly related to Congress’s determination to treat the trafficking of crack and powdered cocaine differently. Eighty-three percent of all Federal offenders convicted of trafficking in crack cocaine were Black, and the average sentence imposed for crack trafficking was twice as long as for trafficking in powdered cocaine (see, US Dept of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does Race Matter?, The Transition to Sentencing Guidelines, 1986-1990, at 1 [Summary] [1993]).
* * *
1985 Determinate Sentencing Report and Recommendations, NY St Comm on Sentencing Guidelines.
1989 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs.
1990 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs.
1991 Crime and Justice Ann Report, Div of Criminal Justice Servs.
Alschuler, The Failure of Sentencing Guidelines: A Plea for Less Aggregation, 58 U Ch L Rev 901 (1991).
Karle and Sager, Are the Federal Sentencing Guidelines Meeting Congressional Goals?: An Empirical and Case Law Analysis, 40 Emory LJ 393 (1991).
Lowenthal, Mandatory Sentencing Laws: Undermining the Effectiveness of Determinate Sentencing Reform, 81 Cal L Rev 61 (1993).
Mulligan, Cruel and Unusual Punishments: The Proportionality Rule, 47 Fordham L Rev 639 (1979).
Rosenblatt, New York’s New Drug Laws and Sentencing Statutes (1973).
Signorelli, A Judicial Analysis and Critique of the New Drug and Sentencing Laws, 46 NY St BJ 9 (Jan. 1974).
US Dept of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does Race Matter?, The Transition to Sentencing Guidelines, 1986-1990, at 1 (Summary) (1993).

=== CASE 9739170 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:56.164056+00 ===

JUSTICE STOUDER delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Helen A. Thurston, brought a petition to modify the January 23, 1991, judgment awarding her maintenance entered by the circuit court of Peoria County. The court entered an order on November 24, 1992, awarding the plaintiff an increase in maintenance. The defendant, John C. Thurston, then filed a motion to reconsider which was denied on February 1, 1993. The defendant appeals, contending that Helen failed to show a substantial change in circumstances of either party justifying an increase in maintenance. Upon dissolution of the marriage of John and Helen, the trial court entered judgement on January 23, 1991, ordering John to pay Helen maintenance of $1,400 per month. At that time John worked for Caterpillar, Inc., and the United States Reserves. The order contemplated that on September 1, 1991, John’s income would decrease as a result of being forced to retire from his position with the United States Reserves and accordingly provided that his maintenance obligation would decrease to $900 per month at that time. John unexpectedly continued his work for the United States Reserves for almost a year longer than anticipated, and continued to pay Helen $l,400-per-month maintenance through July 1992, pursuant to the original order. Helen was receiving $900 per month at the time of the October 15, 1992, hearing on the petition to modify maintenance. The trial court ordered an increase in the maintenance award from $900 to $1,150 per month. At the October 15, 1992, hearing on the petition to modify maintenance, Helen testified that at the time of the January 23, 1991, judgment, she was earning $6.60 per hour resulting in a net income of $769 per month. She also testified that her expenses were then $2,354 per month. Helen was laid off on April 14, 1991, and remained unemployed until December 27, 1991. She received unemployment compensation of $118 per week beginning April 14, 1991. Helen worked part-time as a sales person earning minimum wage from December 27, 1991, until the end of February 1992. In March of 1992, Helen began a full-time job at Pioneer Park Mitsubishi in Peoria, Illinois. Helen testified that at the time of the October 15, 1992, hearing she earned $5.25 per hour and that she had a net income of $861 per month and expenses of $1,866.86 per month. John testified that since the January 23, 1991, order he has retired from the military reserves, losing income of approximately $17,000 per year. He received a raise in his gross income from Caterpillar of $224 per month since January 23, 1991, resulting in an increase in his net income of $153.62 per month. John testified that his monthly expenses had increased $107 since the January 23, 1991, order to $4,174 per month. John further testified that he has remarried since January 23, 1991, and that his new wife is a registered nurse who works for two doctors. He and his wife have purchased a house for $149,000 for which his new wife made a down payment of $52,000. John and his new wife have also made $6,000 in home improvements and John has leased an automobile for which he pays $432 per month. John testified that he did not know his new wife’s exact income and that she used quite a bit of her income to support her two sons of college age. John denied that his new wife shared any of his $4,174 in monthly expenses. At the conclusion of the October 15, 1992, hearing, the court ordered that John’s maintenance obligation to Helen be increased from $900 to $1,150 per month beginning November 1992. John filed a motion to reconsider which the court denied on February 12, 1993. In denying the motion to reconsider, the trial court stated that in determining whether there has been a substantial change of circumstance, "it is appropriate that the [c]ourt may consider the remarriage of the Defendant to the extent that the new spouse contributes to the defendant’s living expenses and the court specifically finds in this case that Seven Hundred Dollars ($700) of Defendant’s monthly expenses are found to be shared.” A reviewing court will not disturb a trial court’s modification of a maintenance award absent a clear abuse of discretion. (In re Marriage of Garelick (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 321, 326, 522 N.E.2d 738, 742.) A court can modify a maintenance award under section 510 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (the Act) "only upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances.” (750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1992).) The party seeking modification of a maintenance award bears the burden of establishing a substantial change in circumstances. (Garelick, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 326, 522 N.E.2d at 742.) In deciding whether a maintenance award should be modified, a court should consider the same factors used in making an initial maintenance award. (In re Marriage of Plotz (1992), 229 Ill. App. 3d 389, 391, 594 N.E.2d 366, 368.) Under section 504 of the Act such factors include: "(1) the income and property of each party, including marital property apportioned and non-marital property assigned to the party seeking maintenance; (2) the needs of each party; [and] (3) the present and future earning capacity of each party.” 750 ILCS 5/504(a) (West 1992); see also In re Marriage of Krupp (1990), 207 Ill. App. 3d 779, 793, 566 N.E.2d 429, 437. We now address whether the trial court abused its discretion by finding a substantial change in circumstances and ordering a $250-per-month increase in maintenance. In the original judgment, the court did provide for the diminution of payments when the husband’s salary as a reserve officer terminated. However, the court made no effort to prophesy or even speculate about the consequence of such reduction and certainly made no finding that the cessation of such payment would be reasonable for both parties. The reduction in the wife’s income is substantial. That the wife reduced her expenses and standard of living to fit her compelled reduction in income does not render such reduction immaterial. It was a significant change in circumstances nowhere considered or contemplated in the original judgment. To compound the problems, the wife was either wholly or partially unemployed during the period prior to this modification proceeding. The trial court may consider the financial circumstances and needs of both parties in light of all the facts surrounding both households. (Garelick, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 327, 522 N.E.2d at 743.) Related both to the change in circumstances and the propriety of the modification is the increase in the mortgage payment made by the husband. Because the new wife made a substantial downpayment contribution to a new house and because there is no segregation of the mortgage payment, it can be inferred, as the trial court did, that half of the $700 mortgage payment went to the benefit of the husband’s new wife. Additionally, we note the trial court found that $1,492 of the husband’s expenses were for the benefit of the husband and his new wife. In this connection, we note that we are primarily concerned with the allocation of the husband’s expenses as they affect his ability to contribute to the maintenance of the wife in that regard, not specifically to the income of the new wife. The modification by the trial court was well within the range of the evidence and did not constitute an abuse of discretion. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is affirmed. Affirmed. BRESLIN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739171 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:09:56.168146+00 ===

JUSTICE BARRY, dissenting: Helen has the burden of demonstrating a substantial change in the circumstances by showing that John’s ability to pay additional maintenance has increased and that her needs for maintenance have increased since the original maintenance order. (In re Marriage of Munford (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 576, 580, 527 N.E.2d 892, 894.) Although the modification of a maintenance award rests within the sound discretion of the trial judge (Gorman v. Gorman (1979), 72 Ill. App. 3d 658, 662, 391 N.E.2d 70, 73), the record in this case does not support the trial court’s finding of a substantial change in the circumstances. Therefore, I respectfully dissent. The record indicates that John’s net income from Caterpillar increased $153.62 per month and that his monthly expenses increased $107 between the original maintenance order and the October 15, 1992, hearing on the petition to modify. We also note that John’s income has decreased by $17,000 since the initial maintenance award and that the trial court originally anticipated this decrease in its initial judgment. The record further indicates that at the time of Helen’s petition to modify maintenance her net income was approximately $92 per month higher than her income at the time of the original maintenance order, and her monthly expenses had decreased from $2,354 to $1,866.86. According to the record, Helen was unemployed for several months and she received unemployment compensation during the time she was without a job. However, evidence showing fluctuations in her income subsequent to the original divorce judgment but before the petition to modify is irrelevant to the question of current earnings. (Robin v. Robin (1977), 45 Ill. App. 3d 365, 371, 359 N.E.2d 809, 814.) Consequently, I find erroneous the majority’s conclusion that Helen’s income has decreased substantially, when the evidence demonstrates that her income has not decreased whatsoever, but has increased almost $100 per month. In sum, Helen is now employed and earning income comparable to her income at the time of the original maintenance award and her monthly expenses have decreased. I also note that pursuant to the original maintenance award, Helen received one-half of John’s profit-sharing plan at Caterpillar, one-half of his Caterpillar government securities investment and one-half of his Caterpillar and Army Reserves pensions. John additionally pays the amount necessary to maintain Helen’s health insurance with Caterpillar and to maintain Helen as a beneficiary of his life insurance. I also find that the court obviously considered the remarriage of the defendant for the purpose of finding a reduction in the defendant’s financial needs. However, the record lacks any evidence whatsoever establishing that John’s new spouse shared any of his $4,174 in monthly expenses. Thus, I believe that the trial court erred by deciding that "in this case...Seven Hundred Dollars ($700) of Defendant’s monthly expenses are found to be shared.” The record contains no evidence reflecting John’s new wife’s income other than the fact that she is a nurse and that his new wife has two college-aged sons who depend on her for support. In fact, the only other testimony on this subject was John’s uncontested statement that his new wife did not contribute to the monthly expenses listed in his affidavit. The Garelick court stated that "[t]he financial status of a divorced party’s spouse has no bearing in a proceeding for modification of maintenance or child support.” (In re Marriage of Garelick (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 321, 327, 522 N.E.2d 738, 743.) I believe the rule might be better stated as follows: A trial court may look at the financial status of a party’s new spouse only to the extent that the new spouse actually contributes to the expenses claimed by the party in the maintenance proceeding to determine a party’s ability to pay maintenance. Of course, there must be evidence in the record of such contributions. I believe it is improper for a court to assume that a party’s new spouse contributes to such expenses based only on the fact that the two are married. The majority suggests that the trial court and this court can properly infer that "half of the $700 mortgage payment went to the benefit of the husband’s new wife.” (260 Ill. App. 3d at 734.) However, the new wife paid the entire $52,000 down payment for the $149,000 house, thus reducing the principal owed on the house to $97,000. Has the wife not paid her share of the purchase price for her benefit? I do not agree with the majority’s inference. I believe that in light of the testimony, if an inference is to be made, it is that the defendant makes the $700 mortgage payment for his share of the home. It is axiomatic, as the Garelick court properly stated, that "a reviewing court will not set aside a modification of a maintenance award unless the trial court clearly abused its discretion.” (Garelick, 168 Ill. App. 3d at 326, 522 N.E.2d at 743.) In the present case I believe that the trial court clearly abused its discretion by making the unsupported conclusion that some of John’s listed expenses were paid by his new wife. Although a trial court should look at all of the factors considered in making an initial maintenance award when adjudicating a petition for a change of maintenance (In re Marriage of Plotz (1992), 229 Ill. App. 3d 389, 391, 594 N.E.2d 366, 368), I find nothing in the record to support the court’s finding that Helen has increased needs or that John’s ability to pay justifies a $250-per-month increase in maintenance to Helen. Section 510 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act states that "the obligation to pay future maintenance is terminated upon *** the remarriage of the party receiving maintenance.” (750 ILCS 5/510(c) (West 1992).) The legislature has made no such rule affirmatively setting forth the public policy regarding the remarriage of the party paying maintenance. Consequently, I believe that the party seeking an increase in maintenance and alleging shared expenses of the paying party has the burden of setting forth some evidence establishing that the paying party’s new spouse contributes to that party’s expenses, other than the fact that they are married. Helen offered no such evidence in the present case. I read the majority opinion to imply that the remarriage of a party paying maintenance results in a per se reduction in that party’s expenses and, consequently, an increase in that party’s ability to pay maintenance. Had the legislature intended such a presumption, it would have been included in the statute. Here, the trial court made a finding unsupported by the record that $1,492 of John’s expenses were for the benefit of his new wife. The parties in this case have gone their separate ways, and upon dissolution of the marriage, the trial court granted Helen a reasonable maintenance award. Helen has suffered no sudden illness, loss of resources or incurred increased needs. Parties to such an equitable disposition upon divorce should not be allowed to come back to court seeking modification for insubstantial reasons. My interpretation of the opinions of our courts leads me to conclude that the record in the present case does not establish a "substantial” change in circumstances as contemplated by section 510(a) of the Act. In light of the foregoing, I would hold that the trial court’s finding that there has been a substantial change in circumstances justifying an increase of the original maintenance award in the amount of $250 per month was against the manifest weight of the evidence.

=== CASE 2218943 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:58.256219+00 ===

633 N.E.2d 270 (1994)
Sean NORCUTT, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 45A04-9311-CR-409.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
April 26, 1994.
*271 Mark A. Bates, Crown Point, for appellant.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Joseph F. Pieters, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Defendant-Appellant Sean Norcutt appeals his conviction for burglary, a class C felony.[1]
We affirm.
ISSUES
Norcutt raises the following issues for our consideration:
1. Whether there was sufficient evidence to establish venue.
2. Whether the trial court committed reversible error in denying repeated motions for mistrial.
FACTS
In the early morning hours of June 22, 1992, James Freund parked his motorcycle in the three car garage across the alley from his home. James bar-locked the three overhead doors and padlocked the service door.
*272 At about 5:30 the same morning, Phyllis Cain heard a loud crash outside her apartment in Lansing, Illinois. She went to the window and observed two young men with a large motorcycle caught under a guard rail. Cain immediately called the Lansing Police. When the police arrived, the two men, who were trying to extricate the motorcycle, fled on foot. Lansing Police Officer Brad Borys was able to apprehend one of the men, who was later identified as Norcutt. Through a registration check, Officer Borys identified the motorcycle as belonging to James Freund.
At approximately 6:00 a.m., James received a phone call from the Lansing Police Department. The officer making the call told James to check and see if his motorcycle was missing. The officer directed James to file a report with the Hammond Police Department and have them contact the Lansing Police.
James and his brother Frank went to the garage and noticed that the middle overhead door was open, both James' and Frank's motorcycles were gone, and the padlock for the service door was missing. James and Frank went to the Hammond Police Department to file a report. They then went to the Lansing Police Department to recover James' motorcycle, which was damaged beyond repair. Frank eventually recovered his motorcycle through his own investigation.
Norcutt was charged and convicted of burglary, a class C felony.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. VENUE
Norcutt contends the State failed to submit sufficient evidence to establish venue. He cites I.C. XX-XX-X-X (1993), which states that a "[c]riminal action shall be tried in the county where the offense was committed... ."
The State must establish venue by a preponderance of the evidence. Evans v. State (1991), Ind., 571 N.E.2d 1231, 1233. Venue may be established by circumstantial evidence. Id. The State has met its burden if the facts and circumstances of the case permit the jury to infer that the crime occurred in a given county. Gillie v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 145, 151.
In the present case, once James and Frank discovered that their motorcycles had been stolen, they filed a report with the Hammond Police Department. When the Lansing Police Department called James, they advised him to file a report with the Hammond Police Department. Further, Officer Borys testified that while James and Frank were at the Lansing Police Department, he told them that "they would have to contact the Hammond Police Department since the vehicle was stolen from Hammond... ." (R. 266). Borys also testified that he turned the case over to Officer Dennis Callahan of the Hammond Police Department. Finally, a written statement made by Norcutt to Officer Callahan indicated the garage was in Hammond. These facts were sufficient to establish that the burglary occurred in Hammond. The trial court judicially knew that Hammond is located in Lake County, and that Lake County is located in Indiana. See Buhmeier v. State (1934), 206 Ind. 645, 190 N.E. 857, 858 (holding that the supreme court will take notice of the fact that City of Evansville is in Vanderburgh County, and that there is in the State of Indiana a Vanderburgh County); Dunlap v. State (1932), 205 Ind. 384, 180 N.E. 475, 478 (holding it is judicially known that Rensselaer is located in Jasper County).
II. MOTIONS FOR MISTRIAL
Norcutt contends the trial court abused its discretion in denying his motions for mistrial. Two such motions were made with regard to the admission of evidence. One motion was made after an alleged discovery violation. Finally, a motion was made after the trial court informed the parties that a written statement could be used for impeachment.
A trial court has discretion in determining whether to grant a mistrial. Gregory v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 585, 589. The trial court's decision is given great deference on appeal because the trial court was in the best position to gauge the surrounding circumstances of the event and its impact on the jury. Id. To succeed on appeal from the *273 denial of a motion for mistrial, the defendant must demonstrate the conduct in question was so prejudicial that he was placed in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected. The gravity of the peril is determined by considering the probable persuasive effect of the misconduct on the jury's decision, not the degree of impropriety of the conduct. Id. A mistrial is an extreme remedy which should be granted only when an error cannot be rectified by some other remedy. Schlomer v. State (1991), Ind., 580 N.E.2d 950, 955.
Norcutt's first motion for mistrial was occasioned by Frank Freund's testimony that Norcutt's accomplice, Brian Runick, told him where his motorcycle could be found. His second motion was a result of Frank's statement that Runick had reimbursed him for damage to the motorcycle but Norcutt had not. In both instances, the trial court immediately admonished the jury to disregard the witness's statement.
Where a motion for mistrial is based upon isolated, inadvertent comments by a witness, the trial court does not abuse its discretion by refusing to declare a mistrial. Jackson v. State (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 617, 622. Unless there is some compelling reason to think otherwise, a trial court's admonition is presumed to have dispelled any prejudice. Roche v. State (1992), Ind., 596 N.E.2d 896, 902. In the present case, the admonishment was sufficient to dispel any false conclusions by the jury.
Norcutt's third motion for mistrial was based on his claim that the State withheld evidence regarding a statement made by Norcutt to Officer Callahan that he acted as Runick's look-out. Norcutt contends the State's withholding of this statement resulted in a surprise response by Officer Callahan during cross-examination.
The statement made to Officer Callahan by Norcutt was never recorded, but was related to the prosecutor sometime before trial. A substantially similar statement was included in Officer Callahan's written report, wherein Norcutt was reported to have stated that "[Runick] told me to wait down the alley which I did and then he brought one of the bikes down to me and then he went back and got the second bike." (R. 311). While Norcutt did not use the word "look-out" in the reported statement, the inference is clear that he was acting in that capacity. In light of the fact that this substantially similar statement was provided to Norcutt, we find that no prejudicial surprise occurred. Accordingly, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying Norcutt's motion for mistrial.[2]
The final motion for mistrial was based upon the trial court's decision to inform the parties, in a bench conference held outside the hearing of the jury, that a previous statement made by Norcutt would be available for impeachment purposes if Norcutt changed his story at trial. The previous statement had earlier been ruled inadmissible.
Norcutt contends that by giving this advice, the trial court abandoned its role as an impartial arbiter and impinged on his right to a fair trial. He cites to the dissenting opinion in Ware v. State (1990), Ind. App., 560 N.E.2d 536, 545, trans. denied, wherein Judge Conover stated that "[e]ven without the presence of a jury to be influenced, the trial court has the duty to conduct proceedings in an impartial manner, so as not to intimidate either party in presenting matters to the court...."
The trial court has a duty to remain impartial and refrain from unnecessary remarks. Rowe v. State (1989), Ind., 539 N.E.2d 474, 476. However, it also has a duty to conduct the trial in a manner calculated to promote the ascertainment of truth, fairness, and economy of time. Id. Within the scope of this duty is the authority to make impartial statements about the general admissibility of evidence. Brandon v. State (1979), 272 Ind. 92, 396 N.E.2d 365, 371.
In the present case, the trial court was merely attempting to ensure that the case would progress in an expeditious manner.[3]*274 The trial court's remarks were made to give both parties an indication of how the court would rule on the use of Norcutt's prior statement for impeachment purposes. In part, the remarks served to warn Norcutt's counsel that impeachment by use of the prior statement was possible. The remarks were not made to intimidate either party; they did not constitute grounds for mistrial.
CONCLUSION
We hold that venue was established by a preponderance of the evidence. Furthermore, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying Norcutt's motions for mistrial.
Affirmed.
CHEZEM and FRIEDLANDER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  IND. CODE 35-43-2-1.
[2]  We note that there is no indication in the record that the prosecutor knowingly attempted to mislead Norcutt's counsel.
[3]  We note that the trial had already been delayed by rancor and numerous lengthy legal arguments on evidentiary matters.

=== CASE 2218945 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:58.284012+00 ===

633 N.E.2d 234 (1994)
261 Ill. App. 3d 232
198 Ill. Dec. 772
Earl McGEE, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Warren DANZ, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 4-93-0873.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
Argued March 23, 1994.
Decided May 5, 1994.
Charles H. Delano IV (argued), Delano Law Offices, P.C., Springfield, for appellant.
David B. Mueller (argued), Peoria, for appellee.
Justice STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Earl McGee, appeals from a summary judgment entered in favor of defendant, attorney Warren Danz, in a legal malpractice action based upon defendant's alleged failure to commence litigation within the appropriate statutory period. The parties agree that if a four-year statute of limitations (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 13-214(a)) applies, the trial court properly granted summary judgment.
We affirm.
I. BACKGROUND
On December 23, 1985, plaintiff was injured while working on a remodeling project of a residence owned by Michael Scully, the owner of Ractain Construction Company, the contractor on the project and plaintiff's employer. Plaintiff hired defendant to represent him for claims arising out of this incident. Defendant filed a workers' compensation claim against Scully on behalf of plaintiff but failed to pursue a third-party claim against L.D. Electric, a subcontractor on the project. Sometime between March and December 1989, the parties ended their attorney-client relationship.
Plaintiff hired new counsel and filed a legal malpractice claim against defendant on December 13, 1989, alleging that defendant failed to file a cause of action against responsible third parties within the two-year statute of limitations provided for actions based on personal injuries under section 13-202 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 13-202). Defendant's motion for summary judgment alleged that as a matter of law he could not be negligent for failing to file a third-party claim on behalf of plaintiff because the applicable statute of limitations *235 in this case was section 13-214(a) of the Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 13-214(a)), not section 13-202 of the Code. As a result, defendant points out that the statute of limitations under section 13-214(a) of the Code did not expire until December 23,1989, when defendant no longer represented plaintiff. Thus, the parties are in somewhat anomalous positions before this court  plaintiff urges the application of the two-year statute of limitations (section 13-202 of the Code) to the cause of action underlying his legal malpractice claim, while defendant urges the application of the four-year statute of limitations (section 13-214(a) of the Code).
In his deposition, plaintiff stated that on the date of his injury, he was working on a project remodeling a house owned by Scully. He was directed to the basement of the house to install a support beam in order to shore up the main floor. The only illumination in the basement was temporary lighting installed by L.D. Electric, which had been working at the project site since September 1985. Plaintiff stood on a bucket and used a hammer to knock out a two by four that ran between the floor joists. While bracing himself against an iron sewer pipe, he grabbed a metal rod extending from the two by four and received a severe electric shock from contact of the temporary wiring with the rod. Plaintiff testified that in addition to the temporary wiring, L.D. Electric had run conduit and wiring to the receptacles upstairs for new construction, removed the old fuse box and installed a new circuit breaker, and run wire from the new breaker box out to the "mixer" across the street. Prior to his injury, plaintiff had done some plastering on the main floor, built a fence, and laid a retaining wall on the exterior of the property.
In his deposition, Scully indicated that he had plumbing and heating subcontractors working on the remodeling project. This work required "some demolition and reorganizing of the interior of the house * * *. And all of the mechanical aspects of the house were to be brought up to code." Nanchen Scully, Michael Scully's wife and the other owner of the property, filed an affidavit stating that a program of replacement and repair to the premises was ongoing at the time of plaintiff's injury. The temporary wiring installed in the basement was not intended to be permanent and was installed to enable the workers to see. She stated that the program of replacement and repair did not include structural changes or additions to the property.
II. ANALYSIS
In granting defendant's motion for summary judgment, the trial court relied on Hernon v. E.W. Corrigan Construction Co. (1992), 149 Ill. 2d 190, 172 Ill. Dec. 200, 595 N.E.2d 561, concluding that plaintiff's injury occurred in a "construction-related event." The court made this determination based upon the nature of the entire project rather than the conduct of any individual subcontractor. Accordingly, the court ruled that the four-year statute of limitations of section 13-214(a) of the Code applied.
Plaintiff argues that neither the remodeling project in its entirety nor the work specifically performed by L.D. Electric constitutes anything more than replacement or repair, which the four-year statute of limitations of section 13-214(a) of the Code does not encompass. Defendant contends plaintiff's action was based on injuries he sustained while working on construction of an improvement to real property; thus, the provisions of the four-year statute of limitations apply to the underlying cause of action.
Section 13-214(a) of the Code, the "construction limitations statute," provides as follows:
"Actions based upon tort, contract or otherwise against any person for an act or omission of such person in the design, planning, supervision, observation or management of construction, or construction of an improvement to real property shall be commenced within 4 years from the time the person bringing an action, or his or her privity, knew or should reasonably have known of such act or omission." Ill.Rev. Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 13-214(a).
In Hernon, the supreme court addressed the certified question of whether an action for bodily injury, based on an occurrence under section 13-214(a) of the Code, was barred by section 13-202 of the Code (two-year *236 limitation on actions for personal injuries) if not filed within two years of the date of injury. (Hernon, 149 Ill.2d at 192, 172 Ill. Dec. at 200, 595 N.E.2d at 561.) The plaintiff in Hernon had sustained injuries when he fell from a roof at a construction site. The supreme court concluded as follows:
"After a cursory review of the limitations statutes involved in this appeal, it is apparent that a persuasive argument could be made that either statute could apply to the plaintiff's cause. Whereas section 13-202 applies to `[a]ctions for damages for an injury to the person,' section 13-214(a) applies to `[a]ctions based upon tort.' Plaintiff's cause of action for injuries he sustained while working at a construction site could fall neatly under either statute of limitations. However, based upon our general rules of statutory construction, our appellate court's interpretation of the repose portion of section 13-214, and the legislative history of section 13-214, we agree with the plaintiff that section 13-214(a) governs his cause." (Emphasis added.) Hernon, 149 Ill.2d at 194, 172 Ill. Dec. at 201, 595 N.E.2d at 562.
Plaintiff contends that the Hernon court assumed, with out deciding, that the facts underlying the cause of action necessarily fell within the bounds of section 13-214(a) of the Code  namely, that defendant's acts arose from "the design, planning, supervision, observation or management of construction, or construction of an improvement to real property." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 13-214(a).) At oral argument in this case, plaintiff asserted that the temporary wiring installed by L.D. Electric could not constitute "construction of an improvement" even if other aspects of the remodeling project are deemed to fall within the meaning of the statute.
An "improvement" is "an addition to real property amounting to more than a mere repair or replacement, and which substantially enhances the value of the property. [Citations.] Improvements include buildings and substantial additions or changes to existing buildings." (Calumet Country Club v. Roberts Environmental Control Corp. (1985), 136 Ill.App.3d 610, 613, 91 Ill. Dec. 267, 270, 483 N.E.2d 613, 616.) In St. Louis v. Rockwell Graphic Systems, Inc. (1992), 153 Ill. 2d 1, 4-5, 178 Ill. Dec. 761, 762, 605 N.E.2d 555, 556, the supreme court addressed whether a product incorporated into new construction constituted an improvement and listed four factors for determining whether an improvement was constructed within the meaning of section 13-214(a) of the Code: (1) whether the addition was meant to be permanent or temporary; (2) whether it became an integral component of the overall system; (3) whether the value of the property was increased; and (4) whether the use of the property was enhanced.
We do not agree with plaintiff's view of the remodeling project as one of repair and replacement, the characterization given by Nanchen Scully. The record indicates extensive demolition and renovation involving the electrical, plumbing, and heating systems, as well as plastering work and the erection of retaining walls, all of which had been ongoing for at least three months prior to plaintiff's injury. The nature and scope of the work suggests a permanent rehabilitation of the realty which enhanced its value and life span, rather than mere incidental repairs which accomplish neither. Under these circumstances, we hold that plaintiff sustained his injuries "while working at a construction site" and, accordingly, that the four-year limitation period of section 13-214(a) of the Code governs his cause of action. See Hernon, 149 Ill.2d at 194,172 Ill.Dec. at 201, 595 N.E.2d at 562.
Plaintiff argues that even if the project comes within section 13-214(a) of the Code, the temporary wiring installed by L.D. Electric does not constitute "construction of an improvement," and fails to meet the St. Louis test of permanency. Plaintiff therefore asks this court to find that dual statutes of limitation apply to construction-related injuries dependent upon the type and amount of work a contractor or subcontractor performs at a construction site. Even if we ignored evidence of L.D. Electric's extensive electrical work on the premises, we would still conclude the limitations period of section 13-214(a) of the Code applies to plaintiff's *237 cause of action. The temporary lighting installed in the basement was clearly incidental to, and an essential part of, renovation of the premises. Moreover, if we concluded that the temporary nature of a subcontractor's work at a construction site exempted it from the time limitations of section 13-214(a) of the Code, we would necessarily be excluding actions brought pursuant to the Illinois Structural Work Act, involving scaffolds, hoists, cranes, stays, ladders, or supports (see Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 48, par. 59.90 et seq.), the exact basis for the cause of action at issue in Hernon. We see no rational basis for imposing this artificial distinction and decline to do so.
Summary judgment is appropriate only when the pleadings, depositions, and admissions, together with any affidavits, show there is no genuine issue as to a material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 2-1005.) Because no genuine issue of fact exists that plaintiff discharged defendant prior to the running of the four-year statute of limitations under section 13-214(a) of the Code, as a matter of law defendant cannot be liable for legal malpractice for failing to file a claim against third parties prior to December 23, 1989, the date the statute of limitations expired in this case.
III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
Affirmed.
COOK and GREEN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2218948 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:58.344566+00 ===

197 Mich. App. 312 (1992)
494 N.W.2d 863
GREAT LAKES HEATING, COOLING, REFRIGERATION AND SHEET METAL CORPORATION
v.
TROY SCHOOL DISTRICT
Docket No. 129890.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1992, at 10:30 A.M.
Lawrence D. Heitsch, P.C. (by Lawrence D. Heitsch), for Great Lakes Heating, Cooling, Refrigeration and Sheet Metal Corporation.
Dickinson, Wright, Moon, Van Dusen & Freeman (by Charles F. Clippert and Terry W. Milne), for Troy School District.
*313 Grylls, Facca, Richter & Pregler (by Patrick A. Facca), for Mechanical Heat & Cold, Inc.
Amici Curiae:
Federlein, Grylls & Keranen, P.C. (by John K. Grylls), for the Construction Association.
Michigan Association of School Boards (by Linda L. Bruin).
Before: SHEPHERD, P.J., and WEAVER and TAYLOR, JJ.
WEAVER, J.
Defendant school district solicited bids from contractors to work on the construction of a new high school. The advertisement stated:
Notice is hereby given that sealed bids will be received by Troy School District, 1100 Urbancrest, Troy, Michigan XXXXX-XXXX  by delivery & mail on or before April 3, 1990, at 2:00 P.M.E.S.T.
Plaintiff was bidding on Bid Package No. 2-11, mechanical work. Within the bid-package proposal, there was a specific provision concerning late bids that read:
Bids must be received at the designated location prior to the time and date for receipt of bids indicated in the Advertisement to Bid or any extension thereof made by addendum. Bids received after designated bid receipt deadlines may at the discretion of the Owner, be returned unopened.
Plaintiff submitted its bid at 2:05 P.M. on April 3, 1990. The bid was marked "late." According to three of defendant school district's employees that were present and in charge of receiving bids, *314 plaintiff's bid was submitted after 2:00 P.M., as shown on the clock located in the office at which the bids were to be received.
At 6:30 P.M. on April 3, 1990, all bids were opened except plaintiff's bid and one other that was also filed after 2:00 P.M. On April 19, 1990, plaintiff filed an action seeking an order requiring the school district to open and consider its bid before awarding a contract.
Following a hearing, the trial court found as a matter of fact that the bid was submitted five minutes after the deadline. The trial court further held that plaintiff's bid should still be opened and considered by the school district. Pursuant to the court's order, defendant allowed both late bids to be opened and considered. Defendant granted plaintiff the contract for the mechanical work.
Mechanical Heat & Cold, Inc., and Monte Costella & Company, Inc., who had entered timely bids, both intervened, asking for relief from the order, which the trial court denied. Defendant and Mechanical both appeal. We reverse and remand.
The essential question presented is whether the court erred in ordering the school board to open and consider the late bid submitted by plaintiff, substituting its discretion for that of the school board.
The exercise of discretion to accept or reject bids will be controlled by the courts only when necessary to prevent fraud, injustice, or the violation of a trust. The courts will indulge the presumption that the authorities acted in good faith. J J Zayti Trucking, Inc v Detroit, 137 Mich. App. 705; 359 NW2d 201 (1984); Leavy v City of Jackson, 247 Mich. 447; 226 N.W. 214 (1929).
We recognize that judicial intervention in procurement necessarily results in delay and the *315 expenditure of funds on behalf of all parties. We hold that a trial court cannot disturb the decision of a school board on a bid unless there has been some form of fraud, abuse, or illegality. See Sea-Land Service, Inc v Brown, 600 F2d 429 (CA 3, 1979), Bud Johnson Construction Co, Inc v Metropolitan Transit Comm, 272 NW2d 31 (Minn, 1978), and In re Nole & Son, Inc v Bd of Ed of the City School Dist of Norwich, 129 AD2d 873; 514 NYS2d 274 (1987). We find that to hold otherwise would create the possibility of opening a floodgate of litigation that would benefit neither the public authority nor the citizens and taxpayers it is attempting to represent and serve.
We recognize and reject plaintiff's arguments concerning the factual question regarding when the bid was delivered and the effect of implementing daylight savings time.
We reverse the order directing the school board to open and consider the bid, and remand to allow the trial court to fashion an appropriate remedy. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739172 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:03.005675+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/ISSUES
The Estate of He Crow (decedent) brought this wrongful death action in Shannon County against defendant Jensen. Decedent’s three children and one stepchild brought personal injury actions against Jensen for injuries sustained in the same incident. A jury trial was held before the Honorable Merton B. Tice, Jr., on May 7, 1991. The jury returned a verdict for the Estate in the amount of $1,000,000. The trial court entered judgment against Jensen on May 31, 1991. Jensen moved for a new trial, judgment notwithstanding the verdict and remittitur. Trial court denied these motions in an order dated September 21, 1991. Jensen appeals from the judgment and order denying his motions, by notice of appeal filed on September 27, 1991. Based upon error as set forth in Issues II and III, set forth below, we reverse and remand.
On appeal, Jensen raises the following issues:
I. Did the issue of contributory negligence constitute a question of fact for the jury?
II. Did trial court err in finding Jensen’s agent negligent per sel
III. Did certain statements by the Estate’s counsel during closing argument constitute grounds for a mistriall
IV. Did trial court abuse its discretion in jury selection1
Due to our determination, we need not consider Jensen’s Issue IV.
FACTS
This wrongful death action arose from a traffic accident involving Pamela He Crow’s (decedent’s) automobile and Jensen’s farm combine, resulting in decedent’s death.
On October 23, 1989, decedent, with her three children and one step-son, was traveling west on Highway 18 between Oelrichs and Pine Ridge, South Dakota, in her 1978 Datsun. They entered a stretch of road which involved driving up a hill, then descended onto a gradual decline leading to a narrow bridge over White Clay Creek. About the time decedent’s automobile hit the crest of the hill, Jensen’s combine (driven by an employee of Jensen) prepared to enter the bridge traveling east. The combine header was 24 feet 9 inches wide. The bridge width was 30 feet wide. The combine entered the bridge at a speed of approximately three miles per hour.
Testimony admitted at trial attested to the fact that as decedent’s car hit the top of the hill, the sun blinded decedent’s eyes and the eyes of the occupants. Decedent’s step-son testified that the occupants of the automobile could not see the bottom of the hill where the bridge was located. Decedent’s expert witness testified that decedent’s range of vision was less than one hundred feet, and may have been as little as ten feet. The combine was on the bridge when decedent finally saw it as she entered a shaded area near the bridge. *188Decedent attempted to brake but did not have enough time and space, with the collision ensuing. The Estate’s expert witness testified that decedent was only able to slow her car to 34 miles an hour before colliding with the combine.
Further discussion of pertinent facts to each related issue in dispute will be addressed in our consideration of those issues.
Standard of Review
Historically, we have held that it is within the trial court's judicial discretion if a new trial should be granted, and we will not disturb that decision absent a clear showing of abuse of discretion. Kusser v. Feller, 453 N.W.2d 619, 621 (S.D.1990). An abuse of discretion occurs only if no “judicial mind in view of the law and the circumstances of the particular case, could reasonably have reached such a conclusion.” Estate of Pejsa, 459 N.W.2d 243, 245 (S.D.1990). Jensen v. Weyrens, 474 N.W.2d 261, 263 (S.D.1991).
DECISION
I. Did the issue of contributory negligence constitute a question of fact for the jury?
Jensen strongly argues that the issue of contributory negligence should not have been submitted to the jury for determination. We disagree. Jensen argues that trial court abused its discretion in not granting his motion for a new trial, and, therefore, the judgment entered against him was improper. We agree that a new trial should be granted as set forth in our later discourse on different issues. This objection is based on the assertion that decedent’s negligence was more than slight, as a matter of law, in comparison with Jensen’s negligence.
In considering the issue of whether decedent was more than slightly contribu-torily negligent as a matter of law, thereby barring any recovery, we must examine our statute referring to comparative negligence. SDCL 20-9-2 provides:
In all actions brought to recover damages for injuries to a person or to his property caused by the negligence of another, the fact that the plaintiff may have been guilty of contributory negligence shall not bar a recovery when the contributory negligence of the plaintiff was slight in comparison with the negligence of the defendant, but in such case, the damages shall be reduced in proportion to the amount of plaintiff’s contributory negligence.
In considering the application of this statute to contributory negligence cases, we have said that, “[t]he comparison is made with the negligence of the defendant, rather than with the ordinarily prudent person ...” Lovell v. Oahe Elec. Co-op, 382 N.W.2d 396, 399 (S.D.1986). However, this Court must also consider, “the norm of conduct of an ordinary, reasonably prudent person ... in determining the extent to which each party fell below that standard, and thus, was found negligent or contribu-torily negligent.” Mitchell v. Ankney, 396 N.W.2d 312, 313 (S.D.1986); Lovell, 382 N.W.2d at 399. The term “slight” in SDCL 20-9-2 has been defined to mean “small in quantum in comparison with the negligence of the defendant.” Crabb v. Wade, 84 S.D. 93, 167 N.W.2d 546, 549 (1969); Estate of Largent v. United States, 910 F.2d 497, 499 (8th Cir.1990). It is a question of fact which varies with the facts and circumstances of each case whether a plaintiff’s negligence is slight compared to that of the defendant. Urban v. Wait’s Supermarket, Inc., 294 N.W.2d 793, 796 (S.D.1980); Estate of Largent, 910 F.2d at 499.
A contributorily negligent plaintiff may not, however, recover anything in South Dakota if the plaintiff’s negligence is more than slight in comparison with the negligence of the defendant. SDCL 20-9-2. Here, we cannot say that, as a matter of law, the decedent’s conduct constituted negligence which was more than slight. Rather, we characterize this as a classic factual dispute which must be determined by the triers of fact, the jury. We refer to *189a Supreme Court case in Pennsylvania. See, Gillespie v. Bentz, 401 Pa. 588, 166 A.2d 25 (1960). The Pennsylvania case also involved impairment of vision by the sun. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania refused to hold that the driver was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. In its rationale, the Pennsylvania court reflected that the driver was not required by any rule of law to anticipate that a vehicle would be blocking the highway.
Was the combine blocking the highway? Was it blocking the highway so that the He Crow vehicle could not pass through the bridge? Could the He Crow vehicle have avoided the combine? These are questions which a jury should decide. In Gillespie, the court dismissed the idea that the vehicle should have made an instantaneous stop to avoid a collision as it might precipitate another peril. Under South Dakota law, a driver may assume that other drivers will exercise ordinary care on the highways. Burmeister v. Youngstrom, 81 S.D. 578, 139 N.W.2d 226 (1965). Pamela He Crow, deceased, it can be argued, had the right to believe that Jensen would exercise ordinary care and, thus, not block both sides of the traveled portion of the road. We note that the driver of the combine testified that he did not travel faster through the bridge because he was afraid he might damage the combine. It might well be argued that it would have been better judgment to hurriedly cross the bridge to avoid a longer exposure to danger.
An accident reconstruction expert for the Estate testified that the combine was oversized and was taking up the entire roadway and that the driver of the combine did not stop or get off the road or make any effort to stop the combine. Further, this expert testified that the combine driver could easily have moved over to the right, by lifting the cutter bar on the header of the combine and then putting it out over the top of the bridge rail. Thus, the expert testified that both combine and automobile could have fit on the bridge if only the combine operator had made this adjustment. Another fact to be considered is that there were radios in the combine and in a truck driven by one of the other employees of Jensen. These employees did not use the radios which could have possibly obviated this tragic accident because the radios could have been employed to advise the combine driver when it would be safe to cross the bridge.
Appellant/Jensen owned the combine in question. On the date of the accident, Jensen’s employees were harvesting a field for Schwarting, a farmer. Kaplan, Jensen’s employee, was moving the combine from Schwarting’s west field to his east field. No instructions or supervision on transporting the combine was given to employees on the manner or the route of moving the combine from the west to the east field. These apparent facts, coupled with the non-use of radios, plus the slow movement over the bridge and the non-removal of a header on the combine, establish that these are factual issues which a jury should consider. Therefore, we cannot say that the He Crow Estate may not recover anything because Pamela He Crow’s negligence is more than slight, as a matter of law, in comparison with negligence of Jensen. SDCL 20-9-2.
We are not unmindful that decedent was quite familiar with this stretch of highway, having traveled it frequently. This stretch of highway was between decedent’s house and her mother’s house. The decedent had driven this same road two hours before that same day. Testimony was admitted that the sun’s position and concomitant effect on vision was generally known among frequent travelers over this stretch of road. Jensen advocates that our decision in Dartt v. Berghorst, 484 N.W.2d 891 (S.D.1992), and Howard v. Sanborn, 483 N.W.2d 796 (S.D.1992), upholds his theory that He Crow was negligent in driving and that her negligence therefore bars recovery as a matter of law. We have reviewed both of these cases and hold that the facts are distinguishable from the present factual scenario. Howard involved headlights on a busy highway in the evening time, facts which are far different than this rural set*190ting. In Berghorst, inter alia, Berghorst admitted during the trial that he “shouldn’t have hit the plow. I shouldn’t have been in that kind of condition. I should have stayed behind him.” Berghorst had been advised by C.B. radio that two snowplows were on the highway and it was difficult to see because snow was being kicked up by the plow. We simply hold that these two cases are inapposite to the case before us.
If under all of the evidence, both parties could be found to be negligent, the comparative negligence of the parties is a question of fact which is within the province of the jury. Thomas v. St. Mary’s Roman Catholic Church, 283 N.W.2d 254 (S.D.1979). Trial court reasonably reached a legal conclusion, under the circumstances of this case, to submit this case for a jury’s deliberation. No abuse of discretion is found on this issue. Pejsa at 245.
II. Did trial court err in finding Jensen’s agent negligent per sel
In instruction # 24, trial court informed the jury that the court had found the operator of the combine to be negligent as a matter of law by violating the highway safety laws of the state in failing to utilize an escort vehicle. Prom a review of the record and based on this instruction, it appears trial court made this determination based on an administrative rule, ARSD 70:03:01:20. We hold that the determination that Jensen was negligent as a matter of law, based as it was on ARSD 70:03:01:20, is in error.
ARSD 70:03:01:20 provided, at the time relied upon by trial court, as follows:
Escort vehicles are required in front on two-lane highways or in the rear on divided highways for loads over 16 feet wide while on the interstate highway system and for loads over 20 feet wide while on the state highway system. The permit-issuing authority may also require escort vehicles because of route limitations, traffic conditions, or unusual permit vehicle configuration conditions.
Special traffic handling is required if the permit vehicle extends more than two feet into an adjacent driving lane or passing lane or if the width of the vehicle does not allow normal traffic to pass without either the traffic or the permit vehicle being driven on the roadway’s shoulder. At a minimum, a ten-foot wide lane must be allowed for normal traffic to pass. Special traffic handling may also be required if the permit vehicle has to perform special maneuvers in order to make turns, cross bridges, or clear height restrictions.
Special traffic handling includes escorts and flagpersons located at the front or rear, or both, of the vehicle, or as required by the permit-issuing authority, to stop, advise, or hold normal traffic until the permit vehicle has completed its special maneuver or it can be pulled off the road at an intersecting road, turnout, or similar place and stopped to allow the normal traffic to pass. (Emphasis added.)
ARSD 70:03:01:20 has since been revised, though its terms have not been materially altered. However, in effect at this time is the following administrative rule:
70:03:01:18. No permit needed for movement of hay, feed, or farm machinery by farmers — Exception. Except on the interstate highway system, farmers may move their own overwidth and overheight but not overweight hay or stacked livestock feed, including baled feed, and their own overwidth and over-height but not overweight farm machinery without a permit. (Emphasis added.)
This rule exception is still in effect.
It is readily apparent from a reading of the administrative rules together that the section of the administrative rules in which they are contained pertains to vehicles which must obtain a permit from the permit-issuing authority. It is a general proposition that administrative rules are subject to the same rules of construction as statutes. Nelson v. State Board of Den*191tistry, 464 N.W.2d 621 (S.D.1991). Therefore, we construe administrative rules according to their intent as determined from the rule as a whole and other rules relating to the same subject. See, Border States Paving, Inc. v. S.D. Dept. of Revenue, 437 N.W.2d 872 (S.D.1989) (statutes construed according to their intent as determined from statute as a whole and enactments relating to same subject). Jensen did not violate ARSD 70:08:01:20 because ARSD 70:03:01:18 specifically exempts farm machinery from the permit vehicle regulations. It is undeniable that the vehicle Jensen’s agent was driving was, indeed, a piece of motorized or self-propelled farm machinery. Cf. State v. Poncelet, 463 N.W.2d 673, 674 (S.D.1990). Further, it is equally undeniable that Jensen is, in fact, a farmer and that his agent was carrying out those activities for Jensen. Though Jensen was engaged in custom combining for another farmer, we find no indication in ARSD 70:03:01:18, or this section of the administrative rules as a whole, that this activity does not come within the definition of “farmers” therein, nor will we read such an implication into ARSD 70:03:01:18.
Additionally relevant to this discussion, is SDCL 32-22-3. This statute, as it existed in 1989, provided:
Except for farm machinery, no motor vehicle may operate upon a public highway if the width, measured at the widest points, either of the vehicle or the load, exceeds one hundred two inches, excluding any required safety equipment. A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor. (Emphasis added.)
This statutory provision exempts “farm machinery” from SDCL 32-22-38.
We reverse the trial court’s holding that Jensen was negligent as a matter of law, based as it was, upon a conceptual violation of ARSD 70:03:01:20.
III. Did certain statements by Estate’s counsel during closing argument constitute grounds for a mistrial"!
Jensen argues that trial counsel for the Estate (Mines) improperly requested a certain dollar amount for a damage award. Jensen further argues that a one million dollar damage award by the jury was not justified or supported by evidence produced at trial.
Estate’s counsel during closing argument twice requested a certain dollar value to be awarded from the jury in damages. He expressed:
Cars cost a lot. Education costs a lot. It costs a lot to raise children, take care of them. I’m going to try to put a figure on it and, you know, whatever you decide, I’m sure the family’s going to feel was very fair. And when you do this, we’re not asking for sympathy. We’re asking for justice, and I’m going to ask you to give the children for the loss of their mother for the pecuniary loss 50,000 a year for 20 years until they reach the age of maturity. (Emphasis added.)
It appears that by multiplication that this comes to the exact amount awarded by the jury, a million dollars. However, Estate offered no testimony by expert witness to opine on the monetary value for the pecuniary loss of the decedent’s services. These statements on the future pecuniary value of the loss of decedent’s services were obviously based on Estate’s own calculations. We held in Binegar v. Day, 80 S.D. 141, 151, 120 N.W.2d 521, 527 (1963) that an attorney cannot make his closing argument “... an avenue for the presentation of unsworn testimony.”
On one occasion, in a limited holding, this Court permitted unsworn testimony by an attorney during closing argument concerning damages. In Stormo v. Strong, 469 N.W.2d 816, 825 (S.D.1991), we held “Given the nature of the services provided and the absence of a well-established market to determine the cost of such services, we cannot say it was an abuse of the trial court’s discretion ... to permit Stormo’s attorney to illustrate how such damages might be calculated.” This all pertained to past services. The service in question was home health care. Furthermore, the Stormo jury actually heard evidence as to the amount of past services rendered by three lay witnesses and was asked to determine *192an award for those services. Here, however, He Crow provided only conjecture for unascertained future services.
Posed before this Court is this specific damage issue: In closing argument, may counsel request the jury to award a specific amount, without benefit of having presented specific evidence or testimony regarding the pecuniary value of decedent’s services? In wrongful death actions, plaintiff has the burden of proving the pecuniary loss resulting from the death of the decedent. Flagtwet v. Smith, 393 N.W.2d 452, 455 (S.D.1986) (citing Gilbert v. Root, 294 N.W.2d 431 (S.D.1980)). The amount of damages to be awarded is a factual issue to be determined by the trier of fact. This Court reviews the issue on appeal under the clearly erroneous standard. Pope v. Brown, 357 N.W.2d 510 (S.D.1984). Damages must be established by facts, not by legal argument alone.
In the present case, the Estate, while listing the decedent’s services, made no attempt during trial to put any monetary figure on their value. Estate presented no evidence showing actual economic loss. Thus, a jury had no basis upon which to reasonably assess the speculative value of the loss of a pecuniary value of decedent’s services. See generally, Flagtwet v. Smith, 367 N.W.2d 188, 191-93 (S.D.1985) (trial court did not commit clear error in adopting expert witness testimony on computation of economic loss of decedent); Jennings v. Hodges, 80 S.D. 582, 129 N.W.2d 59 (1964).
We hold that it was clear error for the trial court to allow Estate’s counsel to request a certain damage award amount in closing argument, under the state of the evidence. We reverse and remand on the issue of damages for a determination of a damage award, if any, in a new trial.
IV. Did trial court abuse its discretion in jury selection?
Several questions on jury selection were addressed by Jensen with the argument that the trial court committed error on being insensitive to the hunger potential of jurors and counsel, as well as rulings on juror qualifications. We shall not address these various arguments, fully briefed by both parties to this litigation, due to our treatment on the merits mooting out a necessity for treatment of Issue IV.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
SABERS, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.

=== CASE 9739173 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:03.012699+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
1. I agree with the majority that plaintiff’s contributory negligence does not bar her recovery as a matter of law under Issue I.
2. On Issue II, I agree with the majority that the trial court erred in determining that Jensen’s conduct constituted negligence per se as a matter of law.
3. Since we reverse and remand on Issue II, we should not reach Issue III. Anything we do say on Issue III is dicta because it is not necessary to the holding of the decision. If we discuss Issue III to provide guidance on retrial, we should caution only, not reverse, because there is evidence of substantial damages in the record. The children lost their mother’s companionship, guidance and services for their lifetime. Counsel’s request for “$50,000 a year for 20 years” is simply argument, not evidence, and the jury was so instructed. See Stormo v. Strong, 469 N.W.2d 816, 825 (S.D.1991) (not an abuse of trial court’s discretion to instruct jury to use their own knowledge to establish a value for services and to permit plaintiff’s attorney to illustrate how such damages might be calculated). Stormo is a very recent unanimous opinion of this court where we stated:
‘The rule against indefinite or uncertain damages applies only to such damages as are not the definite or certain results of the wrong. Uncertainty as to the fact is fatal to recovery, but uncertainty as to the measure or extent of the damages does not bar recovery.’ ... However, it would be a better practice to present *193some testimony on the reasonable value of the services actually provided.
Stormo, 469 N.W.2d at 825, (citations omitted) (emphasis added).
4.Since we reverse and remand on Issue II, I would not reach Issue IV either.

=== CASE 9739174 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:03.554074+00 ===

JUSTICE WOODWARD delivered the opinion of the court: On April 6, 1988, decedent, Carol Pellegrino, fell down a flight of stairs while working in a building in which the appellant, William G. Ceas and Company (the employer), was a tenant. As a result of the fall, she suffered a subdural hematoma and died on April 12, 1988. Her surviving spouse, Robert Pellegrino, and youngest son, Douglas Pellegrino (the claimants), sought death benefits pursuant to section 7(a) of the Workers’ Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.7(a)). The arbitrator awarded benefits to claimants in the amount of $236 per week to Robert Pellegrino and for the benefit of Douglas Pellegrino, son of decedent, for as long as he remained a full-time student and had not attained the age of 25. Burial expenses were awarded in the statutory amount of $1,750; medical expenses of $20,111 were also awarded. Both parties took a review of the arbitrator’s decision to the Industrial Commission (Commission). The Commission, in an order dated June 14, 1991, affirmed the decision of the arbitrator. The circuit court confirmed the Commission’s decision, and the employer now appeals to this court. On March 19, 1993, an opinion was filed by this court reversing the decision of the circuit court. Subsequently, claimants filed a petition for rehearing. The petition for rehearing was granted, and the opinion was withdrawn. After reviewing the entire matter, a majority of this court has reached the conclusion that the Commission’s decision should be affirmed. At this point, we note that the dissent gives a lengthy recounting of the case’s procedural history. Admittedly, it is one filled with twists and turns. It appears that the dissent views this as reflective of an arbitrary and capricious approach to the case before us. Our perspective is that this has been an exceedingly difficult case, in which the majority has conscientiously endeavored to achieve a just result. The following evidence was adduced at the arbitration hearing. We take exception to the dissent’s implication that the following presentation of the facts gives a distorted presentation of the evidence. Decedent was employed as a secretary by Ceas Mortgage Company. This company was on the second floor of an office building, along with Ceas Development and William G. Ceas and Company. A single oak staircase led up to the second floor. The building had no elevator. The stairway was the only way to get to and from the second floor and was used by employees of Ceas Mortgage Company, Ceas Development, and William G. Ceas and Company. Part of decedent’s duties included putting Federal Express envelopes into the Federal Express box at the end of the day. On April 6, 1988, another secretary, Nancy Horcher, noticed that decedent was in a hurry at the end of the day. Horcher testified that decedent had been running back and forth to get something finished before she left. Horcher heard a noise soon after decedent left the office. Horcher then looked out an interior window and saw that decedent had-fallen at the bottom of the stairs. Horcher went to get help from the company comptroller, Kreil Greiter. On cross-examination, she noted that decedent sometimes drank alcoholic beverages during the work day. Horcher sometimes detected alcohol on decedent’s breath when passing her at work. She did notice that decedent had been drinking on April 6, 1988. Virginia Griffith, an employee of another tenant of the building, Fiordalis Associates, testified that at 5 p.m. on April 6, 1988, she had locked up her office to go to the washroom. Upon exiting the washroom, Griffith noticed a woman sprawled out on the floor at the bottom of the stairway. It is undisputed that this woman was decedent. Decedent was bald-headed; a wig lay off to her side. Griffith asked if she could help decedent, who appeared to be nervous and in a great hurry. Decedent said she had to get to the Federal Express box and then get home. About this time, a man from upstairs (Kreil Greiter) came down to offer assistance. Decedent did not say how she had fallen. Bystanders helped her up, and she rested a few moments. Griffith noticed a gash with dried blood around it on the back of the decedent’s head. She refused any medical assistance, namely, calling an ambulance. Decedent put the wig back on her head and left in the direction of the Federal Express box and, subsequently, drove out of the building’s parking lot. On cross-examination, Griffith stated that packages had to be in the Federal Express box at either 5 or 5:30 p.m. for the next day’s delivery. Griffith thought she smelled the odor of alcohol on decedent’s breath; however, she did not think that decedent was under the influence of alcohol. Greiter testified that he was the employer’s comptroller. On the subject date at about 5 p.m., he opened the office door and saw decedent lying at the bottom of the steps, where Griffith was attending to her. Greiter went down the stairs to see if he could help. Decedent seemed disoriented. He said that he would call an ambulance, but she refused any medical assistance. Greiter helped get her on her feet. He noticed several Federal Express envelopes in her purse. Greiter also observed a lump on the back of her head. Greiter stated that he was aware of instances in which decedent had been drinking at work. Greiter did not smell alcohol on decedent’s breath on the subject date. On cross-examination, Greiter stated that he noticed nothing unusual about the stairs on the subject date. He reiterated that decedent was in a hurry; he did not see her go to the Federal Express box. At about 4:30 p.m. on the day in question, Greiter recalled seeing decedent moving quickly from the typewriter to the printer. Claimant Robert Pellegrino testified that he had been married to decedent since April 14, 1956. After work on the date in question, claimant noticed that decedent was very upset. He noticed that she had bruises on her body and a bump on the back of her head. Decedent told the claimant that she had fallen at work. She told him that she was very upset about the fall and about her boss’ habit of giving her things to do at quitting time. Claimant stated that decedent arrived home at the usual time, about 5:50 p.m. On April 8, decedent began to complain that she felt like she was coming down with the flu. The following day, she was getting progressively worse and decided to lie down on the couch. When claimant could not awaken her, he summoned paramedics. Decedent was taken to Humana Hospital, where she died on April 12, 1988. The cause of death was listed as fontotemporal epidural hematoma. Experts for both claimant and the employer agreed that the fall was the cause of decedent’s death. Previously, decedent had suffered from breast cancer and had undergone a mastectomy of the left breast. At the time of her death, she was found to have advanced cancer of the breast with metastases to the brain and rib. Decedent had received chemotherapy and radiation treatment for her cancer. Claimant testified that decedent had completed her radiation therapy approximately one month before the date of the accident. Decedent had been taking the drug Coumadin as an anticoagulant and was also taking Nolvadex, an anti-estrogen breast cancer treatment. Claimant testified that decedent drank alcohol socially, but was unaware of any instances in which she drank at work. Claimant did not notice alcohol on decedent’s breath on April 6, 1988. Kim Ash, a manager in the employer’s executive office, testified that she noticed several incidents when decedent would be drinking around lunch time. Ash noticed the smell of alcohol on decedent several times a week. She did not notice such a smell of alcohol on decedent’s breath on the subject day. Ash also testified that the last pick-up time on the Federal Express box outside the building had always been 6 p.m. None of the witnesses testified that they noticed the smell of alcohol on April 6, 1988, and Virginia Griffith stated that she did not believe decedent was under the influence of alcohol. Dr. William Barnhart, testifying for the employer, opined that decedent’s fall could have been a sequence of events which were the result of decedent being on Nolvadex, having been weakened from chemotherapy, and having metastatic cancer into the brain. Barn-hart admitted that he could find nothing in the medical record to indicate that decedent was, in fact, weakened by cancer. He also stated that he used the word "potential” because he could not tell from the records whether decedent was suffering any side effects from the medicine. Dr. Nathaniel Greenberg testified for claimant. In Dr. Green-berg’s opinion, the fall was not due to either medication or brain metastases. He did state, though, that it was possible that a person could suffer dizziness from chemotherapy and that it was possible that the brain metastases could cause dizziness.  On appeal, the employer argues that the Commission erred in finding that this was an unexplained fall. In support, the employer argues that the Commission erroneously rejected the idiopathic nature of decedent’s fall. Claimant argues that the fall was unexplained, rather than idiopathic. Idiopathic falls result from internal, personal origins, while unexplained falls result from neutral origins. (Oldham v. Industrial Comm’n (1985), 139 Ill. App. 3d 594, 487 N.E.2d 693.) Illinois denies compensation for idiopathic falls (Elliot v. Industrial Comm’n (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 238, 505 N.E.2d 1062), but awards compensation for unexplained falls. Chicago Tribune Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 260, 483 N.E.2d 327. The employer suggests that this issue should be reviewed as erroneous as a matter of law. The employer cites Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665, for the proposition that when undisputed facts are susceptible to a single reasonable inference the issue presented to the court on review becomes a question of law. Claimant agrees with this proposition, but points out that the facts in this case are susceptible to more than one inference. If more than one inference may be drawn from the undisputed facts on any issue, the determination of such issues is a question of fact, and the conclusion of the Commission will not be disturbed on review unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. (Caterpillar, 129 Ill. 2d 52, 541 N.E.2d 665.) We agree with claimant. From the undisputed facts of this case, one could conclude either that decedent suffered an idiopathic fall or an unexplained fall. Therefore, this issue should be reviewed under the manifest weight of the evidence standard.  The finding of the Commission that this was an unexplained fall was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. The employer’s expert witness, Dr. Barnhart, testified that in his opinion decedent’s cancer-related condition caused her fall. Dr. Barnhart admitted that he could not find evidence in the medical record that decedent was in a weakened condition or that she was suffering any side effects from medication. Also, other employees of the William Ceas Company testified that decedent was functioning normally, had not had any dizzy spells, nor had she had any other falls at work. It was for the Commission to determine whether or not the fall was unexplained, and the Commission’s decision was clearly not against the manifest weight of the evidence.  The employer also argues that the finding of the Commission that the fall occurred on the employer’s premises was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Illinois Bell Telephone Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 478, 546 N.E.2d 603, was cited for the proposition that injuries sustained by an employee leaving from work in the common areas of a building are not compensable. Claimant argues that Illinois Bell is not applicable because the employer in that case was a tenant occupying an office on the second floor of a shopping mall complex. The employer in that case had no interest in the common areas of the building. There were many different mall entrances, and employees were not expected to use any particular route to get to the employer’s premises. In the instant case, William Ceas Company, Ceas Development, and Ceas Mortgage Company occupied the entire second floor of the building. The stairway in question was the only way for employees to get to work. The only people who used the stairway were Ceas employees and Ceas customers. Therefore, claimant argues that this is an entirely different situation than in Illinois Bell. Claimant asserts that we should follow the decision in Master Leakfinding Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 517, 367 N.E.2d 1308. In that case, claimant suffered a fall on the back stairs of a building the employer shared with an architectural firm with which it was engaged in a joint venture. The Commission in that case believed the stairs to be a part of the employer’s premises. The Commission’s award was reinstated by the supreme court. We find that the circuit court and Commission were correct in deciding that the stairway in this case was on the employer’s premises. The circuit court noted the intertwined nature of the Ceas companies and that the stairway was the only means to get to and from the second floor. This would make the instant case more similar to Master Leakfinding than to Illinois Bell.  Further, the employer argues that the finding of the Commission that the accident arose out of decedent’s employment is erroneous as a matter of law and contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. For an employee’s injuries to be compensable, those injuries must arise out of and in the course of his or her employment, and both elements must be present at the time of the accident to justify compensation. (Hatfill v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 547, 560 N.E.2d 369.) "Arising out of’ refers to the origin or cause of the accident and presupposes a causal connection between employment and the accidental injury; "in the course of’ refers to the time, place and circumstances under which the accident occurred. Illinois Bell, 131 Ill. 2d 478, 546 N.E.2d 603. It is the Commission’s province to determine the credibility of the witnesses and to determine causal connection between a claimant’s condition of ill being and her employment. (BMS Catastrophe v. Industrial Comm’n (1993), 245 Ill. App. 3d 359, 365.) The question of whether an injury is causally connected to a person’s employment is to be determined by the Commission, and its decision will not be set aside unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Williams v. Industrial Comm’n (1993), 244 Ill. App. 3d 204.) A reviewing court will not reject reasonable inferences made by the Commission merely because the court might have drawn contrary inferences on the same facts. Archer Daniels Midland Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 107. Claimant testified that, after the subject fall, decedent had told him about her anger with the boss’ habit of giving her things to do right before quitting time. Nancy Horcher stated that, right before the fall, decedent had been running back and forth to finish something before she left. Kreil Greiter also saw decedent hurriedly moving from her "typewriter” to the printer immediately prior to quitting time. Subsequently, Horcher heard the noise of decedent falling down the stairs. Virginia Griffith testified that she came upon decedent sprawled on the floor. Griffith sought to help decedent, who stated that she had to get to the Federal Express box. Decedent appeared nervous and in a great hurry. Greiter, who came from upstairs, assisted Griffith in getting decedent to her feet. Greiter and Griffith offered to assist decedent in obtaining medical help. Decedent declined, stating that she had to get to the Federal Express box to mail envelopes. Greiter observed several Federal Express envelopes in decedent’s hands. There was no indication that the Federal Express envelopes were anything but the employer’s business, and after she got up from the fall, she took a right turn to the Federal Express box. The evidence as to when envelopes had to be delivered to the Federal Express box to ensure next day delivery was conflicting. Also, the record does not indicate that decedent was going anywhere but home, after first dropping off the envelopes in the Federal Express box. From these facts, the Commission could have inferred the following. At the end of a workday, decedent had been told by her boss to prepare and mail a number of Federal Express envelopes. It was typical of the boss to make this type of last-minute demand of decedent. Decedent rushed to prepare the employer’s envelopes. She then hurriedly left the office. Her immediate destination was the Federal Express box located on the premises where she would mail the envelopes. In the process of quickly going down the stairs, decedent lost her footing, fell down the stairs and incurred the fatal injury. But for the employer’s habit of requiring last-minute preparation and mailing of Federal Express envelopes and the resulting stress that it placed on decedent, there would have been no fatal fall. Given these permissible inferences, claimant proved that the risk of this type of injury to decedent was increased as a consequence of her work. Orsini v. Industrial Comm’n (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 38, 509 N.E.2d 1005. The dissent asserts that the majority opinion classifies claimant’s fall as employment related and omits testimony that undermines that finding. The evidence, however, clearly supports the Commission’s reasonable inference that claimant’s fall occurred while she was in the process of going to the Federal Express box to mail envelopes transmitting business of the employer. As pointed out in this opinion, the Commission found that the claimant was in the course of her employment at the time of the fall. This was a reasonable inference the Commission could make from the facts. The dissent seeks to avoid this finding by stating that as a matter of law claimant’s fall did not arise out of her employment. Nevertheless, claimant was on the way to deposit mail in the Federal Express box, and she was in a hurry because of the fact that her employer was loading her with duties close to the time her employment for the day had ended, namely, at 5 p.m. The foregoing facts support the finding of the Commission, and such a finding was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Accordingly, the Commission’s decision that decedent’s accident arose out of and in the course of her employment is not against the manifest weight of the evidence. The judgment of the circuit court is affirmed. Affirmed. RAKOWSKI and RARICK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739175 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:03.558718+00 ===

JUSTICE STOUDER, dissenting: I disagree with almost every aspect of the majority opinion. I disagree with the manner in which the facts are presented; I have many concerns about the procedural posture of this case; and I disagree with the majority’s analysis. My factual disagreement with the majority opinion is the omission of certain testimony that undermines the majority’s later attempt to classify the decedent’s fall as employment related. I believe the following testimony of Virginia Griffith, the woman who found decedent at the bottom of the stairs, is very relevant and needs to be included in the opinion for a full understanding of this case: "Q. After you observed her, what did you do? A. I went over to her and asked her if I could help her, and was kneeling down. And she said, 'Yes, I need some help.’ And then she started explaining to me she had to get out of there, she had to get to the Federal Express box to deliver a package, she had to get home, it was either a meeting or an appointment or she had to give the car to somebody, but she was in a great hurry, she was very nervous, and at this point she was still lying down and said she just needed to rest for a minute. Q. Now, after she pulled herself up, what happened? A. Well, Karl at this point was probably doing most of the talking, but he was, you know, very kindly saying, 'We need to have someone look you over before you can leave.’ And she kept saying, 'Absolutely not,’ and somehow she was able to get herself up without the aid of Karl and myself and absolutely ran out the door, took a right to get to the Federal Express box, got in her car and took off. Q. How is it that you drew the impression that she was in a hurry? A. Oh, she kept saying it, she kept saying, 'I’ve got to get out of here.’ It was either to meet somebody or go to an appointment or something, but she was in a rush. Q. Do you recall anything about the manner in which she was driving at that time? A. Well, she took off very quickly. Q. Took off quickly in her car? A. Yes. I mean, again, I got the impression she was racing to get somewhere.” The above testimony clearly shows that the decedent was still in a hurry after posting the Federal Express packages. The majority opinion does not explain why, if the decedent’s haste was employment related, the decedent was still in a hurry after all job tasks had been completed. My next disagreement with the majority opinion concerns the majority’s explanation of the procedural posture of this case. The majority correctly states that on March 19, 1993, an opinion was filed by this court reversing the decision of the circuit court, that a petition for rehearing was granted, that the opinion was withdrawn, and that a majority of the court has now concluded that the Commission was correct. That, however, only begins to tell the story. On March 19, 1993, a unanimous opinion of this court was issued, agreeing with the Commission on the factual issues (that the decedent suffered an unexplained fall on the employer’s premises), but finding that as a matter of law unexplained falls are not compensable injuries in a State that rejects the positional risk doctrine. The appellees then filed a petition for rehearing. The court granted the petition, withdrew the opinion, and asked the parties to submit additional briefs discussing out-of-State authority on the issues of unexplained falls, positional risk, and the relationship between the two subjects. Then a majority of this court, for whatever reason, concluded that the decedent had suffered a compensable injury because she was in a hurry at the end of the day and affirmed the Commission and circuit court on an issue entirely unrelated to the one the parties were directed to address. After requiring the attorneys to go to the considerable time and expense of researching the law of 49 jurisdictions on a complex issue of law, it is interesting to note the amount of space the majority has given to that issue in its opinion. One paragraph? One sentence? No, not even one word. An outside reader of the majority’s opinion would have no idea that the issue on which the original unanimous opinion was decided had even been raised. Under Supreme Court Rule 367(d) (134 Ill. 2d R. 367(d)), when a petition for rehearing is granted the nonmoving party is entitled to file a response to the petition. In this case, when the petition was granted this court entered an order directing the parties to file additional briefs solely on the issue of out-of-State authority on the subjects of positional risk and unexplained falls. This sent a message to the attorneys that the scope of our review on rehearing was limited to the correctness of our decision in light of the law of other jurisdictions. Granting the rehearing petition in this manner indicated to the appellants that it was not necessary to respond to the other issues raised in the petition. For this court to subsequently blindside the appellants with an opinion decided on a basis on which the case could have been disposed of originally is clearly unfair. Only one petition for rehearing is allowed, and the appellants should have been entitled to address the other issues. Without stating so, the majority has apparently concluded that the issue of the relationship between unexplained falls and positional risk is irrelevant to its decision. The question the attorneys must now be asking themselves is, "If those issues are irrelevant, then why did the court order us to research the law in forty-nine jurisdictions on those issues?” Because I do believe those issues are relevant, and because I did not think that out-of-State authority was necessary to the decision, I leave that question for the majority to answer. Finally, I disagree entirely with the analysis in the majority opinion. The majority initially concludes that the Commission was correct in determining that decedent suffered an unexplained fall. Sometime during the course of the next six paragraphs the fall undergoes a metamorphosis and emerges as an explained fall. By creatively selecting certain portions of the record, the majority has put together what it believes to be an employment-related reason for the decedent’s fall. The employer apparently gave the employee too many tasks to complete near the end of the day and that somehow caused her to be in a hurry on her way home from work. This is not what the Commission found. The Commission found this fall to be unexplained. That was a factual finding to be reviewed under the manifest weight of the evidence standard and there is no basis for this court to disagree with that finding as it was not against the manifest weight of the evidence. Rather than deal with the difficult question of whether an unexplained fall is compensable in Illinois, given our supreme court’s rejection of the positional risk doctrine, the majority decides to have its cake and eat it too by finding that the fall was both explained and unexplained. Further, even if it was permissible for this court to disagree with the Commission and find this to he an explained fall, the majority’s "explanation” makes no sense. There was no testimony that indicated that the employer asked the decedent to stay after work or gave her any tasks outside of regular business hours. Also, to the extent the majority is claiming that the employee’s haste was to get to the Federal Express box, the testimony of Virginia Griffith clearly indicated that the decedent was in a hurry even after posting the Federal Express envelopes. The employee was still in a rush after completing all job tasks and told witnesses that she was in a hurry to either go to an appointment or to give someone else the car. The majority’s conclusion, in light of these facts, that the decedent’s haste was employment related is nothing short of incredible. Perhaps the most curious assertion in the majority opinion is the statement, "the record does not indicate that decedent was going anywhere but home, after dropping off the envelopes.” (261 Ill. App. 3d at 637.) Even if this statement were true, it begs the question of whether an employee who falls because she is rushing to get home suffers an injury arising out of her employment. If the decedent was rushing home to watch a television program, would that be a compensable injury? Apparently so, if the employer dared to give her any job tasks too close to quitting time. The message the majority opinion sends to employers is that they now have to always be aware of which employees will be in a hurry to leave work on certain days. On those days they should be cautious not to give those employees any assignments too close to quitting time, even if it is still during regular business hours and even if the employee is being paid for that time. After all, requiring an employee who is in a hurry to attend to personal business to put together envelopes for mailing during business hours could place "resulting stress” on the employee causing a fall. I strongly disagree with the majority’s conclusion that this employee’s haste was employment related. I believe that the Commission’s decision that the decedent suffered an unexplained fall on the employer’s premises was not against the manifest weight of the evidence, but as a matter of law I do not believe such falls arise out of the employment. For an employee’s injuries to be compensable, those injuries must arise out of and in the course of his or her employment, and both elements must be present at the time of the accident to justify compensation. (Hatfill v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 547, 560 N.E.2d 369.) "Arising out of’ refers to the origin or cause of the accident and presupposes a causal connection between employment and the accidental injury; "in the course of’ refers to the time, place, and circumstances under which the accident occurred. Illinois Bell Telephone Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 478, 546 N.E.2d 603. This case can be distinguished from others in which compensation was awarded for unexplained falls. My review of other unexplained-fall cases indicates that in those cases, the Commission was able to infer that the fall was caused by some condition of the employer’s premises. For instance, in Chicago Tribune Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 260, 483 N.E.2d 327, the claimant slipped and fell in the lobby of the employer’s building. There was no idiopathic explanation for the claimant’s fall, and the Commission was able to infer that the floor of the lobby was slippery from ice and water being tracked in by other employees. In Rysdon Products Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 326, 215 N.E.2d 261, the claimant, a spot welder, fell while working at a table. There was a gallon container of glue open on the table, the floor was uneven, and it was a hot, humid day. The Commission was able to infer that those factors caused the claimant’s fall. In the instant case, there were no employment-related inferences for the Commission to draw from the decedent’s fall; the fall was entirely unexplained. And, as already demonstrated above, the majority’s eleventh-hour attempt to attribute the fall to the decedent’s haste is not helpful because both the record and common sense indicate that her haste was not employment related. Professor Arthur Larson has explained that recovery in a pure unexplained fall case can only be justified by an acceptance of the positional risk doctrine. (1 A. Larson, Workmen’s Compensation § 10.31(a), at 3—94 (1990).) Our supreme court has explained: "Under the positional risk doctrine, an injury may be said to arise out of the employment if the injury 'would not have occurred but for the fact that the conditions or obligations of the employment placed claimant in the position where he was injured by a neutral force, meaning by "neutral” neither personal to the claimant nor distinctly associated with the employment.’ ” (Brady v. Louis Ruffolo & Sons Construction Co. (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 542, 552, 578 N.E.2d 921, 925, quoting Larson, The Positional-Risk Doctrine in Workmen’s Compensation, 1973 Duke L.J. 761, 761.) Professor Larson has explained that risks causing injury can be separated into three categories: risks personal to the claimant, risks distinctly associated with employment, and neutral risks. Personal risks are not compensable, while risks associated with the employment are compensable. The confusion is over what should be done when an injury is caused by a "neutral” risk. (1 A. Larson, Workmen’s Compensation §§ 7.00 through 7.30, at 3—12 through 3—14 (1990).) Professor Larson considers unexplained falls during the course of employment to be an example of a neutral risk. With regard to such falls, Larson states: "If an employee falls while walking down the sidewalk or across a level factory floor for no discoverable reason, the injury resembles that from stray bullets and other positional risks in this respect: The particular injury would not have happened if the employee had not been engaged upon an employment errand at the time. In a pure unexplained-fall case, there is no way in which an award can by [sic] justified as a matter of causation theory except by a recognition that this but—for reasoning satisfies the 'arising’ requirement.” 1 A. Larson, Workmen’s Compensation § 10.31(a), at 3—94 (1990). Illinois has never accepted the "but-for” reasoning of the positional-risk doctrine (see Brady, 143 Ill. 2d 542, 578 N.E.2d 921; Campbell "66” Express, Inc. v. Industrial Comm’n (1980), 83 Ill. 2d 353, 415 N.E.2d 1043; Decatur-Macon County Fair Association v. Industrial Comm’n (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 262, 371 N.E.2d 597), and therefore compensation would not be warranted in a pure unexplained-fall case. By rejecting the positional-risk doctrine and allowing recovery for unexplained falls, Illinois has adopted positions that are inherently inconsistent. In this case, it was generally agreed that there was nothing wrong with the condition of the stairs on which the decedent fell. Because the Commission could draw no inference that a defect in the stairs existed, this was a pure unexplained fall. As such, compensation was improper. Cases such as Chicago Tribune and Rysdon were not necessarily wrongly decided, because the inferences the Commission drew in those cases placed them in the category of risks associated with the employment. Those cases were only erroneous to the extent they suggested that compensation would be proper in a pure unexplained-fall case. I would also note here that the appellant’s supplemental brief on rehearing demonstrated a strong correlation in other jurisdictions between the concepts of positional risk and unexplained falls. Among jurisdictions that have addressed both issues, those that recognize positional risk as a theory of compensation generally compensate for unexplained falls and vice versa. To recover in this case, the claimant must have shown that there was an increased risk of harm. The mere fact that an injured party was present at the place of injury because of employment duties will not by itself suffice to establish that the injury arose out of the employment. (Brady, 143 Ill. 2d 542, 578 N.E.2d 921.) A claimant must demonstrate that the risk of injury sustained is peculiar to his employment, or that it is increased as a consequence of the work. (Orsini v. Industrial Comm’n (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 38, 509 N.E.2d 1005.) If an industrial accident is caused by a risk unrelated to the nature of the employment, or is not fairly traceable to the workplace environment, but results instead from a hazard to which the claimant would have been equally exposed apart from his or her work, the injury cannot be said to arise out of the employment. Material Service Corp., Division of General Dynamics v. Industrial Comm’n (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 429, 292 N.E.2d 367. The injury in this case occurred while the decedent was descending a flight of stairs. Descending stairs is not a hazard uniquely related to the decedent’s employment, but rather is an ordinary activity engaged in by the general public. As we noted in Elliot v. Industrial Comm’n (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 238, 505 N.E.2d 1062, an idiopathic fall case, the act of descending stairs does not establish a risk greater than those faced outside of work. Absent a showing of an increased risk, the Commission erred in finding that the accident arose out of the decedent’s employment. Accordingly, I would reverse the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County. The majority has issued an opinion finding the decedent’s fall to be both explained and unexplained and has based its "explanation” on an inference not reached by the Commission and one that is thoroughly contradicted by the record. I dissent. McCULLOUGH, P.J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:10:03.83495+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice
(on reassignment).
LaVonne Red Pox (Red Pox) appeals from an order of the circuit court which granted summary judgment to Ronald Het-tich (Hettich) and Northwest G.P. Mutual Insurance (Northwest), Hettich’s homeowner’s insurance carrier. We affirm.
FACTS
Red Pox is an enrolled member of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe who, at the time this action was commenced in circuit court, resided in Port Yates, North Dakota, which is within the exterior boundaries of the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation. This reservation extends from North Dakota into South Dakota. Hettich is a non-Indian who, at the time this action was commenced, resided and operated a business in McLaughlin, South Dakota,1 which is within the exterior boundaries of the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation. In the past he has utilized the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court to collect judgments from tribal members.
On the night of September 24, 1988, Red Fox was operating a motor vehicle on State Highway 63 in Corson County, South Dakota, which county lies entirely within the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation. She struck a dead horse, owned by Hettich, which was on the highway. A few days later, Red Pox filed a civil complaint in the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court in Fort Yates, alleging that her vehicle was damaged as a result of Hettich’s negligence. On September 28, Hettich was served by certified mail with the summons and complaint as well as a notice of hearing set for October 21.
Hettich did not appear at the hearing in tribal court. At that hearing, the tribal court heard testimony from Red Pox and the officer who investigated the accident. Thereafter, findings of fact and conclusions of law were entered, as was a default judgment against Hettich which awarded Red Fox $1,780.86 for property damages. Notice of entry of judgment was filed and served on Hettich by regular mail on November 3. Hettich refused to satisfy the tribal court judgment and failed to comply with the tribal court’s May 2,1989, order to appear before it to disclose his assets.
Red Fox then commenced this action in circuit court against Hettich and Northwest seeking an order from the circuit court granting full faith and credit to the tribal court judgment or recognizing its judgment on the basis of comity. In addition, Red Pox sought to recover attorney’s fees from Northwest, pursuant to SDCL 58-12-3, for its refusal to pay the judgment.
All parties moved for summary judgment. The circuit court heard argument on November 26, 1990, and on March 12, 1991, entered an order which denied Red Fox’ motion for summary judgment and granted summary judgment to Hettich and Northwest. The circuit court determined that (1) the tribal court had subject matter jurisdiction over the cause of action against Het-tich; (2) the tribal court could not assert personal jurisdiction over Hettich; (3) the tribal court judgment was not entitled to recognition either under full faith and credit or comity principles; and (4) Red Fox had no bad faith claim against Northwest.
*641Red Fox appeals, claiming the circuit court erred (1) in concluding the tribal court’s judgment was not entitled to comity because it did not have personal jurisdiction over Hettich and (2) in failing to award attorney’s fees.. Because we decide the trial court properly concluded the tribal court judgment was not entitled to comity, we need not reach the question of attorney’s fees.
DECISION
WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN REFUSING TO RECOGNIZE THE TRIBAL COURT ORDER UNDER THE PRINCIPLE OF COMITY.
We first examine the status of the parties and the location which gave rise to this civil action. Plaintiff, Red Fox, is an enrolled member of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe. Defendant, Hettich, is a non-Indian. Red Fox resides on the North Dakota portion of the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation; Hettich resides on fee land on the South Dakota portion. The claimed tort occurred within the exterior boundaries of the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation.
A judgment was entered in tribal court which Red Fox asked the circuit court to recognize. The circuit court denied recognition of the tribal judgment. SDCL 1-1-25 guides our determination of whether the tribal court judgment may be recognized by the courts of South Dakota:
No order or judgment of a tribal court in the state of South Dakota may be recognized as a matter of comity in the state courts of South Dakota, except under the following terms and conditions:
(1) Before a state court may consider recognizing a tribal court order or judgment the party seeking recognition shall establish by clear and convincing evidence that:
(a) The tribal court had jurisdiction over both the subject matter and the parties[.]
SDCL l-l-25(l)(a).2
As a preliminary matter, this statute applies only to an “order or judgment of a tribal court in the state of South Dakota[.]” Interestingly enough, it is Red Fox who claims that the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court is not a tribal court of South Dakota because its headquarters is in Fort Yates, North Dakota. Therefore, she asserts that we must recognize the tribal court judgment under the principles of full faith and credit.3 However, the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court exercises its jurisdiction throughout the Standing Rock Reservation, including that substantial portion which lies within South Dakota. Thus, we believe the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court is “a tribal court in the state of South Dakota” within the meaning of SDCL 1-1-25 and that this case is governed by SDCL 1-1-25. We now turn to *642an examination of the statute’s terms and conditions.
Red Fox must first clearly and convincingly establish that the tribal court had jurisdiction over both the subject matter and the parties. SDCL 1-1-25(1)(a); Wells v. Wells, 451 N.W.2d 402, 403 (S.D.1990); In re Defender, 435 N.W.2d 717, 720 (S.D.1989); State ex rel. Joseph v. Redwing, 429 N.W.2d 49, 50 (S.D.1988) cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1069, 109 S.Ct. 2071, 104 L.Ed.2d 636 (1989). See also, Mexican v. Circle Bear, 370 N.W.2d 737 (S.D.1985) (citing Hilton v. Guyot, 159 U.S. 113, 202-03, 16 S.Ct. 139, 158, 40 L.Ed. 95, 122 (1895)). We review jurisdictional challenges de novo. State v. Spotted Horse, 462 N.W.2d 463, 465 (S.D.1990) cert. denied, — U.S.-, 111 S.Ct. 2041, 114 L.Ed.2d 125 (1991).
TRIBAL JUDICIAL JURISDICTION
Before a tribal court may adjudicate a matter, Professor Frank Pommersheim notes: “First, the tribal court has to determine whether it possesses judicial jurisdiction over the suit. And second, the court must resolve whether the tribe has the legislative authority to regulate the conduct of non-Indians engaged in the activities at issue.” F. Pommersheim, The Crucible of Sovereignty: Analyzing Issues of Tribal Jurisdiction, 31 Ariz. L.Rev. 329, 335 (1989) (hereinafter Pommersheim) (citing Iowa Mut. Ins. Co. v. LaPlante, 480 U.S. 9, 12, 107 S.Ct. 971, 974, 94 L.Ed.2d 10, 17 (1987)). See National Farmers Union Ins. Co. v. Crow Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 845, 105 S.Ct. 2447, 85 L.Ed.2d 818 (1985).
We agree with Professor Pommersheim’s general thesis that tribal judicial jurisdiction depends on “whether the tribal court has proper subject matter, personal, and territorial jurisdiction.... ” Pommersheim, supra at 336. These issues are resolved by determining whether federal law limits the tribal court’s authority and whether tribal law has empowered the tribal court to hear the case. Id. at 334. Unless the determination has been made that the tribal court has judicial jurisdiction, we need not resolve whether the tribe has legislative authority to regulate Hettich’s conduct pursuant to Montana v. United States, 450 U.S. 544, 101 S.Ct. 1245, 67 L.Ed.2d 493 (1981). Both must be found before SDCL l-l-25(l)(a) is satisfied, for without legislative authority to regulate Hettich’s conduct, the tribal court will have no case which it can adjudicate.4
SDCL 1-1-25, requires us to analyze jurisdictional issues through its traditional components of subject matter and personal jurisdiction. This is not unreasonable in light of the fact that we engage in such an analysis before recognizing other foreign judgments, Baldwin v. Heinold Commodities, Inc., 363 N.W.2d 191, 194 (S.D.1985); Bahr v. Bahr, 85 S.D. 240, 244, 180 N.W.2d 465, 467 (1970); see also SDCL 15-16A-1 to 10 (Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act), as do federal courts. Nevada v. Hall, 440 U.S. 410, 421, 99 S.Ct. 1182, 1188, 59 L.Ed.2d 416, 425 (1979); Kulko v. California Super. Ct., 436 U.S. 84, 96, 98 S.Ct. 1690, 1702, 56 L.Ed.2d 132, 143 (1978). However, a review of the cases of the United States Supreme Court reveals that the analysis of jurisdictional issues between Indian and federal or state governments is rarely broken down into the traditional facets of subject matter and personal jurisdiction. Rather, the United States Supreme Court refers to criminal or civil jurisdiction. Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S. 191, 98 S.Ct. 1011, 55 L.Ed.2d 209 (1978); Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 79 S.Ct. 269, 3 L.Ed.2d 251 (1959). Montana, 450 U.S. 544, 101 S.Ct. 1245, 67 L.Ed.2d 493, and cases decided since, refer *643to regulatory jurisdiction. But is this a facet of subject matter jurisdiction? Of personal jurisdiction? It is unclear. It appears from our reading of the cases, that it is neither and both. While recognizing Indian tribes occupy a unique position in the United States, we also recognize that this failure to analyze questions of tribal jurisdiction through, jurisdiction’s traditional component parts does not promote clarity of jurisdictional analysis.
We take the opportunity presented by this case to begin to clarify our method of jurisdictional analysis for the recognition of tribal court judgments. SDCL 1-1-25 does not directly address a criminal/civil breakdown of jurisdiction. Nor does it directly address a territorial or a legislative breakdown of jurisdiction. Nevertheless, we must make the initial determination of whether the action is civil or criminal. Once that determination is made, we look to territorial jurisdiction which is implicit in jurisdictional analysis. We then engage in our statute’s traditional subject matter and personal jurisdiction analysis. We conclude with Montana’s legislative analysis which will confirm or negate subject matter and personal jurisdiction, without actually being a facet of either.
The method we engage in today will help to better mesh South Dakota’s comity statute and its traditional subject matter/personal jurisdictional analytic requirements, with the United States Supreme Court’s civil/criminal/legislative jurisdictional analytic requirements.5
A. TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Having previously determined that this is a civil action, we now look to whether the territorial jurisdiction component of tribal judicial jurisdiction is satisfied. Although territorial jurisdiction is not directly addressed by the statute, it is a necessary predicate to the determination of subject matter and personal jurisdiction. This civil action arose out of an incident which occurred within the boundaries of the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation6 on State Highway 63. The landowners adjacent to this highway, who owned their land in fee, had previously granted easements to the state for its construction. Nevertheless, this incident occurred within the boundaries of the reservation and is in Indian country.7 We conclude therefore, that the territorial jurisdiction component of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court’s judicial jurisdiction has been met.
B. SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION
Subject matter jurisdiction relates to the power of a court to hear and determine a general class of cases to which a particular proceeding belongs.
Leon v. Numkena, 142 Ariz. 307, 689 P.2d 566, 568 (1984) (citations omitted). See also Harris v. Young, 473 N.W.2d 141, 143-44 (S.D.1991); In re Guardianship of Flyinghorse, 456 N.W.2d 567, 568 (S.D.1990); Redwing, 429 N.W.2d at 51.
A court’s jurisdiction of the subject matter ... exists when a constitution or statute specifically confers upon the court such jurisdiction. Timmerman v. Timmerman, 163 Neb. 704, 81 N.W.2d 135 (1957). This power is likewise conferred upon Indian courts by their constitutions *644or tribal codes. See generally Cohen, Federal Indian Law, p. 428 (1958).
Leon, 689 P.2d at 568.
The circuit court concluded the tribal court had subject matter jurisdiction over this cause of action. Despite the circuit court’s invitation to do so, Hettich did not formally appeal by way of notice of review. Normally, when an appellee fails to file a notice of review pursuant to SDCL 15-26A-22 (1992 Supp), the trial court’s conclusion of law becomes the law of the case and there is nothing for this court to review. See Rude Transp. Co. v. P.U.C., 431 N.W.2d 160, 162 (S.D.1988); State v. Howell, 354 N.W.2d 196, 198 (S.D.1984); In re Application of Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., 326 N.W.2d 100, 104 (S.D.1982); Gridley v. Engelhart, 322 N.W.2d 3, 5-6 (S.D.1982).
Nevertheless, both parties (and State, who filed an amicus brief) set out extensive arguments in their briefs regarding subject matter jurisdiction. In addition, Red Fox included in the docketing statement the issue of whether the tribal court judgment is entitled to comity. This issue necessarily includes the issue of subject matter jurisdiction. See SDCL 1-1-25. Further, the issue of subject matter jurisdiction in this case is of utmost importance to the state and the tribes. Thus, we will address it. See State Hwy. Comm’n v. Beets, 88 S.D. 536, 539-40, 224 N.W.2d 567, 568-69 (1974).
We first determine whether any federal statutes, decisional law or treaties control.8 Pommersheim, supra at 336. “Interestingly enough, there are no federal statutes or decisions that categorically bar tribal court jurisdiction over certain civil matters. Because of the general absence of federal statutes that deal with the allocation of civil jurisdiction, few civil cases will be disposed of at this stage of analysis.” Id. at 337. Similarly, we find no federal statutes, decisional law, or treaties which categorically limit this tribal court’s civil judicial jurisdiction through limits on subject matter, personal or territorial jurisdiction. Nor do we find any federal statutes or treaties which categorically grant this tribal court civil judicial jurisdiction. Absent specific treaty provisions or federal statutes which categorically bar or grant the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court civil judicial jurisdiction, “[cjivil jurisdiction over [activities of non-Indians on reservation lands] presumptively lies in the tribal courts[.]” Iowa Mutual, 480 U.S. at 18, 107 S.Ct. at 977, 94 L.Ed.2d at 21; Sage v. Sicangu Oyate Ho, Inc., 473 N.W.2d 480, 482 (S.D.1991); Defender, 435 N.W.2d at 722.
We now look to determine whether Red Fox has clearly and convincingly established that the tribal court has civil subject matter jurisdiction as a matter of tribal law. Tribal law includes treaties, the tribal constitution, code, decisional law and custom. Pommersheim, supra at 337. The Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Code provides:
1-107. Civil jurisdiction of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court.
The judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and equity arising under the Tribal Constitution, the customs or the laws of the Tribe, and to any case in which the Tribe, a member of the Tribe, an Indian residing on the Reservation or a corporation or entity owned in whole or insubstantial part by any Indian shall be a party.
The tribal code clearly allows civil subject matter jurisdiction, as Red Fox, an enrolled member of the tribe, is a party to this civil action.
C. PERSONAL JURISDICTION
Tribal judicial jurisdiction also depends on whether the tribal court has personal jurisdiction over the defendant. The Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Code does not appear to limit jurisdiction to any great extent and clearly grants the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court personal jurisdiction over Red Fox. It is, however, silent on whether the *645tribal court has personal jurisdiction over a non-Indian defendant who resides within the exterior boundaries of the reservation.
Some tribal codes contain “long-arm statutes” similar to those found in state and federal law to obtain personal jurisdiction over non-tribal members. See, Law and Order Code of the Shoshone and Arapaho Tribes of the Wind River Indian Reservation, Wyoming Tit. I, § 1-2-3; Law and Order Code for the Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation, Utah ch. 2, § 1-2-3. The Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Code, however, contains no “long-arm” provision. Nevertheless, we agree with Professor Pommersheim’s suggestion that absent a tribal code provision, a tribal court could apply traditional federal long-arm jurisdictional analysis. Pommersheim, supra at 341. See, e.g., Rosebud Hous. Auth. v. LaCreek Elec. Coop., 13 Indian L.Rep. 6030 (Rosebud Sx.Tr.Ct.1986). Therefore, applying traditional long-arm analysis, before the tribal court can assert jurisdiction over a non-Indian, he must receive notice and have “minimum contacts” with the tribe. International Shoe v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 66 S.Ct. 154, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945).
We have previously said that the same due process standards which govern state court assertions of jurisdiction over nonresident defendants apply to tribal courts. Defender, 435 N.W.2d at 720 n. 2. Hettich was served notice of the tribal court proceeding via certified mail. This type of service is permitted by the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Code, 2-102(4)(b)(4) and under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Fed.R.Civ.P. 4(c)(2)(C)(ii) & (D). Cf. Wells, 451 N.W.2d at 403-04. Hettich acknowledged in his answer that he received notice of the claim. We conclude the reasonable notice requirement was met.
We next look to determine whether Red Fox has clearly and convincingly established that Hettich has the requisite “minimum contacts” with the Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation to enable this tribal court to assert jurisdiction over Hettich. More in the way of “minimum contacts” is required for a tribal court to exercise long-arm jurisdiction over a non-Indian “than would be sufficient for the citizen of one state to assert personal jurisdiction over the citizen of another state.” Babbitt Ford, Inc. v. Navajo Indian Tribe, 519 F.Supp. 418, 431 (Ariz.1981) aff'd in part, rev. in part on different grounds, 710 F.2d 587 (9th Cir.1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 926, 104 S.Ct. 1707, 80 L.Ed.2d 180 (1984); Swift Transp., Inc. v. John, 546 F.Supp. 1185, 1193 (Ariz.1982), vacated as moot, 574 F.Supp. 710 (Ariz.1983). See, e.g., World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 100 S.Ct. 559, 62 L.Ed.2d 490 (1980).
Hettich owns land, fee in nature, within the exterior boundaries of the reservation. He also owns and operates a grocery store within the exterior boundaries of the reservation. He engages in commercial transactions with tribal members. He has utilized the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court system to sue tribal members. Het-tich had sufficient minimum contacts with the tribe to justify the tribal court’s assumption of personal jurisdiction over him. Accordingly, we conclude the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court had judicial jurisdiction.
Nevertheless, mere presence within reservation boundaries is not enough to confer adjudicatory power on a tribal court. Montana, 450 U.S. 544, 101 S.Ct. 1245, 67 L.Ed.2d 493; Babbitt, 710 F.2d at 598. Unless the tribe has the authority to regulate the conduct of non-Indians on state highways, the tribal court will not have the authority to adjudicate this action. Iowa Mutual, 480 U.S. at 12,107 S.Ct. at 974, 94 L.Ed.2d at 17; Pommersheim, supra at 334. If mere physical presence within reservation boundaries is enough to confer tribal court jurisdiction, then the distinctions between reservation lands owned by Indians and those owned by non-Indians, as set forth in Montana and Brendale v. Confederated Tribes and Bands of Yakima Indian Nation, 492 U.S. 408, 109 S.Ct. 2994, 106 L.Ed.2d 343 (1989), are meaningless. Therefore, a determination of whether there is tribal authority over non-Indians and their property is the other facet of a *646tribal court’s civil jurisdiction in Indian country. Pommersheim, supra at 334. We now look to determine whether Red Fox has clearly and convincingly established that the tribal court has the authority to adjudicate this matter as a result of the tribe’s authority to regulate the claimed conduct of Hettich.
TRIBAL LEGISLATIVE JURISDICTION
We again begin our inquiry with an examination of federal law. Tribal authority is inherent in the tribe’s retained sovereignty; it does not arise by delegation from the federal government. United States v. Wheeler, 435 U.S. 313, 328, 98 S.Ct. 1079, 1088-89, 55 L.Ed.2d 303, 315-16 (1978). Nevertheless, Indian tribes are “no longer ‘possessed of the full attributes of sovereignty!!]’ ” Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49, 55, 98 S.Ct. 1670, 1675, 56 L.Ed.2d 106, 113 (1978); Montana, 450 U.S. at 565, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 510; Wheeler, 435 U.S. at 322-23, 98 S.Ct. at 1086, 55 L.Ed.2d at 312 (1978). Tribal sovereignty is subject to limitation by specific Constitutional and treaty provisions, Wheeler, 435 U.S. at 323, 98 S.Ct. at 1086, 55 L.Ed.2d at 312, acts of Congress, Id.; Santa Clara Pueblo, 436 U.S. at 56, 72, 98 S.Ct. at 1675, 1684, 56 L.Ed.2d at 114, 124; Oliphant, 435 U.S. at 195, 98 S.Ct. at 1014, 55 L.Ed.2d at 213; Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, 187 U.S. 553, 556, 23 S.Ct. 216, 217, 47 L.Ed. 299, 301 (1903); Fredericks v. Mandel, 650 F.2d 144 (8th Cir.1981); Nebraska Pub. Power Disk v. 100.95 Acres of Land, 540 F.Supp. 592, 598 (Neb.1982); Swift Transp., 546 F.Supp. at 1193; State v. Vandermay, 478 N.W.2d 289, 290 (S.D.1991); or by implication due to the tribe’s dependent status. Montana, 450 U.S. at 565, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 510; Wheeler, 435 U.S. at 323, 98 S.Ct. at 1079, 1086, 55 L.Ed.2d at 303, 312; Cardin v. De La Cruz, 671 F.2d 363, 366 (9th Cir.) cert. denied, 459 U.S. 967, 103 S.Ct. 293, 74 L.Ed.2d 277 (1982). As a general rule, “the inherent sovereign powers of an Indian tribe do not extend to the activities of nonmembers of the tribe.” Montana, 450 U.S. at 565, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 510.
Montana, discussing the extent of tribal civil regulatory authority over non-Indians, “established that the dependent status of Indian tribes has implicitly divested them of the power to regulate, in general, ‘the conduct of non-members on land no longer owned by, or held in trust for the Tribe.’ ” De La Cruz, 671 F.2d at 366 (citing Montana and Colville Confederated Tribe v. Walton, 647 F.2d 42, 52 (9th Cir.1981)). Montana acknowledged that tribes retain some civil authority over non-Indians:
But exercise of tribal power beyond what is necessary to protect tribal self-government or to control internal relations is inconsistent with the dependent status of the tribes and so cannot survive without express congressional delegation.... [Thus,] the inherent sovereign powers of an Indian tribe do not extend to activities of nonmembers of the tribe. To be sure, Indian tribes retain inherent sovereign power to exercise some forms of civil jurisdiction over non-Indians on their reservations, even on non-Indian fee lands. A tribe may regulate, through taxation, licensing, or other means, the activities of nonmembers who enter consensual relationships with the tribe or its members, through commercial dealing, contracts, leases, or other arrangements.
Montana, 450 U.S. at 564-65, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 509-10 (citations omitted). Montana went on to note, without deciding, that a tribe may have other authority as well:
A tribe may also retain inherent power to exercise civil authority over the conduct of non-Indians on fee lands within its reservation when that conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe.
Montana, 450 U.S. at 566, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 511 (citations omitted). In contrast to the determination of the judicial jurisdiction of a tribal court, “[t]he primary effect of Montana is to create a threshold presumption that tribes do not have legislative and regulatory jurisdiction *647over non-Indians on fee lands within the reservation.” Pommersheim, supra at 345.
We look first to determine whether Hettich was engaged in “consensual relationships with the tribe or its members, through commercial dealing, contracts, leases, or other arrangements.” Montana, 450 U.S. at 565, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at 510. It is clear that neither Hettich’s consensual relationship with the tribe, through his utilization of its courts, nor his relationship with its members, through the operation of his grocery store, gave rise to the tort involved in this case. We conclude, therefore, that it is not within the inherent sovereign powers of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe to “regulate, through taxation, licensing, or other means,” Hettich’s claimed tortious conduct on State Highway 63.
We next look to determine whether Red Fox has clearly and convincingly established that Hettich’s claimed conduct, allowing his horse to wander onto State Highway 63, within the reservation, “threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe.” Id. (Emphasis added.) While Montana dealt with a tribe’s authority to regulate non-Indian fishing on reservation land owned in fee by nonmembers of the tribe, it can be used to determine the extent that a tribe may regulate the tortious conduct of non-Indians on non-Indian lands within the reservation boundaries.
It is apparent that Hettich’s conduct had a direct effect on “the economic security, or the health or welfare” of Red Fox. However, the second test under Montana is concerned with the effect upon the tribe, not on the individual tribal member.9 Red Fox argues that the health and welfare of the tribe was affected because a tribal member’s property was damaged and a tribal officer was required to investigate. While it may be argued that the tribe may be “indirectly” affected by Hettich’s conduct, only by stretching the test set forth in Montana to extremes can it be said that Hettich’s conduct “directly” affected the tribe.10 The distinction between tribal interests and tribal member interests is reflected in the cases cited in Montana, as well as subsequent cases applying the test. See Babbitt, 710 F.2d 587 (tribe’s interest in enforcing repossession statute); De La Cruz, 671 F.2d 363 (tribe’s interest in enforcing building, health, and safety regulations); Knight v. Shoshone & Arapahoe Indian Tribes, 670 F.2d 900 (10th Cir.1982) (tribe’s interest in enforcing zoning ordinance). Red Fox has not referred this court to any law of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe which determines that conduct such as Hettich’s claimed conduct has a direct effect on tribal interests. Red Fox has not clearly and convincingly established that the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe is directly affected by Hettich’s claimed conduct. We conclude, therefore, that the state court acted properly when it did not recognize the tribal court judgment under the principles of comity because Red Fox has failed to establish clearly and convincingly that the tribal court had jurisdiction to consider Hettieh’s claimed conduct.11
Our decision today does not determine that the tribal court was without jurisdiction. Nor do we determine that the state of South Dakota has jurisdiction. Rather, we hold only that Red Fox has not met her burden of proof. This holding is consistent with Montana’s general proposition that “the inherent sovereign powers of an Indian tribe do not extend to the activities of nonmembers of the tribe.” Montana, 450 U.S. at 565, 101 S.Ct. at 1258, 67 L.Ed.2d at *648510.12
Affirmed.
AMUNDSON, J., concurs.
SABERS, J., concurs specially.
WUEST and HENDERSON, JJ., concur in part and dissent in part.
. The population of McLaughlin is mostly non-Indian and the town is surrounded mostly by fee land owned by non-Indians.
. SDCL 1-1-25 was passed by the legislature following our decision in Mexican v. Circle Bear, 370 N.W.2d 737 (S.D.1985). The statute’s requirements for the application of comity are more restrictive than we set out in Circle Bear. The terms and conditions of SDCL 1-1-25 continue:
(b) The order or judgment was not fraudulently obtained;
(c) The order or judgment was obtained by a process that assures the requisites of an impartial administration of justice including but not limited to due notice and a hearing;
(d) The order or judgment complies with the laws, ordinances and regulations of the jurisdiction from which it was obtained; and
(e) The order or judgment does not contravene the public policy of the state of South Dakota.
(2) If a court is satisfied that all of the foregoing conditions exist, the court may recognize the tribal court order or judgment in any of the following circumstances:
(a) In any child custody or domestic relations case; or
(b) In any case in which the jurisdiction issuing the order or judgment also grants comity to orders and judgments of the South Dakota courts; or
(c) In other cases if exceptional circumstances warrant it; or
(d) Any order required or authorized to be recognized pursuant to 25 U.S.C. § 1911(d) or 25 U.S.C. § 1919.
. 28 U.S.C. § 1738 (1988) requires states to give full faith and credit to judicial proceedings of other states, territories or possessions. We have not extended full faith and credit to tribal court judgments in the past, Mexican v. Circle Bear, 370 N.W.2d 737, 740 (S.D.1985), and are not compelled to do -so now.
. This method of analysis may be summarized mathematically:
A tribal court’s adjudicative authority = judicial jurisdiction + legislative jurisdiction. This is further broken down:
Judicial jurisdiction = territorial jurisdiction -I- subject matter jurisdiction + personal jurisdiction. Legislative jurisdiction = Montana's regulatory authority.
Therefore: (A tribal court’s adjudicative authority) = (territorial jurisdiction + subject matter jurisdiction + personal jurisdiction) + (Montana’s regulatory authority).
The import of this formula is that if any part is missing, regardless of what else exists, it still equals something less than a tribal court’s adjudicative authority.
. We have no occasion today to address criminal jurisdictional analysis and express no opinion in that area.
. A significant portion of the history of this reservation is set out in Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463, 104 S.Ct. 1161, 79 L.Ed.2d 443 (1984), and State v. Janis, 317 N.W.2d 133 (S.D.1982).
. "Indian Country" includes "all land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States Government, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and, including rights-of-way running through the reservation!;.]” 18 U.S.C. § 1151 (1988). This section generally applies to questions of civil jurisdiction as well as to questions of criminal jurisdiction. DeCoteau v. District County Court, 420 U.S. 425, 427 n. 2, 95 S.Ct. 1082, 1084 n. 2, 43 L.Ed.2d 300, 304 n. 2 (1975); McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Comm'n, 411 U.S. 164, 177-78 n. 17, 93 S.Ct. 1257, 1265 n. 17, 36 L.Ed.2d 129, 139 n. 17 (1973); Kennedy v. District Court of Montana, 400 U.S. 423, 424 n. 1, 91 S.Ct. 480, 481 n. 1, 27 L.Ed.2d 507, 509 n. 17 (1971); Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 220-22 nn. 5, 6 & 10, 79 S.Ct. 269, 270-72 nn. 5, 6 & 10, 3 L.Ed.2d 251, 254-55 nn. 5, 6 & 10 (1959).
. See, e.g., General Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1152 (1988); Major Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1153 (1988); Public Law 280, 18 U.S.C. § 1162 (1988), 25 U.S.C. §§ 1321-1326 (1988), 28 U.S.C. § 1360 (1988); Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1901-1963 (1988).
. We are aware that federal legislation can confer individual rights on the individual tribal member. See McClanahan, 411 U.S. 164, 93 S.Ct. 1257, 36 L.Ed.2d 129.
. But see Sage v. Lodge Grass Sch. Dist., 13 Indian L.Rep. 6035 (Crow Ct.App.1986), which found tribal interest were affected in the remand of National Farmers Union from the United States Supreme Court.
.In light of this decision, we need not address the remaining terms and conditions of SDCL 1-1-25.
. Our decision today does not leave Red Fox without a forum in which to press her claim. It is not clear from the record whether Red Fox can levy on the judgment or has other avenues available in the tribal court to enforce her tribal court judgment. Nor does our decision pre-elude her from bringing an action in state court against Hettich, similar to her original action in tribal court, assuming it is not barred by time or otherwise.

=== CASE 9739321 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:10.630834+00 ===

JUSTICE HOFFMAN, specially concurring: I agree with Justice Wolfson’s reasoning, but write separately because I believe there is a more basic reason why the dismissal of the plaintiffs’ amended complaint should be affirmed; namely, it fails to allege facts, which if true, would entitle the plaintiffs to the relief they seek even in the absence of the provisions of section If of the University of Illinois Act (110 ILCS 305/lf (West 2004)). The plaintiffs’ amended complaint purports to state a claim against the University of Illinois (University) and its board of trustees for a violation of the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003 (Civil Rights Act) (740 ILCS 23/1 et seq. (West 2004)). Specifically, the plaintiffs assert that the University’s use of Chief Illiniwek (Chief) as a sports mascot violates section 5 of the Civil Rights Act (740 ILCS 23/5 (West 2004)). Section 5(b) of the Civil Rights Act provides a private right of action in favor of any person aggrieved by conduct that violates subsection (a) of the statute. Section 5(a) provides: “(a) No unit of State, county or local government in Illinois shall: (1) exclude a person from participation in, deny a person the benefits of, or subject a person to discrimination under any program or activity on the grounds of that person’s race, color or national origin; or (2) utilize criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color or national origin.” 740 ILCS 23/5(a) (West 2004). The plaintiffs make no claim that the University violated section 5(a)(2); rather, their action appears to be based on a claim of discrimination under section 5(a)(1). The term “discrimination” is not defined in the statute. However, Webster’s Third N.ew International Dictionary defines the word as, inter alia, the act or practice of “according of differential treatment to persons of an alien race or religion.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 648 (1981). Black’s Law Dictionary defines discrimination as “[t]he effect of a law or established practice that confers privileges on a certain class or that denies privileges to a certain class because of race, age, sex, nationality, religion, or handicap.” Black’s Law Dictionary 479 (7th ed. 1999). Five individuals joined as plaintiffs in this action: Stephan Naranjo, a Native American student at the University; Roger Fontana, a Native American; Bess Van Asselt, a student at the University; John Low, a Native American student at the University of Michigan; and Tom Cafcas, a Native American student at the University. Clearly, no claim has been stated as to Van Asselt as the amended complaint does not allege that she is a Native American or that she was in any way discriminated against because of her race, color or national origin. See 740 ILCS 23/5(a)(l) (West 2004). Additionally, her assertions of retaliation by fellow students because of her opposition to the Chief form no basis for relief. The Civil Rights Act, unlike the Human Rights Act, does not grant a right of action to a person who experiences retaliation because he or she has opposed that which he or she reasonably believes to be unlawful discrimination. See 775 ILCS 5/6 — 101(A) (West 2004). The claims of the remaining individual plaintiffs, all of whom are alleged to be Native Americans, present different considerations. The amended complaint alleges that Naranjo and Fontana feel “humiliated and embarrassed” when their heritage is reduced to “halftime sporting event entertainment” by the Chiefs performances. Low alleges that he decided to attend the University of Michigan, rather than the University of Illinois, as “a result of the hostile atmosphere against Native Americans at the University of Illinois arising out of the Chief Illiniwek controversey.” Cafeas asserts that the “Anglo-American construction of Chief Illiniwek” reminds him of how “the exploitation and distortion of Native American Culture and religion is woven into institutions like the University of Illinois.” Conspicuously absent from the amended complaint is any allegation that the University excluded these individual plaintiffs from participation in, or the benefits of, any program or activity based on their Native American heritage. Rather, they allege that they find the Chief’s performances to be insulting, demeaning, and humiliating and, as a result, do not attend University sporting events where the Chief performs or, in the case of Low, chose to attend a different university. According to the amended complaint, the use of the Chief as a sports mascot creates a hostile environment for Native Americans. It appears that the Native American plaintiffs’ claims of discrimination are based upon their subjective feelings and the assertion of a hostile environment based upon the Chiefs performances. However, in the absence of any allegation that the individual Native American plaintiffs had ever been denied admittance to any University program, activity, or event based upon their race or color, I am left with the question of whether the allegations in their amended complaint state a claim for discrimination within the meaning of section 5(a)(1) of the Civil Rights Act. The amended complaint states that the Chief wears orange and blue face paint and is dressed in a costume which includes a feathered head garment and fringed shirt and pants. His halftime performances at sporting events include a ritual where he prances about the field of play, waving his arms about vigorously, and leaping high into the air as he splits his legs. Upon completing what the plaintiffs refer to as a “spasm of gymnastic maneuvers,” the Chief composes himself and walks off the playing field. Distilled to its finest, the plaintiffs’ amended complaint asserts that the symbolism of the Chief’s performances is discriminatory, and it is that symbolism which the plaintiffs assert creates a hostile environment. Because of the nature of the Civil Rights Act, it should be accorded a liberal interpretation in order to effectuate its purpose. The actions prohibited by the statute are not limited to tangible deprivations such as the exclusion of an individual from participation in a program or the denial of any specific benefit. The inclusion in section 5(a)(1) of a proscription against subjecting a person to discrimination under any program or activity based on that persons race, color, or national origin evinces a legislative intent to define discrimination in its broadest possible terms and prohibit all forms of disparate treatment. Consequently, I believe that a plaintiff can establish a violation of section 5(a)(1) of the Civil Rights Act by proving discrimination predicated upon a hostile environment. See Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 66-67, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49, 59-60, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 2405-06 (1986). However, if the mere uttering of disparaging words or phrases about a class of persons which engenders offensive feelings is insufficient to establish a hostile environment (see McPhaul v. Board of Commissioners, 226 F.3d 558, 566-67 (7th Cir. 2000)), I believe it follows that gestures or dress which a member of a class may find offensive are also insufficient. Conduct which is not severe enough to create a hostile environment is beyond the purview of section 5(a)(1). In this case, the Native American plaintiffs have alleged subjective feelings of embarrassment and humiliation by the Chiefs performances and that they find the symbolism that the Chief represents to be both insulting and demeaning. However, I do not believe that the conduct of which they complain is objectively hostile. These plaintiffs made no charge that any of the Chief’s actions were directed to them as individuals; rather, they assert insult as members of a class. Although some Native Americans may well find the Chief to be insulting and demeaning, his performances are certainly not of such a character that a reasonable person would find so abusive that it would interfere with his or her ability to participate in, or benefit from, the University’s programs or activities. For this reason I am of the opinion that the plaintiffs’ amended complaint fails to state a cause of action under section 5 of the Civil Rights Act. The trial court dismissed this action based on the grounds addressed by Justice Wolfson. However, the defendants raised the amended complaint’s failure to allege facts rising to the level of discrimination as a basis for dismissal before the trial court, and the University raised the issue in its brief before this court. A reviewing court can affirm a trial court’s decision on any ground apparent from the record (Material Service Corp. v. Department of Revenue, 98 Ill. 2d 382, 387, 457 N.E.2d 9 (1983)), and I believe that the failure of the plaintiffs to allege facts rising to the level of discrimination within the meaning of section 5(a) of the Civil Rights Act is the principal reason why their amended complaint should be dismissed. For this reason, I concur in the affirmance of the circuit court’s judgment. JUSTICE HALL, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I am not as confident as my colleagues that plaintiffs’ amended complaint fails to state a cause of action under the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003 (740 ILCS 23/5(a)(l) (2004)). According to the allegations set forth in the amended complaint, the University’s use of Chief Illiniwek as its sports mascot creates a hostile educational environment for Native American students. To establish the existence of a racially hostile educational environment, plaintiffs must prove that the alleged discriminatory conduct at issue is sufficiently severe, pervasive, or persistent so as to interfere with their ability to participate in or benefit from the school’s services. See Note, Native American Mascots, Schools, and the Title VI Hostile Environment Analysis, 1995 U. Ill. L. Rev. 971, 987. A hostile-environment analysis in the educational context entails an examination of the frequency of the alleged discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with the student’s academic performance. Hayut v. State University of New York, 352 F.3d 733, 745 (2d Cir. 2003). This standard requires the student to present evidence that he or she not only subjectively perceived the environment to be hostile, but also that the environment was objectively hostile or abusive. Hayut, 352 F.3d at 745. In this case, considering the allegations of the amended complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, I believe the allegations are sufficient to state a cause of action for racially hostile educational environment under the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003 (740 ILCS 23/ 5(a)(1) (2004)). See, e.g., Leslie v. Board of Education for Illinois School District U-46, 379 F. Supp. 2d 952, 963 (N.D. Ill. 2005) (allegations by minority and limited-English-proficient students that they suffered racially disparate effects as a result of local board of education redistricting plan was sufficient to state a claim under the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003 (740 ILCS 23/5(a)(l) (West 2004))). A trier of fact should decide, on another day, whether plaintiffs can actually prove their allegations, but plaintiffs have pleaded sufficient facts to allege a racially hostile educational environment. In light of the number of prominent educational institutions that have voluntarily discontinued the use of Native American nicknames, symbols, and mascots (see generally 1995 U. Ill. L. Rev. at 1000), I cannot conclude that a reasonable person in plaintiffs’ position would not find that the University’s continued official sanctioning of Chief Illiniwek as its sports mascot violates the civil rights of Native American students by creating and contributing to an objectively hostile educational environment.

=== CASE 9739322 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:12.465347+00 ===

JUSTICE KARMEIER delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Thomas and Justices Kilbride and Gar-man concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Freeman concurred in part and dissented in part, with opinion, joined by Justices McMorrow and Fitzgerald. OPINION Tri-G, Inc. (Tri-G), brought a legal malpractice action in the circuit court of McHenry County against the law firm of Burke, Bosselman & Weaver (Burke) to recover damages it sustained as a result of Burke’s failure to prosecute a complaint Tri-G had previously filed against Elgin Federal Bank (Elgin Federal). Following a trial on the merits, a jury found that Burke had been negligent in handling Tri-G’s case against Elgin Federal and that but for that negligence, Tri-G would have recovered $1,168,775 in compensatory damages and an equal sum in punitive damages from Elgin Federal. Accordingly, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Tri-G and against Burke for $2,337,550. After the circuit court entered judgment on the jury’s verdict, Burke appealed. Tri-G cross-appealed. The appellate court affirmed the judgment in part, reversed in part, and remanded the cause to the trial court for further proceedings. 353 Ill. App. 3d 197. In so ruling, the appellate court expressly rejected Burke’s arguments that the award of punitive damages to Tri-G was either improper as a matter of law or excessive in light of the evidence adduced at trial. It held that Illinois law permits a legal malpractice plaintiff to receive an award of lost punitive damages from a defendant attorney and concluded that the punitive damages award made in this case was justified by the evidence. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 232. Burke and Tri-G each filed petitions for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R 315(a). We allowed their respective petitions and consolidated the appeals for review. The primary issue before us is whether the appellate court erred in upholding the award of lost punitive damages to Tri-G. For the reasons that follow, we hold that it did. The judgment of the appellate court is therefore affirmed in part and reversed in part. The basic principles governing legal malpractice claims are well established. To prevail on a legal malpractice claim, the plaintiff client must plead and prove that the defendant attorneys owed the client a duty of due care arising from the attorney-client relationship, that the defendants breached that duty, and that as a proximate result, the client suffered injury. Northern Illinois Emergency Physicians v. Landau, Omahana & Kopka, Ltd., 216 Ill. 2d 294, 306 (2005). The injury in a legal malpractice action is not a personal injury, nor is it the attorney’s negligent act itself. Rather, it is a pecuniary injury to an intangible property interest caused by the lawyer’s negligent act or omission. The fact that the attorney may have breached his duty of care is not, in itself, sufficient to sustain the client’s cause of action. Even if negligence on the part of the attorney is established, no action will lie against the attorney unless that negligence proximately caused damage to the client. The existence of actual damages is therefore essential to a viable cause of action for legal malpractice. Northern Illinois Emergency Physicians v. Landau, Omahana & Kopka, Ltd., 216 Ill. 2d at 306-07. The theory underlying a cause of action for legal malpractice is that the plaintiff client would have been compensated for an injury caused by a third party, absent negligence on the part of the client’s attorney. Where the alleged legal malpractice involves litigation, no actionable claim exists unless the attorney’s negligence resulted in the loss of an underlying cause of action. If the underlying action never reached trial because of the attorney’s negligence, the plaintiff is required to prove that but for the attorney’s negligence, the plaintiff would have been successful in that underlying action. A legal malpractice plaintiff must therefore litigate a “case within a case.” See Cedeno v. Gumbiner, 347 Ill. App. 3d 169, 174 (2004). The “case within a case” on which Tri-G’s malpractice claim is predicated was Tri-G’s cause of action against Elgin Federal. That cause of action arose from certain construction loans Tri-G received from the bank to build residential homes in a development known as Huntington Point. Tri-G’s complaint, filed in 1981, alleged breach of contract, common law fraud, and violation of the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 121/2, par. 261 et seq. (now 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 2002))). Trial of the case was postponed for several years, during which time Tri-G was represented by a succession of law firms. Eventually, a May 11, 1987, trial date was set by the court. Approximately three months before the trial was scheduled to begin, Tri-G retained Burke to handle the case. The attorney from Burke assigned to represent Tri-G did not file an appearance, however, until May 4, 1987. When the case was called for trial as scheduled the following week, the attorney answered “not ready.” Because the attorney was not prepared to proceed, the trial court dismissed Tri-G’s case with prejudice. Tri-G, still represented by Burke, appealed the dismissal. On November 13, 1987, the appellate court dismissed the appeal sua sponte on the grounds that Tri-G had failed to comply with a previous order of that court. Tri-G subsequently replaced Burke with new legal counsel, who filed a second complaint against Elgin Federal. The new complaint alleged the existence of oral construction loan contracts between the parties, numerous breaches by Elgin Federal of those contracts, and fraud. On Elgin Federal’s motion, the circuit court dismissed the complaint based on res judicata. The court also imposed sanctions against Tri-G and its attorneys. The appellate court affirmed. Tri-G, Inc. v. Elgin Federal Savings & Loan Ass’n, 182 Ill. App. 3d 357 (1989). With the failure of its substantive claims against Elgin Federal, Tri-G looked to Burke for recourse. In 1989 it filed a legal malpractice action against the law firm. It voluntarily dismissed that action in 1994 and refiled it in 1995. Burke then moved to dismiss the complaint. Although Burke’s motion was allowed by the circuit court, the appellate court reversed and remanded. Tri-G, Inc. v. Burke, Bosselman & Weaver, No. 2—96—0980 (1997) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). Tri-G’s original and amended complaints against Burke each consisted of a single count claiming negligence. In its original complaint, Tri-G alleged that Burke was negligent for (1) failing to file an appearance until May 4, 1987; (2) failing to advise Tri-G’s witnesses and discuss their testimony in advance of depositions; (3) failing to attend certain depositions; (4) failing to properly prepare the case for trial; and (5) failing to seek a voluntary nonsuit on the date of trial. The 1981 complaint against Elgin Federal was attached as an exhibit to the malpractice complaint. The 1981 complaint contained 10 counts, claiming breach of contract, common law fraud, and violations of the Consumer Fraud Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 121V2, par. 261 et seq. (now 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 2002))). It alleged that in 1976, Tri-G was the general contractor for a residential real estate development in McHenry County known as the Huntington Point subdivision. First National Bank of Woodstock (First National) owned Huntington Point as the trustee of a land trust with Tri-G as beneficiary. In 1978, Elgin Federal made construction loans to Tri-G to build residential homes on vacant lots in Huntington Point, specifically enumerating 13 lots. Tri-G entered into a contract with Chain of Lakes Group (CLG), in which CLG agreed to complete construction on eight of those lots, specifically 7, 24, 25, 30, 32, 35, 36, and 37. Counts I through VII of Tri-G’s complaint asserted claims for breach of contract regarding lots 7, 24, 25, 30, 32, 36, and 37, respectively. Tri-G alleged that Elgin Federal breached its construction loan agreements by making payouts to CLG from the construction loans without the written authorization of Tri-G and allowing CLG to submit new contractor’s affidavits that Elgin Federal used as a basis for additional payouts in excess of the amounts stated in the original contractor’s affidavits submitted by Tri-G. Concurrent with the construction loans, Elgin Federal made a land loan to Tri-G for improvements to land surrounding the lots. In count VIII of its complaint, Tri-G alleged that Elgin Federal breached that land loan agreement by withholding payouts owed to Tri-G after it entered into the contract for CLG to complete construction on the eight above-listed lots. In count IX, Tri-G alleged that Elgin Federal committed common law fraud by: (1) making unauthorized payouts on the construction loans for lots 16, 17, 26, 28, and 31; (2) withholding money from Tri-G at the time of closing on lots 16, 26, 28, 30, and 37; (3) withholding from Tri-G the fact that Elgin Federal had made unauthorized disbursements to CLG; (4) allowing CLG to substitute new contractor’s affidavits for the original contractor’s affidavits with respect to the construction loans on all 13 lots; and (5) misleading Tri-G into believing that an accounting would be done once all of the lots had been closed upon, at which time Tri-G would receive monies withheld by Elgin Federal. In pleading damages under this count, Tri-G itemized the damages incurred with respect to the construction loans on lots 7, 17, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 36, and 37. Tri-G further alleged that it was damaged by unauthorized payouts from the land loan it secured from Elgin Federal in the amount of $30,000. Tri-G claimed a total of $139,159 in compensatory damages and $140,000 in punitive damages. In count X, Tri-G’s allegations under the Consumer Fraud Act essentially mirrored those of the common law fraud count. Discovery ensued. In January 2002, one month prior to trial, Tri-G was allowed to amend the malpractice complaint to add an allegation that Burke was negligent for failing to review and amend the 1981 complaint against Elgin Federal. Also, the trial court denied Burke’s motion in limine to exclude punitive damages. The court reasoned that if the jury assessed punitive damages against Elgin Federal in the underlying case, that amount would be compensatory damages to Tri-G in the malpractice action. During the trial, Irene Geschke testified that in June of 1976, she and her husband, Clarence, purchased a 16.5-acre tract of land, intending to develop it as the Huntington Point subdivision. Irene was working as a real estate broker. Irene and Clarence obtained a loan from First National to purchase the property and placed it in a land trust with First National as trustee and Irene and Clarence as beneficiaries. Irene and Clarence formed Tri-G as general contractor for the development of the property. Clarence was the sole shareholder of Tri-G and Irene was principally responsible for Tri-G’s operation. Tri-G divided Huntington Point into 46 lots, 45 of which were for single-family homes. Irene recounted that in 1977, she approached Dennis Neubert of Elgin Federal regarding financing for Tri-G. Tri-G subsequently obtained a loan from Elgin Federal to pay off the loan from First National. The loan was secured by the then-remaining 38 unsold Huntington Point lots, 37 of which were planned for single-family homes. Irene also spoke with Neubert about financing for the construction of homes on Huntington Point. Neubert told Irene that Elgin Federal would finance the construction. Tri-G introduced into evidence a one-page document from Elgin Federal entitled “Construction Loan Procedure,” which dealt with such matters as Elgin Federal’s inspection of construction sites and its payout of loan proceeds to subcontractors and suppliers of materials. Tri-G also introduced into evidence several loan commitment letters from Elgin Federal that set forth specific terms for each construction loan, e.g., the loan amount and the rate of interest. According to Irene, the documents, which purported to memorialize the loan agreements, actually included only some of the loan terms. Additional terms were agreed to orally. The oral terms identified by Irene were as follows: (1) payout from loans would be made only upon Tri-G’s written request; (2) each loan was separate so that funds advanced on one loan could not be used for construction on a lot that was subject to a different loan; (3) although interest on a particular loan would begin accruing once funds were disbursed, principal and interest payments on that loan would not be due until all the funds on that loan had been paid out; and (4) the purchaser of a completed home would be given a loan with the same interest rate and terms, i.e., 9% interest and no points, as the construction loan Tri-G had obtained for that house. Finally, Irene and Neubert agreed that if a subcontractor or supplier of materials required more funds than were originally stated in Tri-G’s affidavit itemizing the costs for constructing the home, Tri-G was required to submit an amended affidavit before the additional funds would be disbursed. According to Irene, the loan agreements contained no provision for when payouts could be terminated by Elgin Federal. Irene testified that Tri-G’s dealings with Elgin Federal initially went smoothly. Although she and Neubert agreed that interest payments on any particular loan would not be due until the proceeds had been entirely paid out, Elgin Federal initially billed her for interest, and she paid the interest as billed. Also, when Tri-G needed a payout from one of its loans, Elgin Federal would issue the payout within three days after Tri-G had submitted a payout authorization. Tri-G built and sold homes on eight of the Huntington Point lots. In each case, in accord with the construction loan agreements, the buyer of the home received a loan from Elgin Federal with the same interest rate and terms as Tri-G’s construction loan. In late 1977, Neubert left Elgin Federal and Edward Swartz assumed responsibility for the Huntington Point loans. Around this time, Tri-G began having difficulties with Elgin Federal. For example, Elgin Federal’s response to payout requests slowed down in early 1978. According to Irene, the slowdown caused one of Tri-G’s suppliers, Hines Lumber, to file a lien in February 1978. Irene complained to Swartz about the slowdown in payouts, and Swartz responded that the delay was due to his having just taken over the construction loans from Neubert. Irene stopped paying interest in March 1978. During Irene’s testimony, the trial court, over Burke’s objection, allowed Tri-G to introduce evidence of breach of contract and fraud regarding lots not specified in the 1981 complaint. The purpose of this evidence was to establish the existence of a scheme alleged to exist with respect to the lots that were specified in the 1981 complaint. Irene testified that on April 17, 1978, Swartz sent Tri-G several letters demanding regular monthly payments of principal and interest under three of the construction loans, even though the proceeds had not been paid out entirely on any of these loans. Irene testified that, without warning from Elgin Federal and without her independent knowledge, payouts stopped altogether on May 26, 1978, during Tri-G’s construction of homes on 14 projects: lots 7, 16, 17, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, and 38. The total amount of the loans on these projects was $795,797. As of May 1978, $548,626 in loan proceeds had been paid out and $247,171 remained unpaid. Irene testified that, contrary to Elgin Federal’s position, no interest was due on any of the open loans in May 1978 because the proceeds had not been paid out entirely on any of the loans. According to Irene, she received another letter from Swartz on June 16, 1978. In that letter, Swartz stated that there was a total of $21,688 in delinquent interest on the open construction loans and the land loan. Swartz demanded that the delinquent interest be paid within 45 days. Swartz also stated that Tri-G would have to complete construction of four of the homes on which Tri-G had open loans before Elgin Federal would open any further loans. Swartz demanded that Tri-G begin advertising its unsold homes at “realistic prices.” Swartz also stated that purchasers of Huntington Point houses would receive mortgages at 9.25% and 1 point. Swartz threatened that if Tri-G did not comply with the terms of the letter, Elgin Federal would take legal action effective August 1, 1978. Irene testified that at no time before the June 16, 1978, letter did Elgin Federal suggest that Tri-G’s homes were overpriced. She also testified that the letter gave no indication that Elgin Federal had decided to terminate payouts, though in fact payouts had ceased several weeks before, unbeknownst to her. Irene noted that, although Elgin Federal required Tri-G to complete four homes before it could obtain any more loans, Elgin Federal continued to refuse to make payouts, which were necessary for construction. Irene testified that, had Elgin Federal continued the payouts and allowed construction to finish, Tri-G could have paid the allegedly delinquent interest with proceeds from sales of the homes. Irene also noted that the terms of the mortgages offered to potential buyers in the June 16, 1978, letter were less favorable than the terms that she and Neubert had agreed upon. Irene recounted that on June 20, 1978, Elgin Federal sent her bills for interest relative to the loans on several lots. Irene did not believe that she was obligated to pay any interest because the entire proceeds had not been paid out on any of the loans. Swartz sent Tri-G another letter on July 3, 1978, demanding payment of delinquent interest prior to Elgin Federal refinancing any of the existing construction loans to secure additional funds for construction. Swartz required Tri-G to cure the delinquency on the land loan interest before Elgin Federal would release its interest in any lots that Tri-G might wish to sell to a third party. Swartz also stated that the terms of the mortgages offered to potential buyers in the letter of June 16, 1978, would be valid only until October 1, 1978, after which current market rates and fees would apply. Swartz threatened legal action if Tri-G took no action to complete the homes and establish an advertising plan to sell the homes “at a realistic price.” Swartz further stated that Elgin Federal’s “board feels that it is important to complete this project at an early date or we will ask for a deed in lieu of foreclosure or foreclosure proceedings will commence.” Swartz informed Irene that Elgin Federal had found a buyer, CLG, for the 23 lots in Huntington Point that were still vacant. CLG proposed to pay $15,000 for each of the vacant lots. Based on her experience in the real estate market, Irene testified that the fair market value of the lots at that time was $25,000 each. Irene had found another party who wanted to buy the lots at a higher price, but Elgin Federal refused to release its mortgages on the lots unless the delinquencies in interest were paid. Elgin Federal subsequently presented Irene and Clarence with a contract for the sale to CLG of the 23 vacant lots at the price of $15,000 per lot. The contract provided that $9,300 of the purchase price for each lot would be paid to Elgin Federal for the release of the lot under the land loan agreement. The contract also provided that CLG would act as general contractor on 8 of the 14 lots where construction was partially completed, and Tri-G would finish construction on the remaining 6 partially completed lots. Tri-G would remain responsible for the loans on all 14 lots. To compensate for any shortfall should CLG fail to complete construction of the homes within 90 days of the signing of the contract, CLG was required to place $2,500 in escrow for each of the eight lots on which CLG agreed to complete construction (totaling $20,000). The contract also required Tri-G to pay Elgin Federal $51,300 to cover any deficiency in the open construction loans. The contract further provided that Irene and Clarence would execute the necessary documents to allow CLG to handle exclusively all payouts under construction loans on the partially completed lots to be completed by CLG. Irene’s attorney, Michael Poper, suggested changes to the contract, but Elgin Federal rejected them and essentially gave Tri-G the choice of signing the contract or facing foreclosure on the open loans. Irene and Clarence agreed to the terms. The contract was executed on August 17, 1978. The parties to the contract were First National, as trustee of the land trust; Irene and Clarence, as sole owners of the entire beneficial interest in the land trust; and CLG. After the contract with CLG was signed, Elgin Federal refused to make payouts on the six lots on which Tri-G was to complete construction. Irene also discovered that Elgin Federal was permitting CLG to use payouts for purposes other than construction on the eight lots on which CLG was general contractor. Irene considered this practice to be a violation of the oral construction loan agreements, which did not allow payouts from a particular loan to be applied to a purpose other than construction on the lot for which that particular loan was obtained. Irene reviewed Elgin Federal’s ledger and determined the amount of funds that CLG used improperly. The total was $75,787. Irene complained to Swartz about Elgin Federal’s refusal to make payouts on the lots on which Tri-G was to complete construction and about the inappropriate payouts to CLG. Swartz told her that the contract between CLG and the Geschkes made CLG the agent of First National and deprived Tri-G of any control over the Huntington Point development. According to Irene, Elgin Federal made payouts from the land loan without Tri-G’s authorization, a practice contrary to the land loan’s terms. The trial court admitted into evidence portions of Elgin Federal’s ledger reflecting payouts to subcontractors during the years 1977 through 1979. Irene identified $21,725 in payouts that she did not authorize. Without Tri-G’s approval, CLG submitted its own contractor’s affidavits on the eight lots on which it had agreed to finish construction. Irene considered this a violation of the terms of the construction loan agreements on those lots. The costs specified in CLG’s affidavits exceeded the costs specified in Tri-G’s original affidavits, thus reducing Tri-G’s equity in the eight homes. Also, according to Irene’s testimony, Elgin Federal eventually foreclosed on the 14 open construction loans. Although CLG did not fulfill its contractual promise to complete construction on the eight lots, Elgin Federal returned the $20,000 in escrow funds to CLG without Irene’s knowledge or approval. Irene testified that she would never have entered into loan agreements with Elgin Federal had she known it did not intend to honor its oral agreements. She also would not have entered into the contract with CLG had Elgin Federal not threatened foreclosure and disallowed her from selling the lots to any party other than CLG. Michael Poper was the Geschkes’ attorney during their dealings with Elgin Federal. He testified that, without notice, Elgin Federal stopped making payouts on May 26, 1978. Poper noted that, even in June 1978, Elgin Federal still had not formally announced that it had stopped payouts. When Irene complained about the cessation of payouts, Elgin Federal told her that it would make no more payouts until interest was brought current. In Poper’s opinion, Elgin Federal’s demand for interest was premature under the construction loan agreements. In his view, if Elgin Federal had continued making payouts, thereby enabling Tri-G to finish constructing the homes, Tri-G could have used the proceeds from the sales of the homes to pay whatever interest was then due. By withholding payouts and thus halting construction, however, Elgin Federal effectively precluded payment of the interest it demanded. Over Burke’s objection, Poper testified that he had represented other developers whom Elgin Federal had placed in the same kind of predicament. John Brittain was a member of Elgin Federal’s board of directors when Elgin Federal extended the land and construction loans to Tri-G in 1977. He testified that Elgin Federal’s standard policy at that time was to require monthly interest payments on construction loans. Elgin Federal threatened foreclosure in June 1978 because Tri-G had fallen behind in interest payments. Brittain acknowledged that Irene had complained to him that Elgin Federal had paid proceeds from certain of Tri-G’s construction loans toward deficiencies on other construction loans. According to Brittain, Elgin Federal commingled funds in this fashion to avoid placing Tri-G in default. Brittain admitted, however, that such commingling was contrary to Elgin Federal’s policies. Tri-G rested its case. For its defense, Burke first called Brent Sherman, the founder and sole shareholder of CLG. Sherman testified to the events surrounding CLG’s contract with the Geschkes under which CLG agreed to purchase 23 vacant lots and to finish construction on several of the remaining lots. According to Sherman, the contract gave him full authority to request payouts from Elgin Federal on the homes he was completing, but he nonetheless obtained Irene’s approval for all payouts he requested. Also, because he did not complete construction of the homes within the agreed time, Sherman disbursed to Tri-G $10,000 of the $20,000 CLG had placed in escrow to guarantee completion of the homes. Sherman admitted, however, that he had no documentation reflecting that payment. Sherman denied that he ever conspired with Elgin Federal to deprive Tri-G of control over the Huntington Point development. Also, Sherman had anticipated receiving a profit of $20,000 on each of the 23 lots once construction was complete. Burke next called Edward Swartz, who testified that he assumed responsibility for Tri-G’s loans after Dennis Neubert left Elgin Federal in late 1977. According to Swartz, Elgin Federal’s policies made borrowers responsible for monthly interest payments on their construction loans once funds were disbursed. Tri-G initially paid interest on the construction loans without protest but stopped paying in early 1978, giving rise to Elgin Federal’s delinquency notices and threats of foreclosure. Contrary to Irene’s interpretation, Swartz stated that the contract between CLG and Tri-G made CLG responsible for interest and principal on the loans relating to the construction it had agreed to finish. Swartz denied that funds from Tri-G’s loans were ever commingled with funds from the loans CLG took over. On cross-examination, Swartz conceded that the written construction loan agreements between Elgin Federal and Tri-G did not specify when interest was to be paid. Swartz admitted that Elgin Federal’s procedures were “informal” and that not all policies were in writing. Swartz acknowledged that the total amount of delinquent interest reflected in his June 16, 1978, letter included interest for June 1978, which in fact was not due until after the date of the letter. According to Swartz, the characterization of the June interest as delinquent was an innocent error. Swartz categorically denied that Elgin Federal had ever stopped payouts on any of Tri-G’s loans. Shown documents from Elgin Federal reflecting that the bank had made virtually no payouts between May 26 and September 19, 1978, Swartz speculated that no payouts were made because Tri-G had not requested them. Swartz further admitted on cross-examination that, after the contract between CLG and Tri-G was signed, Irene told him several times that she did not want CLG authorizing payouts on the homes CLG agreed to finish and that she was revoking CLG’s authority under the contract to make such authorizations. In response, Swartz told Irene that she would have to cancel the contract in writing if she wanted to stop CLG from authorizing payouts. Swartz further admitted on cross-examination that he could point to no document memorializing CLG’s assumption of responsibility for interest and principal on the loans relating to the construction projects CLG agreed to complete. Swartz acknowledged that the fact that foreclosure proceedings were brought against Tri-G when these projects failed indicated that Tri-G remained responsible for the loans despite the contract with CLG. Swartz also admitted that Elgin Federal commingled funds on Tri-G’s loans and that Irene protested the practice on numerous occasions. At the conclusion of the evidence, the trial court instructed the jury on five specific categories of damages, with their respective elements, sought by Tri-G. In its closing argument, Tri-G sought damages in the following amounts: $75,787 for breach of the construction loan agreements; $21,675 for breach of the land loan agreement; $10,000 for breach of the escrow agreement; $361,000 for fraud that resulted in loss of profits on the 23 vacant lots; and $280,000 for fraud that resulted in lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots. These sums totaled $748,562. The jury ultimately returned a verdict in favor of Tri-G for $2,337,550, more than three times the amount Tri-G asked for. In four special interrogatories, the jury found that: (1) Burke was negligent in representing Tri-G in the underlying case; (2) Burke’s negligence proximately caused Tri-G to lose the underlying case; (3) had Tri-G prevailed in the underlying case, it would have recovered a verdict against Elgin Federal for $1,168,775 in compensatory damages; and (4) had Tri-G prevailed in the underlying case, Elgin Federal would have been required to pay it an additional $1,168,775 in punitive damages. Burke filed a posttrial motion seeking alternative forms of relief. Tri-G filed a posttrial motion in which it requested interest on the judgment and an award of attorney fees and costs pursuant to the Consumer Fraud Act. Both motions were denied. Burke appealed and Tri-G cross-appealed. The appellate court rejected a contention by Burke that the amount of compensatory damages awarded to Tri-G was not supported by the record. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 222-23. It upheld the award of punitive damages to Tri-G (353 Ill. App. 3d at 226-32), but rejected Tri-G’s claim for judgment interest (353 Ill. App. 3d at 223-24). In addition, it reversed the trial court’s denial of Tri-G’s request for attorney fees and costs pursuant to the Consumer Fraud Act and remanded the cause to the trial court to allow Tri-G to request attorney fees and costs incurred in bringing the consumer fraud claim. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 224-26. One justice dissented solely on the issue of lost punitive damages. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 233 (Gilleran Johnson, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). That justice would have followed precedent from New York and California and held that “a plaintiff may not recover punitive damages lost by reason of attorney malpractice.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 236 (Gilleran Johnson, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Burke and Tri-G each filed petitions for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). We allowed their respective petitions and consolidated the appeals for review. We subsequently granted leave to the Illinois Association of Defense Trial Counsel, and the Illinois Civil Justice League, the Du Page County Bar Association, and the Northwest Suburban Bar Association to file amicus curiae briefs in support of Burke. See 155 Ill. 2d R. 345. In its appeal to our court, Burke contends that it was denied procedural due process when Tri-G was permitted to amend its complaint to add allegations regarding lots not specified in the 1981 complaint, that the amount of compensatory damages awarded was not supported by the record, and that the award of lost punitive damages was erroneous. Because only the punitive damages issue was raised in Burke’s petition for leave to appeal (No. 99584), Tri-G filed motions to strike Burke’s additional two issues from its brief. We took the motions with the case and now deny them. Supreme Court Rule 315(b)(3) requires that a petition for leave to appeal contain “a statement of the points relied upon for reversal of the judgment of the Appellate Court.” 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(b)(3). A party’s failure to raise an issue in the petition for leave to appeal may be deemed a waiver of that issue. Central Illinois Light Co. v. Home Insurance Co., 213 Ill. 2d 141, 152 (2004); Sullivan v. Edward Hospital, 209 Ill. 2d 100, 124-25 (2004). In this case, however, Tri-G filed its own, separate petition for leave to appeal to contest the lower courts’ denial of its claim for judgment interest (No. 99595) and that petition was allowed. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 318(a) (155 Ill. 2d R. 318(a)), Burke, as appellee in that cause, is entitled to “seek and obtain any relief warranted by the record on appeal without having filed a separate petition for leave to appeal or notice of cross-appeal or separate appeal.” This authorization encompasses the two additional issues asserted by Burke. In challenging this conclusion, Tri-G argues that to apply Rule 318(a) to permit Burke to assert the additional issues “eviscerates the principle that points relied on by an appellant for reversal not contained in the petition for leave to appeal are waived.” We disagree. Tri-G chose to file a separate petition for leave to appeal, and our application of Rule 318(a) is a natural consequence of Tri-G’s tactical decision. See, e.g., Weatherman v. Gary-Wheaton Bank of Fox Valley, 186 Ill. 2d 472, 489-91 (1999); Zimmerman v. Village of Skokie, 183 Ill. 2d 30, 40-41 (1998). Tri-G’s motions to strike the additional issues from Burke’s brief are therefore denied. Turning then to the merits of this appeal, Burke first contends that it was denied procedural due process by the trial court’s decision to allow Tri-G to recover damages for the 23 vacant lots and the 14 partially completed lots not specified in the 1981 complaint and by the appellate court’s review of that decision. As earlier noted, Tri-G was allowed to amend the malpractice complaint prior to trial to add an allegation that Burke was negligent for failing to review and amend the 1981 complaint against Elgin Federal. In allowing Tri-G’s motion to amend, the trial court stated: “Both sides are dragging in the question of damages. *** [T]he proposed amendment has absolutely nothing to do with damages because you can’t back door the damages. I mean the damages if there are any, if it gets that far, would have to come from the 1981 complaint. It doesn’t come from anywhere else.” The trial court reasoned that the amendment only went to the question of what negligence Tri-G intended to prove. During Irene’s testimony, the trial court allowed Tri-G to introduce evidence of breach of contract and fraud regarding the 23 vacant and 14 partially completed lots not specified in the 1981 complaint. The trial court admitted this evidence for the purpose of establishing an alleged scheme with respect to the lots that were specified in the 1981 complaint. Indeed, the trial court expressly stated that Tri-G would not be able to argue to the jury that it was entitled to damages based on the additional lots. However, at the jury instruction conference, over Burke’s objection, the trial court ruled that damages on the fraud claims properly included the additional lots. Tri-G sought such damages, which the jury awarded. In denying Burke’s posttrial motion, the trial court explained that the fraud claims relating to the additional lots were encompassed within the 1981 complaint. In the appellate court, Burke assigned error to this decision. The appellate court disagreed with the trial court that the 1981 complaint was sufficiently broad to encompass claims relating to the additional lots. Noting that it can affirm the trial court’s decision on any basis in the record, however, the appellate court held as follows: “We hold that the claims outside the 1981 complaint were admissible at the malpractice trial on the basis that a reasonably competent attorney would have filed a motion to amend the complaint to add the claims within a reasonable time after being retained by Tri-G in January 1987, and that such a motion should have been granted because it would have been proper under the prevailing rules of pleading.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 214. The appellate court opined that a reasonably competent attorney retained by Tri-G in late January 1987, aware that May 11, 1987, was the date certain for trial, would have immediately reviewed the 1981 complaint. Further, according to the appellate court, given the interrelationship between the claims relating to the lots specified in the 1981 complaint and the same claims relating to the additional lots, a reasonably competent attorney would have sought to amend the 1981 complaint prior to the May 11, 1987, trial. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 214-15. In this court, Burke specifically contends that the lower courts’ decisions cumulatively effected a deprivation of procedural due process because Burke was unable to present a defense to claims related to the additional lots. Burke argues that it was fundamentally unfair for the trial court to permit the jury to award damages on claims relating to the additional lots, which the trial court ruled, during trial, could not be the basis of recovery. Burke further argues that the appellate court, instead of correcting the trial court’s error, compounded it by upholding the trial court’s decision based on alternative reasoning. Thus, according to Burke, the appellate court’s conclusion “was an integral part of the due process violation.” Procedural due process claims concern the constitutionality of the specific procedures employed to deny a person’s life, liberty, or property interest. East St. Louis Federation of Teachers, Local 1220 v. East St. Louis School District No. 189 Financial Oversight Panel, 178 Ill. 2d 399, 415 (1997). The requirement of due process is met by having an orderly proceeding wherein a person is served with notice, actual or constructive, and has an opportunity to be heard and to enforce and protect his rights. The “ ‘fundamental requirement of due process in any proceeding which is to be accorded finality is notice reasonably calculated, under the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections.’ ” People ex rel. Devine v. $30,700.00 United States Currency, 199 Ill. 2d 142, 156 (2002), quoting Stratton v. Wenona Community Unit District No. 1, 133 Ill. 2d 413, 432 (1990). Due process does not guarantee against erroneous or unjust decisions by courts which have jurisdiction of the parties and the subject matter, and a constitutional question is not presented where a court may have misconstrued the law or committed an error for which its judgment should be reversed. See Reyes v. Court of Claims, 299 Ill. App. 3d 1097, 1104-05 (1998). Applying these principles to this case, it is clear that Burke was not denied procedural due process. There is no merit to Burke’s contention that Burke was not able to present a defense to claims relating to the additional lots. The issue of damages related to the additional lots permeated the entire trial, including Tri-G’s pretrial motion to amend the malpractice complaint to include an allegation that Burke was negligent for failing to review and amend the 1981 complaint. “An element of damage anticipated by a pretrial motion can hardly be said to come as a surprise.” Union Electric Power Co. v. Sauget, 1 Ill. 2d 125, 132 (1953). Further, the evidence of the additional lots is nearly identical to allegations relating to the lots pled in the 1981 complaint. If Burke were truly surprised by evidence of the additional lots, it would have requested a continuance to conduct further discovery. Instead, Burke chose to proceed. Indeed, Burke did not even introduce expert witnesses or other evidence valuating the lots that were specified in the 1981 complaint. Burke does not explain how it was prevented from deposing any witness, pursuing any line of questioning, or presenting any avenue of proof. The absence of surprise or other prejudice militates against finding a procedural due process violation. See, e.g., McDermott v. Metropolitan Sanitary District, 240 Ill. App. 3d 1, 38-39 (1992); La Salle National Bank v. International Ltd., 129 Ill. App. 2d 381, 397-98 (1970). In support of its position, Burke cites Delarosa v. Approved Auto Sales, Inc., 332 Ill. App. 3d 623 (2002), Hiscott v. Peters, 324 Ill. App. 3d 114 (2001), Koplin v. Hinsdale Hospital, 207 Ill. App. 3d 219 (1990), and Pettigrew v. National Accounts System, Inc., 67 Ill. App. 2d 344 (1966). In each of those cases, new causes of action were adjudicated on the merits without the appellant being given the opportunity to answer the new causes of action, take discovery, and prosecute or defend itself against the new causes of action at trial. Those cases are distinguishable from the matter before us. Unlike the appellants in those cases, Burke was not required to litigate new causes of action on short notice with no opportunity to answer the causes of action, take discovery, and present evidence in opposition to the new causes of action. Burke had ample time to take discovery on all claims related to Tri-G’s dealings with Elgin Federal. Absent its unsuccessful claim of prejudice, Burke’s contention amounts to nothing more than an argument that it was denied procedural due process because the decisions of the trial and appellate courts were erroneous. As we have previously indicated, however, procedural due process is not a guaranty against erroneous or unjust decisions, or the incorrect interpretation of statutes or rules of law. Neither an abuse of discretion nor an erroneous rule of law will support a reversal for a deprivation of procedural due process. Peoples Gas Light & Coke Co. v. Buckles, 24 Ill. 2d 520, 530 (1962); Benton v. Marr, 364 Ill. 628, 629 (1936), quoting Genslinger v. New Illinois Athletic Club of Chicago, 332 Ill. 316, 319 (1928). In this case, the trial court had within its discretion the power to rule as it did on the complained-of matters. Even if the challenged rulings of the lower courts may have been erroneous — which we expressly do not decide— they did not deprive Burke of due process of law. See Kazubowski v. Kazubowski, 45 Ill. 2d 405, 413 (1970); Chicago Land Clearance Comm’n v. Darrow, 12 Ill. 2d 365, 369-70 (1957). Burke next challenges the amount of the jury’s compensatory damages award. As earlier noted, the trial court instructed the jury on the elements of five specific categories of damages that Tri-G sought. In its closing argument, Tri-G requested $75,787 for breach of the construction loan agreements, $21,675 for breach of the land loan agreement, $10,000 for breach of the escrow agreement, $361,000 for fraud that resulted in loss of profits on the 23 vacant lots, and $280,000 for fraud that resulted in lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots. These amounts totaled $748,562. The jury, however, determined that Tri-G was actually entitled to $1,168,775 in compensatory damages. In assailing the jury’s verdict, Burke contends that Tri-G should not have recovered compensation for lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots. The firm also takes issue with the total amount of the compensatory damages awarded by the jury. Our consideration of these arguments is guided by the principle that “[t]he determination of damages is a question reserved to the trier of fact, and a reviewing court will not lightly substitute its opinion for the judgment rendered in the trial court.” Richardson v. Chapman, 175 Ill. 2d 98, 113 (1997). Absent a clear indication in the record that the jury failed to follow some rule of law or considered some erroneous evidence, or that the verdict was the obvious result of passion or prejudice, a reviewing court will not upset the jury’s assessment of damages. See Perry v. Storzbach, 206 Ill. App. 3d 1065, 1069 (1990). Burke challenges the jury’s award of $280,000 for lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots on the grounds that it was speculative and not supported by the evidence. This argument cannot be sustained. As we noted earlier, CLG president Brent Sherman testified that he reasonably anticipated a profit of $20,000 per lot for each completed house. During closing argument, Tri-G relied on Sherman’s testimony in requesting compensatory damages for lost profits in the amount of $20,000 for each of the 14 partially completed lots, which totals $280,000. The appellate court held that Sherman’s testimony as to the expected profits was an adequate basis for the jury’s award. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 221-22. The controlling principles are well established. “A recovery may be had for prospective profits when there are any criteria by which the probable profits can be estimated with reasonable certainty.” Barnett v. Caldwell Furniture Co., 277 Ill. 286, 289 (1917). “In order to recover lost profits, it is not necessary that the amount of loss be proven with absolute certainty. [Citation.] Being merely prospective, such profits will, to some extent, be uncertain and incapable of calculation with mathematical precision.” Midland Hotel Corp. v. Reuben H. Donnelley Corp., 118 Ill. 2d 306, 315-16 (1987); accord Barnett, 277 Ill. at 289. The impossibility of proof of the exact amount of lost profits will not justify refusing damages. The law requires only that the plaintiff approximate the claimed lost profits by competent evidence. Such evidence must with a fair degree of probability tend to establish a basis for the assessment of damages for lost profits. Barnett, 277 Ill. at 289. “However, recovery of lost profits cannot be based upon conjecture or sheer speculation. [Citation.] It is necessary that the evidence afford a reasonable basis for the computation of damages ***.” Midland Hotel, 118 Ill. 2d at 316. A plaintiff may satisfy the requirement of proving with a reasonable basis or with reasonable certainty damages for claimed lost profits through evidence of past profits in an established business. Generally speaking, however, courts consider evidence of lost profits in a new business too speculative to sustain the burden of proof. Chapman v. Kirby, 49 Ill. 211, 219 (1868); see Malatesta v. Leichter, 186 Ill. App. 3d 602, 621 (1989); Drs. Sellke & Conlon, Ltd. v. Twin Oaks Realty, Inc., 143 Ill. App. 3d 168, 174 (1986). Reviewing the record, the appellate court observed that Sherman spent several years in the construction business, which he described as profitable, prior to becoming involved in Huntington Point. Each of the 23 vacant lots was comparable to the 14 partially completed lots. Also, Sherman’s, i.e., CLG’s, business of selling houses for profit was comparable to Tri-G’s business of selling houses for profit. In the appellate court’s view, Sherman’s testimony was an adequate basis for calculating Tri-G’s lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 221-22. Assigning error to the appellate court’s reasoning, Burke contends that, as a matter of law, evidence of past success in a similar enterprise is not sufficient to support an award of lost profits and, specifically, past success on one real estate project is not sufficient to support an award of lost profits on a subsequent real estate project. According to Burke, “Sherman’s testimony about his expectations based on his prior successes on other real estate projects was [therefore] not sufficient to support an award of lost profits of Tri-G on this project.” (Emphases in original.) We cannot accept Burke’s contention. There is no inviolate rule that a new business can never prove lost profits. Rather, in some cases, “courts have found that the rule that a new business’ profits are too speculative did not fit the circumstances before them.” Milex Products, Inc. v. Alra Laboratories, Inc., 237 Ill. App. 3d 177, 192 (1992); see, e.g., Malatesta, 186 Ill. App. 3d at 620-22. The cases on which Burke relies determined that where lost profits are based solely upon speculation, such proof was inadequate to establish lost profits with reasonable certainty. In this case, CLG’s business was an established business. The 14 houses to be completed cost the same amount to construct and had comparable prices as the completed houses. Given these facts, with Sherman’s testimony, Tri-G’s lost profits could be determined with reasonable certainty from CLG’s past experience. See, e.g., Milex, 237 Ill. App. 3d at 193. We therefore uphold the jury’s award of $280,000 for lost profits on the 14 partially completed lots. Burke’s contention that the jury’s overall award was excessive presents a more difficult question. Tri-G requested a total of $748,562 in compensatory damages for five categories of damages on which the jury was instructed. The jury, however, awarded $1,168,775 in compensatory damages, which was $420,213 — over 50% — more than what Tri-G requested. Burke contends that such an award was not supported by the record and was the result of passion, prejudice, or confusion. It therefore requests that we remand the cause for a new trial solely on the issue of damages or, alternatively, that we order a remittitur in the amount of $420,213, thereby reducing the compensatory damages award to $748,562. We conclude that remittitur is necessary in this case. Under Illinois law, an award of damages will be deemed excessive if it falls outside the range of fair and reasonable compensation, results from passion or prejudice, or is so large that it shocks the judicial conscience. Richardson, 175 Ill. 2d at 113. In Burke’s view, the jury’s decision to award Tri-G $420,213 more than it had requested, “could only have been produced by passion, prejudice, or confusion.” We disagree. “A jury’s award of a verdict higher than that requested by counsel does not, by itself, indicate that the jury acted out of passion or prejudice.” See Fedt v. Oak Lawn Lodge, Inc., 132 Ill. App. 3d 1061, 1072 (1985). Having said that, however, we must nevertheless conclude that the jury’s verdict, as rendered, cannot stand. In attempting to rationalize the jury’s compensatory damage award, Tri-G suggests that its trial counsel deliberately asked for less than it was entitled to recover as a strategic maneuver. The record, however, belies that notion. During its closing argument, Tri-G referred extensively to evidence from documents and witnesses. In each of the five categories of damages on which the jury was instructed, Tri-G asked the jury to award it the dollar amount that corresponded to the loss reflected in the evidence. Indeed, in one category of damages, Tri-G presented the jury with a time range within which to determine damages and asked for the maximum amount within that range, which the jury awarded. In its brief, Tri-G additionally responds that the record contains “ample” evidence to support the jury’s $1,168,775 compensatory damages award. Citing again to documents and witness testimony, Tri-G argues that the award “appears to consist” of a list of categories of damages, assigning a dollar value to each category. Two of Tri-G’s claimed categories of damages, however, are outside of the five categories of damages on which the jury was instructed: “$255,336.00 paid by Tri-G to purchase the land and develop it into 24 lots,” and “$240,754.00 loss of money paid by Tri-G in opening waivers for 14 houses.” Tri-G does not dispute that these two claimed categories of damages were not identified in the jury instructions. Rather, Tri-G contends that it is not reversible error for a jury to disregard the elements of damages identified in jury instructions as long as the ultimate damages award “is consistent with the evidence and proven damages.” This contention is meritless. Jurors do not possess a roving commission to find such damages as they please. The damages awarded by a jury must be measured by a legal standard, and that standard must guide the jury’s determination as to what sum would compensate the injured party. Accordingly, while the amount of recoverable damages is a question of fact for the jury, the measure of damages upon which the jury’s factual computation is based is a question of law for the court (see United States for the Use of N. Maltese & Sons, Inc. v. Juno Construction Corp., 759 F.2d 253, 255 (2d Cir. 1985); Basic American, Inc. v. Shatila, 133 Idaho 726, 745, 992 P.2d 175, 194 (1999); 25A C.J.S. Damages § 342 (2002); 15 Ill. L. & Prac. Damages § 125, at 558 (2000)), and the court’s instructions should limit the jury’s consideration to facts that are properly a part of the damages allowable (Allied Vista, Inc. v. Holt, 987 S.W.2d 138, 141 (Tex. Ct. App. 1999); accord Creek v. Village of Westhaven, 144 F.3d 441, 447 (7th Cir. 1998) (“A jury’s discretion in awarding damages is limited by the parameters of what the law will allow [citations], and it is the court’s instructions which hopefully assist the jury”); C. McCormick, Damages § 15, at 58 (1935) (observing that, in action for damages, trial judge has duty to include in jury instructions a rule or standard for measuring amount of award)). In the present case, the trial court instructed the jury: “It is your duty to resolve this case by determining the facts and following the law given in the instructions.” See Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 1.01(2) (2000). The trial court further instructed the jury on only the five above-stated categories of damages. Under the principles discussed above, Tri-G therefore cannot justify the jury’s award of compensatory damages by hypothesizing categories of damages on which the jury was not instructed. We are thus left with no basis in the law or the record to support a verdict $420,213 greater than Tri-G had requested. Where, as here, a jury’s award “exceed[s] the proven damages, it must be corrected. The practice of entering or ordering a remittitur has long been an accepted practice in Illinois and it has been consistently acknowledged to be promotive of both the administration of justice and putting an end to litigation.” See McElroy v. Patton, 130 Ill. App. 2d 872, 877 (1970) (collecting authorities); see generally Best v. Taylor Machine Works, 179 Ill. 2d 367, 411-13 (1997). In this legal malpractice action, the underlying case was instituted with the filing of the 1981 complaint— approximately 24 years ago. “Rather than prolong this litigation any further, remittitur will be utilized to correct the excessive verdict.” Peter J. Hartmann Co. v. Capitol Bank & Trust Co., 353 Ill. App. 3d 700, 711 (2004). The applicable principles are widely recognized. A remittitur is an agreement by the plaintiff to relinquish, or remit, to the defendant that portion of the jury’s verdict which constitutes excessive damages and to accept the sum which has been judicially determined to be properly recoverable damages. It is a judicial determination of recoverable damages and should not be construed as an agreement between the parties or a concession by the plaintiff that the damages were excessive. See Carter v. Kirk, 256 Ill. App. 3d 938, 947-48 (1993); Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Touche Ross & Co., 224 Ill. App. 3d 559, 588 (1991), aff’d, 159 Ill. 2d 137 (1994); Haid v. Tingle, 219 Ill. App. 3d 406, 411 (1991) (collecting authorities). Although a trial court may refuse to enter judgment on a verdict unless a portion of the verdict is remitted, the court does not have the authority to reduce the damages by entry of a remittitur if the plaintiff objects or does not consent. The trial court must afford the plaintiff the choice of agreeing or refusing to the entry of a remittitur, with the proviso that the plaintiffs refusal to agree to the entry of a remittitur will result in the ordering of a new trial. The only alternative to a remittitur in a case where the verdict exceeds the damages properly proven, or where the verdict can be accounted on the sole basis that the jury acted from some improper motive, such as passion or prejudice, is for the trial judge to order a new trial. Carter, 256 Ill. App. 3d at 947-48; Haid, 219 Ill. App. 3d at 411-12 (and cases cited therein). Further, Supreme Court Rule 366(a)(5) specifically provides that a reviewing court has the power to grant any relief, including the entry of a remittitur. 155 Ill. 2d R. 366(a)(5). Accordingly, in the present case, we enter a remittitur of $420,213, thereby reducing Tri-G’s compensatory damages award to $748,562, conditioned upon Tri-G’s consent. Absent such consent, we order a new tried, solely on the issue of damages. See, e.g., Peter J. Hartmann Co., 353 Ill. App. 3d at 711-12; Haid, 219 Ill. App. 3d at 417; Briante v. Link, 184 Ill. App. 3d 812, 815 (1989). We next consider Tri-G’s contention that the lower courts erred in denying its claim for judgment interest. In considering Tri-G’s arguments, which repeat those it presented in the appellate court, we observe that the pertinent facts are undisputed and the issues raised are purely legal. “If the facts are uncontroverted and the issue is the trial court’s application of the law to the facts, a court of review may determine the correctness of the ruling independently of the trial court’s judgment.” Norskog v. Pfiel, 197 Ill. 2d 60, 70-71 (2001). Tri-G divides the interest it seeks into two time periods, -with the focal point being June 1, 1987. First, Tri-G seeks “prejudgment” interest, which covers the period from June 1978, when Elgin Federal committed the acts from which the underlying case arose, to June 1, 1987, the approximate date that a verdict would have been entered against Elgin Federal but for Burke’s negligence. Prejudgment interest is recoverable only where authorized by agreement of the parties or by statute. In chancery proceedings, however, equitable considerations permit a court to allow interest as the equities of the case may demand. City of Springfield v. Allphin, 82 Ill. 2d 571, 576, 579 (1980) (collecting cases); Continental Casualty Co. v. Commonwealth Edison Co., 286 Ill. App. 3d 572, 577 (1997) (collecting cases). Tri-G argues that, had a damages judgment been entered against Elgin Federal in 1987, Tri-G would have been entitled to prejudgment interest on equitable grounds. Tri-G also seeks “postjudgment” interest for the period from June 1, 1987, through February 28, 2002, when judgment against Burke was entered. Before the appellate court, Tri-G relied on section 2 — 1303 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provides in relevant part: “Judgments recovered in any court shall draw interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of the judgment until satisfied ***. When judgment is entered upon any award, report, or verdict, interest shall be computed at the above rate, from the time when made or rendered to the time of entering judgment upon the same, and included in the judgment.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1303 (West 2002). Tri-G argues that, because Burke failed to obtain a judgment against Elgin Federal in 1987, Burke is responsible for “postjudgment” interest, extending from June 1, 1987, when the judgment should have been entered, through February 28, 2002, when Tri-G finally recovered on its allegations against Elgin Federal. Relying on the plain language of the statute, the appellate court rejected Tri-G’s purported category of “post-judgment” interest. “Section 2—1303 speaks of judgments recovered, not judgments that should have been recovered. Tri-G recovered no judgment in this action until February 28, 2002, and therefore this is the date by which interest will be reckoned.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 224. Before this court, Tri-G concedes that its claim to what it characterizes as “postjudgment” interest “is not based directly” on section 2 — 1303. Rather, according to Tri-G: “Combining section [2 — 1303] and the principle that the judgment in a legal malpractice case is supposed to give the plaintiff ‘those sums which would have been recovered if the underlying suit had been successfully prosecuted,’ *** Tri-G is entitled to additional compensatory damages equal to the amount of post-judgment interest on a judgment that would have been entered in June 1987 but for Burke’s negligence.” Tri-G now contends that the appellate court’s rejection of its claim to “postjudgment” interest “completely ignored the principle that the prevailing plaintiff in a legal malpractice case is entitled to everything it would have recovered if the underlying action had been successfully prosecuted.” This argument is erroneous. A judgment is the final determination of a court upon matters submitted to it in an action or proceeding. A judgment is the judicial act of the court. In contrast, the right to judgment interest, apart from contract, “does not emanate from the controversy, or from the judgment, or from anything of a judicial nature. *** The recovery of interest in this State, not contracted for, finds its only authority in the statute. It is purely statutory.” Blakeslee’s Storage Warehouses, Inc. v. City of Chicago, 369 Ill. 480, 482-83 (1938). In this case, as the appellate court reasoned, section 2 — 1303 refers only to judgments recovered, not to judgments that should have been recovered. We must give effect to this statutory provision by giving its language its plain and ordinary meaning. Hall v. Henn, 208 Ill. 2d 325, 330 (2003). Therefore, we agree with the appellate court that the focus of this claim should not be June 1, 1987, the date of a purported, hypothetical judgment against Elgin Federal, but rather February 28, 2002, the date when the judgment against Burke was entered, which was the only judgment rendered in this legal malpractice action. Because February 28, 2002, is the operative date, the appellate court reasoned that the interest Tri-G was seeking was actually entirely prejudgment interest, but of two types. In the appellate court’s view, the interest covering the period from June 1978 to June 1, 1987, was sought from Burke only derivatively, its ultimate basis being Elgin Federal’s wrongdoing. By contrast, the interest for the period from June 1, 1987, to February 28, 2002, was claimed directly on the basis of Burke’s own negligent misconduct. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 224. In analyzing and rejecting Tri-G’s claims for this interest, the appellate court looked to the nature of the claims for which interest was sought. With respect to the later period, ending February 28, 2002, the appellate court reasoned that the request for interest failed because the claim against Burke was one at law and our state does not allow nonstatutory prejudgment interest on any type of claim at law. We agree. As we have already suggested, “[i]t is well settled that interest is not recoverable absent a statute or agreement providing for it.” Allphin, 82 Ill. 2d at 576. An exception to this rule exists in equity. “In chancery proceedings, the allowance of interest lies within the sound discretion of the judge and is allowed where warranted by equitable considerations and disallowed if such an award would not comport with justice and equity.” (Emphasis added.) Allphin, 82 Ill. 2d at 579; accord Groome v. Freyn Engineering Co., 374 Ill. 113, 131 (1940) (observing: “In a proper case, equitable considerations permit a court of equity to allow or disallow interest as the equities of the case may demand”). The availability of equitable relief is not necessarily precluded merely because a case is heard in the law division of a circuit court, nor is equitable relief automatically awarded merely because a case is proceeding in the chancery division of a circuit court. Rather, it is the substance of the claim that determines the appropriate relief and the nature of the court. Continental Casualty Co., 286 Ill. App. 3d at 579; see, e.g., In re Estate of Wernick, 127 Ill. 2d 61, 86-87 (1989) (referring to “proceedings sounding in equity”). There is no question, however, that this legal malpractice action was entirely an action at law. See 65A C.J.S. Negligence § 649 (2000) (stating that negligence is an action at law); Cook v. Gould, 109 Ill. App. 3d 311, 314 (1982) (stating that legal malpractice action is no different than cause of action for ordinary nonprofessional negligence). “Illinois courts have declined to apply the rule governing equitable awards of prejudgment interest to cases at law, notwithstanding that an injured party who is eventually compensated may suffer detriment from the inability to use the money from the date of loss to the date of compensation.” Continental Casualty Co., 286 Ill. App. 3d at 579 (collecting cases). Prejudgment interest in therefore not available for the period ending February 28, 2002. In our view, the same rationale is applicable to the earlier period between June 1978 and June 1, 1987. The interest for that period was ultimately linked to the February 28, 2002, judgment and is therefore based on the legal malpractice claim against Burke, just as the interest for the latter period was. Because prejudgment interest is not available in legal malpractice cases, TriG’s claim for prejudgment interest for this earlier period was also properly rejected. In reaching this conclusion, we are aware that our analysis on this point differs from that of the appellate court. It is axiomatic, however, that we are not bound by the appellate court’s reasoning and may affirm for any basis presented in the record. Raintree Homes, Inc. v. Village of Long Grove, 209 Ill. 2d 248, 261 (2004). The final issue in this case, and the only one about which the members of the appellate court were in disagreement, concerns the jury’s decision to include in its judgment against Burke the sum of $1,168,775 to compensate Tri-G for lost punitive damages Tri-G would have received in the underlying action against Elgin Federal but for Burke’s legal malpractice. As noted earlier in this opinion, Burke contended in the appellate court that allowing recovery of punitive damages was expressly prohibited by 2 — 1115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provides that “[i]n all cases, whether in tort, contract or otherwise, in which the plaintiff seeks damages by reason of legal, medical, hospital, or other healing art malpractice, no punitive, exemplary, vindictive or aggravated damages shall be allowed.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1115 (West 2002). The appellate court rejected Burke’s position, over the dissent of one justice. It viewed Tri-G’s lost punitive damages in the underlying case as an element of compensatory damages in the malpractice action, and held that such compensatory damages were not prohibited by Code of Civil Procedure section 2—1115. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 226-32. In reaching this result, the appellate court acknowledged the divergence of authority on this issue. The court recognized that courts in New York and California have held, based on public policy, that lost punitive damages are not recoverable in a legal malpractice action. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 226-27 (citing Ferguson v. Lieff, Cabraser, Heimann & Bernstein, LLP, 30 Cal. 4th 1037, 69 P3d 965, 135 Cal. Rptr. 2d 46 (2003), and Summerville v. Lipsig, 270 A.D.2d 213, 704 N.Y.S.2d 598 (2000)). The appellate court discussed Ferguson, which presented several reasons for prohibiting recovery of lost punitive damages in legal malpractice actions. First, according to Ferguson, allowing such recovery would defeat the punitive and deterrent purposes of punitive damages because the negligent attorney in the legal malpractice action is usually not the tortfeasor who committed the intentional or malicious acts that gave rise to the punitive damages claim in the underlying case. Therefore, imposing liability for lost punitive damages on the negligent attorney would neither punish the culpable tortfeasor nor deter that tortfeasor and others from committing similar wrongful acts in the future. Also, the amount of the award bears no relationship to the gravity of the negligent attorney’s misconduct or the attorney’s wealth. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 227, discussing Ferguson, 30 Cal. 4th at 1046-48, 69 P.3d at 970-71, 135 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 52-54; see Summerville, 270 A.D.2d at 213, 704 N.Y.S.2d at 599. Second, according to Ferguson, allowing recovery of lost punitive damages in legal malpractice actions would violate public policy against speculative damages for several reasons. Compensatory damages in a legal malpractice action requires an objective determination. However, an award of punitive damages is an expression of the jury’s moral condemnation and thus necessarily requires a moral judgment. Because moral judgments are inherently subjective, a jury assessing damages in a legal malpractice action cannot objectively determine whether punitive damages would have been awarded or the proper amount of those damages with any legal certainty. Also, the standards of proof for compensatory and punitive damages differ. Accordingly, the standard of proof for lost punitive damages would be a standard in a standard. This pragmatic difficulty is so complex that it militates against recovery of such damages. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 227, discussing Ferguson, 30 Cal. 4th at 1048-49, 69 P.3d at 971-72, 135 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 54-55. Lastly, as the Ferguson court discussed, allowing malpractice plaintiffs to recover lost punitive damages would exact a societal cost. Exposing attorneys to such liability would likely increase legal malpractice premiums, cause insurers to exclude coverage for these damages, or discourage insurers from providing professional liability insurance in the jurisdiction. This financial burden on attorneys would probably make it more difficult and costly for consumers to obtain legal services, or to obtain recovery for legal malpractice. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 227, discussing Ferguson, 30 Cal. 4th at 1050, 69 P.3d at 972-73, 135 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 55-56. Further, there is no compelling reason to take these risks. The recovery of lost punitive damages is not necessary to make a successful plaintiff whole in a legal malpractice action. Rather, a plaintiff is made whole by compensatory damages and punitive damages constitute an undeserved windfall. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 227, discussing Ferguson, 30 Cal. 4th at 1050-51, 69 P.3d at 973, 135 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 56. The appellate court recognized that the view taken by the courts of California and New York is not universally accepted. Courts in several jurisdictions have held that a plaintiff in a legal malpractice action may recover as compensatory damages those damages that the plaintiff would have been awarded as punitive damages in the underlying action. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 226-27 (citing Jacobsen v. Oliver, 201 F. Supp. 2d 93 (D.C. 2002) (interpreting District of Columbia law), Haberer v. Rice, 511 N.W.2d 279 (S.D. 1994), Scognamillo v. Olsen, 795 P.2d 1357 (Colo. App. 1990), Elliott v. Videan, 164 Ariz. 113, 791 P.2d 639 (1989), and Hunt v. Dresie, 241 Kan. 647, 740 P.2d 1046 (1987)). Rather than focusing on the purpose behind punitive damages, these courts have focused on the concept of compensatory damages. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 227-28. Compensatory damages for negligence are those which flow directly and proximately from a defendant’s breach of duty owed to a plaintiff. In a legal malpractice action based on an attorney’s breach of duty to represent the client in a prior case, it is the defendant attorney’s conduct and its consequences which govern the analysis of damages. See Scognamillo, 795 P.2d at 1361. “If an attorney’s negligence is the cause of dismissal of the underlying claim, the proper measure of damages is all compensatory and punitive damages awarded by the jury in the trial of the case within a case.” Elliott, 164 Ariz. at 119-20, 791 P.2d at 645-46. From the vantage point of the underlying case, some of a plaintiffs damages might be designated “punitive” damages. However, from the vantage point of the legal malpractice action, all the damages are simply those which proximately resulted from the attorney’s negligence. Indeed, they are no longer properly called punitive damages. Hunt, 241 Kan. at 661, 740 P.2d at 1057. Thus, the punitive damages assessed in the underlying case “are part and parcel” of the damages which the plaintiff suffered as a result of the defendant’s alleged negligence. See Haberer, 511 N.W.2d at 288; Scognamillo, 795 P.2d at 1361. These courts have also reasoned that allowance of lost punitive damages in a legal malpractice action furthers the goal of deterrence: “Attorneys who appreciate that they will be liable in malpractice actions for ‘lost punitives’ will be motivated to exercise reasonable care in investigating or defending punitive damages claims.” Jacobsen, 201 F. Supp. 2d at 101-02, citing Hunt, 241 Kan. at 661, 740 P.2d at 1057. After discussing the two conflicting approaches, the appellate court adopted the view of the latter group of jurisdictions and concluded that it should regard lost punitive damages in the underlying case as compensatory damages in the malpractice case. In its view, “the proper focus of our analysis [is] what would make the plaintiff whole with respect to the defendant attorney’s negligence. When, as in this case, a jury has determined that the plaintiff would have been entitled to punitive damages but for the negligence of the attorney, then such damages must be recoverable in order for the plaintiff to be made whole. We note that this result is consistent with the general principle in this state that ‘[a] legal malpractice plaintiff is entitled to recover those sums which would have been recovered if the underlying suit had been successfully prosecuted.’ Weisman v. Schiller, Ducanto & Fleck, 314 Ill. App. 3d 577, 580 (2000). Based on (1) our view of lost punitive damages as compensatory and (2) the fact that such damages are not imposed for the purpose of punishing the attorney who commits malpractice, we hold that section 2—1115 does not bar the recovery of lost punitive damages in a legal malpractice case.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 228-29. The appellate court lastly concluded that the evidence adduced at trial justified the award of punitive damages. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 232. The dissenting justice, who rejected the majority’s approach, observed that punitive damages are not awarded for compensation and have nothing to do with a plaintiff’s loss or making the plaintiff whole. Rather, the purpose of punitive damages is similar to a criminal penalty, i.e., to punish a defendant for wrongdoing and to deter that defendant and others from committing similar misconduct in the future. Also, section 2 — 1115 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1115 (West 2002)) bars recovery of punitive damages in a legal malpractice action. The dissent viewed the appellate court majority as attempting to “circumvent” these limitations by “mischaracterizing” lost punitive damages as compensatory damages. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 233-34 (Gilleran Johnson, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The dissent also observed: “It is inconsistent with Illinois public policy to transfer punishment and deterrence intended for a malicious, fraudulent, or deliberately oppressive wrongdoer to another who has not acted with such a wanton disregard.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 234 (Gilleran Johnson, J, concurring in part and dissenting in part). Based on these considerations, the dissenting justice concluded that “a plaintiff may not recover punitive damages lost by reason of attorney malpractice.” 353 Ill. App. 3d at 236 (Gilleran Johnson, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Burke assigns error to the reasoning and conclusion of the appellate court majority on this issue, and points to the dissent as “cogent and correct, and ably describ[ing] why the majority was wrong and why this Court should reverse the award of underlying punitive damages.” Supported by amici, Burke focuses on the nature of punitive damages. It is well established that such damages are not awarded as compensation to a plaintiff. Rather, they serve to punish the defendant and to deter the defendant and others from committing similar misconduct in the future. Misconduct for which punitive damages are imposed must be outrageous, because it is committed with an evil motive or a reckless indifference to the rights of others. See Loitz v. Remington Arms Co., 138 Ill. 2d 404, 414-16 (1990) (collecting authorities). Indeed, the punitive and deterrent function of punitive damages is similar to that of a criminal penalty. “Because of their penal nature, punitive damages are not favored in the law, and the courts must take caution to see that punitive damages are not improperly or unwisely awarded.” Kelsay v. Motorola, Inc., 74 Ill. 2d 172, 188 (1978). Burke correctly observes that it was not a wanton or malicious wrongdoer. Elgin Federal was. Elgin Federal, however, will bear none of the consequences of its wrongdoing. If the punitive damage award is allowed to stand, those consequences will fall entirely on Burke. Burke argues that punitive damages imposed against a wrongdoer in the underlying case do not become compensatory when paid by the attorney in the legal malpractice action. In Burke’s view, shifting the punishment from the wrongdoer in the underlying case to the law firm in the legal malpractice action does not make the punishment less punitive. Rather, Burke continues, it makes the punishment unjust because it is inflicted on the wrong party. In support of its argument, Burke notes the following comment from the Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers: “A few decisions allow a plaintiff to recover from a lawyer punitive damages that would have been recovered from the defendant in an underlying action but for the lawyer’s misconduct. However, such recovery is not required by the punitive and deterrent purposes of punitive damages. Collecting punitive damages from the lawyer will neither punish nor deter the original tortfeasor and calls for a speculative reconstruction of a hypothetical jury’s reaction.” Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 53, Comment h, at 393 (2000). According to Burke: “A lost opportunity to punish does not become ‘compensatory’ and should not be recoverable from someone other than the person for whom the punishment was intended.” Burke further cites section 2 — 1115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which bars recovery of punitive damages in a legal malpractice action. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1115 (West 2002). Burke reasons that if punitive damages cannot, by statute, be imposed on a law firm in a legal malpractice action for its own negligence, it follows that punitive damages cannot be imposed on the firm for the intentional or reckless wrongdoing of someone else. Burke contends that the appellate court erred “by shifting Elgin Federal’s punishment onto Burke.” Burke next contends that the award of lost punitive damages that would have been imposed against Elgin Federal in the underlying case “grants Tri-G a windfall” in this legal malpractice action. Burke notes this court’s recognition of the effect of punitive damages imposed against a defendant on the plaintiffs compensation. See Mattyasovszky v. West Towns Bus Co., 61 Ill. 2d 31, 36 (1975) (“The fine that is imposed upon the defendant in a criminal case goes to the State. But in a civil case the exaction taken from the defendant, under the label of exemplary damages, becomes a windfall for the plaintiff’). According to Burke, granting a legal malpractice plaintiff the punitive damages it would have recovered in the underlying case “is not a ‘make-whole,’ compensatory recovery. It is a windfall.” In further support of its position, Burke urges this court to adopt what it considers to be the “well-reasoned” rationale of the above-mentioned Ferguson and Summer-ville decisions. Burke also criticizes the cases that allow recovery of lost punitive damages in the underlying case as compensatory damages in the legal malpractice action. In Burke’s view, the case law allowing such recovery is wrongfully decided, or at least factually distinguishable. Finally, Burke warns that allowing recovery for lost punitive damages in the underlying case as compensatory damages in a legal malpractice action will necessarily result in increased professional liability insurance premiums or denials of coverage. According to Burke, attorneys representing plaintiffs will be encouraged to seek punitive damages in cases where they would not have done so, motivated by a fear that “their failure to make the claim could be the seed from which a malpractice claim might grow.” Whether a plaintiff in a legal malpractice action may recover as an element of damages punitive damages he or she would have recovered in the underlying action but for the attorney’s professional negligence is a question of first impression in Illinois. It is a question on which reasonable minds can certainly disagree. The dissent in the appellate court, the dissent which follows in this case, and the split among courts from other jurisdictions illustrates that sound arguments can be made for both sides of the issue. In the end, however, we have concluded that the approach taken by the courts of California and New York and urged by Burke in this case represents the sounder view. Lost punitive damages are not recoverable in a subsequent action for legal malpractice. Disallowing lost punitive damages means that plaintiffs in legal malpractice actions may not receive as much money as they might have if the underlying action had been handled properly. Compensating plaintiffs, however, is but one of several factors that must be balanced in assessing whether lost punitive damages should be recognized in legal malpractice actions. There is no reason in logic or the law why it should be given preeminent effect where, as here, the jury has already awarded full compensation to the plaintiff for all the damages it actually sustained. Punitive, or exemplary, damages are not awarded as compensation, but serve instead to punish the offender and to deter that party and others from committing similar acts of wrongdoing in the future. Loitz v. Remington Arms Co., 138 Ill. 2d at 414. Allowing Tri-G to recover its lost punitive damages from Burke would not advance that policy in any way. To the contrary, by holding the firm liable for the intentional or willful and wanton misconduct of a third party, it tears the concept of punitive damages from its doctrinal moorings. Section 2—1115 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1115 (West 2002)) expressly bars recovery of punitive damages in a legal malpractice action. By characterizing lost punitive damages as “compensatory,” Tri-G is attempting to evade reach of this statute. In our view, its efforts are ultimately unpersuasive. If the General Assembly has determined that lawyers cannot be compelled to pay punitive damages based on their own misconduct, as section 2 — 1115 decrees, it would be completely nonsensical to hold that they can nevertheless be compelled to pay punitive damages attributable to the misconduct of others. Any construction of the law that permits such a result would be absurd and unjust.1  For the foregoing reasons, we reverse that portion of the appellate court’s judgment which upheld the award of $1,168,775 in lost punitive damages to Tri-G. The judgment in favor of Tri-G and against Burke is hereby reduced by that amount. We also reverse the appellate court’s judgment to the extent that it sustained the full $1,168,775 in compensatory damages awarded to the company by the jury. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 366(a)(5) (155 Ill. 2d R. 366(a)(5)), we enter a remittitur of $420,213 on the compensatory damage award and affirm the judgment entered in favor of Tri-G for the reduced amount of $748,562. If Tri-G does not consent to the entry of a remittitur within 21 days of the filing of this opinion, or any further period in which the mandate is stayed, the cause will be remanded to the circuit court of McHenry County for a new trial solely on the issue of damages. In all other respects, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Appellate court judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; circuit court judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; remittitur entered.   1Contrary to the claim made by Justice Freeman in his separate opinion, this characterization is not meant to castigate him or anyone else on the court. It is simply an application of the “no absurdity” rule for statutory construction. The rule has been formulated in various ways, but essentially it holds that statutes should be construed in a manner that avoids absurd, unreasonable, unjust or inconvenient results. See, e.g., In re Mary Ann E, 202 Ill. 2d 393, 406 (2002). Our court invokes the rule frequently. It appeared in In re Donald A.G., 221 Ill. 2d 234 (2006), an opinion we just filed, and is regularly cited by this court and our appellate court. Justice Freeman, himself, has discussed it in cases he has authored. See, e.g., Antunes v. Sookhakitch, 146 Ill. 2d 477, 485-88 (1992).