=== CASE 9739965 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:47.120913+00 ===

JON P. WILCOX, J.
¶ 64. (dissenting). I agree with the majority that Strasser's claim for negligent failure to warn must fail because Transtech had reason to believe that Strasser knew that the ladders did not have safety treads.
¶ 65. However, I disagree with the majority's conclusion that Strasser's claim for negligent design, manufacture, construction, assembly, and installation of the ladders is viable. I would hold that Rolph v. EBI Cos., 159 Wis. 2d 518, 464 N.W.2d 667 (1991) bars such a claim. Therefore I dissent on that issue.
¶ 66. This court reviews a grant of summary judgment by applying the same methodology as the circuit court, namely, the standards set forth in Wis. Stat. § 802.08(2) (1995-96).1 Rolph, 159 Wis. 2d at 527. Under this methodology, the court first examines the pleadings and decides whether a claim for relief has been stated. Id. If so, the court then examines the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file to determine whether there are issues of material fact that preclude summary judgment. Id. If no genuine issue of material fact exists and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, summary judgment should be granted. Id.
*465¶ 67. The pleadings state a claim for relief. The complaint alleges that Strasser was seriously injured when he fell off of a ladder that had been constructed and installed by Transtech. The complaint further alleges that these injuries were caused by Transtech's negligent design, manufacture, construction, assembly, and installation of the ladder. Based on the same facts, the complaint also seeks to hold Transtech liable for negligently failing to warn Strasser about the defects and hazards present in the ladder.
¶ 68. In its responsive pleading, Transtech denies Strasser's allegations. However, Wisconsin recognizes a claim for negligent design or manufacture of a product. See, e.g., Sharp v. Case Corp., 227 Wis. 2d 1, 18-19, 595 N.W.2d 380 (1999). See also Wis JI — Civil 3240. Wisconsin also recognizes a claim for negligent failure of a manufacturer or supplier of a product to warn of dangerous conditions in the product. See Wis JI — Civil 3242. Thus, the pleadings state claims for relief.
¶ 69. The next step is to examine the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions on file, and affidavits to determine whether there exist genuine issues of material fact that preclude summary judgment. Wis. Stat. § 802.08(2). We view the facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff and ask whether under these facts the moving party has demonstrated that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Morris v. Juneau County, 219 Wis. 2d 543, 550, 579 N.W.2d 690 (1998).
¶ 70. The facts viewed in the light most favorable to Strasser are these. Recycled Fibers was a recycler that used cranes mounted onto trailers to pick up and move bales of cardboard and other paper materials for recycling. Strasser worked for Recycled Fibers as a *466truck driver and crane operator. Strasser operated the crane at issue from a seat about 13 feet in the air. Two ladders were mounted on the sides of the crane to enable the operator to reach the seat.
¶ 71. The ladders mounted on the crane before the accident (the "old ladders") had rungs that consisted of one and one-half inch steel plate. The pieces of steel were positioned so that the narrow edge, which was approximately one-quarter inch in width, pointed up. Grooves were cut into the top of the rung. In other words, a person looking at the old ladders from the front would see the wide, flat side of the steel plate, but a person climbing the ladder would step on a flat, narrow edge with grooves.
¶ 72. The old ladders were not strong enough to sustain the recycling work. They often bent and twisted and became detached from the crane assembly. One of the old ladders on the crane in question had been removed completely. The other was so damaged that it was beyond repair. Although the old ladders were rickety, Strasser testified that he had never slipped on them.
¶ 73. Darryl Frick was the president of Trans-tech, a mobile fleet maintenance and repair company that had contracted to do certain maintenance and repair work for Recycled Fibers, including maintenance and repair of the company's trailers and cranes. Frick was familiar with the crane in question because Transtech regularly maintained the crane and trailer.
¶ 74. Recycled Fibers asked Frick to put new, sturdier ladders on the crane in question. Recycled Fibers told Frick that it wanted sturdier ladders and that it wanted safety treads on the rungs. Frick knew that it was important that the steps not be slippery, because hydraulic fluid from the crane sometimes *467leaked onto the steps and because the operators sometimes had to climb the ladder in the rain. However, Frick specifically informed Recycled Fibers that he did not have the material to make safety tréads and did not know where to get it.
¶ 75. On approximately March 29, 1994, Frick fabricated new ladders for the crane, without stair treads. He fabricated new uprights from three-inch square tubing. He constructed new rungs made out of trailer U-bolts, which are large threaded bolts in the shape of a "U". Frick cut the "U" off of each bolt, leaving two straight sections. When these sections were installed into the new ladders as rungs, about three-quarters of each rung was covered with threaded grooves. Approximately two and one-half inches of each rung was smooth.
¶ 76. It is undisputed that Recycled Fibers took the completed crane and began using it, despite the fact that Frick had been unable to install safety treads on the ladder rungs. In addition, Strasser admits that the new ladders were stronger and sturdier than the old ones and that the new rungs provided a wider footing. •
¶ 77. Strasser's complaint is that the new ladders were more slippery than the old ones. He claims that after Frick installed the new ladders, he experienced problems with slipperiness. He alleges that he told his supervisor and a dispatcher at Recycled Fibers about these problems. In addition, Frick could not rule out the possibility that Strasser mentioned having slipped on the new ladder. However, it is undisputed that Recycled Fibers did not return the ladder to Frick for installation of safety treads.
¶ 78. On June 7, 1994, a drizzly day, Strasser slipped on the bottom rung as he was climbing down *468the ladder. He fell four and one-half feet to the pavement and seriously injured his right knee. He seeks to hold Transtech liable for his injury on the theory that Transtech negligently designed and manufactured the ladder.
¶ 79. As already noted, Wisconsin recognizes a claim for ordinary negligence in design, construction, and manufacture of a product. See Sharp, 227 Wis. 2d at 18-19 (discussing causes of action for negligent manufacture and strict products liability). See also Wis JI — Civil 3240. Moreover, a person who negligently completes a repair may be liable under ordinary principles of negligence. Colton v. Foulkes, 259 Wis. 142, 147-48, 47 N.W.2d 901 (1951).
¶ 80. However, this court may preclude an ordinary negligence claim when public policy considerations lead to the conclusion that liability "' "would shock the conscience of society."' "Rolph, 159 Wis. 2d at 534 (citations omitted). The public policy considerations include: (1) whether the injury is too remote from the negligence, (2) whether the injury is too wholly out of proportion to the tortfeasor's culpability, (3) whether in retrospect it seems too extraordinary that the negligence would have resulted in the harm, (4) whether allowing recovery would place too unreasonable a burden on the tortfeasor, (5) whether allowing recovery would open the way for fraudulent claims, and (6) whether allowing recovery would enter a field that has no sensible or just stopping point. Id. at 534 (quoting Coffey v. Milwaukee, 74 Wis. 2d 526, 541, 247 N.W.2d 132 (1976)).
¶ 81. Based on these public policy concerns, this court held in Rolph that a reconditioner of machinery has no duty to bring machines into compliance with applicable safety standards unless the reconditioner *469holds itself out as bringing machines into compliance with safety standards or is requested to do so by the machine's owner. Rolph, 159 Wis. 2d at 524. Transtech argues that Rolph bars Strasser's claims.
¶ 82. The plaintiff in Rolph was injured when his hand got caught in a "bending roll" machine. Id. at 523-25. The plaintiff brought claims against the manufacturer of the machine for strict products liability, negligent design and manufacture, and negligent failure to warn. Id. at 525. The manufacturer brought a third-party action against a company that had reconditioned the machine approximately two years before the plaintiffs injury. Id. Reconditioning of the machine was understood to mean "disassembly, cleaning, inspecting parts for wear, and replacing certain parts." Id. at 526 (emphasis added).
¶ 83. This court held that strict products liability could not be imposed on the reconditioner because a reconditioner is not a manufacturer. Id. at 532.
¶ 84. Furthermore, this court rejected the ordinary negligence claim against the reconditioner, on grounds of public policy. Id. at 535. We explained that "[imposing liability on [the reconditioner] for failing to correct a design defect simply because it reconditioned the machine would make all repairers who disassemble a product in order to repair it insurers against design defects created by manufacturers." Id. Recovery would contravene public policy because it would enter a field with no sensible or just stopping point. Id. at 535-36. Therefore there was no duty on the part of the recondi-tioner to correct design flaws in a machine unless the reconditioner either held itself out as a business that would bring machines into compliance with specific safety standards, or was requested to bring the *470machine into compliance with such standards. Id. at 536-37.
¶ 85. Like the reconditioner in Rolph, Transtech was not a manufacturer, seller, or supplier of cranes or ladders. Transtech was merely a repairer or recondi-tioner. Recycled Fibers asked Transtech to construct replacement ladders for the crane assembly in a limited period of time. Although Recycled Fibers asked for stair treads, there were no such treads on the old ladders, and Frick informed Recycled Fibers that he did not have any material with which to make such treads.
¶ 86. Under these circumstances, as in Rolph, public policy should bar Strasser's claim. Imposing liability on Transtech under these circumstances runs the risk of exposing every business that repairs equipment to liability if parts must be fabricated to complete the repair. See Rolph, 159 Wis. 2d at 535-36 ("Every business that services equipment would be exposed to liability if the repair required disassembly of the product."). Repairers would be exposed to an unreasonable burden and would be discouraged from engaging in preventative maintenance and repair. As in Rolph, "[s]uch liability would shock the conscience of society because it would have no sensible or just stopping point." Id. at 536.
¶ 87. The majority contends that Rolph is distinguishable because while the reconditioner in Rolph only restored a machine to its original condition, Transtech built new ladders for the crane with different rungs. Majority op. at ¶¶ 45-49. However, as Judge Curley stated in her concurrence in the unpublished decision of the court of appeals,
Frick's role in replacing the ladders on the crane is similar to that of the machine repairman in Rolph *471who disassembled, cleaned, inspected parts for wear and replaced certain parts. The only significant difference in the facts here and the Rolph scenario is the size of the products fixed by the repairmen... ,2
It seems likely that repairers are often unable to obtain original parts for equipment and therefore fabricate replacement parts. For example, a bicycle repair shop that is unable to obtain an original replacement part might fabricate a replacement. If the replacement part failed and resulted in damages, under the majority's theory the shop could be held liable for "negligent manufacture" or "negligent design" of the replacement part, even if the'bicycle owner took delivery of the bicycle with full knowledge that a fabricated part had been installed to make do in a pinch.
¶ 88. The majority itself admits that the line between "reconditioning" and "manufacture" is quite a narrow one. Majority op. at ¶ 43 (admitting that it is "understandable" to conclude that Transtech was a reconditioner that did not have a duty to install ladder treads). Liability should not turn on such a fine distinction.
¶ 89. It is clear that neither of the exceptions set forth in Rolph apply to this case. Transtech did not hold itself out as a business that could bring equipment into compliance with safety standards, and Recycled Fibers did not request that Transtech make the ladders compliant with any particular standards. See Rolph, 159 Wis. 2d at 537 (explaining that failure to meet specific safety standards may provide a basis for negligence if the reconditioner holds itself out as bringing machines *472into compliance with present engineering standards, or is requested to bring a particular machine into compliance with such standards).
¶ 90. Under these conditions, this court should adhere to precedent and hold that Rolph bars Trans-tech's claim. Accordingly, I dissent.
¶ 91. I am authorized to state that Justice N. PATRICK CROOKS joins this dissent.
All future references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1995-96 volumes unless otherwise noted.
Strasser v. Transtech Mobile Fleet Serv. Inc., No. 98-1581, unpublished slip op. (Wis. Ct. App. Aug 31, 1999)(Curley, J., concurring).

=== CASE 2221675 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:17.548032+00 ===

43 Ill. App. 2d 303 (1963)
193 N.E.2d 473
William Beers, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Indianapolis Forwarding Company, a Corporation, and Harwood Trucking, Inc., a Corporation, Defendants-Appellants. William O. Beers, Administrator of the Estate of Mary E. Beers, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Indianapolis Forwarding Company, a Corporation, and Harwood Trucking, Inc., a Corporation, Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. Nos. 48,924, 48,925.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, First Division.
October 14, 1963.
*304 *305 Vogel & Vogel, of Chicago (L.H. Vogel, R.C. Vogel and Dom J. Rizzi, of counsel), for defendant-appellant Harwood Trucking, Inc., and Heineke, Conklin & Schrader, of Chicago (William H. Schrader and Edwin A. Strugala, of counsel), for defendant-appellant Indianapolis Forwarding Company.
Hinshaw, Culbertson, Moelmann & Hoban, of Chicago (John M. Moelmann, Richard G. French and Thomas J. Weithers, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
MR. JUSTICE BURMAN delivered the opinion of the court.
The two actions before us were tried as consolidated cases and have also been consolidated for purposes of appeal. The first case was brought by plaintiff, William Beers, to recover damages for loss of consortium, and medical and hospital expenses he incurred as a result of injuries to his wife in an Indiana highway *306 collision on March 20, 1952, and for burial expenses from her subsequent death in Illinois on July 20, 1953. The second case was brought in plaintiff's capacity as the administrator of his wife's estate to recover damages for her wrongful death. There are two defendants, namely, Indianapolis Forwarding Company [Indianapolis], and Harwood Trucking, Inc. [Harwood]. The jury found both defendants negligent by its verdict awarding $19,000 to plaintiff, individually, and $15,000 in the wrongful death action and both defendants appeal from the judgments entered upon the verdicts.
Sidney R. Perryman owned and operated a restaurant in Louisville, Kentucky, and also owned six truck tractors and trailers which he leased together with his drivers to various trucking companies. On March 19, 1952, Perryman entered into a written lease agreement separately with defendants Indianapolis and Harwood in which agreement each defendant leased from Perryman a tractor trailer unit to ship their merchandise from Louisville to Chicago. Perryman was paid by the load ton. As provided in the respective leases the driver who hauled the Indianapolis merchandise was Marvin Resinger and the Harwood driver was Robert L. Boling. Both drivers were employees of Perryman who paid them their salaries on a mileage basis and who also supplied the gas and oil for the trips. In the course of their respective trips Boling met Resinger at Reno's Truck Stop in Schneider, Indiana. At that time Boling told Resinger he was having trouble with the starter on the tractor he was driving. They decided to switch trailers because at Boling's destination there would be seven or eight trucks in front of him and he would have to wait all day and leave the tractor running because of the faulty starter. As a result of this exchange, Boling continued to use his tractor, but *307 was hauling the Indianapolis merchandise to its destination instead of hauling Harwood's merchandise.
When the drivers switched trailers, they exchanged bills of lading and permits which were issued to Indianapolis and Harwood respectively. Defendants Harwood and Indianapolis were common carriers by motor truck, operating pursuant to certificates of public convenience and necessity issued by Interstate Commerce Commission. Both also were certificated for the purposes of intrastate motor truck carriage by the State of Indiana. Perryman does not obtain the bills of lading and operates under other company's permits.
As Boling was driving toward the Indianapolis Forwarding Company destination, approximately one mile north of Schneider, Indiana, on U.S. Highway 41, the collision which resulted in this cause of action occurred. Boling was driving over a dip between a concrete bridge and the highway when the trailer and tractor separated. The tractor went to the left side of the highway, crossed over the center line, and struck the automobile in which plaintiff's wife was riding, inflicting serious injuries which caused her death 16 months later.
Defendant Harwood contends that the plaintiffs failed to prove that Boling was their agent and therefore the court erred in denying its motion for directed verdict. Harwood argues that at the time of the accident Boling was not operating under the Harwood trip lease, not operating under Harwood's franchise, not hauling Harwood merchandise, not headed for a Harwood destination and therefore they were not liable on any basis and a judgment notwithstanding the verdict should be entered in its favor.
Defendant Indianapolis contends that under the lease agreement between Perryman and themselves, Resinger was their agent and servant and that as a *308 matter of law Boling was a volunteer whose employment they did not accept and was not their agent and servant and therefore the court erred in denying its motion for directed verdicts. It is further contended by Indianapolis that burial expenses were erroneously allowed.
[1] Since the occurrence in question took place in the State of Indiana, that law governs as to the substantive rights and liabilities of the parties. ILP Torts § 6; 16 ILP Death § 15; see also, generally, 16 Am Jur Death § 390.
The basic rule of law upon which the liability of each defendant is predicated is stated in Section 428 of the Restatement of the Law of Tort:
An individual or a corporation carrying on an activity which can be lawfully carried on only under a franchise granted by public authority and which involves an unreasonable risk of harm to others, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to such others by the negligence of a contractor employed to do work in carrying on the activity.
[2] Negligence in the operation of the truck trailer and plaintiff's due care are not disputed. The liability of Perryman is not in issue before us. The sole question presented is whether Harwood or Indianapolis or both are responsible for plaintiff's injuries. The Supreme Court of Indiana in the case of Bates Motor Transport Lines v. Mayer, 213 Ind 664, 14 NE2d 91, wherein appellant also contended that there was no evidence that the driver and operator of the truck was a servant, agent or employee of appellant made the following statement, which we think is applicable here:
... [t]he appellant was the common carrier, licensed under the laws of Indiana ... There is *309 no question as to the ownership of the truck ... [t]hat is not a question in the case. The question is: Whose business was being transacted? Who was the common carrier? Who held the permit from the Public Service Commission of Indiana? ... [t]he appellant furnished the permit to transport interstate shipments as a common carrier and furnished the freight to be transported ... [t]he appellant was the responsible licensed party to use the highways of the state, in an enterprise necessarily attended by some danger. It cannot avoid liability for injury to third parties by contracting with an irresponsible party. Such contract would be a fraud upon the public and state. Lake Shore & Michigan Railway Co. v. Foster, 1885, 104 Ind 293, 4 N.E. 20, 54 Am Rep 319.
The Circuit Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Venuto v. Robinson, 118 F.2d 679, reviewed a judgment upon a verdict wherein the appellant contended there was insufficient evidence to establish that the owner of a truck who was hauling a load of merchandise for a common carrier pursuant to its permit was its servant at the time of the accident and that the trial court erred in denying its motion for directed verdicts had this to say:
Inter-state motor carriage is now regulated by elaborate rules and regulations set out in the Motor Carrier Act of 1935 and the regulations thereunder. The carriage of freight in high powered motor vehicles on public highways is certainly business attended with very considerable risk. The rule stated has been applied in cases against railroads to hold a lessor railroad liable even where the relationship has been lessor and lessee without even general control or direction *310 by the lessor over the lessee. See annotation, 28 A.L.R. 122, and following. The application to one employed by a common carrier by motor truck upon the public highways is an even clearer case. See Duncan v. Evans, 1938, 134 Ohio St 486, 17 NE2d 913, affirming Duncan v. Evans, 1937, 60 Ohio App 265, 20 NE2d 729. Bates Motor Transp. Inc. v. Mayer, 1938, 213 Ind 664, 14 NE2d 91.
Defendant Indianapolis contends that the trial court erroneously instructed the jury that if they should find any negligence on the part of the operator of the tractor-trailer unit, that both Indianapolis and Harwood were jointly and severally responsible in law for such negligence. Indianapolis insists that this issue should have been submitted to the jury.
The facts are undisputed that Indianapolis had leased a trailer truck from Perryman to ship its merchandise exclusively to a terminal designated by Indianapolis. The lease provided that, "... during the term of this lease, the foregoing equipment shall be subject to direction and control of the Indianapolis Forwarding Co., and shall be operated only by the lessor or his representative while in the employ of Indianapolis Forwarding Co." It is clear from the evidence that at the time of the accident the trailer involved was leased to Indianapolis and contained its merchandise which was being transported on the highways pursuant to a bill of lading and an Indianapolis permit secured by it. In addition the decals granted to Indianapolis by the Commerce Commission were on the trailer at the time of the accident.
[3-5] The appellant Indianapolis argues that it cannot be held liable for the negligent acts of Boling. They claim that Resinger was the only agent sanctioned by them and that Boling was a mere volunteer whose actions can impose no liability upon them. We do not agree. Resinger, Indianapolis' servant and *311 agent permitted Boling to haul the Indianapolis merchandise in the Indianapolis leased trailer, under the Indianapolis permit. Both Resinger and Boling initially were employees of Perryman. There is no specification in the lease that Resinger and Resinger alone, would operate the vehicle. The change of tractors and drivers was arranged en route between the two drivers leased to defendants and was not done in frolic, but in the interest of efficient performance. It is as if Resinger had become ill and Boling had taken his place at the wheel. Indianapolis seeks to remove the nondelegable duty imposed upon a common carrier of freight operating under a public franchise and as we have indicated it cannot be permitted to escape its duty or responsibility to the public. Restatement of the Law of Tort, Section 428; Venuto v. Robinson, 118 F.2d 679; Bates Motor Transp. Lines v. Mayer, 213 Ind 664, 14 NE2d 91; Louis v. Youngren, 12 Ill. App. 2d 198, 138 NE2d 696. There is no showing that Indianapolis relied, when making the contract with Perryman, on the particular skill of Resinger, and thus those cases in which a principle's tort responsibility is terminated by a change of parties, or unconscionable delegation of duties, are not applicable. One of the principal purposes, if not the primary purpose, of the regulatory laws in the field of high speed interstate trucking is for the protection of the travelling public upon the highways. Hodges v. Johnson, DCWD Va, 52 F Supp 488. Under the circumstances presented in this case, it was the duty of the trial court to instruct the jury that the acts of the operator were imputable to Indianapolis. See Gassaway v. Barry, 123 F Supp 670. In affirming the holding of the trial court that the lessee was liable for the acts of the operator as a matter of law the Circuit Court of Appeals for the third circuit, in the case of Mellon National Bank & Trust Co. v. Sophie Lines, Inc., 289 F.2d 473 stated on page 476:
*312 So we have that at the time and place of the accident the truck was under a lease which put exclusively possession, use and control during the thirty day period in Turner. Without the lease, at the moment of the accident the truck had not even a semblance of excuse to be on the road. There was a copy of the lease in the cab of the truck as required by ICC Rules Ex Parte MC-43, 207.4(7). In addition Turner decals were on the cab together with the Turner ICC permit number and no receipt showing termination of the lease had been given by Sophie Lines to Turner.
[6-8] As we view the evidence both Harwood and Indianapolis the lessees of the trip lease were common carriers, each operating under its own franchise on interstate highways which rendered each responsible for the equipment leased to it. See Section 428 of the Restatement of Torts. Harwood's lease agreement provided that the lessee in part, "... (d) agrees, during the term of this agreement, to assume full responsibility for the operation of such motor vehicle." The tractor unit involved in the accident was the same one for which Harwood by the above quoted language had agreed to assume "full responsibility." The assumption of "full responsibility" certainly includes responsibility for the acts which were done at Reno's Truck Stop. When Boling and Resinger switched trailers each one did his own coupling and generally co-operated in the changeover. They combined their resources and services. Harwood having shipped its merchandise on the highway into interstate commerce and having agreed to assume "full responsibility" for it cannot escape liability for acts which as a result of these circumstances became its own. Under these circumstances neither Harwood nor Indianapolis will be permitted to delegate its duty *313 or responsibility to the public. See Louis v. Youngren, 12 Ill. App. 2d 198, 138 NE2d 696. Where two or more persons participate in the commission of a tort, each is liable for the entire damage. City of Indianapolis v. Lee, 76 Ind App 506, 132 N.E. 605. The Appellate Court stated:
[i]t is generally held that where a servant, without express or implied authority from the master, suffers or permits a stranger to do, or to assist in doing, the work which the master intrusted to the servant, the master is liable under the rule of respondeat superior for an injury to a third person inflicted through the tortious act of the stranger.
Since Resinger, Indianapolis' servant, permitted Boling to haul the Indianapolis merchandise in the Indianapolis trailer, under the Indianapolis permit, the acts of Boling were the acts of Indianapolis. Nor can Harwood escape its liability since the tractor for which it had agreed to assume liability was operated by Boling, its lease driver at the time of the occurrence.
[9] Finally Indianapolis contends that the court erred in permitting a cancelled check evidencing a payment of $732.75 for burial expenses to be introduced as an exhibit. Under the judicial interpretation of the Indiana death statute (Burns' Ind Ann Stat § 2-404), burial expenses are not recoverable by the personal representative. However, in addition to the wrongful death action which was brought by plaintiff in his representative capacity, plaintiff also sued for the loss of consortium and for funeral expenses incurred by him. As pointed out by plaintiff's counsel, defendant, Indianapolis cites no Indiana cases holding that one spouse cannot recover burial expenses when the spouse brings such an action in an individual capacity, as opposed to an action as Executor.
*314 [10] However, the Indiana cases do hold to the proposition that there is a common-law duty upon a husband to pay for the funeral expenses of his wife. Rocap v. Blackwell, 79 Ind App 232, 153 N.E. 515; Kirtman v. Gallentine (1960 Ind App) 169 NE2d 1. In Heuer v. Loop, SD Ind, 198 F Supp 546 the District Court said, "neither the death of the wife nor the Wrongful Death Act abate the common-law right of action in a husband for loss of services and consortium and for sums expended for medical expenses prior to her death... that the cause of action for loss of services, etc., prior to the wife's death, did not abate at the death of the wife, nor does the Wrongful Death Act supplant that action."
[11] We must also observe that the judgment in the cause of action brought by the husband plaintiff in his individual capacity was in the round figure of $19,000. It is impossible to conclude that the contested amount of $732.75 was definitely awarded to plaintiff by the jury verdict. None of the plaintiff's instructions directed the jury to consider burial expenses as an element of damages. More important the post-trial motion of Indianapolis did not as is required bring this specific allegation of error to the trial court's attention. Paragraph 20 of Defendant Indianapolis' motion generally states, "[t]he Court erred in admitting in evidence, over objection of counsel for this defendant, incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial and inadmissible evidence offered by plaintiff." Paragraph 21 complains that, "[t]he Court erred in admitting into evidence over the objection of counsel for this defendant bills and statements for alleged hospital, medical, nursing and other care marked `plaintiff's Exhibits 10 through 39' for the reason that sufficient foundation for introduction of those alleged exhibits were not laid." (Emphasis supplied.) Paragraph 30 complains, "[t]he Court erred *315 in permitting counsel for plaintiff to argue to the jury over objection three separate alleged causes of action for damages, whereas, in law, damages for alleged medical and hospital care and for funeral expense must properly have been included as part of the elements of damage in plaintiff's alleged action for wrongful death." (Emphasis supplied.) We conclude that no opportunity was given to the trial court to rule upon this contention and that therefore such question has not been properly preserved for the consideration of this court.
Various other grounds are urged for reversal, but in the view we take we do not consider it necessary to pass upon them.
For the reasons stated the judgment of the Circuit Court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
ENGLISH, PJ and MURPHY, J, concur.

=== CASE 9739966 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:51.85957+00 ===

Taylor, J.
In these consolidated cases we are required yet again to consider the parameters of civil liability for governmental agencies and police officers when a police chase results in injuries or death to a person other than the driver of the fleeing vehicle. More specifically, the question in these cases is whether the city of Detroit or individual police officers face civil liability for injuries sustained by passengers in vehicles fleeing from the police when the fleeing car caused an accident. As explained below, we hold that defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
First, we hold that the police owe a duty to innocent passengers, but owe no duty to passengers who are themselves wrongdoers whether they help bring about the pursuit or encourage flight. A passenger who seeks to recover for injuries allegedly caused by a negligent police pursuit bears the burden of proving personal innocence as a precondition to establishing the duty element of a cause of action. Because the record does not allow us to conclude as a matter of law whether plaintiffs were innocent as a matter of law,1 we are required to address additional grounds *445on which defendants assert they are entitled to prevail.
Second, we hold that the city of Detroit is entitled to judgment as a matter of law because one cannot reasonably conclude under a narrow reading of the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity, MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105), that plaintiffs’ injuries resulted from the operation of the police vehicles. We agree with Fiser v Ann Arbor, 417 Mich 461; 339 NW2d 413 (1983), that an officer’s physical handling of a motor vehicle during a police chase, can constitute “negligent operation ... of a motor vehicle” within the motor vehicle exception. However, plaintiffs’ injuries did not, as a matter of law, result from the operation of the police cars where the police cars did not hit the fleeing car or physically cause another vehicle or object to hit the vehicle that was being chased or physically force the vehicle off the road or into another vehicle or object.2 Thus, we overrule Fiser and Rogers v Detroit, 457 Mich 125; 579 NW2d 840 (1998). Contrary to Rogers, we also hold that an officer’s decision to pursue does not constitute the negligent operation of a motor vehicle.
Third, we conclude the individual police officers are immune from liability because their actions were not “the proximate cause” of the plaintiffs’ injuries. Thus, we overrule Dedes v Asch, 446 Mich 99; 521 NW2d 488 (1994), and hold that the phrase “the proximate cause” as used in the employee provision of the *446governmental immunity act, MCL 691.1407(2); MSA 3.996(107)(2), means the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause preceding an injury, not “a proximate cause.” Because the conduct of the individual police officers in these cases were not “the proximate cause,” i.e., the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause, of the passengers’ injuries, the officers are entitled to governmental immunity.
I. REVIEW OF OUR CASE LAW
Our first opinion addressing police chase liability was Fiser, supra, where this Court considered a lawsuit filed by a plaintiff who was injured when his car was hit by a car driven by someone who was fleeing the police. The plaintiff sued the city of Ann Arbor and the police officers involved in the chase. The trial court granted summary disposition to the city and the police officers. The Court of Appeals affirmed.3 This Court reversed with respect to the city and two of the police officers, holding that the excessive speed of the fleeing vehicle could be said to have resulted from the fact that the driver was being pursued by the police and that it was this high speed that caused the fleeing driver to lose control. Id. at 475. The Court further held that the issues of negligence and proximate causation of his injuries was for the jury. Id.
More recently in Rogers, supra, we considered two consolidated police chase cases. Both cases involved car chases in which the fleeing vehicle crashed into vehicles occupied by innocent parties. The defendants *447argued that the conduct of the police officers could not be a proximate cause of the injuries. The majority held that it was for the factfinder to determine whether the actions of the police officers in operating the pursuing vehicles were causes in fact of the plaintiffs injuries, i.e., the jury could effectively conclude that the police were causing the flight. Id. at 129. The Rogers majority reaffirmed Fiser and expanded on it by holding that the municipal defendants could be held hable for their officer’s decision to commence pursuit or to continue the pursuit. Id. at 143-145.
Thus, pursuant to Fiser, police officers face a conundrum wherein they have a sworn duty to apprehend suspected lawbreakers yet simultaneously face legal liability if anyone but the fleeing driver is injured when they give chase. Under Fiser this liability is imposed even where the police car does not hit the fleeing car or physically cause another vehicle or object to hit the fleeing car or physically force the fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle or object. Pursuant to Rogers, even more remarkably, liability may attach for the mere decision to give chase to a suspected lawbreaker.
n. FACTS AND LOWER COURT PROCEEDINGS
In Cooper, plaintiffs Marlon Cooper and Martell Morris, both fourteen years of age, were passengers in a stolen Jeep Cherokee driven by Damian Collins, who was also fourteen years old. The Detroit police initially noticed that Damian Collins appeared too young to drive and that the Jeep’s steering column was broken. The officers, who were in a partially marked police car, attempted to stop Collins by turning on their car’s lights, briefly using the siren, show*448ing Collins a police badge, and instructing him to pull over. Instead of stopping, Collins sped away. The police pursued him. After a chase through a residential neighborhood, Collins crashed the Jeep he was driving into a house. Collins was killed, while Cooper and Morris were seriously injured.
The parents of Cooper and Morris filed a lawsuit4 against the individual officers and the city of Detroit. The defendants moved for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(7), (8), and (10). After argument, the trial court granted summary disposition for both the officers and the city. The trial court held that the officers were entitled to governmental immunity because plaintiffs had failed to state a claim in avoidance of the employee provision of the governmental immunity act. The trial court also concluded the officers owed no duty to plaintiffs. The trial court further held that the city was entitled to governmental immunity because the plaintiffs had failed to state a claim within the motor vehicle exception.
The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the officers were not entitled to governmental immunity because plaintiffs’ claims avoided the employee provision of the governmental immunity act and also that the officers owed a duty to plaintiffs.5
6The Court of Appeals also held that the city was not entitled to governmental immunity because plaintiffs’ claims fell within the motor vehicle exception.
In Robinson, Courtney Henderson, age fifteen, was walking to his summer job when neighbor Marcelle *449Blakeney offered him a ride. Henderson sat in the back seat; Marlon Smith, age eighteen, was in the front passenger seat. The Detroit police observed Blakeney weaving from lane to lane. When the police activated the lights on their police car, Blakeney began to flee rather than stop. The police turned on the siren and began to pursue the vehicle. This pursuit ended when Blakeney’s car collided with a nonpolice vehicle. Henderson died in the accident.
Plaintiff, as personal representative for Henderson’s estate, filed a lawsuit against the city of Detroit and the police officers involved in the pursuit. Defendants filed a motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(7), (8) and (10). The trial court granted defendants’ motion for summary disposition. The trial court ruled that the officers were entitled to governmental immunity because plaintiff had failed to state a claim in avoidance of the employee provision of the governmental immunity act. The trial court also held the officers owed no duty to Henderson. The trial court ruled that the city was not entitled to governmental immunity because plaintiff’s claim fell within the motor vehicle exception. The trial court nevertheless concluded that summary disposition in the city’s favor was proper in light of its duty ruling.
After a conflict panel was convened, the Court of Appeals ultimately affirmed, holding that the police owe no duty to a voluntary passenger in a fleeing driver’s vehicle.6
*450This Court granted leave in both Robinson7 and Cooper8 and ordered the cases to be submitted together. After oral argument, we set the case over to the present term and asked the parties to file additional briefing regarding whether Fiser, Rogers, and Dedes were properly decided.9
m. THE QUESTION OF DUTY
In Fiser, supra at 469-473, this Court implicitly held, in the context of a police pursuit, that the police owe a duty to innocent bystanders. In Jackson v Oliver, 204 Mich App 122, 126-127; 514 NW2d 195 (1994), the Court of Appeals distinguished Fiser and held that in the context of a police pursuit the police do not owe the fleeing suspect, i.e., a wrongdoer, a duty to refrain from chasing the suspect at speeds dangerous to the suspect. The Jackson panel’s holding was premised on public policy:
*451Out of concern for public safety, police must sometimes allow fleeing suspects to get away. However, it would be absurd to conclude that the police, out of concern for the safety of a fleeing criminal suspect, must cease pursuit of the fleeing suspect or risk possible civil liability. [Id. at 126.]
The cases at bar concern a scenario not considered in either Fiser or Jackson, i.e., whether the police owe a duty to a passenger in a fleeing vehicle. The Court of Appeals in Cooper held that the police had a duty to passengers, while the conflict panel in Robinson resolved this issue consistently with Jackson, holding that the police do not owe a duty to passengers in a fleeing driver’s vehicle.
We conclude that it is irrelevant whether a wrongdoer is a driver or a passenger or whether an innocent person is inside or outside the vehicle. Consistent with the reasoning in Fiser and Jackson, whatever their location, there is a duty to innocent persons, but not to wrongdoers. In other words, the police owe a duty to innocent persons whether those persons are inside or outside the vehicle. Conversely, the police owe no duty to a wrongdoer, whether the wrongdoer is the fleeing driver or a passenger.
Our conclusion that police officers giving chase owe a duty to innocent persons is consistent with the statutes governing operation of emergency vehicles. MCL 257.603(3)(c); MSA 9.2303(3)(c) authorizes emergency vehicles to exceed prima facie speed limits, but only as long as “life or property” is not endangered. Similarly, MCL 257.632; MSA 9.2332 exempts police officers from speed limits when chasing violators of the law, but does not exempt the police from the consequences of a “reckless disregard of the safety of others.” Further, MCL 257.653; MSA 9.2353, *452which requires drivers to pull over upon the approach of an emergency vehicle with flashing lights, specifically states that the statute does not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of persons using the highway.
The statutory references to endangering life and the safety of others demonstrates that the Legislature has placed a duty upon police officers toward innocent persons when they are giving chase.10
We place on the plaintiff the burden of proving that a passenger was an innocent person and that the police therefore owed the passenger a duty. Where no genuine issue of material fact exists regarding the status of a passenger, summary disposition may be appropriate. However, when a genuine issue of material fact exists concerning whether a passenger is innocent or a wrongdoer, and thus whether the police owed a duty, the question is appropriately resolved by the trier of fact. See, e.g., Holland v Liedel, 197 Mich App 60, 65; 494 NW2d 772 (1992) (although the issue whether a duty exists is generally a question of law for the court to decide, where the determination of duty depends on factual findings, those findings must be made by the jury). In the cases at bar, the issue of the passengers’ status has not been sufficiently devel*453oped, thereby making summary disposition on the basis of duty inappropriate at this time. Thus, we turn to consideration of defendants’ additional defenses.
IV. THE motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity
Plaintiffs contend the city of Detroit may be liable pursuant to the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity. This statute provides in relevant part as follows:
Governmental agencies shall be liable for bodily injury and property damage resulting from the negligent operation by any officer, agent, or employee of the governmental agency, of a motor vehicle of which the governmental agency is owner .... [MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105).]
In Fiser, supra at 469, this Court held that a police officer’s pursuit of a fleeing vehicle could fall within the motor vehicle exception as the “negligent operation of a motor vehicle.” The Court so held even where the police vehicle did not hit the fleeing car or physically cause another vehicle or object to hit the fleeing car or physically force the fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle or into some other object.
In Rogers, supra at 145-146, the majority went beyond Fiser and concluded that negligent operation of a motor vehicle encompasses not only the pursuit itself, but also a police officer’s decision to commence a pursuit. The dissent would have held that the phrase “negligent operation of a motor vehicle” encompasses the manner in which a police vehicle is driven during a pursuit, but does not encompass an *454officer’s decision to pursue a fleeing vehicle. Id. at 158-161 (Taylor, J., with Weaver, J., concurring).
As indicated in footnote 9, we have been asked on numerous occasions to revisit Fiser. See, e.g., Frohman v Detroit, 181 Mich App 400, 414-415; 450 NW2d 59 (1989):
When a situation occurs, such as in the instant case, where an officer performs his legal duty by attempting to catch a fleeing lawbreaker, conducts the pursuit in what one may minimally call a negligent manner, and does not strike any vehicle with his vehicle, it is a remarkable legal principle that he can be said to have “caused” the resultant accident. To prevent the accident, all the fleeing driver need have done is stop. For the law to incorporate the presumption that a person will violate the law and to thereby hold that the officer’s pursuing the violator is a proximate cause of an accident involving the fleeing person makes society the insurer of a risk no private corporation is required to assume under the law. Furthermore, the ordinary person in society has no such obligation or even a right to pursue such a lawbreaker, whereas a police officer has.
We conclude that in police pursuit cases an initial legal decision should be made to determine whether the nature of the pursuit is such as to create a question which must be submitted to a jury. We invite the Supreme Court or Legislature to establish a bright line test which provides that a decision to engage in pursuit, as a matter of law, cannot be the basis of a claim of negligence. Only when the officer’s driving itself is a direct cause of an injury would the question of negligence be submitted as a fact question to the jury. The determination should not turn on how the officer was conducting the pursuit but rather on what effect the manner in which the officer drove his vehicle had on the cause of the accident. Fiser’s legal fiction, that a police pursuit of a lawbreaker should give rise to a legal expectation the lawbreaker will flee, should be re-examined, especially in light of Ross [v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567; 363 NW2d 641 (1984)] ....
*455We begin our analysis with the basic principle, of which there is no longer any dispute, that the grant of immunity in MCL 691.1407(1); MSA 3.996(107)(l)11 is broad and that the statutory exceptions12 thereto are to be narrowly construed. Kerbersky v Northern Mich Univ, 458 Mich 525, 529; 582 NW2d 828 (1998); Horace v City of Pontiac, 456 Mich 744, 749 ff; 575 NW2d 762 (1998); Wade v Dep’t of Corrections, 439 Mich 158, 166; 483 NW2d 26 (1992).
In this regard, we note that Fiser was decided before this Court’s seminal governmental immunity opinion in Ross v Consumers Power Co, supra, where we held that statutory exceptions to governmental immunity are to be narrowly construed. Previously, of course, this Court had given the exceptions broad readings. As explained in Horace v City of Pontiac, two cases decided by this Court before Ross that had given a broad reading to the defective public building exception to governmental immunity were no longer good law once Ross determined that statutory exceptions were to be narrowly construed. Id. at 750, n 3. Fiser meets a similar fate. Fiser may have been proper when decided, but it is no longer “good law” after Ross. Contrary to Ross, Fiser requires a broad reading of the motor vehicle exception to conclude *456that a police vehicle, merely by the fact of pursuit, proximately caused a subsequent accident when the police vehicle did not hit the fleeing car or force it off the roadway or into another vehicle or object.
In Robinson, the plaintiff alleged that the city was negligent “through the conduct of one or more of its police officer employees in failing to operate the police vehicle at all times in such manner as to avoid placing the general public in danger . . . .” In Cooper, plaintiffs alleged that the city was liable because the pursuing officer “[flailed and neglected to operate the vehicle owned by Defendant city of Detroit in a safe, prudent and reasonable manner at all times and to obey all traffic laws and regulations.” Notably absent from the plaintiffs’ allegations is the assertion that the police vehicles hit the fleeing car or otherwise physically forced the fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle or object.
The motor vehicle exception requires that a plaintiff’s injuries result from the operation of a government vehicle. MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105). Because there is no case law that has previously examined the phrase “resulting from” we turn to the dictionary.13 The American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Ed, p 1054, defines “result” as: “To occur or exist as a consequence of a particular causef;] To end in a particular way[;] The consequence of a particular action, operation or course; outcome.” Given *457the fact that the motor vehicle exception must be narrowly construed, we conclude that plaintiffs cannot satisfy the “resulting from” language of the statute where the pursuing police vehicle did not hit the fleeing car or otherwise physically force it off the road or into another vehicle or object.14
We also agree with the dissenting opinion in Rogers that the decision to pursue a fleeing motorist, which is separate from the operation of the vehicle itself, is not encompassed within a narrow construction of the phrase “operation of a motor vehicle.”15 Further, allowing a police officer’s decision to pursue to be construed as the “operation of a motor vehicle” and therefore fall under an exception to governmental immunity, conflicts with the police officer’s duty to apprehend criminal suspects. The officer should be able to rely on MCL 257.602a; MSA 9.2302(1) and MCL 257.653; MSA 9.2353, which mandate that a motorist not wilfully fail to obey a police officer’s direction to stop. We thus reject the holding in Rogers that a police officer’s decision to pursue a fleeing *458vehicle falls within the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity.
V. THE EMPLOYEE PROVISION OF THE GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY ACT
The plaintiffs also sued the individual police officers, seeking to hold them personally liable. The tort liability of governmental employees is governed by the employee provision of the governmental immunity act, which states in pertinent part:
Each . . . employee of a governmental agency . . . shall be immune from tort liability for injuries to persons or damages to property caused by the . . . employee . . . while in the course of employment . . . while acting on behalf of a governmental agency if all of the following are met:
(a) The . . . employee ... is acting or reasonably believes he or she is acting within the scope of his or her authority.
(b) The governmental agency is engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function.
(c) The . . . employee’s . . . conduct does not amount to gross negligence that is the proximate cause of the injury or damage. As used in this subdivision, “gross negligence” means conduct so reckless as to demonstrate a substantial lack of concern for whether an injury results. [MCL 691.1407(2); MSA 3.996(107)(2).]
There is no question that (a) and (b) are met in both of these cases. As to subsection (c), in Dedes, supra at 107, this Court effectively interpreted “the proximate cause” in subsection (c) to mean “a proximate cause.” The Court further explained that “the” proximate cause does not mean “sole” proximate cause. Id. We overrule Dedes to the extent that it interpreted the phrase “the proximate cause” in subdivision (c) to mean “a proximate cause.” The Legisla*459ture’s use of the definite article “the” clearly evinces an intent to focus on one cause. The phrase “the proximate cause” is best understood as meaning the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause preceding an injury.
Because the Legislature is presumed to understand the meaning of the language it enacts into law, statutory analysis must begin with the wording of the statute itself. Carr v General Motors Corp, 425 Mich 313, 317; 389 NW2d 686 (1986). Each word of a statute is presumed to be used for a purpose, and, as far as possible, effect must be given to every clause and sentence. Univ of Mich Bd of Regents v Auditor General, 167 Mich 444, 450; 132 NW 1037 (1911). The Court may not assume that the Legislature inadvertently made use of one word or phrase instead of another. Detroit v Redford Twp, 253 Mich 453, 456; 235 NW 217 (1931). Where the language of the statute is clear and unambiguous, the Court must follow it. City of Lansing v Lansing Twp, 356 Mich 641, 649; 97 NW2d 804 (1959).
These rules of statutory construction are especially germane in the cases now before us because Michigan strictly construes statutes imposing liability on the state in derogation of the common-law rule of sovereign immunity. Johnson v Ontonagon Co Bd of Co Rd Comm’rs, 253 Mich 465, 468; 235 NW 221 (1931); Detroit v Putnam, 45 Mich 263, 265; 7 NW 815 (1881). This Court has repeatedly acknowledged that governmental immunity legislation “evidences a clear legislative judgment that public and private tortfeasors should be treated differently.” Ross at 618.
The majority in Dedes interpreted the phrase “the proximate cause” to mean “a proximate cause.” It did *460this on the basis of an analysis that not to do so would produce a marked change in Michigan law, and that the Legislature, in its “legislative history,” gave no indication that it understood that it was making such a significant change. This approach can best be described as a judicial theory of legislative befuddlement. Stripped to its essence, it is an endeavor by the Court to use the statute’s “history” to contradict the statute’s clear terms. We believe the Court had no authority to do this. After all, the judiciary has always adhered to the principle that the Legislature, having acted, is held to know what it has done, i.e., to know the difference between “a proximate cause” and “the proximate cause.” Yet, in this circumstance, it is not necessary to rely on theoretical surmises to conclude this, as the Legislature has shown an awareness that it actually knows that the two phrases are different. It has done this by utilizing the phrase “a proximate cause” in at least five statutes16 and has used the phrase “the proximate cause” in at least thirteen other statutes.17 Given such a pattern, it is particularly indefensible that the Dedes majority felt free to read “the proximate cause” as if it said “a proximate cause.” The error will not be compounded, as today *461this Court corrects the flawed analysis of the Dedes majority.18
Nevertheless, the fact that the Legislature sometimes uses “a proximate cause” and at other times uses “the proximate cause” does not, of course, answer the question what “the proximate cause” means other than to show that the two phrases should not be interpreted the same way. Our duty is to give meaning to the Legislature’s choice of one word over the other.
We agree with the following analysis found in the dissent in Hagerman v Gencorp Automotive, 457 Mich 720, 753-754; 579 NW2d 347 (1998):
Traditionally in our law, to say nothing of our classrooms, we have recognized the difference between “the” and “a.” “The” is defined as “definite article. 1. (used, esp. before a noun, with a specifying or particularizing effect, as opposed to the indefinite or generalizing force of the indefinite article a or an) . . . .” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary, p 1382. Further, we must follow these distinctions *462between “a” and “the” as the Legislature has directed that “[a]ll words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language .... MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1). Moreover, there is no indication that the words “the” and “a” in common usage meant something different at the time this statute was enacted ....
Further, recognizing that “the” is a definite article, and “cause” is a singular noun, it is clear that the phrase “the proximate cause” contemplates one cause. Yet, meaning must also be given to the adjective “proximate” when juxtaposed between “the” and “cause” as it is here. We are helped by the fact that this Court long ago defined “the proximate cause” as “the immediate efficient, direct cause preceding the injury.” Stoll v Laubengayer, 174 Mich 701, 706; 140 NW 532 (1913). The Legislature has nowhere abrogated this, and thus we conclude that in MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c) the Legislature provided tort immunity for employees of governmental agencies unless the employee’s conduct amounts to gross negligence that is the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause of the injury or damage, i.e., the proximate cause.
Applying this construction to the present cases, we hold that the officers in question are immune from suit in tort because their pursuit of the fleeing vehicles was not, as a matter of law, “the proximate cause” of the injuries sustained by the plaintiffs. The one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause of the plaintiffs’ injuries was the reckless conduct of the drivers of the fleeing vehicles.19
*463Accordingly, summary disposition for the defendant officers was proper because reasonable jurors could not find that the officers were “the proximate cause” of the injuries. Moll v Abbott Laboratories, 444 Mich 1, 28, n 36; 506 NW2d 816 (1993).
VI. STARE DECISIS
In overruling Fiser/Rogers and Dedes we have given serious consideration to the doctrine of stare decisis.20 Stare decisis is generally “the preferred course because it promotes the evenhanded, predictable, and consistent development of legal principles, fosters reliance on judicial decisions, and contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process.”21 However, stare decisis is not to be applied mechanically to forever prevent the Court from overruling earlier erroneous decisions determining the meaning of statutes.22
*464Courts have cited numerous factors to consider before overruling a prior case. For example, Helvering v Hallock, 309 US 106, 119; 60 S Ct 444; 84 L Ed 604 (1940), states:
[S\tare decisis is a principle of policy and not a mechanical formula of adherence to the latest decision, however recent and questionable, when such adherence involves collision with a prior doctrine more embracing in its scope, intrinsically sounder, and verified by experience.
We must also recognize that stare decisis is a “principle of policy” rather than “an inexorable command,”23 and that the Court is not constrained to follow precedent when governing decisions are unworkable or are badly reasoned.24
Further, as Justice Powell stated concurring in Mitchell v W T Grant Co, 416 US 600, 627-628; 94 S Ct 1895; 40 L Ed 2d 406 (1974), “[i]t is thus not only our prerogative but also our duty to re-examine a precedent where its reasoning or understanding of the Constitution is fairly called into question.”
Courts should also review whether the decision at issue defies “practical workability,” whether reliance interests would work an undue hardship, and whether changes in the law or facts no longer justify the questioned decision. See, e.g., Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v Casey, 505 US 833, 853-856; 112 S Ct 2791; 120 L Ed 2d 674 (1992).
The first question, of course, should be whether the earlier decision was wrongly decided. We believe the decisions at issue here were. As previously explained, *465we conclude that Fiser has fallen victim to a subsequent change in the law, that Rogers reflects a misunderstanding of the statute that establishes the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity, and that Dedes misconstrued a plainly worded statute.
However, as this discussion makes clear, the mere fact that an earlier case was wrongly decided does not mean overruling it is invariably appropriate.25 *466Rather, the Court must proceed on to examine the effects of overruling, including most importantly the effect on reliance interests and whether overruling would work an undue hardship because of that reliance.
The “practical workability” of Fiser has also been suspect. As set forth in footnote 9, the Court of Appeals has repeatedly questioned Fiser.
As to the reliance interest, the Court must ask whether the previous decision has become so embedded, so accepted, so fundamental, to everyone’s expectations that to change it would produce not just readjustments, but practical real-world dislocations.26 It is in practice a prudential judgment for a court.
We conclude that these cases have not become so embedded, accepted or fundamental to society’s expectations that overruling them would produce significant dislocations. It is apparent that the fleeing drivers, as they sought to evade the police, were undoubtedly not aware of our previous case law, nor is it likely that they drove as they did in reliance on the theory that they or the person injured as a result of their fleeing might have recourse against the municipality or individual police officers. In fact, it seems incontrovertible that only after the accident would such awareness come. Such after-the-fact *467awareness does not rise to the level of a reliance interest because to have reliance the knowledge must be of the sort that causes a person or entity to attempt to conform his conduct to a certain norm before the triggering event. Such a situation does not exist here.
Further, it is well to recall in discussing reliance, when dealing with an area of the law that is statutory (which Fiser/Rogers and Dedes do), that it is to the words of the statute itself that a citizen first looks for guidance in directing his actions. This is the essence of the rule of law: to know in advance what the rules of society are. Thus, if the words of the statute are clear, the actor should be able to expect, that is, rely, that they will be carried out by all in society, including the courts. In fact, should a court confound those legitimate citizen expectations by misreading or misconstruing a statute, it is that court itself that has disrupted the reliance interest. When that happens, a subsequent court, rather than holding to the distorted reading because of the doctrine of stare decisis, should overrule the earlier court’s misconstruction. The reason for this is that the court in distorting the statute was engaged in a form of judicial usurpation that runs counter to the bedrock principle of American constitutionalism, i.e., that the lawmaking power is reposed in the people as reflected in the work of the Legislature, and, absent a constitutional violation, the courts have no legitimacy in overruling or nullifying the people’s representatives.27 Moreover, not only *468does such a compromising by a court of the citizen’s ability to rely on a statute have no constitutional warrant, it can gain no higher pedigree as later courts repeat the error.
In summary, we are compelled to overrule Dedes because our responsibility is to interpret the words of the Legislature and “the proximate cause” does not mean “a proximate cause,” and because this distinction is critical in determining responsibility for the injuries suffered by passengers in fleeing vehicles. We are equally compelled to overrule Rogers because we do not believe that the phrase “operation of a motor vehicle” encompasses the mere decision itself by the police to pursue a fleeing suspect, as opposed to the specific conduct of the police during such pursuit. Finally, we believe it is necessary to overrule Fiser because a narrow reading of the phrase “bodily injury . . . resulting from the negligent operation of a motor vehicle” does not properly characterize a situation in which a police vehicle pursuing a fleeing suspect has neither hit the fleeing car nor physically forced the vehicle off the road or into another vehicle or object.
We return the law, as is our duty, to what we believe the citizens of this state reading these statutes at the time of enactment would have understood the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity and the employee provision of the governmental immunity act to mean.
*469CONCLUSION
Thus, the police owe a duty to innocent passengers and pedestrians but not to passengers who are engaged in encouraging or abetting the fleeing. If an innocent person is injured as a result of a police chase because the police physically force a fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle that person may seek recovery against a governmental agency pursuant to the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity. Plaintiffs in the cases at bar do not have causes of action against the city of Detroit under this exception because the injuries did not result from the police physically hitting the fleeing car or physically causing another vehicle or object to hit the fleeing car or physically forcing the fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle or object.
Innocent persons who are injured as the result of police chases may sue an individual police officer only if the officer is “the proximate cause” of the accident, i.e., the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause of the accident. Because the officers in the cases at bar were not “the proximate causes” of the injuries, the plaintiffs have no causes of action against the officers.
The result in Robinson is affirmed. Cooper is reversed.
Weaver, C.J., and Corrigan, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Taylor, J.
As noted in footnote 6, there was some evidence suggesting that Henderson was not innocent. However, because the test we announce is new, and Henderson’s estate was never on notice of its obligation to produce any evidence to the contrary, we take the more prudent course and decline to find as a matter of law that Henderson was a wrongdoer.
Conversely, if an innocent person is injured as a result of a police chase because a police car physically forces a fleeing car off the road or into another vehicle or object, such person may seek recovery against a governmental agency pursuant to the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity and also against'the officer operating the police vehicle if the individual police officer is “the proximate cause” of the accident.
107 Mich App 367; 309 NW2d 552 (1981).
Plaintiffs also brought a lawsuit against the personal representative of the estate of Damian Collins. However, that lawsuit is not before us.
218 Mich App 649; 554 NW2d 919 (1996).
225 Mich App 14; 571 NW2d 34 (1997). The three-judge panel in Robinson originally issued an opinion on September 10, 1996, affliming the judgment of the trial court and holding that no duty is owed to a passenger voluntarily in a fleeing car. 220 Mich App 801, 803; 561 NW2d 390 (1996). The Robinson panel then granted rehearing on its own motion to review the apparent conflict between this decision and that of Cooper v *450Wade, which was released fifteen minutes before its decision in Robinson. Id. at 801. On rehearing, the Robinson panel, concluded that it was compelled to follow Cooper and reversed the judgment of the trial court holding that “a duty was owed the present decedent despite the fact that he made obscene gestures to the police and encouraged the flight that led to his death.” Id. at 802. The Court of Appeals then convened a special panel to resolve the conflict between Cooper and Robinson. Id. at 801.
458 Mich 861 (1998).
456 Mich 905 (1997).
461 Mich 1201 (1999). This Court has been urged to revisit Fiser on several occasions. See, e.g., Frohman v Detroit, 181 Mich App 400, 413-415; 450 NW2d 59 (1989) (“We invite the Supreme Court or Legislature to establish a bright line test”); Ewing v Detroit (On Remand), 214 Mich App 495, 499-500; 543 NW2d 1 (1995) (“I urge our Supreme Court to reconsider Fiser," opinion of Doctoroff, C.J.), affd 457 Mich 125; 579 NW2d 840 (1998); Cooper v Wade, 218 Mich App 649, 663; 554 NW2d 919 (1996) (“I concur but suggest this area of the jurisprudence of this state should be revisited by the Supreme Court,” concurring opinion by Michael J. Kelly, X). It is also the case that Dedes and Rogers were decided over vigorous three-justice dissents.
One might even argue that these statutes create a duty toward a fleeing driver. We need not reach that question, but do note that, even if such a duty were found to exist, a fleeing driver would nevertheless be barred from seeking to recover for iqjuries sustained while attempting to evade a lawful order to stop his vehicle under Michigan’s wrongful conduct rule. This rule is rooted in the public policy that courts should not lend their aid to plaintiffs whose cause of action is premised on their own illegal conduct. Orzel v Scott Drug Co, 449 Mich 550; 537 NW2d 208 (1995). Culpable passengers have no greater claim to benefit from the wrongful conduct than does the driver.
This statute provides in pertinent part as follows:
Except as otherwise provided in this act, all governmental agencies shall be immune from tort liability in all cases wherein the government agency is engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function.
The other four statutory exceptions are maintenance of public highways, MCL 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102), performance of proprietary functions by government entities, MCL 691.1413; MSA 3.996(113), the public building exception, MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106), and the governmental hospital exception, MCL 691.1407(4); MSA 3.996(107)(4).
It is appropriate to consult a lay dictionary when defining common words or phrases that have not acquired a unique meaning at law because “the common and approved usage of a nonlegal term is most likely to be found in a standard dictionary and not a legal dictionary.” Horace v City of Pontiac, supra at 756. See also Consumers Power Co v Public Service Comm, 460 Mich 148, 163, n 10; 596 NW2d 126 (1999), and MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1).
The dissent suggests that there should be liability where a police vehicle forces an innocent intervening car to hit the fleeing vehicle causing injury to an innocent person in the fleeing vehicle. However, we do not believe that such a scenario would fit within a narrow reading of the statutory requirement of “resulting from.” The dissent’s position would be more in accord with a proximate cause “but for” analysis. However, the statute does not say that governmental agencies are liable for injuries or property damage “proximately caused” by the negligent operation of a motor vehicle. Rather, the statute says the injuries or property damage must result from the negligent operation of a motor vehicle. Because the Legislature did not utilize proximate cause language, we will not import such an analysis here.
The decision to give chase is not the operation of a motor vehicle, just as an inebriated person’s decision to drive drunk is not a crime. Only when the decision is translated into driving can there be the operation of a motor vehicle or the commission of the crime of driving while under the influence of alcohol.
See MCL 436.1801(3); MSA 18.1175(801)(3), MCL 600.2947(6)(a); MSA 27A.2947(6)(a), MCL 600.6304(8); MSA 27A.6304(8), MCL 691.1665(a); MSA 12.418(5)(a), and MCL 750.145o; MSA 28.342A(o).
See MCL 257.633(2); MSA 9.2333(2), MCL 324.5527; MSA 13A.5527, MCL 324.5531(11); MSA 13A.5531(11), MCL 324.5534; MSA 13A.5534, MCL 418.375(2); MSA 17.237(375)(2), MCL 500.214(6); MSA 24.1214(6), MCL 600.2912b(4)(e); MSA 27A.2912(2)(4)(e), MCL 600.2912b(7)(d); MSA 27A.2912(2)(7)(d), MCL 600.2912d(l)(d); MSA 27A.2912(4)(l)(d), MCL 600.2947(3); MSA 27A.2947(3), MCL 600.5839(1); MSA 27A.5839(1), MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c), and MCL 750.90e; MSA 28.285e.
The dissent claims our construction of the word “the” ignores MCL 8.3b; MSA 2.212(2), which states:
Every word importing the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural number, and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number.
We disagree. First, the statute only states that a word importing the singular number “may extend” to the plural. The statute does not say that such an automatic understanding is required. Moreover, MCL 8.3; MSA 2.212 provides that the rule stated in § 3b shall be observed “unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Legislature.” Second, the Legislature has directed that
[a]ll words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language .... [MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1).]
There is no indication that the words “the” and “a” in common usage meant something different at the time this statute was enacted.
We recognize that our proximate cause analysis with respect to individual police officers is inconsistent with that found in Fiser. However, *463the employee provision of the governmental immunity act, which requires the governmental actor to be “the proximate cause,” was enacted three years after Fiser was decided as part of 1986 PA 175. Thus, the Fiser Court was not restricted by the statute as are we. The dissent’s broad statement that we are rejecting the Fiser Court’s proximate cause analysis is in error. As previously explained, the Legislature changed Fiser’s proximate cause analysis with respect to the individual police officers when it enacted the employee provision of the governmental immunity act.
Stare decisis means “To abide by, or adhere to, decided cases.” Black’s Law Dictionary (rev 4th ed), p 1577.
Hohn v United States, 524 US 236, 251; 118 S Ct 1969; 141 L Ed 2d 242 (1998).
Holder v Hall, 512 US 874, 944; 114 S Ct 2581; 129 L Ed 2d 687 (1994). It is also the case that “this Court will not close its eyes to a possible error it may have committed in the past.” Wilson v Doehler-Jarvis, 358 Mich 510, 514; 100 NW2d 226 (1960). Moreover, this Court has no obligation to perpetuate error simply because it may have reached a wrong result in one of its earlier decisions. Thus, the doctrine of stare decisis does not tie the law to past, wrongly decided cases solely in the interest of stability and continuity.
Hohn, n 21 supra at 251.
Holder, n 22 supra at 937.
We reject the dissent’s argument that Fiser should not be overruled because of legislative acquiescence. As we recently explained in Donajkowski v Alpena Power Co, 460 Mich 243, 261; 596 NW2d 574 (1999):
If it has not been clear in our previous decisions, we wish to make it clear now: “legislative acquiescence” is a highly disfavored doctrine of statutory construction; sound principles of statutory construction require that Michigan courts determine the Legislature’s intent from its words, not from its silence.
See further Van Dorpel v Haven-Busch Co, 350 Mich 135, 146; 85 NW2d 97 (1957) (Voelker, J.):
Now this beguiling doctrine of legislative assent by silence possesses a certain undeniable logic and charm. Nor are we oblivious to the flattery implicit therein; double flattery, in fact: flattery both to the profound learning and wisdom of the particular supreme court which has spoken, and flattery to a presumably alert and eagerly responsive State legislature. One pictures the legislators of our various States periodically clamoring and elbowing each other in their zeal to get at the pearls of wisdom embalmed in the latest decisions and advance sheets of their respective supreme courts—■ and thenceforth indicating their unbounded approval by a vast and permanent silence.
Yet there are several dark shadows in this picture. For one, it suggests a legislative passion for reading and heeding the decisions of our supreme courts which we suspect may be scarcely borne out by the facts. For another, pushed too far such a doctrine suggests the interesting proposition that it is the legislatures which have now become the ultimate courts of last resort in our various States; that if they delay long enough to correct our errors those errors thus become both respectable and immutably frozen; and, finally, the larger and more dismal corollary that if enough people persist long enough in ignoring an injustice it thereby becomes just.
Cases that come to mind with regard to reliance that, even if wrongly-decided, we might nevertheless decline to overrule could well be our recent ruling regarding term limits Massey v Secretary of State, 457 Mich 410; 579 NW2d 862 (1998), or this Court’s initial advisory opinion with regard to automobile no-fault insurance. In re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, 389 Mich 441; 208 NW2d 469 (1973). What it is that singularizes these cases, even as with the United States Supreme Court’s legal tender cases after the Civil War, see Knox v Lee, 79 US (12 Wall) 457; 20 L Ed 287 (1870), is that to overrule them, even if they were wrongfully decided, would produce chaos.
In addition to this, at a very practical plane, we question whether anyone would reasonably have relied upon these controversial opinions, as they were decided with the narrowest of majorities. As was stated in Sommers v City of Flint, 355 Mich 655, 662; 96 NW2d 119 (1959):
*468Younglas [v City of Flint, 345 Mich 576; 77 NW2d 84 (1956)] was decided too recently and by too close a margin to carry great weight under the doctrine of stare decisis.

=== CASE 9739967 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:51.866461+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
I concur with the majority opinion in all respects! I write separately to respond to the dis*470sent’s claim that this Court’s recent decisions reflect a “casual disregard” for precedent.1
This Court has displayed a proper respect for judicial restraint while discharging its weighty responsibility to the people of Michigan to uphold the constitution and laws. The rule of stare decisis is not an *471inexorable command. People v Graves, 458 Mich 476, 481; 581 NW2d 229 (1998). As the highest Court in this state, our responsibility is not limited to deciding issues of first impression. We need not simply render decisions and close our eyes to their ramifications.2 Wilson v Doehler-Jarvis, 358 Mich 510, 514; 100 NW2d 226 (1960). Would those who equate activism with a willingness to correct error favor a body of law totally insulated from change? Or does the “judicial activist” label only attach to those who correct erroneous decisions that do not comport with the accuser’s policy preference, whatever that policy may be?
hi my experience, the justices of this Court struggle diligently to render principled decisions. The justices are not, however, infallible. Subsequent events and further reflection frequently reveal errors in the reasoning of an opinion or unforeseen consequences. In such cases, our responsibility demands that we reconsider the prior decision. See Wilson, supra at 514. “When it becomes apparent that the reasoning of an opinion is erroneous, and that less mischief will result from overruling the case rather than following it, it *472becomes the duty of the court to correct it.” Graves, supra at 481.
This Court has fulfilled its duty. In People v Kazmierczak, 461 Mich 411; 605 NW2d 667 (2000), for example, we overruled People v Taylor, 454 Mich 580; 564 NW2d 24 (1997), because Taylor misread and misapplied controlling United States Supreme Court Fourth Amendment jurisprudence. Taylor “confused the concept of probable cause and how it may be shown with the concept of search warrant exceptions and when they exist.” Kazmierczak, supra at 420. To allow that fundamentally flawed two-year-old decision to stand would have violated the public interest because lower courts would have been compelled to dismiss legitimate criminal charges on the basis of a misapplication of United States Supreme Court precedent in the Taylor case.
Similarly, in People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484; 596 NW2d 607 (1999), we overruled People v Gearns, 457 Mich 170; 577 NW2d 422 (1998), because the Gearns test for harmless error clearly conflicted with MCL 769.26; MSA 28.1096. We acknowledged and corrected the clear error in Gearns because the statute controls judicial review of preserved, nonconstitutional error. Lukity, supra at 495. To allow Gearns to stand would have violated the public interest because it would have resulted in the reversal of valid criminal convictions in contravention of legislative policy.
Our decisions since January 1999 reflect our adherence to our respective oaths to support the constitution and faithfully discharge the duties of our office. Const 1963, art 11, § 1. To preserve the legitimacy of the judicial branch, this Court must not exceed the limits of its constitutional authority. I agree that too *473rapid change in the law threatens judicial legitimacy, as it threatens the stability of any institution. But the act of correcting past rulings that usurp power properly belonging to the legislative branch does not threaten legitimacy. Rather, it restores legitimacy. Simply put, our duty to act within our constitutional grant of authority is paramount. If a prior decision of this Court reflects an abuse of judicial power at the expense of legislative authority, a failure to recognize and correct that excess, even if done in the name of stare decisis, would perpetuate an unacceptable abuse of judicial power.
In McDougall v Schanz/Sobran v McKendrick, 461 Mich 15; 597 NW2d 148 (1999), for instance, we were required to recognize the limits of our constitutional authority. Our prior decisions had “failed to consider the constitutionally required distinction between ‘practice and procedure’ and substantive law and thus overstated the reach of our rule-making authority.” Id. at 29. Our duty to adhere to the constitution compelled us to reject our prior characterization of all statutes that resemble rules of evidence as relating solely to practice and procedure in favor of an analysis that distinguishes between procedural rules of evidence and evidentiary rules of substantive law. Id. at 30-31. We could not follow past precedent when to do so would exceed the scope of this Court’s constitutional authority.
The present case likewise requires that we respect the constitutional division of powers between the Legislature and the judiciary. This Court has the authority to construe statutes, not to redraft them. This task can be difficult because the Legislature sometimes uses language that is reasonably suscepti*474ble to more than one meaning. This Court properly exercises its constitutional authority in construing such ambiguous statutes in light of their language and legislative purpose. When, however, under the guise of statutory construction, this Court ignores the language of the statute to further its own policy views, it wrongly usurps the power of the Legislature.
In her dissent in Dedes v Asch, 446 Mich 99, 123-124; 521 NW2d 488 (1994), Justice Riley explained that this Court exceeds the limit of its constitutional authority when it substitutes its policy choice for that of the Legislature:
If the Legislature acted unwisely in enacting the statute or failing to adequately debate its merits, the judiciary may not act to save the Legislature from its folly. As long as they do not violate the constitution, legislative controversies are to be resolved by the various democratic safeguards and checks in the constitution: ballot box, initiative, referendum, or constitutional amendment. The majority, however, stifles and denigrates these processes by reaching beyond the plain language of the act and crafting a new statute reflective of its sensibilities.
In my view, our decision today restores judicial legitimacy by overruling decisions that wrongly usurped the power of the Legislature.
The dissent builds on a theme first expressed in this case in Justice Cavanagh’s statement dissenting from the resubmission order. 461 Mich 1201-1204 (1999). He suggested that the actions of “the majority” evidenced a lack of judicial restraint. In support of this position, he identified six opinions in which this Court allegedly disregarded the principle of stare decisis: Ritchie-Gamester v City of Berkley, 461 Mich 73; 597 NW2d 517 (1999), McDougall v Schanz/Sobran v McKendrick, 461 Mich 15; 597 NW2d 148 (1999), People v Carines, 460 Mich 750; 597 NW2d 130 (1999), People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484; 596 NW2d 607 (1999), People v Borchard-Ruhland, 460 Mich 278; 597 NW2d 1 (1999), and McCready v Hoffius, 459 Mich 1235 (1999). The claims that the majority lacks respect for the doctrine of stare decisis are ill-founded and cannot withstand scrutiny.
In his dissenting statement, Justice Cavanagh used former Justice Brickley, the senior member of the Court at that time, as a barometer of principled decision making. In his words, Justice Brickley brought to the cases “unwavering objectivity and reason, unconstrained by any predetermined notions.” 461 Mich 1204, n 4. After distinguishing Justice Brickley in this manner, Justice Cavanagh noted that Justice Brickley had joined “a few” of the opinions cited as examples of “the majority’s” lack of restraint. In fact, Justice Brickley actually joined the majority opinion in five of the six cases cited and concurred in the result in the sixth. Lukity, supra at 503 (Brickley, J., concurring) (“I concur in the majority opinion, and write separately to acknowledge its discussion of the proper standard for reviewing whether error is harmless”); McDougall, supra at 37; Carines, supra at 773; Borchard-Ruhland, supra at 295; McCready, supra at 1235-1236; Ritchie-Gamester, supra at 95 (Brickley, J., concurring). Justice Brickley’s actual voting record undermines the veiled suggestion that a new group of intemperate justices seized control of this Court after the “ascendancy” of “the majority” on January 1, 1999. 461 Mich 1203.
Further, it is clear that the principle of stare decisis is inapplicable in three of the six cases alleged to violate stare decisis. In Corines, supra, we declined to follow People v Vaughn, 447 Mich 217; 524 NW2d 217 (1994), a plurality opinion that had no precedential force, in Borchard-Ruhland, supra, we declined to follow dicta in an earlier case, and in McCready, supra, in lieu of granting rehearing we remanded for further argument of a constitutional issue that was not addressed in the lower courts. It is axiomatic that principles of stare decisis do not apply to plurality opinions, dicta from previous cases, or to cases considered anew on motions for rehearing.
This willingness to reexamine precedent is actually an important component of the development of the common law. The common law is not immutable; rather, it is flexible and adaptable to changing conditions. Bugbee v Fowle, 277 Mich 485, 492; 269 NW 570 (1936). “[C]hanging conditions may give rise to new rights under the law, and, also, where the reason on which existing rules of the common law are founded ceases, the rules may cease to have application.” Beech Grove Investment Co v Civil Rights Comm, 380 Mich 405, 430; 157 NW2d 213 (1968) (plurality opinion), quoting 15A CJS, Common Law, § 2, pp 43-44. In Ritchie-Gamester v City of Berkley, n 1 supra, we exercised our authority over the development of the common law and adopted reckless misconduct as the minimum standard of care for coparticipants in recreational activities.

=== CASE 9739968 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:51.874196+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the majority’s holding that “the police owe a duty to innocent passengers, but owe no duty to passengers who are themselves wrongdoers . . . ,”1 Ante, p 444. The majority recognizes correctly that the Legislature “has placed a duty upon *475police officers toward innocent persons when they are giving chase.” Ante, p 452.
Unfortunately, my agreement with the majority ends there. Its attempt to move our law one step forward by overruling three established decisions leaves it, in my estimation, trailing three steps behind the times.
The majority overrules the proximate cause analysis of Fiser v Ann Arbor, 417 Mich 461; 339 NW2d 413 (1983), and Rogers v Detroit, 457 Mich 125; 579 NW2d 840 (1998). It holds that “an officer’s decision to pursue does not constitute the negligent operation of a motor vehicle.” Ante, p 445. Also, the majority overrules Dedes v Asch, 446 Mich 99; 521 NW2d 488 (1994). In so doing, it holds “that the phrase ‘the proximate cause’ as used in the employee provision of the governmental immunity act, MCL 691.1407(2); MSA 3.996(107)(2), means the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause preceding an injury, not ‘a proximate cause.’ ” Ante, pp 445-446.
The majority’s decision to overrule three distinct, well-reasoned lines of cases is unparalleled. I am not alone in adjudging such casual regard for prior Michigan jurisprudence and the principles of stare decisis disheartening and unwarranted. One might perceive from the majority’s review of the issues in Fiser, Rogers, and Dedes, that the outcome of this case turns simply on who had the better argument. It does not. The majorities’ positions in those cases became the law of the land. As a consequence, the real question in this case is whether today’s majority has justified *476its decision with the extraordinary showing that this Court has consistently demanded before overruling precedent. In my view, the majority has not come close to making such a showing.
As aptly stated by Justice Marshall in another context:
The overruling of one of this Court’s precedents ought to be a matter of great moment and consequence. Although the doctrine of stare decisis is not an “inexorable command,” Burnet v Coronado Oil & Gas Co, 285 US 393, 405 [52 S Ct 443; 76 L Ed 815] (1932) (Brandéis, J., dissenting), this Court has repeatedly stressed that fidelity to precedent is fundamental to “a society governed by the rule of law,” Akron v Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc, 462 US 416, 420 [103 S Ct 2481; 76 L Ed 2d 687] (1983). See generally Patterson v McLean Credit Union, 491 US 164, 172 [109 S Ct 2363; 105 L Ed 2d 132] (1989) (“[I]t is indisputable that stare decisis is a basic self-governing principle within the Judicial Branch, which is entrusted with the sensitive and difficult task of fashioning and preserving a jurisprudential system that is not based upon ‘an arbitrary discretion.’ The Federalist, No. 78, p 490 [H. Lodge ed. 1888] [A. Hamilton]”); Appeal of Concerned Corporators of Portsmouth Savings Bank, 129 NH 183, 227; 525 A2d 671, 701 (1987) (Souter, J., dissenting) (“[S]tare decisis ... ‘is essential if case-by-case judicial decision-making is to be reconciled with the principle of the rule of law, for when governing legal standards are open to revision in every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of judicial will, with arbitrary and unpredictable results,’ ” quoting Thornburgh v American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 476 US 747, 786-787 [106 S Ct 2169; 90 L Ed 2d 779] [1986] [White, J., dissenting]).
Consequently, this Court has never departed from precedent without “special justification.” Arizona v Rumsey, 467 US 203, 212 [104 S Ct 2305; 81 L Ed 2d 164] (1984). Such justifications include the advent of “subsequent changes or development in the law” that undermine a decision’s ration*477ale, Patterson v McLean Credit Union, supra, 491 US 173; the need “to bring [a decision] into agreement with experience and with facts newly ascertained,” Burnet v Coronado Oil & Gas Co, supra, 285 US 412 (Brandeis, J., dissenting); and a showing that a particular precedent has become a “detriment to coherence and consistency in the law,” Patterson v McLean Credit Union, supra, 491 US 173. [Payne v Tennessee, 501 US 808, 848-849; 111 S Ct 2597; 115 L Ed 2d 720 (1991) (Marshall, J., dissenting).][2]
The majority cannot convincingly assert that any of these traditional scenarios for overruling precedent applies to Fiser, Rogers, or Dedes. The evidence it proffers in support of reversal is so feeble that it strains credibility. What has changed since this Court decided Fiser, Rogers, and Dedes is not the law, not the circumstances, but the makeup of the Court, itself.
i
In Rogers v Detroit, this Court revisited its decision in Fiser v Ann Arbor and reaffirmed the principle that a plaintiff may recover from the government for injuries caused by individuals fleeing police officers. The plaintiff must show that a police pursuit constituted negligent operation of a police vehicle. As evidenced by the differing opinions written by members of this Court, the decision was arrived at after consid*478erable deliberation and debate. Now, a new majority has decided that Fiser “has fallen victim to a subsequent change in the law, that Rogers reflects a misunderstanding of the statute that establishes the motor vehicle exception to governmental immunity . . . .” Ante, p 465.
The majority reasons that Fiser has not been good law since 1984, when we decided Ross v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567; 363 NW2d 641 (1984). Ross, it concludes, requires a narrow reading of the motor vehicle exception. Ante, p 455.
Contrary to the majority’s position, Fiser did not fall “victim to a subsequent change in the law.” Instead, it has fallen victim to a change in this Court. In Rogers, we explicitly considered the defendants’ argument that Fiser was overruled sub silentio by Ross, supra. We stated:
The contention that Fiser was overruled misapprehends the meaning of Ross. The “discretionaiy/ministerial” test of Ross applied only to the common-law liability of individual employees, not to the statutory liability of governmental agencies. Ross held that neither that decision nor MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107) detracts from a city’s liability under MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105), as applied to police pursuits in Fiser. Ross, supra at 591, 593-594, 620-622.
We find that Ross could not and did not overrule Fiser. Thus, we conclude that Fiser remains good law in Michigan .... [Rogers, supra at 140-141.]
The majority adopts Justice Taylor’s dissenting opinion in Rogers. It now maintains that a police officer’s pursuit is comprised of two parts: 1) the decision to pursue and 2) the officer’s physical handling of the vehicle.
*479In Rogers, we explicitly stated that the officer’s decision to commence or continue a pursuit could provide a basis for a finding of liability under MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105). Id. at 145-146. The decisions to pursue, to continue pursuit, and the officer’s actions while pursuing are so intertwined that they provide a jury with no rational means of distinguishing among them.
The majority ignores the fact that an officer’s decision to operate a vehicle at breakneck speed is made simultaneously with the continuing decision to pursue the suspect. Moreover, other investigative measures often can be used in preference to high speed pursuits.3 Police officers should seriously consider these measures in the interest of avoiding the injury or death of innocent persons. It is sometimes better to let a suspect go than to endanger the Uves of innocents.4
Although certain drivers operate their motor vehicles without careful thought, I doubt that the Legislature perceived that police officers routinely do so while in high speed pursuit through residential *480streets. Forcing the jury to sift through the wreckage to find such a distinction defies practical workability.5
Likewise, the majority’s assertion that “the ‘resulting from’ language” does not encompass injuries sustained when the fleeing driver’s vehicle is not hit or otherwise forced off the road or into another vehicle or object by the pursuing police vehicle challenges common sense. Ante, p 457. It illustrates how the majority ignores the factual complexities underlining police chases.
For example, the majority’s premise fails to take into consideration a situation in which a police car forces an innocent intervening car to “hit” the fleeing vehicle. There, the fleeing driver’s vehicle is not hit or otherwise forced off the road or into another vehicle or object by the pursuing police vehicle. Under the majority’s analysis, the government escapes liability simply because the fleeing car was hit by a vehicle other than the police vehicle.
I also note that the Legislature’s deliberate inaction on this subject supports our previous decisions. As Rogers observed, the Legislature has demonstrated *481awareness of this Court’s decision in Fiser. When it chose to amend the governmental immunity act in 1986, it retained unmodified the provisions that were at issue in Fiser. Thus, I continue to adhere to this Court’s Rogers decision, because I believe that Rogers supports legislative policy.
n
Added to the unworkability of its new test to determine whether police officers’ actions allow recovery under MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105), the majority provides a new hurdle for injured innocent third parties. By overruling Dedes v Asch, supra, today’s majority ignores established proximate causation principles and effectively negates the legislative mandate that fault be determined individually with respect to each contributor to a plaintiff’s injuries. MCL 600.6304(1); MSA 27A.6304(1).
Given that the majority has forced this Court to revisit Bedes, I would affirm our decision in that case. The majority couches its holding in terms of “the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause . . . .” Ante, p 459. However, in effect, it revisits the dissenting position in Dedes, opining that “the proximate cause” in MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c) should really read “the one most immediate, efficient, and direct cause preceding an injury . . . ,”6 Ante, p 446. As Justice Boyle opined in Bedes, whether “the *482proximate cause” in MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c), should be read “the sole proximate cause,”7 raises “profound consequences for the course of future litigation involving the government.” Dedes, supra at 104.
In search of the answer to this question, the majority asserts that the phrase “the proximate cause,” when used to instruct a jury, actually contemplates “one cause.” Ante, p 462.8 However, as Justice Boyle so aptly noted in Dedes, this argument has only surface appeal:
“A general rule of statutory construction is that ‘[w]ords or phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rule of grammar and common usage,’ ” Deur v Newaygo Sheriff, 420 Mich 440, 445; 362 NW2d 698 (1984), cert den 471 US 1136 (1984), and “[w]hat is ‘plain and unambiguous’ often depends on one’s frame of reference.” Shiffer v Gibraltar Bd of Ed, 393 Mich 190, 194; 224 NW2d 255 (1974). The defendants contend that because “the” is a definite article while “a” is usually indefinite, the Legislature’s use of the word “the” preceding “proximate cause” demonstrates a clear intent to limit liability to only those circumstances in which the defendant is the sole proximate cause. This plain meaning argument is buttressed by authority from this Court that recognizes a distinction between the *483use of “a proximate cause” versus “the proximate cause” in jury instructions.
The source of the surface appeal of the argument is an instructional issue involving proximate cause, of which the practicing bar is acutely aware. However, it cannot be safely assumed that every courtroom connotation is a part of the legislative culture. While to lawyers the phrase “the proximate cause” implies “sole cause” heresy, it is incorrect to conclude that therefore “the” means sole. “The” cause language is inappropriate because “the” is ambiguous and might be understood by the jury to mean either “a” cause or the “sole” cause. Thus, where the proofs raise a question regarding whether more than one party’s negligence caused the injury, and the jury is not instructed that there can be more than one proximate cause, reference to “the” and “a” proximate cause is instructional error. As we observed in Kirby v Larson, 400 Mich 585, 607; 256 NW2d 400 (1977):
“While it is true that the instructions might have been interpreted to mean a proximate cause, it is also equally true that the jury might have contemplated otherwise.”
Moreover, where used to describe the cause in fact of the injury, “the” and “a” are interchangeable and “the” does not mean “sole.” As noted by the author of the Restatement:
“In many cases the question before the court is whether the actor’s negligence was in fact the cause of the other’s harm—that is, whether it had any effect in producing it—or whether it was the result of some other cause, the testimony making it clear that it must be one or the other, and that the harm is not due to the combined effects of both.” [Restatement Torts, 2d, § 431, comment b, p 429. Emphasis added.] (Dedes, supra at 105-107.]
I continue to find our Bedes rationale persuasive, given the lack of any legislative suggestion of an intent to abolish the long-recognized and fundamental tenet of tort law that “[t]here may be more than one proximate cause for the same injury, and the mere fact that some other cause co-operates with the negligence of the defendant to produce the injuiy for *484which suit is brought does not relieve him from liability.” Camp v Wilson, 258 Mich 38, 42; 241 NW 844 (1932).
The majority contends that Stoll v Laubengayer9 over eighty-five years ago defined proximate cause as “the immediate efficient, direct cause preceding the injury.” However, as we noted in Hagerman v Gencorp Automotive,10 “that was merely one of several definitions considered in Stoll, and the rule to be gleaned from that case is that proximate cause is a case-by-case analysis.”
As we stated in Hagerman, this analysis has developed over time to our present understanding of concurrent proximate causation, consistent with the statutory enactment of comparative fault. Hagerman, supra at 732. Thus, not only may there be more than one proximate cause of an injury, but, where there is, the negligent wrongdoer’s behavior may be referred to as “the proximate cause”:
“[T]here may be two or more concurrent and directly cooperative and efficient proximate causes of an injury. Negligence which was operative at the time an injury was inflicted may constitute the proximate cause of the injury and be actionable, notwithstanding it concurred with the act of a third person to produce the injury.” [Brackins v Olympia, Inc, 316 Mich 275, 281; 25 NW2d 197 (1946) (emphasis added).]
Thus, as we so aptly stated in Hagerman, construing the phrase “the proximate cause” to require one cause contradicts our longstanding recognition of the fact that “there may be two or more concurrent and *485directly cooperative and efficient proximate causes of an injury.” Hagerman, supra at 733. We have neither a textual nor an historical basis on which to find that the Legislature intended we construe MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c) to require only one cause. This is particularly significant given the common law’s established recognition of concurrent proximate causation.
Under the majority’s reasoning, this tenet is to be abolished. In its place appears a rule relieving a government employee of all liability for negligence if another tortfeasor is negligent, however slightly, as long as the other’s negligence is later. The net effect of today’s decision is to deny innocent victims of police car chases recovery for their injuries. Applying its rationale, the pursuing police officer will never be the only proximate cause of an injury to an innocent passenger. If a vehicle is fleeing the police, its driver will always be a wrongdoer.
The holding in effect revives the doctrine of contributory negligence with respect to government employees. As Justice Boyle noted, “It defies common sense and the responsible exercise of our authority to conclude that the Legislature would have provided protection tantamount to eliminating liability without having commented on it.”11 Dedes, supra at 115. *486There are no grounds to believe that the statute intended absolute immunity for the actions of police officers when chasing fleeing vehicles.
Moreover, MCL 600.6304(1); MSA 27A.6304(1), as amended by 1995 PA 249, provides additional support for the correctness of our decision in Dedes. This provision states in relevant part:
In an action based on tort or another legal theory seeking damages for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death involving fault of more than 1 person, including third-party defendants and nonparties, the court, unless otherwise agreed by all parties to the action, shall instruct the jury to answer special interrogatories or, if there is no jury, shall make findings indicating both of the following:
* * *
(b) The percentage of the total fault of all persons that contributed to the death or injury ....
Surely, had the Legislature intended to exempt government tortfeasors and enact a separate standard of proximate causation with respect to them, it would have included it in this recently amended section. The language of this section makes clear that all tortfeasors, whether government agents ór not, shall be subject to the same standards for purposes of liability.
*487This reasoning is consistent with Justice Boyle’s opinion in Dedes, our opinion in Rogers, and common-law principles of proximate causation. A police officer’s negligence need not be the only or most direct proximate cause of an injury in order to allow recovery. The majority’s decision to overturn this Court’s well-reasoned precedent and reinstate contributory negligence by judicial fiat is mistaken and unwarranted.
in
In her concurrence, Justice Corrigan attempts to defend the majority’s disregard for this Court’s precedents. She protests that the majority is only righting the wrongs perpetrated by previous members of this Court. An examination of the justifications offered by the majority in defense of its disregard for precedent reveals that these protests ring hollow.
In People v Graves,12 Justice Taylor acknowledged:
It is true of course that we do not lightly overrule a case. This Court has stated on many occasions that “[u]nder the doctrine of stare decisis, principles of law deliberately examined and decided by a court of competent jurisdiction should not be lightly departed.” [Quoting People v Jamieson, 436 Mich 61, 79; 461 NW2d 884 (1990).]
In this case, instead of determining whether Fiser and Rogers were “deliberately examined and decided by a court of competent jurisdiction,” Justice TAYLOR first uses the dictionary to define the term “resulting from.” But instead of analyzing whether plaintiffs’ injuries resulted from defendant’s action, he merely *488concludes that “plaintiffs cannot satisfy the ‘resulting from’ language of the statute where the pursuing police vehicle did not hit the fleeing car or otherwise physically force it off the road or into another vehicle or object.” Ante, p 457.
The doctrine of stare decisis does “apply with full force to decisions construing statutes or ordinances . . . .” Boyd v WG Wade Shows, Inc, 443 Mich 515, 525; 505 NW2d 544 (1993). The wisdom of this rule becomes apparent when members of this Court apply contrived meanings to the language of statutes instead of using accepted legal analysis.
The majority also infuses public policy into its reading of the motor vehicle exception, despite its own oft-repeated admonitions that this Court may not consider public policy when interpreting the plain language of a statute. Clearly, the motor vehicle exception allows plaintiffs to recover when government entities negligently operate a motor vehicle. MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105). The exception says nothing about the duty of police officers to apprehend criminal suspects.
In fact, the Legislature has made it clear that emergency vehicles may exceed posted speed limits only in a manner that will not endanger “life or property.” MCL 257.603(3)(c); MSA 9.2303(3)(c). But the majority insists that the police officer’s duty to apprehend criminal suspects conflicts with (1) plaintiffs’ right to recover under these circumstances, and (2) the police officer’s duty not to endanger innocent lives when deciding to pursue a criminal suspect. Ante, p 457. But where does the language of either the motor vehicle exception or MCL 257.603(3)(c); MSA 9.2303(3)(c) address the duty to apprehend criminal suspects? It *489does not. The majority simply places a higher premium on this consideration, to the derogation of the explicit intent of the Legislature.
Moreover, not all the cases in which this majority disposed of prior precedent involved statutory construction. In Ritchie-Gamester v Berkley,13 it overruled Felgner v Anderson14 and Williams v Wood.15 These cases held that, for injuries arising from recreational activities, the proper standard is that of ordinary care. The majority substituted a new standard, reckless misconduct, on the basis of arguments that it made more “common-sense,” and that other states have adopted a similar rule. Ritchie-Gamester, supra at 89. The majority also stated that it sought to “encourage[] vigorous participation in recreational activities.” Id. It did so without consideration of whether the rule Michigan courts had applied during the preceding sixty years had dampened participation in recreational activities. Id.
Finally, Justice Corrigan chastises Justice Cavanagh because, in his dissenting statement to the order granting leave in this case, he refers to Justice Brickley’s past service to this Court.16 I believe that, in so doing, she clouds the real issue.
*490I read Justice Cavanagh’s statement as pointing out that the remaining four justices acted together in all of the six listed occasions. Justice Brickley’s contributing vote did not change the fact that the remaining members of the Court always acted together. Justice Cavanagh’s separate footnote to Justice Brickley’s jurisprudential standards clarified his belief that the latter’s record in opposition to overturning precedent extended far beyond the instant cases. Hence, his decision to join the majority on some occasions was irrelevant.
Justice Corrigan misconstrues Justice Cavanagh’s obvious intent.17 In his dissenting statement, Justice Cavanagh referred to the collective conscience of the majority and its seeming compulsion to act without judicial reserve to nullify past decisions. The majority has affirmatively changed the law, whether through disagreement with the lead opinion in plurality decisions, by expressly overruling precedent, or by forging paths around well-established principles.
Justice Corrigan argues that Justice Brickley’s actual voting record disproves “[t]he claims that the majority lacks respect for the doctrine of stare deci*491sis . . . Ante, p 470, n 1. However, to find support for my concerns, I need go no further than the majority’s opinion in this case. In it, three opinions of this Court are discarded in favor of a strained and erroneous interpretation of the statute involved.
The majority’s casual disregard for this Court’s past opinions suggests to future courts that they do the same and creates instability in the law of this state.
CONCLUSION
The reasons proffered to overrule Dedes, Rogers, and Fiser are based solely on the majority’s subjective, contrived interpretation of the statutes involved. For instance, the Legislature has stated that eveiy time a statute refers to something in the singular, it may be read, also, to mean the plural. MCL 8.3b; MSA 2.212(2). Yet, in a statute where the Legislature referred to one or “the” proximate cause, the majority refuses to include several proximate causes, thereby finding the need to overrule Dedes. Ante, p 468.
In this decision, the majority exposes itself to criticism that it picks and chooses when to apply its preferred principles of statutory interpretation. Here, it has overruled past decisions of this Court because it claims that past Courts have not interpreted the statute involved properly. It acclaims the virtues of giving statutory language its “plain meaning.” But is has given its own meaning to the expression “resulting from,” rather than using the plain meaning. Similarly, it admonishes us not to infuse public policy into the plain language of the Legislature, but proceeds to do so here in reaching its interpretation of the statute. As a consequence of this selective use of preferred *492principles of statutory interpretation, the majority arrives at the conclusion that Fiser and Rogers must be overruled.
The majority fails to convince me that Rogers and Fiser erroneously interpreted the motor vehicle exception to government immunity. It must be reiterated that it has eliminated these rulings without making the extraordinary showing that this Court has consistently demanded before overruling established law.
In the majority’s race to overrule precedent, it establishes a rule that will likely yield unconscionable results. Its new “proximate cause” language provides little motivation for police departments to promulgate and enforce coherent rules concerning police chases. There is little incentive for police officers to adhere carefully to such rules, where they exist. A police officer could claim not to be the most direct proximate cause of an accident arising from a police chase, no matter how outrageous the officer’s actions.18I agree that the fleeing individuals here are responsible to a great extent for plaintiffs’ injuries. However, I would not join the majority in automatically holding the police officers harmless.
Consistent with Dedes and Rogers, I would remand to the trial court for a factual determination of the extent of fault, if any, attributable to the defendant officers.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Although no duty is owed to wrongdoers in a fleeing vehicle, it does not follow that summary disposition should be granted in a broad range of *475circumstances. At some point, a determination must be made whether wrongdoing occurred.
2 In his dissenting statement accompanying the supplemental briefing order in this case, Justice Cavanagh pointed out that Rogers was decided only fourteen months ago:
Stare decisis, of course, is hardly a handcuff enfeebling us from responding to the changes that inevitably occur over time. Such time has, however, heretofore been measurable in years, rather than months. [Cooper v Wade, 461 Mich 1201, 1201-1202 (1999).]
For example, there are instances when the officer could radio the dispatcher and request a roadblock. Other options include the use of air support and photographic evidence to identify the perpetrator. Allowing innocent victims of police chase auto crashes to recover from the state may encourage the further development of technology to apprehend fleeing felons. See note, Cooling the hot pursuit: Toward a categorical approach, 73 Ind L J 1277, 1293-1294 (1998).
The facts of Cooper poignantly illustrate this point. Was it worth the life of fourteen-year-old Damian Collins merely to apprehend him and recover a stolen Jeep Cherokee? likewise, is it not ludicrous to argue that, to protect the public from underage drivers, it was necessary to engage Collins in a high speed pursuit?
I agree with the statements reiterated by the Tennessee Supreme Court in Haynes v Hamilton Co, 883 SW2d 606, 610 (Term, 1994), quoting Boyer v State, 323 Md 558, 574; 594 A2d 121 (1991):
Negligent operation of a car is not limited to the negligent manipulation of the gas pedal, steering wheel, or brake pedal, such as involved in speeding, failure to pay attention to what may be in front of the vehicle, failure to apply the brakes, etc. A decision to operate or continue operating the car, when a reasonable person would not do so, clearly can be “negligent operation.” For example, if one decides to operate or to continue operating a motor vehicle when he is dizzy or otherwise ill, he may be guilty of negligent operation. A decision to operate a car or to continue operating a car knowing that brakes are faulty may obviously constitute the “negligent operation” of the vehicle.
The majority’s construction of the word “the” also ignores the mandates of MCL 8.3b; MSA 2.212(2), which states:
Every word importing the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural number, and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number.
*482In the case at bar, despite the majority’s contention to the contrary, the word “the,” insomuch as it connotes “the singular number,” also “embracejs] the plural number,” meaning more than one.
I detect with increasing frequency a tendency among certain jurists to maintain that a statute is “clear and unambiguous” while adding words to its “plain language” to reach a desired meaning.
One must wonder why the majority resorts to Black’s Law Dictionary (5th ed) to determine what meaning the Legislature placed on the word “the.” For at pages 458-459 the majority states that “[t]he Legislature’s use of the definite article ‘the’ clearly evinces an intent to focus on one cause.” If that were truly the “clear” case, then resort to a dictionary would be unnecessary.
174 Mich 701, 706; 140 NW 532 (1913).
457 Mich 720, 730, n 8; 579 NW2d 347 (1998).
As Dedes notes, this is not a case where the practical effect of a certain statutory provision was difficult to foresee at the time of enactment, making legislative comment unlikely. As proposed and enacted, MCL 691.1407(2); MSA 3.996(107)(2) was intended to limit the liability of lesser government employees in response to this Court’s distinction between ministerial and discretionary government activities in Ross, supra. The new legislation protected employees, eliminated the Ross distinction between ministerial and discretionary activities, extended protection to volunteers, raised the standard from negligence to gross negligence, and specifically defined gross negligence. All these purposes were noted and *486commented on as the bill moved through the legislative process and took its final form. The construction of proximate cause advanced by the defendants and adopted by the majority will enormously limit that liability, much more than the gross negligence standard adopted by the Legislature. Yet, nothing was written about the supposed “plain language” use of “the proximate cause,” further negating any inteipretation that the Legislature decided to modify the common law with respect to governmental employees. It is difficult to imagine that legislators were in such agreement on this matter that they found it not worth their time to discuss it.
458 Mich 476, 480; 581 NW2d 229 (1998).
461 Mich 73; 597 NW2d 517 (1999).
375 Mich 23, 56; 133 NW2d 136 (1965).
260 Mich 322; 244 NW 490 (1932).
461 Mich 1201, 1204, n 4 (1999). Her footnote indicates that Justice Brickley joined the majority’s opinion in cases that overruled precedent. I interpret that as an acknowledgment that Justice Brickley’s overall record demonstrates a proper respect for the doctrine of stare decisis. Likewise, Justice Cavanagh wished to point out that his criticisms of this current majority’s treatment of the doctrine could not fairly include Justice Brickley.
More problematic, in footnote 1 of her concurrence, Justice Corrigan summarizes Justice Brickley’s voting record inaccurately. When referring to Justice Cavanagh’s dissent to the prior order, she claims that Justice Brickley joined the majority opinion in five out of six cases. Her statement is misleading. Justice Brickley joined a majority opinion in McDougall v Schanz/Sobran v McKendrick, 461 Mich 15; 597 NW2d 148 (1999); People v Borchard-Ruhland, 460 Mich 278; 597 NW2d 1 (1999); People v Carines, 460 Mich 750; 597 NW2d 130 (1999). Also, he signed the majority order in McCready v Hoffius, 459 Mich 1235 (1999). He concurred separately in both People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484; 596 NW2d 607 (1999), and Ritchie-Gamester v City of Berkley, supra. Even if Justice Corrigan is not specific with reference to Justice Brickley’s decisions, it is clear that he was part of the majority in four, rather than five, of the aforementioned cases.
Of course, this presumes that the fleeing driver’s vehicle is not hit or otherwise forced off the road or onto another vehicle or object by the pursuing police officer. See discussion in part I.

=== CASE 9739969 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:51.879112+00 ===

*493Cavanagh, J.
{dissenting). I concur with Justice Kelly’s dissent in its entirety. However, the majority having taken the opportunity, quite properly, to respond to the dissent, I offer a few brief words of my own in response to the wonderfully defensive concurrence. The concurrence’s uncontrolled compulsion to respond to a 1999 statement, and its efforts to reargue the merits of decided cases evidence its perceived shortcomings of the rationale already provided by the majority in these cases. Despite the concurrence’s proclamations about the importance of legitimacy and continuity in the law, the concurrence fails to adequately justify this Court’s recent routine practice of ignoring precedent and overruling our cases.
I cannot disagree more with the concurrence that today’s decision “restores judicial legitimacy by overruling decisions that wrongly usurped the power of the Legislature.” Ante at 474. To suggest that legitimacy has been restored is to suggest that legitimacy had been lost. One need only review the decisions cast aside by today’s decision in order to discover that they were firmly rooted in the law.
Although the concurrence provides an explanation for the Court’s recent track record, it provides no justification. I take comfort in the fact that anyone who reads the concurrence with a critical eye will be led back to the cases cited. The criticisms of the majority opinions in the cited cases will not soon be erased.1
*494It is unclear exactly how the concurring opinion relates to the merits of the present cases. Rather, the concurrence latches onto a new discussion as a means for rehashing a tangential debate. Yet, paranoia about how a prior debate has been viewed is not a sufficient basis for injecting that former debate into a subsequent phase of this case. Although I could offer further explanations for my dissenting statement from the resubmission order in this case, 461 Mich 1201-1204 (1999), I disagree that this is the time to debate a dissent that focused on whether this Court should manufacture issues to be briefed. Rather, this is the time to decide the issues argued. Thankfully, the majority and dissent have done so.
For an explanation on the merits, see the dissenting opinions in McDougall v Schanz/Sobran v McKendrick, 461 Mich 15, 38; 597 NW2d 148 (1999) (pointing out an unconstitutional legislative usurpation of judicial power); People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484, 504; 596 NW2d 607 (1999) (arguing that People v Gearns, 457 Mich 170; 577 NW2d 422 [1998], rather than the majority opinion, was true to MCL 769.26; MSA 28.1096). In People v Kazmierczak, 461 Mich 411; 605 NW2d 667 (2000), the dissent pro*494vides an explanation why People v Taylor, 454 Mich 580; 564 NW2d 24 (1997), was not “fundamentally flawed” as the concurrence asserts. Ante at 472. The Kazm/ierczak dissent amply explained why Taylor could be applied, and cautioned against overruling precedent unnecessarily.

=== CASE 2221683 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:17.769181+00 ===

28 Ill. 2d 552 (1963)
193 N.E.2d 19
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
WILLIAM LEE HURST, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 37630.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed September 27, 1963.
WILLIAM LEE HURST, pro se.
WILLIAM G. CLARK, Attorney General, of Springfield, and BRICE IRVING, State's Attorney, of Pittsfield, for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HERSHEY delivered the opinion of the court:
By indictment returned to the circuit court of Pike County the defendant, William Lee Hurst, was charged with forging an indorsement on the back of a check and with uttering and passing said check with the intent to *553 prejudice, damage and defraud the payee named therein. The defendant was tried by a jury, found guilty and sentenced to the penitentiary for a term of not less than 5 years nor more than 10 years. His sole contention here is that he was not tried within four months of the date of his commitment, (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 38, par. 748) and that the court erred in denying his motion for discharge.
The defendant was arrested and placed in jail on September 3, 1959, and was not admitted to bail. He was indicted on November 10, 1959, and the case was called for trial January 4, 1960. On that date the defendant moved for a discharge under the above statute, which motion was denied. Thereafter both parties announced ready for trial and a jury was impanelled and sworn to try the case. Thereupon it appears that when the time for adjournment arrived the jurors were released until the following morning. The trial was completed and verdict returned on January 5, 1960. At no time did the defendant make a motion for a continuance.
The State contends that the four-months period computed on a calendar month basis expired on January 3, 1960, a Sunday, and that the commencement of the trial on January 4 was in compliance with the statute. (People v. Hannon, 381 Ill. 206; People v. Shaw, 24 Ill. 2d 219.) The defendant contends that the four-months period should be computed as 120 days and that said period expired on January 2, 1960, a Saturday, which fact did not operate to extend the time to the following Monday. (See People v. Shaw, 24 Ill. 2d 219.) He further argues that the length of time from incarceration to trial would vary, unless calculated on a day-to-day basis and would result in denying the defendant equal protection of the law.
The defendant's theory has been expressly rejected by this court and it is now settled that the four-months period "is computed not by counting days, but by looking *554 at the calendar, and it runs from a given day in one month to a day of the corresponding number in the next or specified succeeding month, except where the last month has not so many days, in which event it expires on the last day of that month." (People v. Gilbert, 24 Ill. 2d 201, 203.) The argument that the possibility of a variance in the number of days that a person could be held before trial depending upon the month of his arrest requires that a day-to-day calculation be made was expressly considered by us in the Gilbert case and rejected. The trial, having commenced by the impanelling of the jury on January 4, was begun within the period of time specified by the aforementioned statute, and the defendant's motion for discharge was properly disallowed. Accordingly the judgment of the circuit court of Pike County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739970 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:54.527705+00 ===

FINE, J.
¶ 1. Miguel Angel Santana-Lopez appeals from a judgment entered on a jury verdict convicting him of first-degree sexual assault of a child, see *334Wis. Stat. § 948.02(1).1 He claims that the trial court erroneously exercised its discretion in preventing him from testifying that he offered to take a DNA test. We agree and remand for further proceedings.
I.
¶ 2. Santana-Lopez, now fifty years old, was charged and convicted of forcibly licking, and penetrating with his finger, the vaginal area of the six-year-old granddaughter of the woman with whom he lived. On the second day of trial, the prosecutor told the trial court that Santana-Lopez told the police that "he would take a polygraph and DNA tests." The prosecutor wanted the trial court to exclude evidence of Santana-Lopez's offer to take a polygraph examination. The trial court then discussed the matter with Santana-Lopez's trial lawyer:
THE COURT: Ms. Ramirez, was it your intention to illicit [sic] such testimony?
MS. RAMIREZ: It wasn't my intention, Your Honor, but my client has told me that repeatedly. And I don't know if he will say that he offered to *335take DNA tests or polygraph tests in his conversation with Detective Hoering.
THE COURT: Well, I assume that you have discussed that with him that that would be inappropriate. An offer to take a polygraph is not admissible and relevant and an offer to submit DNA is not admissible and relevant and it shouldn't be offered as testimony by the defendant in this case. That would be highly objectionable.
I will enter that order at this time that no such testimony shall be offered. It is inadmissible and irrelevant.
There was a recess to allow Santana-Lopez's lawyer and interpreter to confer with him. When proceedings resumed, the prosecutor clarified her request for the trial court:
MS. SKWIERAWSKI: Judge, I'm just concerned because I only want the part about the polygraph excluded, and I am concerned about the DNA part because it is a legal test. It is something that speaks directly I think to his— I have essentially confirmed with other attorneys in my office, and I don’t want to have to do this trial again perhaps because I know that the DNA is one of their big defenses that it was not done, and I think he has the right to say he was willing to have a test that is legal. And I can talk about and we have already talked about in court. And I am just concerned if we stop him from talking about that in particular there might be issues.
I am willing to say that it's okay for him just to say he has offered to take a DNA test because I think I have argument out there about why it wasn't done. But that strikes me that is going to be one of the things that speaks directly to I think his thoughts of his own innocence.
*336The trial court disagreed:
THE COURT: There isn't any evidence in this case about DNA testing when it could or could not have been done in this case. We don't have any expert witnesses here to explain under what circumstances a specimen can be, evidence specimens can be retrieved from a victim and how those specimens can be tested against known standards taken from swabs. We don't have any expert testimony about that.
So to get into the whole issues [sic] is going to confuse the jury unless we call in an expert to say those couldn't be retrieved. We have it in very vague terms as a matter of protocol the police department if it is after 48 hours but we don't have any expert testimony about how and why that is done, and I mean if that was going to be anticipated as a defense and as something that had to be rebutted by the prosecution we need an expert to come in here and explain that. Either somebody from Sexual Assault Treatment Center who routinely does this stuff and knows how the protocol is or someone from the crime lab who would do the same thing.
After additional colloquy, Santana-Lopez's trial lawyer reiterated her position:
MS. RAMIREZ: And it is relevant when that would go as to his state of mind to show that he believed he was innocent so he offered to do anything that they wanted him to do.
THE COURT: No, that's not relevant. The question here is whether he did or did not assault this child and whether he had a certain state of mind at the time he made the statement to the police officer is not the issue.
*337II.
¶ 3. A trial court's decision to admit or exclude evidence is a discretionary determination and will not be upset on appeal if it has "a reasonable basis" and was made " 'in accordance with accepted legal standards and in accordance with the facts of record.'" State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d 334, 342, 340 N.W.2d 498, 501 (1983) (citation omitted). As we see below, the trial court misapplied the law in ruling that Santana-Lopez's offer to undergo a DNA test was not relevant.
¶ 4. As the State concedes in its appellate brief, both an offer to take a polygraph test and an offer to undergo a DNA analysis are relevant to the state of mind of the person making the offer — so long as the person making the offer believes that the test or analysis is possible, accurate, and admissible.2 See State v. Hoffman, 106 Wis. 2d 185, 217, 316 N.W.2d 143, 160 (Ct. App. 1982) ("an offer to take a polygraph examination is relevant to an assessment of the offeror's credibility and may be admissible for that purpose," *338even though the test results might not be admissible);3 cf. Hemauer v. State, 64 Wis. 2d 62, 74-76, 218 N.W.2d 342, 348 (1974) (offer to take polygraph test not admissible where tests results would not be admissible — no argument that defendant believed that the results would have been admissible); United States v. Harris, 9 F.3d 493, 502 (6th Cir. 1993) (failure to agree to the admissibility of polygraph test results irrespective of outcome rendered willingness to take test only "marginally relevant"); Milenkovic v. State, 86 Wis. 2d 272, 282-285 272 N.W.2d 320, 325-326 (Ct. App. 1978) (relevance of motive of alleged rape victim to lie about the sexual assault so as to hide from boyfriend source of her venereal disease depends on a showing that the alleged rape victim believed her boyfriend did not know prior to the alleged assault that she had the disease). Simply put, an offer to undergo DNA testing, like an offer to take a polygraph examination, may reflect a consciousness of innocence.
¶ 5. As with evidence bearing directly on consciousness of guilt, see, e.g., State v. Schirmang, 210 Wis. 2d 324, 331-332, 565 N.W.2d 225, 228 (Ct. App. 1997) (refusal to submit to mandatory blood-alcohol testing relevant to defendant's consciousness of guilt), evidence bearing directly on consciousness of innocence is also relevant, see Hoffman, 106 Wis. 2d at 217, 316 N.W.2d at 160; United States v. Biaggi, 909 F.2d 662, 690-691 (2d Cir. 1990) (rejected offer of immunity from prosecution: "a jury is entitled to believe that most *339people would jump at the chance to obtain an assurance of immunity from prosecution and to infer from rejection of the offer that the accused lacks knowledge of wrongdoing"), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 904. Santana-Lopez's offer to undergo DNA testing reflects a consciousness of innocence, however, only if he believed that such testing would indicate whether he assaulted the child; his offer to undergo such testing would have been a mere hollow gesture if he knew that such testing would reveal nothing where oral and digital sexual assault is alleged.
¶ 6. The trial court did not permit Santana-Lopez to establish the necessary evidentiary foundation relating to the relevance of his offer to undergo DNA testing, despite the prosecutor's concession that his offer, in her words, "speaks directly to I think his thoughts of his own innocence." Rather, the trial court ruled flatly that the evidence was "not relevant" because, as the trial court phrased it, "whether he had a certain state of mind at the time he made the statement to the police officer is not the issue." The trial court erred in ruling that Santana-Lopez's state of mind was not relevant and thus erroneously exercised its discretion.4
*340¶ 7. We remand this case to the trial court for a finding under Wis. Stat. Rule 901.04(1) of whether Santana-Lopez believed DNA could detect the sexual assaults of which he was charged. See State v. Cardenas-Hernandez, 219 Wis. 2d 516, 534, 579 N.W.2d 678, 686 (1998) ("admission of contested evidence is dependent upon the presentation of a sufficient foundation establishing the relevancy of the evidence under Wis. Stat. § 901.04(1)"). If the trial court determines that, based on what Santana-Lopez knew at the time he made the offer to undergo DNA testing, evidence of his offer is relevant, the trial court should then exercise its discretion under Wis. Stat. Rule 904.03 and decide whether the relevance of that evidence is "substantially outweighed" by the factors set forth in that rule.5 If the trial court determines that Santana-Lopez's offer to undergo DNA testing should have been received into evidence, it should decide whether Santana-Lopez is thus entitled to a new trial or whether the error in excluding the evidence was harmless beyond a reason*341able doubt. See State v. Harris, 199 Wis. 2d 227, 252-256, 544 N.W.2d 545, 555-557 (1996).6
By the Court. — Cause remanded.
The notice of appeal states that it is from a "Judgment and Order entered on May 15, 1998." The judgment of conviction was entered on May 18, 1998. There is no trial court order entered on May 15,1998, or on any day close to that date, other than the order to the sheriff to "execute this sentence," which is printed on the face of the judgment. We construe the notice of appeal as an appeal from the May 18 judgment. See WlS. Stat. Rule 805.18(1) ("The court shall, in every stage of an action, disregard any error or defect in the pleadings or proceedings which shall not affect the substantial rights of the adverse party."), incorporated into appellate practice by WlS. STAT. Rule 809.84.
The State's brief before us notes:
The admissibility of a defendant's offer to take a DNA test is similar to the admissibility of a defendant's offer to take a polygraph exam. An offer to take a polygraph examination may be relevant and admissible to bolster the offeror's credibility. See State v. Hoffman, 106 Wis. 2d 185, 217, 316 N.W.2d 143 (Ct. App. 1982) (citing Lhost v. State, 85 Wis. 2d 620, 634 n.4, 271 N.W.2d 121 (1978)).
(Footnote omitted.) The results of lie-detector tests are not admissible in Wisconsin. See State v. Dean, 103 Wis. 2d 228, 307 N.W.2d 628 (1981). The results of DNA tests are admissible. See State v. Peters, 192 Wis. 2d 674, 685-693, 534 N.W.2d 867, 871-874 (Ct. App. 1995).
Santana-Lopez does not argue on appeal that the trial court erred in excluding evidence that he offered to take a polygraph examination. Accordingly, that issue is waived, see Reiman Assocs., Inc. v. R/A Advertising, Inc., 102 Wis. 2d 305, 306 n.1, 306 N.W.2d 292, 294 n.1 (Ct. App. 1981).
In an argument set out only in a footnote, the State contends that Santana-Lopez's offer to undergo DNA testing was inadmissible hearsay, and that we should affirm the trial court on that ground. See State v. Holt, 128 Wis. 2d 110, 124-125, 382 N.W.2d 679, 687 (Ct. App. 1985) (an appellate court may affirm a trial court's correct ruling irrespective of the trial court's rationale). We reject the State's contention for two reasons. As in the Second Circuit, " 'We do not consider an argument mentioned only in a footnote to be adequately raised or preserved for appellate review.'" Badger III Ltd. Partnership v. Howard, Needles, *340Tammen & Bergendoff, 196 Wis. 2d 891, 899 n.1, 539 N.W.2d 904, 908 n.1 (Ct. App. 1995) (quoting United States v. Restrepo, 986 F.2d 1462, 1463 (2d Cir. 1993)). Moreover, Santana-Lopez's statement is, if as represented, admissible under the state-of-mind exception to the rule against hearsay, Wis. Stat. Rule 908.03(3). See United States v. Terry, 702 F.2d 299, 314 (2d Cir. 1983) (applying Rule 803(3) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, which is identical to Rule 908.03(3)), cert. denied, 461 U.S. 931.
Wis. Stat. Rule 904.03 provides:
Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice, confusion, or waste of time. Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
Although the State argues on appeal that if the trial court erred in excluding evidence of Santana-Lopez's offer to undergo DNA testing, the error was harmless, in our view a reasoned assessment of that issue may depend on the nature of Santana-Lopez's offer.

=== CASE 9740249 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:30:57.608176+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent.
While the issue of liquidated damages versus penalty is a question of law for the court to decide, it must be supported by adequate findings of fact. The trial court heard the evidence and entered findings of fact which supported its conclusion that the claim was a penalty. Its findings are supported by substantial evidence. I would affirm the trial court.
The majority opinion relies heavily on Dave Gustafson & Co. v. State, 83 S.D. 160, 156 N.W.2d 185 (1968). I quote from a portion thereof, which cites Anderson v. Cactus Heights Country Club, 80 S.D. 417, 125 N.W.2d 491 (1963):
“[Tjhat the amount stipulated bears a reasonable relation to probable damages and not disproportionate to any damages reasonably to be anticipated.”
83 S.D. at 166, 156 N.W.2d at 188 (emphasis added). The present contract was conceived in procrastination and delay not of-the bidders doing. The Congressional Act which provided the basis for approximately eighty-two percent participation of federal funding was passed in 1970 and originally had a May 1973 deadline for compliance. This was extended to May 1974 by the FAA, yet the state, acting as agent for the cities involved, did not even invite bids until February of 1974. No reason or explanation for this unseemly delay is apparent in the record. The bid proposal, by its own terms, acknowledged that a further extension of the deadline for compliance would have to be obtained from the FAA by the cities since the contracts could not even be *325let until the 1074 deadline had come and gone. Clearly the state anticipated no problem in getting that requisite extension.
According to our long-standing standard of review, we cannot overturn the findings of the trial court unless they are clearly erroneous. Cunningham v. Yankton Clinic, P.A., 262 N.W.2d 508 (S.D.1978). I would decide the appeal solely on the issue of non-anticipation of damages. Contrary to what the majority says, the record discloses that there were no negotiations as to the damage amount. The figure was in the bid form prepared by the state and taken from previous highway construction contracts and PAA guidelines for runway construction contracts, a type of contract entirely unrelated to the contracts in question. The trial court in its Finding of Pact No. 8 found:
Furthermore, the $50 per truck per day figure does not appear to bear a reasonable relation to probable damages which might occur, as it depended upon whether the FAA would require immediate compliance or issue waivers. ... In the latter, where the PAA would issue waivers, damages would be minimal or nonexistent. Defendants did not consider these facts in arriving at the $50 per truck per day figure.
Upon this finding the trial court based its Conclusion of Law Ño. 2, which, in pertinent part, stated:
The so-called liquidated damages clause in the contract between the parties is a penalty in that . . . said amount is disproportionate to any damages which might be reasonably anticipated.
I would affirm the trial court’s judgment because I do not perceive that in the fact situation in this case any damage whatsoever was reasonably to be anticipated. That was the trial court’s conclusion and in my opinion it was based on solid findings of fact.

=== CASE 9740250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:30:57.611711+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent and would affirm the trial court upon the basis that the trial court justly found the clause in question to be a penalty.
Shortly after the submission by plaintiff of its bid on March 4, 1974, and continuing through the time of the contract, unanticipated and serious material shortages developed in the entire national economy, and particularly in the automotive and heavy equipment industries which made it impossible for plaintiff to timely deliver the airport crash, fire and rescue trucks as required in the contract.
The trial court found that it was uncon-troverted that the reasons for the delay in performing the contract were beyond the control of the plaintiff. Those reasons indicated:
(1) A reduction in the production of Rockwell axles for light rescue crash trucks;
(2) Inability to obtain dry chemical systems due to shortages of foundry components for a period of three months;
(3) A fire at the foundry producing Hale pumps which cut production by 50%; and
(4) A number of spot shortages of a more minor nature.
The facts establish that these shortages could not have reasonably been foreseen by the plaintiff at the time of the contract documents, due to the then prevailing economic conditions.
South Dakota was in trouble meeting the federal deadline when the bids were let. The parties knew that an additional extension of time would be necessary and the federal government would grant it. In fact, South Dakota had already received one extension of time from the original deadline of May 1, 1973, to May 1, 1974. Bids were not requested until January or February of 1974.
It is important to note, when considering damages, that no airports were closed down due to respondent’s inability to produce firetrucks; no persons complained about the airports failing to have crash trucks; no carrier refused to land or complained about the lack of crash equipment; and all cities were able to receive waivers or extensions of time for compliance from the federal government. In essence, there were no *326damages. Defendants contend that stipulated damages may be recovered in the event of a breach even though no actual damage occurs. This presupposes that the’ clause . qualifies as a liquidated damage clause.
This lawsuit arose because of the fact that the Division of Aeronautics, heeding its counsel’s advice, expressed that it could not-legally extend the time for performance and could not modify the contract to exonerate appellant from the penalty clause. The trial court disagreed and rightly so. As stated in 64 Am.Jur.2d Public Works and Contracts § 108 (1972):
Although parties to a contract for public work may agree that time shall be of the essence of their contract, and, if proper legal conditions exist, may stipulate for damages and the measure of them, they may subsequently change their views and requirements and consider that performance within the stipulated time is unimportant. The prescribed date for the completion of the public contract may be waived by the public authorities. Either or both parties may waive a breach of the terms of the contract and have and allow a performance thereafter. A waiver of the time limit for performance releases any claim to damages for the delay.
I do not agree that there was a reasonable endeavor by the parties to fix fair compensation. The real purpose of the penalty clause was to insure prompt delivery of the safety equipment. Compensation was never contemplated; it was not within the realm of the parties’ thoughts or their dealings. Damages were not contemplated since it was reasonably assured that F.A.A. waivers would be procured to cure any late delivery of equipment.
Under the circumstances here, I cannot agree that the amount stipulated bore a reasonable relation to probable damages. The amount stipulated, $50 per day per truck, was disproportionate to damages supposedly to be anticipated. The only resultant damage or hypothesis of inconvenience is: that if the crash trucks were not delivered on schedule, the airports would somehow be deprived of equipment or services which were previously unavailable to them. Damages, therefore, were a legal phantom. We are not here legally trafficking with essential highways or runways that adversely and vitally affect the public interest. Cf. Dave Gustafson & Co. v. State, 83 S.D. 160, 156 N.W.2d 185 (1968). The United States Supreme Court has held that a contract provision for liquidated damages in case of a breach which can produce no possible damages is, in fact, a penalty and therefore, unenforceable. Priebe & Sons, Inc. v. United States, 332 U.S. 407, 68 S.Ct. 123, 92 L.Ed. 32 (1947).
A $63,950 judgment is being taken from the plaintiff without fault on its part. A technical construction takes the fruits of labor without recompense.

=== CASE 9740251 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:31:00.40736+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE CRAVEN delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal from the trial court’s ruling in a declaratory action suit for recovery of back pay and reinstatement. The trial court held that plaintiff, a deputy sheriff, was improperly suspended and discharged by the sheriff of Champaign County. The court awarded plaintiff money damages for back pay to the date of the illegal discharge. The court denied plaintiff’s claim for reinstatement and back wages for the period subsequent to the date of discharge on the theory of laches. Plaintiff appeals this latter portion of the trial court’s order. Defendants cross-appeal the court’s decision awarding any damages to plaintiff on the theory that plaintiff’s entire claim is barred by laches. Alternatively, defendants cross-appeal for failure to allow setoffs from the amount awarded. Defendants also purport to “cross-appeal” several evidentiary rulings. The events giving rise to this litigation are complex. It is necessary to set out in some detail the history of events. It should be noted that this court has taken judicial notice of its records from two previous appeals so that we have a complete chronology: 1. December 22,1976 Champaign County Merit Commission suspends plaintiff for 180 days to begin January 1,1977. 2. December 29, 1976 Petition for writ of certiorari filed with the Champaign County Circuit Court. 3. December 29,1976 Order for writ of certiorari issued requiring Merit Commission to certify record to the trial court. Stay of enforcement order granted. 4. January 3, 1977 County sheriff files motion to quash writ. 5. January 25,1977 Hearing on motion to quash. Sheriff requests stay order be vacated. Motion denied, stay in full force. 6. January 25,1977 On the same day, sheriff unilaterally suspends plaintiff for an undisclosed period of time. 7. January 26,1977 Plaintiff injured in automobile accident. 8. January 26,1977 Plaintiff files petition for rule to show cause why sheriff should not be held in contempt for violation of writ of certiorari. 9. February 22,1977 Hearing on rule to show cause held. 10. March 10,1977 Memo and opinion of trial court holds that sheriff is not in contempt because writ directed to Merit Commission and not to sheriff. 11. March 11,1977 Notice of interlocutory appeal filed. 12. July 14, 1977 Letter from sheriff to plaintiff requesting information about plaintiff’s physical condition and when plaintiff can return to work. 13. July 26, 1977 Letter from plaintiff to sheriff stating he is ready to perform work but that doctors advise him not to place himself in a situation where he might have to perform work of a combative nature. Plaintiff also requests clarification as to whether suspension was for indefinite period or for the 180 days as ordered by the Commission. 14. August 3, 1977 Sheriff in letter to plaintiff requests medical reports from doctors. Sheriff indicates that order of suspension of January 25, 1977, is self-explanatory. 15. August 29,1977 This court issues a Rule 23 order in case No. 14330 affirming the trial court’s finding that the writ was directed only to the Merit Commission and not to the sheriff. 16. September 2,1977 Plaintiff’s attorney forwards medical reports to sheriff and indicates that a lawsuit would soon be filed against the sheriff to test the legality of the suspension. 17. September 9, 1977 Sheriff informs plaintiff’s attorney by letter that medical reports indicate plaintiff is unable to perform duties. Sheriff states that he will hold position open for three months. 18. September 12,1977 Letter from chairman of Merit Commission to plaintiff’s attorney and members of the Commission indicating that as of that date he has delivered transcript and record to the circuit court as per the December 29, 1976, order. The letter goes on to state that if none of the parties object, the Merit Commission could enter an order indicating that plaintiff had already served the 180 days’ suspension. This suggestion was qualified in two respects. First, this offer was not to be construed as stating that the Commission was making any finding with regard to whether plaintiff was physically able to return to his duties. Second, the Merit Commission was making no decision or suggestion regarding the propriety of the sheriff’s suspension of plaintiff on his own without proceeding through the Merit Commission procedures. 19. September 13,1977 Mandate in No. 14330 issued. 20. May 24, 1978 Sheriff informs Merit Commission by letter that he had notified plaintiff by registered mail that his position was being held open for three months after September 9,1977. Having not heard from plaintiff since that time, sheriff suggests that plaintiff’s employment be terminated. 21. June 7, 1978 Sheriff informs plaintiff’s counsel that plaintiff is terminated as of that date because he failed to provide medical reports within three months saying he could resume his duties. 22. August 23, 1978 Circuit court affirms Merit Commission’s suspension of plaintiff. Writ of certiorari dismissed. 23. September 21, 1978 Notice of appeal from the circuit court’s ruling, case No. 15212, is filed with this court. 24. April 10, 1979 This court, in a Rule 23 order, affirms the circuit court’s judgment affirming the Merit Commission’s suspension of plaintiff. 25. May 3, 1979 In response to plaintiff’s attorney’s request for clarification of plaintiff’s status from the Merit Commission, the chairman of the Commission advises plaintiff’s attorney that the Commission has taken no official action with respect to plaintiff since the 180-day suspension was stayed by the circuit court in December of 1976. Commission acknowledges that they are aware that sheriff gave plaintiff notice of termination in June of 1978 and that this action was taken independently by the sheriff. 26. May 7,1979 Mandate in No. 15212 stayed. 27. May 8,1979 Plaintiff’s attorney’s letter to new sheriff of county indicates that plaintiff is ready, willing, and able to return to work. Letter notes that plaintiff had contacted the sheriff shortly after he took office to inquire about his status and advised sheriff that purported discharge of plaintiff was illegal. Letter concluded that suit would be filed within five days if plaintiff was not reinstated. 28. May 16, 1979 New sheriff indicates in letter to plaintiff’s attorney that plaintiff would not be automatically reinstated. New sheriff left open option of reemployment through ordinary means as positions became available. 29. May 24, 1979 Plaintiff files complaint for declaratory and supplemental relief which is this cause of action. 30. June 5,1979 Petition for leave to appeal in No. 15212 filed with supreme court (No. 52905). 31. October 1, 1979 Supreme court denies leave to appeal in No. 15212. 32. October 29,1979 Mandate in No. 15212 issued. 33. January 10, 1980 Bench trial held in this case. 34. March 26,1980 Order of trial court in this case entered. 35. April 8, 1980 Plaintiff files notice of appeal. 36. April 24, 1980 Notice of cross-appeal filed. Plaintiff’s complaint seeks a declaration of rights as to his status as a deputy sheriff. Plaintiff seeks back pay and reinstatement on the basis that • the suspension and subsequent purported discharge of plaintiff by the sheriff were without legal authority. Defendants contend that laches apply. They assert that any cause of action the plaintiff had against the sheriff by reason of his actions arose when the sheriff wrote a letter to plaintiff in September of 1977 indicating that he would hold plaintiff’s job open for three months. The lapse of time between that correspondence and this lawsuit, filed in May of 1979, is, in defendants’ opinion, prejudicial and should bar relief. Plaintiff counters that laches should not be applied because subsequent to his suspension by the Merit Commission he has been exhausting his judicial and administrative remedies. This process concluded, in plaintiff’s opinion, with the filing of this court’s Rule 23 order in April of 1979, affirming the Merit Commission’s suspension. Plaintiff argues that he did not delay in filing this lawsuit. This suit was filed a little more than one month later. The trial court concluded that the sheriff’s suspension and discharge of plaintiff were in violation of the rules and regulations of the Merit Commission and in excess of his legal authority. The court held that under the Merit Commission rules, the sheriff could not terminate the plaintiff for any reason. The court awarded plaintiff back pay from the period of January 25,1977, the date of the sheriff’s suspension, to June 1978, the date of the sheriff’s purported discharge of plaintiff. The trial court, however, barred plaintiff’s claims for salary subsequent to June 1978 on a theory of laches. The trial court held that the sheriff’s termination of plaintiff’s employment, though admittedly illegal, was the act which constituted prejudice to the defendants for the purpose of applying laches. In addition, defendants argue that notwithstanding the applicability of laches, plaintiff by his inaction has impliedly resigned or abandoned his position as deputy sheriff.  It is well established that an officer or employee unlawfully suspended is entitled to recover his salary loss during the period of suspension where the suspending officer is without authority, or having power, exerts it in a manner in contravention of statute. It is no defense that the employee has not done the work, for if the suspension is unlawful, the suspension is a mere forced vacation for which the employee must be paid as if he had never been suspended. (Chriswell v. Rosewell (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 320, 388 N.E.2d 175.) As an employee, plaintiff was entitled to his salary unless and until he was lawfully suspended or discharged. Plaintiff has a clear legal right to compensation absent the establishment of an affirmative defense.  The doctrine of laches is available to an employer sued by a discharged public employee. (People ex rel. Casey v. Health & Hospitals Governing Com. (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 108, 370 N.E.2d 499.) It is immaterial whether a dismissal or suspension is in conformity with the statute if the plaintiff is guilty of laches or is estopped by his conduct. Chriswell.  The defense of laches, which is dependent upon the facts of each case, has been defined as such neglect or omission to assert a right, taken in conjunction with a lapse of time of more or less duration and other circumstances causing prejudice to an adverse party, as will operate to bar relief in equity. (Slatin’s Properties, Inc. v. Hassler (1972), 53 Ill. 2d 325, 291 N.E.2d 641.) A defendant must show prejudice or hardship rather than a mere passage of time for the defense of laches to apply. If the defendant is not injured by the delay, then plaintiff is not guilty of laches. Harper v. City Mutual Insurance Co. (1978), 67 Ill. App. 3d 694, 385 N.E.2d 75; Chriswell; Casey.  We hold under the facts present in this record that plaintiff is not guilty of laches. Plaintiff has been in constant litigation concerning the propriety of the Merit Commission’s suspension since 1977. That appeal process concluded little more than one month before the filing of the instant lawsuit. Even though the sheriff’s action and the Merit Commission’s suspension are not the same for purposes of the granting of relief, the operative facts upon which they rely are essentially identical. The record demonstrates that the sheriff’s suspension is inexorably entangled with the Merit Commission’s suspension. This is demonstrated by the fact that the sheriff’s suspension, under defendant’s sworn statement, was pursuant to the Merit Commission’s suspension order and was of a duration identical to that set by the Merit Commission. We hold that under the facts of this case, plaintiff’s delay in filing this lawsuit was reasonably explained by the fact that he was awaiting the outcome of prior litigation. Laches should also not have been applied because defendant failed to show prejudice. The trial court held that the sheriff’s illegal termination of plaintiff’s employment was the act constituting prejudice to the defendants. We disagree. The sheriff’s suspension order of January 1977 and his letter unilaterally terminating plaintiff’s employment are without legal authority and therefore void. The administrative procedures, rules and regulations of the Champaign County Sheriff’s Department Merit Commission provide the exclusive means by which disciplinary measures may be exacted by the sheriff of the county. A sheriff may suspend without filing charges with the Commission for any reasonable period not to exceed a total of 30 days within a 12-month period. Suspensions in excess of 30 days may only be made after charges against the member have been filed with the Commission. No other disciplinary measures may be taken by the sheriff except by order of the Commission.  It is unquestioned that the sheriff followed none of the above regulations when he unilaterally suspended and subsequently terminated plaintiff’s employment. The sheriff’s failure to comply with procedural rules of the Merit Commission is a jurisdictional question which renders his actions void. Edwards v. City of Marion (1970), 130 Ill. App. 2d 895, 266 N.E.2d 491; Kozsdiy v. O’Fallon Board of Fire & Police Commissioners (1975), 31 Ill. App. 3d 173, 334 N.E.2d 325.  Laches is an equitable doctrine which requires that the party who seeks equity must do equity. We hold that defendants cannot have been prejudiced by reason of their commission of an unauthorized illegal act. Equity will not permit defendants to justify one improper unauthorized act by commission of yet another. One who has defrauded his adversary to his injury in the subject matter of the action will not be heard to assert a right in equity. See Mills v. Susanka (1946), 394 Ill. 439,68 N.E.2d 904; Keessen v. Zarattini (1970), 119 Ill. App. 2d 284, 256 N.E.2d 377.  Since the illegal discharge was not a prejudicial act to defendants, they have failed to show how they were prejudiced and laches should not have been applied. The present sheriff of Champaign County testified that even though plaintiff was allegedly terminated in 1978, a replacement for him was not hired until June of 1979, a month after plaintiff filed this suit for declaratory judgment.  Defendants’ reliance on People ex rel. Sullivan v. Smith (1971), 133 Ill. App. 2d 218, 272 N.E.2d 755, for the proposition that cases of reinstatement after a period of time are inherently prejudicial to the governmental body and prejudice need not be specifically proved, is misplaced. This holding is in derogation of the clear weight of authority to the contrary that prejudice is a necessary element of laches which must be proved. Moreover, neither the First District nor our supreme court has subsequently adopted the rationale of Sullivan. We adopt the generally accepted rule that defendants must demonstrate prejudice before laches will be applied. People ex rel. Casey v. Health & Hospitals Governing Com. (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 108, 370 N.E.2d 499; Chriswell v. Rosewell (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 320, 388 N.E.2d 175.  We also reject defendants’ mutually exclusive claim that plaintiff has impliedly resigned or abandoned his position as the deputy sheriff because he did not respond to the sheriff’s request to get together and plan for plaintiff’s return to work following the unauthorized suspension. While one may impliedly resign or abandon a particular office of public employment, and though the two concepts are not identical, effective resignation or abandonment requires an intention to relinquish the employment accompanied by an unequivocal act of relinquishment. (City of Chicago ex rel. Martin-Trigona v. O’Malley (1978), 69 Ill. 2d 474, 372 N.E.2d 671.) We hold that defendants have not demonstrated that plaintiff had any intention of relinquishing his position as the deputy sheriff. Plaintiff’s continuous extended litigation of this issue over the past three years demonstrates that plaintiff did not intend to dissolve his relationship with the Champaign County Sheriff’s Department.  Since the suspension and termination were improper and defendants have failed to prove any affirmative defense, plaintiff is lawfully entitled to his salary. (Zook v. Hedrick (1977), 52 Ill. App. 3d 736, 367 N.E.2d 1356.) We affirm that part of the trial court’s order granting plaintiff his salary to the date of termination. We reverse that portion of the trial court’s order denying plaintiff’s salary subsequent to that date and return the case to the trial court for trial on the issue of damages. Though plaintiff is entitled to his lawful salary subsequent to January 25, 1977, the date he was suspended, that award is subject to all applicable setoffs to which defendants are legally entitled. For this reason we also reverse that portion of the trial court’s order denying setoffs to the amount actually awarded by the trial court. Finally, we make no finding with regard to whether plaintiff is entitled to reinstatement as a deputy sheriff. The record before us does not contain sufficient evidence to make such a determination. We remand to the circuit court for such a determination. Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded with directions. TRAPP, P. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740294 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:03.79561+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The defendant, Willie Kirtdoll, appeals his convictions of the crimes of rape *239(MCLA 750.520; MSA 28.788) and robbery armed (MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797).
At the trial a physician other than the treating physician was permitted to testify, over objection, from a hospital record that the victim was seen at the emergency room of the hospital at 10:53 p.m. on April 18, 1967, a little over an hour after the crime was alleged to have been committed, and that the results of the examination showed sperm.
In People v Lewis, 294 Mich 684, 688 (1940), the Michigan Supreme Court held that the business record exception (now MCLA 600.2146; MSA 27A.2146) to the hearsay rule is inapplicable in criminal cases on the ground that a contrary rule would violate the constitutional right of confrontation guaranteed persons accused of crime.
In People v Gauthier, 28 Mich App 318, 321-322 (1970), Judge Gillis of this Court examined the Lewis rule and stated:
"We proceed here on the assumption that Justice Wiest’s declaration is decisionally binding on this Court and that the Supreme Court did not intend its holding in Lewis to be limited to the facts of the case. However, on this appeal the people contend, and we agree, that Lewis was incorrectly decided. Our research leads us to the view that Lewis’ general prohibition against the use of business record hearsay in criminal cases rests upon an unsound—if indeed any—analysis of the scope of the confrontation clause. We write in the hope that the Lewis rule will, on an appropriate record, be re-examined by its creating tribunal.”
The Michigan Supreme Court did not, however, accept the invitation extended to it to reconsider Lewis. Leave to appeal was denied in People v Gauthier, 384 Mich 812 (1971).
In Gauthier, we concluded that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. In this case *240we could not properly affirm the defendant’s conviction on that basis.
The only evidence implicating the defendant was the testimony of the victim. The defendant took the stand and denied that he had committed the crimes charged against him. The evidence that shortly after the victim returned to her home she complained that she had been raped, and that a medical examination showed evidence of sexual intercourse tended to strengthen her testimony.
The issue of guilt or innocence turned entirely on the credibility of the witnesses. Especially where, as here, the only testimony establishing the commission of the crime is the testimony of the victim, we could not properly declare a belief beyond a reasonable doubt that the inadmissible evidence here introduced did not affect the result. See People v Moore, 39 Mich App 329, 336 (1972).
Although the inadmissible evidence did not bear on the issue of the defendant’s guilt or innocence of the charge of armed robbery, the crucial question was the credibility of the complaining witness —whether her testimony identifying the defendant as her assailant was to be believed. The introduction of the inadmissible evidence, which tended to strengthen her testimony, tainted the conviction of armed robbery as well as the conviction of rape.
Without intimating an opinion whether Gau-thier expresses a sound view of the matter, this panel again wishes to highlight the importance of the question dealt with in Lewis and Gauthier. The question recurs with considerable frequency and, therefore, it is a matter of importance to the jurisprudence. Reconsideration of Lewis by the Supreme Court in an appropriate case would be desirable.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
Levin and Borradaile, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9740371 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:30.135504+00 ===

Gehl, J.
The plaintiff contends and the trial court agreed that, because the defense relied upon is based upon an inadmissible oral agreement, the prior and contemporaneous verbal agreements set forth in defendant’s pleadings are merged in the written contract evidenced by the notes, and that parol evidence of such agreements is not admissible to vary or contradict its terms, he was entitled to summary judgment.
As appears from the foregoing statement of facts, the notes were simple in form without any reference to any collateral or extraneous agreement. Particularly, they do not on their face contain any reference to the alleged agreement that the stock of the Borg Company was to be held as security for their payment. To prove such agreement requires plaintiff to establish its existence by parol and thereby open the door to parol proof of the entire oral contemporaneous agreement.
“Where one party has been permitted to introduce extrinsic evidence of the facts and circumstances leading up to, and connected with, the execution of a written contract, the other party may introduce evidence as to the same matters notwithstanding such evidence tends to vary or contradict the writing.” 20 Am. Jur., Evidence, p. 1013, sec. 1159.
Plaintiff has no means of establishing that he has possession of the stock certificates under an agreement to hold *194them as collateral to the notes except by resorting to the oral agreement. It would be an unjust rule, contrary to all principles of equity, to permit plaintiff to take advantage of that part of the oral agreement under which, he alleges, he holds the certificates as collateral to the notes, and to repudiate those parts of the same agreement which, defendant alleges, define the circumstances under which the notes and the certificates are held by plaintiff.
Plaintiff contends that by admitting in his pleadings that the stock certificates were agreed to be held as collateral security for the notes defendant has waived his right to prove the rest of the oral agreement. That might be true if the admissions were inconsistent or conflicting with defendant’s offer. They are not only consistent but are also in accord with, and a part of the defendant’s, alleged defense.
Thus, it appears that there were factual issues presented by the pleadings. Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment should therefore have been denied. Prime Mfg. Co. v. A. F. Gallun & Sons Corp. 229 Wis. 348, 281 N. W. 697.
There is another reason why the motion for summary judgment should have been denied. The facts pleaded in the counterclaims and the plaintiff’s reply thereto present substantial issues of fact. Plaintiff contends that defendant has not been prejudiced by the court’s failure to try the issues raised by the counterclaims; that he can still pursue the remedy sought to be enforced thereby. It has been the general practice in the courts of this state to dispose at one trial of all of the issues made by the pleadings. There are many sound reasons for following the practice, reasons which concern the interests of both the public and the litigants.
“. . . the piecemeal trial of separable issues of fact, so as to have separate trials and interlocutory adjudications as to such separable issues, even though there is thereby a substantial disposal of the merits, should be undertaken only *194awith great caution, even when requested upon stipulations by the parties, so as to avoid complicating and delaying the disposition of litigation and unduly increasing the cost and expense thereof to all concerned.” Cooper v. Commercial Casualty Ins. Co. 209 Wis. 314, 318, 245 N. W. 154.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed, and cause remanded for further proceedings according to law.

=== CASE 9740372 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:30.139418+00 ===

The following opinion was filed February 5, 1952:
Gehl, J.
(on motion for rehearing). We find nothing in plaintiff’s brief to convince us that we were wrong in determining that where one sues upon a written instrument and reaches beyond the writing for parol evidence of a contemporary arrangement to support a demand for relief which the terms of the paper do not afford him the court should receive such of the evidence as supports his claim and should not deny to the other party the right to establish other terms of the parol arrangement. Had the plaintiff brought a simple action at law for judgment upon the note everything which he said in his original brief and urges in that filed on this motion would apply, unless, of course, the defendant had presented a case for the application of sec. 116.20, Stats., or one within the other exceptions to the parol-evidence rule.
To reach our conclusion it is not necessary that we declare a new exception to the parol-evidence rule. Our opinion should not be construed as a declaration of one or as an abandonment of the rule that parol evidence may be introduced only with respect to aspects of the agreement which are not expressly covered by the writing, but not in contradiction of those terms of the agreement specifically stated in the writing. It should be read and considered only in connection with the facts here involved. Vinograd v. Travelers Protective Asso. 217 Wis. 316, 258 N. W. 787.
*194bWe might, probably we should, have made it more clear that we were in fact disposing of the question upon the doctrine of waiver. To admit defendant’s testimony as to the alleged contemporary oral arrangement as original testimony would probably be improper. But to permit plaintiff to give his version of a part of the arrangement gathered from conversation between the parties and to deny the defendant the privilege of giving his version of the entire oral arrangement would be manifestly unfair.
Our position might also have been made more clear had we anticipated plaintiff’s contention now made that “the notes and the pledge are wholly separate transactions. The notes are evidence of a debt. The pledge is a method of securing payment, and evidence or pleading as to one transaction cannot open the door to the admission of evidence to the other.” The answer to that contention lies in the fact that plaintiff seeks to enforce a pledge the terms of which are not contained in the note. It is he, not the defendant, who first ventured into “the other” oral transaction for parol proof to sustain his claim that it was agreed that the stock certificates were held by him as security for the debt evidenced by the notes. He asks the court to enforce the terms of the other transaction solely upon his offer to prove that to secure the payment of the notes defendant pledged the certificates and to deny to defendant the right to prove the rest of that transaction. We are asked to ignore the rule that when one party gives in evidence one part of a conversation with respect to a transaction the other party may give the whole thereof. Estate of Gilbert, 167 Wis. 291, 166 N. W. 442, 167 N. W. 447; Anderson v. Arpin Hardwood Lumber Co. 131 Wis. 34, 110 N. W. 788; 2 Jones, Evidence (2d ed.), p. 1340, sec. 715.
Nemo vinum habere atque bibere potest.
By the Court. — Motion for rehearing denied with costs.

=== CASE 2223116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.954205+00 ===

260 Wis. 459 (1952)
BAST, Respondent,
vs.
MARSDEN, Appellant.[*]
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
December 6, 1951.
January 8, 1952.
*460 For the appellant there were briefs by Toebaas, Hart, Kraege & Jackman and Carl Flom, all of Madison, and oral argument by Mr. W. L. Jackman and Mr. Flom.
For the respondent there was a brief by Curkeet & Curkeet of Madison, and oral argument by William R. Curkeet, Sr., and William R. Curkeet, Jr.
FRITZ, C. J.
In 1943 the defendant, Dr. Wendell H. Marsden, treated the plaintiff, Louis W. Bast, for an injury to his right arm, and on May 7, 1949, Bast consulted Marsden with a complaint that the arm was stiff and sore. An X ray taken showed an exostosis, which is a bony growth or spur that juts out from the normal contour of a bone and can occur anywhere in a bone where there is a bony irritation. It was the result of plaintiff's occupation and his using a hammer and saw, and it disturbed the normal function of plaintiff's arm.
On May 20, 1949, Marsden operated on the arm to remove the exostosis. In the course of the operation, Marsden, after locating the position of the exostosis by use of the X ray, made an incision just through the skin with the sharp edge of the scalpel, and he found an exostosis of the right radius with several spurs about one inch below the head of the radius and elevated about one-fourth inch above the medial border of the radius and extending along the radius about *461 one inch. Marsden testified that without using the sharp edge of the scalpel he separated the muscles immediately beneath the skin without disturbing their structure at all; that the first muscle it was necessary to disturb structurally was the supinator, located directly over the exostosis, and this muscle was separated in the direction of its fibers, which was at right angles to the incision, to secure exposure of the exostosis; and that said fibers were not cut, but were separated with the blunt end of the scalpel, so as to avoid disturbing the function of the muscle as little as possible.
Marsden testified he was aware of the usual position of the deep radial nerve as located in the muscle belly of the supinator muscle and thus planned the operation; that the radial nerve comes down the humerus and ends near the elbow by dividing into two branches; one, a sensory branch to the skin, and the other, a motor nerve or muscular branch known as the posterior interosseous; that just below the elbow the posterior interosseous branch goes through the supinator muscle and his intention was to avoid exposing the deep radial nerve if possible, and if it came in his view, to retract it and stay away from it; and that if it had been in the cleavage of the supinator muscle it would have been in Marsden's field of view and he would have seen it; but he did not see it. Marsden and several physicians testified that the radial nerve was about one-quarter inch in diameter and slightly flattened. Marsden testified the absence of the nerve from his view, although he was watching for it, as he dissected through the supinator muscle, indicated to him that the nerve was not in the path of the operation.
During the operation Marsden did not know that the deep branch of the radial nerve had been injured and nothing that occurred during the operation led him to believe that it had been injured; and when he did not see the nerve in the course of the operation he assumed it was retracted with the portion *462 of the supinator muscle which was held aside by retractors; and that had it been in its normal position it was his opinion that it would have been retracted as he planned the operation. Dr. Grumke assisted Marsden by holding the retractors in the position Marsden placed them, but Grumke was not so situated that he could see in the wound or see the exostosis.
The day after the operation there was swelling at the site of the operation which persisted for a week and there was weakness of plaintiff's hand which Marsden attributed to the swelling and trauma incident to the operation. When that weakness persisted Marsden did not conclude the nerve had been severed, but believed it was due to temporary swelling or trauma or bruising to the nerve.
In July, 1949, plaintiff was examined by Doctor Erickson, a neurosurgeon, and three physicians. Erickson diagnosed plaintiff's trouble as an injury to the interosseous (deep) branch of the radial nerve, which supplies the muscles which extend the fingers and wrist; and he operated on plaintiff on February 23, 1950, for the purpose of exploring that nerve. He found the nerve was interrupted and sutured the ends. The previous scar was excised and the scar tissue was followed down between the muscles running down from the region of the elbow. This scar tissue was removed to expose the ends of the posterior interosseous nerve, down to the supinator brevis muscle. By further dissection the lower portion of the nerve was found but not in its usual position, and was found to be completely interrupted. There were two ends with scar tissue between them, and on the upper portion of the nerve there was a neuroma which may result from injury of various sorts. The neuroma was cut off by Erickson and the nerve ends were sutured, and an X ray shows the nerve is still together.
At the conclusion of the trial the jury found: (1) That Marsden was causally negligent as to the lookout he kept for the radial nerve; but (2) that he was not negligent with *463 respect to the manner in which he used his instruments during the operation he performed. Upon the jury's finding that Marsden was causally negligent as to the lookout he kept for the radial nerve, the court entered judgment against the defendant for the plaintiff's recovery of the damages assessed by the jury.
There were conflicts in the testimony of the physicians as to whether or not in their opinion Marsden used such care and skill as a competent physician and surgeon in Marsden's position would ordinarily use. In his argument to the jury, the defendant's attorney stated: "Dr. Erickson says, and I believe honestly, that the nerve was divided when he found it. Now, there is no question about it and we don't question it." On the trial there was ample evidence which the jury could consider credible and sufficient to warrant a finding that the radial nerve in question was severed by an incision made by the defendant, and that with the exercise of due care by him the particular cleavage plane he dissected through the nerve would be in his field of vision.
There was credible evidence that when performing an operation in the vicinity of such larger nerves, a physician should be more careful in his dissection so that if such nerves appear in sight, he can see and recognize them, and stay away from them. Dr. Erickson testified that in the area in which he subsequently operated, the radial nerve was readily distinguishable from surrounding tissue and that a doctor should be able to recognize that nerve. And the defendant testified that the interosseous branch of the radial nerve should be readily visible if exposed; that it is a little clearer and shinier than other tissues; and that you would expect to be able to distinguish nerve tissue from other tissue surrounding it; that it is clear and shiny.
Consequently, in view of Dr. Marsden's failure to see the radial nerve  which is the specific act of causal negligence found by the jury  although, as he testified, he knew that *464 it was in the area in which he was operating and that his vision was not obscured by blood and the nerve would be readily distinguishable from the surrounding tissues; and in view of the evidence that after Dr. Marsden had operated, Dr. Erickson found the nerve in the scar tissue of Dr. Marsden's operation, and in two pieces after the fact of its severance was proven, there was clearly warranted the jury's verdict and the judgment entered in this action.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Motion for rehearing denied, with $25 costs, on March 4, 1952.

=== CASE 2223117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.983135+00 ===

260 Wis. 336 (1951)
HOREL, Appellant,
vs.
HOREL, Respondent.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
December 3, 1951.
January 8, 1952.
*338 For the appellant there were briefs by Jenkins, Nason & Jenkins of Stevens Point, and oral argument by Lyle N. Jenkins.
For the respondent there was a brief by Fisher, Reinholdt & Peickert of Stevens Point, and oral argument by Clifford W. Peickert.
BROADFOOT, J.
Upon this appeal the plaintiff attacks only that part of the judgment which provides for the division of property and the amount of support money and alimony that he is ordered to pay by the judgment, claiming each is excessive.
The plaintiff, a veterinarian, and his wife moved to Stevens Point in 1938. In 1940 the parties purchased a home in said city, at 1242 Church street. Later the plaintiff built a small animal hospital upon the rear of the lot upon which the home is located. Record title to said real estate was in the name of both parties as joint tenants. The home was occupied by the parties until plaintiff moved therefrom prior to commencing this action for divorce.
The judgment provided that the real estate and the home thereon should remain in the names of the parties as joint tenants, but awarded the small animal hospital to the plaintiff. The judgment further provided that the defendant might occupy said dwelling house and the real estate so long as she desired, upon condition that she pay all taxes and insurance and maintain said property during her occupancy thereof. The judgment further directed the plaintiff to execute a mortgage upon his interest in said real estate to secure said payments of alimony and support money, and further provided that should it become necessary or desirable in the future to sell said real estate, either of the parties may apply to the court for an order with respect thereto.
*339 The house and the real estate were valued at the sum of $10,000 and the small animal hospital was valued at $2,500. The wife was also awarded the household furnishings valued at $4,250, three insurance policies with a cash surrender value of $1,731, and $5,752 in cash. The plaintiff was awarded $2,378 in cash, his accounts receivable valued at $3,500, an automobile and a jeep valued at $2,850, his veterinary equipment and supplies valued at $1,000, a life insurance policy with a cash value of $412, and $5,750 in government savings bonds. The bonds, however, were delivered to the clerk of court as security for the payments of alimony and support money. The plaintiff was directed to pay debts and obligations of the parties amounting to $1,432.15. The property of the parties, after provision for the debts, amounted to $38,690.85.
In cases where a divorce is granted to the wife the statute (sec. 247.26) provides for the division and distribution of the estate, both real and personal, of the husband and so much of the estate of the wife as shall be derived from the husband, and that title to the property shall be transferred accordingly. There should be an actual division wherever possible, and the provision of the judgment before us as to the real estate with the home and small animal hospital thereon is not a practical or equitable division.
The right of the defendant to occupy the home and real estate for an undetermined period could greatly reduce the plaintiff's interest therein. Further, the value of the small animal hospital could be greatly diminished if it should become necessary for the plaintiff to move the same from the real estate. Because of the attitude of the parties toward each other following the divorce many disputes could arise between them as to a division of taxes and with respect to maintenance of the property. The judgment should be modified to award the house and the real estate to the plaintiff, because of the location of the small animal hospital. The *340 judgment should be further modified to provide that the defendant and the children may occupy the house under the same terms as provided in the judgment for a period not exceeding two years, and that the plaintiff pay to the defendant the sum of $5,000 for her interest in said real estate within thirty days after she vacates the same, and that said payment of $5,000 constitute a first lien upon said real estate until paid. The judgment should be further modified to provide that the United States government savings bonds be delivered to the plaintiff so that he will be enabled to make such payment at the time the defendant vacates said premises. Future payments of support money and alimony may be made a lien upon said premises within the discretion of the county judge.
With these changes, the award to the defendant will amount to something more than forty-three per cent of their property. It has been frequently stated by this court that the division of property in divorce cases is a matter peculiarly within the discretion of the trial court, and that its determination must prevail in the absence of some mistake or error respecting the facts upon which it rests which would amount to an abuse of discretion. Voegeli v. Voegeli, 204 Wis. 363, 236 N. W. 123; Littig v. Littig, 229 Wis. 430, 282 N. W. 547; Quigley v. Quigley, 244 Wis. 94, 11 N. W. (2d) 638. The percentage of the property awarded to the defendant seems high, but under all the circumstances it cannot be said to be an abuse of discretion.
The plaintiff contends that his net earnings amount to approximately $5,000 per year, and that the awards for alimony and support money are excessive. Upon the trial the defendant was able to show that all of the plaintiff's income was not reflected upon his books. The trial court, in view of this testimony, determined his annual income from a computation of his net worth after allowing for the expense of supporting the family. The amount of alimony *341 and support money to be paid by a husband to his divorced wife is also a matter peculiarly within the discretion of the trial court. The order of February 15, 1951, denying the plaintiff's petition for a reduction of alimony and support payments was appealed from in part because the trial judge did not call in another judge to hear the matter after having mentioned that he would do so. A different county judge has taken office in Portage county and upon proper showing the plaintiff can have the matter passed upon by a different judge.
The order of November 29, 1950, required the plaintiff to pay family bills aggregating $121.78. The only argument against it is that it was additionally burdensome. From the record we cannot say that this was an abuse of judicial discretion.
By the Court.The orders appealed from are affirmed. The judgment will be modified in conformity with this opinion, and as so modified it is affirmed.

=== CASE 9739971 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:54.531937+00 ===

SCHUDSON, J.
¶ 8. (concurring). I agree with the majority opinion, with one small exception. The majority indicates that "[w]e do not consider an argument mentioned only in a footnote to be adequately raised or preserved for appellate review." See Majority at ¶ 6 n.4 (quoted sources omitted). In my estimation, that is not quite correct and could be read to preclude consideration of important, footnoted arguments.
¶ 9. For various reasons, appellate briefs sometimes relegate arguments to footnotes. On some of those occasions, however, the footnote adequately develops the argument and, in some appeals, the opposing party responds. It has always been my impression that when issues have been adequately developed, we may address them, regardless of whether the parties' discussions appear in the footnotes or main texts of their briefs.
¶ 10. We should not preclude appellate review of an argument merely because the argument is "mentioned only in a footnote," unless its mere mention means that the argument has not been adequately developed. Our inquiry should focus on the argument's merits, not its location in the briefs. And, interestingly enough, in this appeal, while the majority indicates that "[w]e do not consider an argument mentioned only *342in a footnote," it goes on to do so, deciding the issue in the very next sentence. See Majority at ¶ 6 n.4.
¶ 11. Accordingly, I respectfully concur.

=== CASE 9739972 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:55.301339+00 ===

Markman, J.
Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of first-degree felony murder, MCL 750.316(l)(b); MSA 28.548(l)(b), and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony (felony-firearm), MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2).1 The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court’s reversal of defendant’s convictions, agreeing that defendant had been denied the effective assistance of counsel. The Court of Appeals also found that the admission of testimony regarding statements made by defendant to a forensic psychologist in contemplation of interposing an insanity defense was error requiring reversal. We hold that any error stemming from the introduction of defendant’s statements to the forensic psychologist was harmless and that defendant was not denied his constitutional right to the effective assistance of *285counsel. Consequently, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
i
Defendant’s convictions arose from events that occurred sometime around 10:30 P.M. on the night of November 29, 1993, when Steve Burge was shot , in the face and doused with gasoline at the front door of a residence he shared with Margo DeVita (now known as Margo McPherson) and her two children. Margo2 testified that she had temporarily cohabited with defendant on two prior occasions under circumstances that she described as platonic. However, during the second of these periods, which lasted about a month, defendant began making unwelcome sexual overtures, and personal items went missing from Margo’s bedroom. After an incident when defendant tried to imprison Margo in his house, she moved in with her mother until she was able to lease a unit in a duplex house. Steve, Margo’s boyfriend, later moved in with her. In the months before the killing, Margo observed defendant drive past this house on numerous occasions, and, once, defendant stopped in and offered to pay Margo’s rent if Steve would move out.
Margo testified that on the night of November 29, 1993, someone kicked the front door open while she was half-asleep on the couch and Steve was watching football on television. Margo ran to her children in another room, and later came out to find Steve stum*286bling back through the front door, dripping with gasoline and bleeding profusely from a gunshot wound to the cheek. Through the window, Margo saw a man of defendant’s build, wearing a mask and light colored surgical gloves, struggle with her neighbor, Danny Parenteau, and then run away. After Steve was transported to the hospital, Margo observed an unfamiliar hat with hair attached to it in her living room, a gas can in front of her house, and a mask near the gas can. She reported to the police her suspicions that defendant was the assailant.
Danny Parenteau testified that on the night in question, he was watching football on television when he heard a gunshot from the house across the street. Danny ran outside and observed Steve and another man struggling inside the front door of Steve’s house. Steve forced the other man out of the house, and, when Danny approached to assist, he noted that Steve was covered with blood. As Steve collapsed, he shoved the other man away. Danny realized that this other man, who had also fallen to the ground, was armed with a gun, so Danny seized this man’s wrist and called to his brother, Russell, for help. The man smelled of gasoline, was wearing white, see-through gloves, and fired off several shots that Danny was able to direct away from himself. Russell came to help, but took cover behind a tree when the assailant shot toward him. As this was occurring, Danny observed Steve get back up, while holding his throat, and make it through his front door before again collapsing.
Danny tried to drag or carry the armed man, but when Danny stumbled and lost his grip, he ran for cover for fear of being shot. The man was not wean *287ing a mask at this point and he ran to a car, which Danny recognized as one that he had observed cruise past Margo’s house on four or five occasions. Danny was able to identify defendant at a police lineup as the man with whom he had struggled. Russell Parenteau, who lived with Danny, corroborated his brother’s account and added that the assailant ran to a car that was parked next to the home of another neighbor, John Talarico.
John Talarico testified that he lived next door to Steve and Margo and that, on the night in question, he heard gunshots just after he got out of the shower, so he looked out his window and saw a gunman wrestle with Danny and shoot toward Russell. From a distance of fifty feet, John observed the gunman’s face and identified him as defendant. Defendant departed in a car that John recognized as one that he had observed cruise slowly by on several occasions, once with its lights out.
Donald Lumm, a neighbor who lived around the comer from Margo and Steve, testified that on the night of November 29, 1993, he was in his kitchen when he heard several shots. Donald then heard squealing tires and, through his kitchen window, saw a vehicle “take off really quick.” Donald identified a photograph of defendant’s car as the one he saw that night.
Steve died from what was determined to be a single gunshot wound to the right side of his jaw, with the bullet traveling down through his neck. From the scene, the police recovered: a white towel soaked in gasoline, a hat with a wig sewn to it, several .38 caliber bullet casings, a mask found between the sidewalk and curb, and a fingertip from a “rubber” glove. *288The front screen door was broken outward and covered with blood, but there was no visible damage to the interior door. There was also blood outside the house, around the door area and on the grass. A subsequent search of defendant’s house turned up a large quantity of the type of gloves used by meat packers.3 Hairs were retrieved from the mask and hat, which were later determined to be similar in all respects to a sample of defendant’s hair. Fingerprints recovered from tape attached to the mask were later determined to be those of defendant.
The police began staking out defendant’s house on the night of the killing, and defendant was stopped in his automobile and taken into custody at 7:30 A.M. the following morning. The officers detected a strong smell of gasoline from defendant’s vehicle and hat. After an attempted arraignment, where there was some discussion regarding count five in the multiple count warrant, defendant was overheard to make the following unsolicited statement: “They count five. They say I killed five people. I only kill one. Why do they count five now?”
Defendant, whose native language is Arabic, testified at trial through an interpreter, although he frequently answered questions in English. His testimony described his relationship with Margo, during the twelve days she first lived with him as that of a husband and wife, just as it was when she again stayed with him. Margo allegedly began stealing from defendant and only moved out the second time after defendant assured her that he would be her boyfriend and would come to visit her everyday and pay the *289rent. However, when defendant came over after working late one night, he found Margo in the company of “John” and “Don.” The three of them were drunk and Margo was wearing only a slip. After that, defendant stopped going to Margo’s house.
According to defendant, around 3:00 P.M. on the day of the incident, Margo came to defendant’s home and demanded that he sign over his house, and car to her. She also commanded him to give her all the money he had in the bank, and to vacate the house, taking only his clothes, but leaving the furniture. Defendant refused, so Margo took his car. She returned later, along with her children, in a different car, claiming that defendant’s car was broken and that Steve had taken it to get it fixed. Margo drove defendant to her house, and he played with Margo’s children while waiting for Steve to return with defendant’s car. Margo’s daughter brought a mask into the room and defendant and the children played with it.
The events that defendant next described are somewhat muddled by the circumstances that gave rise to the trial court and the Court of Appeals determinations that defendant was denied the effective assistance of counsel. Specifically, defense counsel failed to clarify who defendant was identifying as his story unfolded. Defendant mispronounced certain names, and the interpreter made certain incorrect translations of what defendant said. However, as it was told to the jury, somebody named “Cherry” arrived, then within ten minutes Steve came home and denied being in possession of defendant’s car. Margo then said that John had defendant’s car. Then John, Jim, and “Rose” (and apparently “Don”) entered the residence, with John and “Don” being armed with what *290the inteipreter described as “a small gunshot, black” and a shotgun. These men ordered defendant to pay a $3000 drug debt owed by Margo, and defendant tried to talk them into postponing payment until the next day. John ordered defendant to sign a piece of paper, but defendant crushed it and threw it back in John’s face.
The juiy heard that John drew his gun while Margo yelled “kill him outside.” Steve tried to grab John’s hand, and defendant began fistfighting with “Jimmy.” Defendant’s blows caused Jimmy to bleed and run away, so defendant then engaged “Rose” in a fight that began inside and continued outside on the concrete. Defendant heard a shot and then “Cherry” came out and said “John kill Steve.” Then John emerged from the house holding a black gun that had a nine-shot capacity. John ran “to Don Andrews,” then “Don” came out of the house and tried to hit defendant with his shotgun, so defendant began fighting “Don” and “Rose” simultaneously. Defendant disabled “Don” with a kick between the legs, then made his way down the street where he found his car and effected an escape.
Defendant then recounted that he went home and had a beer. Feeling hungry, he went out for a kabob, and stopped at a store. After returning home, he drank a second beer, then slept until it was time to get up for work. He was stopped and arrested on his way to work the next morning.
Although defendant did not raise insanity as a defense at trial, he was cross-examined, over a defense objection to inadequate foundation, regarding whether he gave a version of the relevant events to Dr. Mae Keller, a clinical psychologist who had interviewed him pursuant to a notice that he intended to *291interpose an insanity defense. Defendant was further questioned regarding a different version that he had supposedly given to Keller. Keller was then permitted to testify, over a defense objection on the basis of privilege, as a rebuttal witness that defendant described routine activities on the day and night in question, and that these activities did not include even being at Margo’s house.
Following defendant’s sentencing, the Court of Appeals granted his motion to remand for a Ginther4 hearing on defendant’s claim that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel. At that hearing, defendant testified that: “Cherry” was Steve’s girlfriend,5 “Jimmy” was Cherry’s brother and Margo’s boyfriend, “Don” was prosecution witness Danny Parenteau, “Rose” was prosecution witness Russell Parenteau, and “John” was prosecution witness John Talarico. Errors by the interpreter at trial were noted. Defendant had not said that John entered holding a “gunshot,” but had stated that John entered, then “Don” entered holding a small black machine gun. Also, defendant had not said that John was running “to Don Andrews,” but had said that John was running “to Don and Rose’s,” meaning that John ran toward the house of Danny and Russell.
Defendant’s trial counsel testified that he did not notice that defendant was saying “Rose” instead of “Russ” and “Don” instead of “Dan,” and that it was *292possible that he had become accustomed to his client’s accent. Further, defendant’s counsel conceded that from his first contact with defendant until the end, defendant made major adjustments in his story. Originally defendant claimed not to have been present at Margo’s on the night of the killing. The evolving events, as defendant claimed to remember them, formed the basis for the defense theory of the case.
The trial court found that defense counsel had been ineffective on the basis of a number of factors. The Court of Appeals affirmed a subsequent order granting a new trial on the basis of counsel’s failure to present defendant’s side of the story in clear terms, as well as the admission of the testimony of the forensic psychologist.
n
We first address the admission of testimony regarding statements made by defendant to a forensic psychologist in contemplation of interposing an insanity defense.6 The Legislature has provided:
Statements made by the defendant to personnel of the center for forensic psychiatry, to other qualified personnel, or to any independent examiner during an examination *293shall not be admissible or have probative value in court at the trial of the case on any issue other than his or her mental illness or insanity at the time of the alleged offense. [MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5).]
This is a clear expression by the Legislature that these statements cannot be admitted at trial except on the issue of insanity, and it is also clear that, under the precedent that the trial court was obligated to follow, no exception to this rule existed for impeachment. See People v Jacobs, 138 Mich App 273, 276-278; 360 NW2d 593 (1984). Hence, the admission of testimony regarding these statements was error,7 but the question remains whether this was error that now requires reversal.
Defense counsel objected to the testimony of the forensic examiner on the ground that the communication was privileged. The communication was, in fact, privileged from admission for any purpose other than defendant’s mental illness or insanity at the time of the alleged offense. MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5); Jacobs, supra at 276-278. However, had the proper statutory provision and controlling case law been brought to the trial court’s attention, the trial court surely would not have admitted the now challenged statements and testimony. Hence, the trial court’s decision was nothing more than an erroneous evidentiary ruling at trial. Nonetheless, the dissent would bootstrap this mistake into constitutional error by asserting that the statutory scheme requiring *294defendant to cooperate with the examiner on pain of losing the insanity defense placed him in a coercive situation. That is, claims the dissent, defendant was forced to choose between his constitutional right to assert a substantial defense8 or to give up his constitutional privilege to be free from compelled self-incrimination.9 With all respect to the dissent, we fail to see when defendant was actually put to such a choice.
It is well settled that the right to assert a defense may permissibly be limited by “established rules of procedure and evidence designed to assure both fairness and reliability in the ascertainment of guilt and innocence,” Chambers v Mississippi, 410 US 284, 302; 93 S Ct 1038; 35 L Ed 2d 297 (1973). This Court has previously recognized that limitations placed on raising the insanity defense, pursuant to the procedures established in MCL 768.20a; MSA 28.1043(1), do “not unconstitutionally infringe on a defendant’s right to present a defense.” People v Hayes, 421 Mich 271, 283; 364 NW2d 635 (1984).
If the established rules of procedure found in MCL 768.20a; MSA 28.1043(1) do not impermissibly limit a defendant’s right to assert the insanity defense, it follows that no aspect of defendant’s decisions regarding: (1) providing notice of intent to raise the defense; (2) cooperating with the examiner; or (3) abandoning the insanity defense, was the product of impermissible coercion. The eventual erroneous ruling by the trial court, which occurred well after both the exami*295nation and defendant’s decision to abandon the insanity defense, could not have reasonably been anticipated by assessing the extant rules of procedure. If the mere possibility that a court will apply the law incorrectly gives rise to a justified reluctance to provide full disclosure to the examiner or to avail oneself of an available defense, then defendant’s right to present an insanity defense would have been equally infringed even if the trial court had later correctly refused to admit any testimony regarding his statements to the examiner. This is so because any coercion to defendant’s detriment was complete by the time the court ruled on this issue.
Likewise, we cannot accept the dissent’s position regarding the effect on future defendants of affirming defendant’s convictions. The dissent assumes that a failure to reverse defendant’s conviction will have a chilling effect on access to the insanity defense. The dissent reaches this conclusion despite our present conclusion that the admission of testimony regarding the forensic interview constituted error. Hence, its conclusion appears necessarily to be premised upon future disregard by the trial courts of this Court’s present holding.
The dissent also asserts that this error violated due process because defendant was lured into speaking with the forensic psychologist by a statutory promise that his statements would not be used against him at trial, and the admission of those statements broke that promise. We agree with the proposition that if a criminal defendant relies on a promise from the state and the state breaches that promise, the state must provide a remedy for any resulting due process violation. See, e.g., People v Gallego, 430 Mich 443; 424 *296NW2d 470 (1988). Fundamental notions of due process dictate that if the resulting breach contributes to a defendant’s conviction, reversal is warranted. See People v Wyngaard, 226 Mich App 681, 695; 575 NW2d 48 (1997) (Markman, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). However, if every error in the application of a rule of evidence or criminal procedure was treated as a breach of a governmental promise, just as if it had been specifically made to an individual defendant as part of a plea bargain or to secure testimony, all trial errors would violate due process. While we are not oblivious to the similarity between this statute’s protection and a specific promise that a defendant’s statements will not be used against him, we conclude that the two are sufficiently distinguishable to justify a rejection of the proposition that every trial error effectively presents a constitutional violation. In any event, as we shall explain, our resolution of whether the error here rises to the level of a constitutional violation does not affect the outcome in this case.
Consequently, this is preserved nonconstitutional error,10 and our harmless error analysis entails the application of the rule this Court announced in People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484, 495; 596 NW2d 607 (1999). “The object of this inquiry is to determine if it affirmatively appears that the error asserted ‘undermine [s] the reliability of the verdict.’ ” Such error does not require reversal unless, in the context of the untainted evidence, “it is more probable than not that a different outcome would have resulted without the error.” Id.
*297The first step in determining whether this error was harmless is to assess its potential prejudice to defendant. The prosecutor, of course, introduced this evidence to impeach defendant’s credibility. To the extent that this was accomplished, it was achieved by the jury’s appreciation of a logical syllogism that goes something like this: (1) defendant lied to the forensic psychologist about the incidents in question; (2) this shows that defendant has a propensity for untruthfulness, particularly with regard to this incident; therefore, (3) the jury should not believe defendant’s trial testimony with regard to this incident. However, the prejudice of the tainted evidence cannot be measured in a vacuum. Rather it must be measured in context. By defendant’s own testimony, after being present at the killing of Steve Burge, he went home and did not call the police. He made no arrangements for his own personal security, but, rather, engaged in a number of routine activities such as going out to eat, stopping for groceries, getting a night’s sleep, and rising and going to work. Putting aside its limited believability, the best interpretation of this testimony that is consistent with defendant’s innocence is that defendant did not want to be drawn into the investigation of this killing and was going to pretend that he was not there. Consequently, there is very little additional prejudice to defendant from the jury learning that, at a subsequent point, he claimed that he was not present when Steve was killed. This is so because most of this prejudice was already present from defendant’s own untainted testimony, and defendant’s false statement to the forensic psychologist was consistent with the interpretation of defendant’s postkilling conduct that was the most favorable to him.
*298By contrast, the untainted evidence pointing to defendant’s guilt is overwhelming. In an unsolicited statement, defendant essentially admitted the crime, saying: “They count five. They say I killed five people. I only kill one. Why do they count five now?”11 Two eyewitnesses positively identified defendant as the assailant, and, by his own testimony, he was present when Steve was killed. Defendant claimed that he was the intended robbery or extortion victim of the real killers, but took no precautions for his safety, did not call the police, and engaged in routine behaviors immediately after the killing. Margo testified about a pattern of stalking by defendant that was corroborated by her neighbors. Defendant’s attempt to explain his frequent presence, by claiming that his promise to visit her everyday was the only way he could get Margo to move out of his house, defies common sense.12
Defendant’s testimony is inconsistent with the physical evidence, while the testimony of Margo and *299her neighbors does not conflict.13 The fingertip of a rubber or latex glove found at the scene is consistent with Margo’s testimony that the masked assailant wore light colored surgical gloves, as well as the fact that there was a struggle during which Danny kept defendant from pointing his weapon at him. The possession by, and availability to, defendant of such gloves supports the prosecutor’s case. It is undisputed that Steve was not only shot in the jaw, but doused with gasoline. Defendant was arrested the next morning reeking of gasoline. The recoveiy of a hat with a wig sewn to it, along with a mask that had tape on it bearing defendant’s fingerprints, is consistent with the theory that defendant arrived at Margo’s house dressed in a manner calculated to conceal his identity. Defendant’s claim that Margo’s daughter brought the mask into the room and that defendant played with it, does not explain the wig-hat or why the mask was recovered by the police from the sidewalk in front of the house. Nor does anything in defendant’s account explain why he would calmly accompany Margo to her home, then bide his time in idle play with her children waiting for the return of his car, *300after Margo had supposedly demanded he give her his house, his furniture, and his money, and had stolen his car.
If someone named Cherry had come out of the house and said “John kill Steve,” that statement would have been inaccurate when made. Steve was alive and still conscious when the police arrived, and he remained alive for another twenty hours. It was decidedly convenient for defendant that Cherry would make this inaccurate statement, thus permitting defendant to be removed from the place of the killing, yet still be able to identify John as its perpetrator. Defendant’s story that Steve was shot inside the house while defendant was outside fighting others does not explain the large amount of blood found outside the house and on the broken exterior door. Defendant’s story that John emerged from the house carrying a gun that had a nine-shot capacity imputes knowledge to defendant that is unlikely under the circumstances that he recounted. Defendant’s claim to have prevailed in a fistfight with three men, two of whom were armed, is less than credible. Likewise, it appears to be a significant coincidence that defendant not only had his car keys with him, but was able to immediately locate his car when fleeing from armed assailants. By his account, his car had been taken from him earlier in the day and he was driven to Margo’s house in a different car.14
*301On one side of the scale, we have the consistent testimony of several eyewitnesses, the physical evidence, and defendant’s unsolicited admission. On the other side, we have defendant’s version of events that would be unbelievable even if not contradicted. Given the damage that defendant’s own story did to his credibility, and the enormity of the untainted evidence, we conclude that any error stemming from the jury learning that defendant had, at some point, denied being at the scene to a psychologist was harmless. Defendant has not established that it is more probable than not that a different outcome would have resulted without the error.
In fact, the evidence in this case is so substantial that, even if we were to analyze this as constitutional error under a due process theory (e.g., that defendant was enticed to give up his privilege to be free from compelled self-incrimination and speak to the forensic examiner by the statutory assurance that his statements could not be used for the purpose for which they were ultimately admitted), we would, nevertheless, conclude that the error was harmless.15 It is *302clear to us that the prejudice from the improperly admitted evidence, in view of the untainted evidence, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
ni
We next address the Court of Appeals holding that defendant was denied the effective assistance of counsel because his attorney failed to clarify his testimony so that it was presented in a way that was more comprehensible to the jury. Specifically, defendant contended, inter alia, that his trial counsel should have asked follow-up questions that would have clarified the action described by defendant and made it clear to the jury that the true offenders, as described by defendant, included all of the most damning of the prosecutor’s eyewitnesses.
For a defendant to establish a claim that he was denied his state or federal constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel, he must show that his attorney’s representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that this was so prejudicial to him that he was denied a fair trial. Strickland v Washington, 466 US 668, 687; 104 S Ct 2052; 80 L Ed 2d 674 (1984); People v Pickens, 446 Mich 298, 303; 521 NW2d 797 (1994). As for deficient performance, a defendant must overcome the strong presumption that his counsel’s action constituted sound trial strategy under the circumstances. People v Mitchell, 454 Mich 145, 156; 560 NW2d 600 (1997). As for prejudice, a defendant must demonstrate “a reasonable prob*303ability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different . . . ” Id. at 167. We conclude that counsel’s failure to elicit elaborative testimony from defendant was neither deficient nor prejudicial.
As defense counsel’s testimony at the Ginther hearing established, defendant’s story, as he claimed to remember it, evolved during the course of his representation from not having been at the scene of the crime, to being present, but not being the shooter. Defense counsel conceded that defendant’s latest version of events did not comport with the physical evidence. Under these circumstances, no reasonably competent attorney would have thought it advisable for defendant to relate his story in sufficient detail to enable its veracity to be checked by comparing it to the physical evidence or subjecting it to precise cross-examination.16
The dissent states that, at the Ginther hearing, defense counsel “admitted having failed to prepare or review with defendant specific questions he would ask.” Post at 312. Actually, defense counsel denied *304failing to review with defendant the questions he would be asking, and only conceded that he “did not specifically write out the questions [he] was going to ask . . . Moreover, defense counsel testified that he visited defendant in jail a tremendous number of times to enlist defendant’s aid in preparing the defense. Defense counsel expressly stated, “we prepared [defendant] as best we could” and he estimated spending ten to twelve hours specifically preparing defendant to take the stand.17
A defendant’s decision whether to testify on his own behalf is an integral element of trial strategy. For a variety of reasons, many defendants, under the advice of counsel, do not take the stand, presumably concluding that the advantages of doing so would be outweighed by the disadvantages. It is likely that a great many of those who do not take the stand would be less hesitant to do so if, like defendant, they could plausibly tell the jury that they did not commit the crime with which they are charged, while advancing an alternative exonerating theory in general and somewhat unintelligible terms, thus effectively precluding detailed cross-examination.18 Even if this was *305not counsel’s express plan, it would have been dangerously inept of him to intentionally provide defendant with the opportunity to offer more details such as the magazine capacity of John’s gun. The supposed language barrier19 in this instance provided defendant with a way for the jury to see him deny committing this crime, yet plausibly not let them hear his story in a manner in which its incredible nature was completely clear to them.20
*306The dissent states that defense counsel did not testify that he thought defendant’s story was a fabrication21 and that defense counsel found that defendant’s story “made sense and rebutted the theory of the prosecution.” Post at 312. The closest that defense counsel’s testimony came to that proposition was when he stated:
Well, it’s troubling, you know, when you’re trying to prepare a defense and the client tells you one thing and the physical evidence clearly points in a different direction, and there are certain things you have to own, I mean, you have to bite the bullet when comes to certain things, but, ultimately, you know, what he told us seemed to make sense, some sense.
We cannot agree with the dissent’s characterization of this testimony in light of defense counsel’s acknowledgment that defendant made “major adjustments” in his story and that the theory of the defense was based on events of the evening as defendant ultimately “claimed to remember them.”
Moreover, finding that counsel was deficient presumes that, as of trial, defendant’s version of events was as developed as it was by the time of the Ginther hearing. Given counsel’s testimony about the evolving nature of defendant’s story, it is just as likely that, having sat through trial, defendant merely tried *307to cover as many details presented in the prosecutor’s case as possible, and he experienced trouble keeping his story and names straight. With the passage of time, and the assistance of a transcript, perhaps defendant was able to refine this story. This does not demonstrate that counsel was deficient at the time of trial for not knowing what defendant would later “remember.”
Finally, we fail to see how defense counsel's conduct could have been prejudicial to defendant, given not only the enormity of the evidence against defendant as discussed in part n, but also the fact that defendant’s clarified testimony (as elicited at the Ginther hearing) is hardly more believable than the somewhat garbled version presented at trial.22 It is *308not more believable that John was holding a machine gun than a shotgun, and, given that .38 caliber casings were found at the scene, defendant’s best alternative was to have the jury hear this weapon described as “a small gunshot, black.” The jury was not in possession of transcripts, so they would not necessarily have understood defendant’s mispronunciations in the same way as the transcriber (e.g., hearing “Rose” when defendant was referring to “Russ”). The defense theory was clear that a number of people who were present during the killing were trying to shift the blame to defendant. Under defendant’s version of events, these unclearly identified persons, out of necessity, would have included John Talarico, Danny Parenteau, and Russell Parenteau. Confusion by defendant about the exact identities of those trying to rob or extort him at gunpoint was consistent with his theory, and more believable than the potential “details” that defendant later demonstrated that he was capable of adding.
The Court of Appeals noted that defendant’s testimony offered the only direct rebuttal of the prosecutor’s theory. However, effective rebuttal is accomplished only if defendant’s testimony is believed. The problem with defendant’s clarified version is that it is so unbelievable that defendant was arguably better off letting the jury speculate about what he was really trying to say, and hoping the jurors would rely on *309defense counsel’s opening statement regarding what the facts would show. Consequently, defendant did not demonstrate that, by failing to clarify his testimony, his trial counsel’s performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that this was so prejudicial that he was denied a fair trial. Rather, defendant’s trial was fundamentally fair and the verdict is reliable.23
CONCLUSION
We hold that any error stemming from the admission of the testimony regarding statements given to a forensic psychologist by defendant in compliance -with MCL 768.20a; MSA 28.1043(1) was harmless. We also hold that defendant was not denied his right to the effective assistance of counsel on the basis of his counsel’s failure to ensure that his testimony about what occurred was presented to the jury in a different manner. Defense counsel’s performance was neither deficient nor prejudicial in this regard. Consequently, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and, because defendant raised issues in his cross appeal not addressed by the Court of Appeals, we remand this case to that Court for consideration of the unaddressed issues.
*310Weaver, C.J., and Taylor and Corrigan, JJ., concurred with Markman, J.
The jury convicted defendant on six counts: (i) second-degree murder, MCL 750.317; MSA 28.549, as a lesser included offense to a charge of first-degree, premeditated murder, MCL 750.316(l)(a); MSA 28.548(l)(a); (h) felony-firearm based on count i; (in) felony-murder based on arson or attempted arson; (iv) felony-firearm based on count rv; (v) felony-murder based on breaking and entering a dwelling with the intent to commit arson; and (vi) felony-firearm based on count v. The jury hung on two counts of assault with intent to commit murder, MCL 750.83; MSA 28.278, as well as two counts of felony-firearm based on those assault charges. At sentencing, the prosecutor elected to maintain the convictions on counts v and vi, and the trial court vacated the others.
Uncharacteristically, our recitation of the facts employs the first names of witnesses who were at or near the location of the shooting. This is necessary because the various parties’ first names are relevant to one of defendant’s claims.
Defendant worked as a meat cutter in a grocery store.
People v Ginther, 390 Mich 436; 212 NW2d 922 (1973).
At defendant’s preliminary examination, Margo testified that defendant had a relationship with a woman named either “Sheny” or “Cherry” Smith. At trial, Margo identified this person as Sherry. At the Ginther hearing, the prosecutor made an offer of proof that Janice Burge could testify that her son, Steve, did not have a relationship with anyone named “Cherry” and that Margo had been Steve’s girlfriend.
Legal insanity is an affirmative defense to a crime in Michigan. MCL 768.21a; MSA 28.1044(1). A defendant in a felony case who wishes to interpose an insanity defense, must serve written notice on the court and the prosecutor not less than thirty days before trial and submit to a court-ordered examination, relating to the claim of insanity, by personnel for the center for forensic psychiatry or other qualified personnel. MCL 768.20a(l) and (2); MSA 28.1043(1)(1) and (2). A defendant or the prosecutor may also obtain independent psychiatric examinations. MCL 768.20a(3); MSA 28.1043(1)(3). The failure by the defendant to fully cooperate in either the court-directed or independent examinations, bars the defendant from presenting testimony relating to insanity at trial. MCL 768.20a(4); MSA 28.1043(1)(4).
We express no opinion here on whether MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5) requires a court to sit by while testimony known to the court to be perjury is introduced. We have previously stated that a defendant has “no right, constitutional or otherwise, to testify falsely . . . .” People v Adams, 430 Mich 679, 694; 425 NW2d 437 (1988).
See Chambers v Mississippi, 410 US 284, 302; 93 S Ct 1038; 35 L Ed 2d 297 (1973); People v Whitfield, 425 Mich 116, 124, n 1; 388 NW2d 206 (1986); People v Hayes, 421 Mich 271, 278; 364 NW2d 635 (1984).
US Const, Am V; Const 1963, art 1, § 17.
People v Carines, 460 Mich 750, 764-765; 597 NW2d 130 (1999).
The dissent does not characterize defendant’s unsolicited statement as an admission. Bather, the dissent believes, given defendant’s poor command of the English language, that this could have been an expression of defendant’s incredulity at being charged with three counts of murder when only one man died. Post at 326-327. We find that to be a highly improbable interpretation of “I only ldll one.” We view it to be objectively more probable that reasonable triers of fact would interpret defendant’s statement as an expression of incredulity at being charged with what he thought were five murder counts after having only killed one person. This is particularly true in light of Margo’s testimony that defendant spoke and understood English reasonably well.
The dissent finds it reasonable that Margo “would not leave without assurances of [defendant’s] continued presence and her continued financial security.” Post at 325. We concede that it does not defy common sense for defendant allegedly to have agreed to onerous conditions in order to secure the departure from his house of an unwelcome thief. What more defies common sense is that defendant would adhere to such conditions after Margo had moved out and had established residence elsewhere.
The dissent latches onto an argument made by defense counsel at trial that, although Margo testified that the assailant kicked open her front door from the outside, the only damage was to the storm door, which was bent outward. Prom this, defense counsel argued that the door was damaged by someone trying to get out, and not by someone forcing their way in, and that this supported defendant’s version of events. However, Margo never testified that her interior door had been locked, there is no reason to presume that the doorknob was not turned before the kick was delivered, and Margo specifically stated on cross-examination that the door was not damaged when it was kicked open. Moreover, the fact that the exterior storm door was broken outward is consistent with Danny Parenteau’s testimony that he saw Steve fighting a man inside the front door of Steve’s house and that Steve forced the man out through that door.
The dissent discounts the overall implausibility of defendant’s testimony because, among other things: (1) a witness who saw someone shot in the face might have exclaimed that the person had been killed; (2) it is believable that defendant could have serendipitously found his car to effect an escape; and (3) defendant might have engaged in routine conduct after the killing out of shock, mental imbalance, or distrust for the police. However, we do not view these aspects of defendant’s story as *301conclusive evidence of his guilt. A brick is not a wall, and the credibility of defendant’s story cannot be measured by viewing its elements in isolation. Instead, we consider the entire panoply of improbable or highly coincidental elements in defendant’s testimony to be significant. This is particularly so in light of the more reasonable explanations that were offered by the prosecutor’s witnesses, which were consistent with the physical evidence.
Constitutional error is either structural and subject to automatic reversal, or it is nonstructural and requires reversal only if the improperly admitted evidence, in light of the properly admitted evidence, was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Arizona v Fulminante, 499 US 279, 309-310; 111 S Ct 1246; 113 L Ed 2d 302 (1991); People v Anderson (After Remand), 446 Mich 392, 404-406; 621 NW2d 538 (1994). Even the admission of involuntary confessions, which was once considered to be structural error, is currently understood to be subject to harmless error analysis. Fulminante, supra at 308-310; People v Howard, 226 Mich App 528, *302543; 575 NW2d 16 (1997). There is nothing about the error in this case that would compel a more rigorous test than that applied to coerced confessions.
It may well be that defense counsel’s failure to nail down the details of defendant’s story before trial was the only way that counsel could aid defendant in presenting his story within counsel’s ethical obligation not to knowingly offer evidence that counsel knows to be false. While a defendant may have the constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel, this does not encompass the right to assistance of counsel in committing perjury. In fact, an attorney’s refusal to knowingly assist in the presentation of perjured testimony is not only consistent with his ethical obligations, but cannot be the basis of a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. Nix v Whiteside, 475 US 157, 174-175; 106 S Ct 988; 89 L Ed 2d 123 (1986). See also United States v Grayson, 438 US 41, 54; 98 S Ct 2610; 57 L Ed 2d 582 (1978) (“Counsel ethically cannot assist his client in presenting what the attorney has reason to believe is false testimony”); Adams, n 7 supra, 430 Mich 694 (“there is no right, constitutional or otherwise, to testify falsely”); MRPC 3.3(a)(4) (“A lawyer shall not knowingly . . . offer evidence that the lawyer knows to be false”).
The dissent also suggests that defense counsel affirmatively asserted that it did not occur to him that clarification of defendant’s testimony was needed because counsel had become accustomed to defendant’s accent. In fact, defense counsel only conceded appellate counsel’s theory that it was possible that acclimation was the reason why he did not notice the mispronunciations.
The dissent does not accept that the prosecutor’s ability to cross-examine defendant was impaired by the fact that defendant’s direct testimony was not detailed. The prosecutor could possibly have exposed the weaknesses in defendant’s story by asking the clarifying questions that, according to the dissent, defense counsel should have asked. However, defense counsel was aware of the fact that defendant’s story was inconsistent with the physical evidence, whereas the prosecutor would have been on a fishing expedition. Although the prosecutor was not prohibited from *305clarifying defendant’s testimony, many experienced trial attorneys would agree that it is rarely sound practice to ask questions before the jury without first knowing the answer. Defense counsel may well have viewed the prosecutor as being reasonably competent when deciding on the merits of eliciting elaborative testimony from defendant.
In addition to Margo’s trial testimony that defendant understood and spoke English reasonably well, at the Ginther hearing, defense counsel testified: “when I first met with [defendant], he spoke to me in English, but I was always concerned that he didn’t understand the nuances of our language.”
The dissent claims that defense counsel’s decision not to clarify defendant’s version of events “allowed the prosecution to argue effectively that defendant’s testimony was a figment of his imagination, undermining his credibility in the eyes of the jury.” Post at 313. In fact, the prosecutor did ridicule defendant’s testimony as ludicrous and unintelligible. Although the prosecutor’s characterization of what the jury heard is valid, it is questionable whether defendant could have possibly fared better had the prosecutor and jury been privy to defendant’s “clarified version” at trial. The preliminary examination testimony reveals that Russell and Danny were watching Monday Night Football in the company of eight other friends and family members (including their mother, their sister, their sister’s boyfriend, and their sister’s children) when the first shot was heard. Would defendant have been better off if the prosecutor, having fully comprehended defendant’s version, called each of these individuals to testify in rebuttal that Danny and Russell were not at Margo’s when the first shot was heard? Would defendant have been better served if the clarified version had been presented and the prosecutor had noted in closing argument how impossible it would have been for the various members of this neighborhood to have conspired to frame defendant, including coming up with consistent stories and planting incriminating physical evidence, in the few minutes before the police arrived and while Steve was still conscious and speaking? As ludicrous and unintelligible as defendant’s testimony was, a more palatable alternative was not available to defense counsel.
The dissent misinterprets our position as arguing “that the reason defense counsel did not clarify his client’s testimony is because he believed it was fabricated.” Post at 312. Actually, we do not go so far as to presume that fact, but merely acknowledge that, when faced with a constantly evolving story from one’s client, a reasonably competent and ethical attorney might well elect to consciously maintain uncertainty with regard to his client’s explanation, and avoid highlighting details of that explanation that are inconsistent with the physical evidence or that are otherwise highly suggestive of the explanation’s falsity.
The dissent seeks our comment on the fact that the jury deliberated for two and a half days before convicting defendant on only six of the ten charges. To the dissent, this demonstrates that the jury was reluctant to convict defendant. The dissent further reasons that this means that the evidence against defendant on the counts of which he was convicted was not overwhelming, and that what the dissent perceives to be counsel’s errors were necessarily prejudicial. Post at 313-314, 327-328. We are not persuaded by the dissent’s reasoning. All that the record reveals is that, after two and a half days of deliberation, the jury informed the court that it had reached verdicts on the first six charges, but was deadlocked eleven to one, and ten to two on the charges of assault with intent to commit murder regarding Danny and Russell Parenteau, along with the concomitant charges of felony-firearm. After receiving the verdicts on the first six counts, the court declared a mistrial on the remaining charges.
We know of no sound method or good reason for attaching significance to the amount of time jurors spend deliberating. Perhaps they agreed on the first six charges in an hour and spent the rest of the time debating the counts on which they eventually could not reach consensus. Given that this jury must have rejected defendant’s version of events in order to convict him of the first six charges, if we were forced to speculate regarding the significance of the jury becoming deadlocked, we would most likely conclude that the jury could not agree on whether it had been proven that defendant had formed the specific intent to murder Danny and Russell Parenteau. Although this is admittedly speculation, which deserves no more credence than the dissent’s speculation, it exposes the error in the dissent’s determination that the jury was reluctant to convict defendant. *308Our present holding is not premised on overwhelming evidence of defendant’s intent to murder Danny and Russell, and there is nothing from which to conclude that the jury was reluctant to convict on the counts where it did so. Moreover, the limited success of achieving a mistrial on four counts could easily be viewed as a testament to the efficacy of counsel’s chosen strategy, rather than as evidence of deficient performance that was prejudicial to defendant.
The dissent concludes that “allow[ing] defendant’s convictions to stand malees a mockery of the law’s concern for a fair trial and damages public respect for the judicial process.” Post at 328. Respectfully, such hyperbole is hardly supported by a thorough review of the record. No trial is error free, and, in our judgment, “public respect” for the judicial process is justifiably diminished when criminal convictions are set aside on the basis of mistakes that do not truly prejudice the defendant or damage the integrity of the criminal justice system. We leave it to the public itself to determine which of the alternative opinions in this case is more genuinely “damaging of public respect” for the judicial process.

=== CASE 9739973 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:55.310144+00 ===

Kelly, J.
I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that defendant was not deprived of effective assistance of counsel. Moreover, the trial court committed constitutional error by permitting the forensic examiner to testify for purposes of impeachment, in violation of MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5). This error does not survive harmless error review. Therefore, I would affirm the Court of Appeals decision reversing the defendant’s convictions on both grounds.
i. ineffective assistance of trial counsel
The denial of effective assistance of counsel violates a defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial.1 People v Lloyd, 459 Mich 433, 446; 590 NW2d 738 (1999). Appellate courts address constitutional issues under a de novo standard of review. McDougall v Schanz, 461 Mich 15, 24; 597 NW2d 148 (1999).
To establish ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must show that the attorney’s representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness compared to professional norms. People v Pickens, 446 Mich 298, 309; 521 NW2d 797 (1994). He must show that the ineffective assistance so prejudiced him that he was deprived of a fair trial. Id. To demonstrate the requisite prejudice, a defendant must prove that, but for errors of counsel, there *311was a reasonable probability of a different outcome.2 Id. at 314.
A. OBJECTIVE STANDARD OF REASONABLENESS
Adil Toma has poor command of the English language and an Arabic accent. He testified with the aid of an interpreter, and his testimony was often disjointed and confusing. Frequently, it was unclear who defendant was referring to in his recitation of events and whether they were the same as those the prosecution alleged were involved.
The defense attorney failed to clarify who defendant implicated in the shooting. He allowed defendant to identify people only by their first names. Defendant said that Steve Burge’s girlfriend was “Cherry,” and Margo DeVita’s boyfriend was “Jimmy.” None of the prosecution witnesses mentioned these names. They all stated that Margo’s boyfriend was Steven Burge. Defendant’s attorney never explained that the persons defendant referred to as “Rose” and “Don” were prosecution witnesses Russell and Danny Parenteau.
Defense counsel did not ask defendant or the interpreter to correct mispronunciation of the names. He failed to ask follow-up questions of defendant to clarify his testimony and to correct errors of translation, in the interest of making the testimony coherent.
Counsel’s failure to clarify his client’s testimony was not a matter of trial strategy. In Lloyd, supra, defense counsel was found not ineffective for choos*312ing one of two incompatible defenses, although both were weak, due to significant evidentiary problems. Id. at 448. Here, by contrast, there was only one viable defense theory. And, trial counsel failed adequately to aid defendant in its presentation.
The majority argues that the reason defense counsel did not clarify his client’s testimony is because he believed it was fabricated. The testimony, clarified, would have been even more damaging.
However, at the Ginther3 hearing, defense counsel did not testify that he thought defendant’s version of the events was a lie. The explanation he gave for failing to clarify the mispronunciations of names was that, having spoken with defendant at length, he may have become accustomed to his pronunciation and accent. Thus, it did not occur to him that clarification for the jury was needed.
At the Ginther hearing, the defense attorney stated that defendant’s version of the events made sense and rebutted the theory of the prosecution. He admitted having failed to prepare or review with defendant specific questions he would ask.
Defendant’s testimony, if clarified, could not have been more damaging than it was in its garbled and unintelligible state. I disagree that failing to clarify the testimony could have been a strategy to effectively preclude detailed cross-examination by the prosecution. Defense counsel’s presentation of incomprehensible testimony did not prevent the prosecution from asking questions on cross-examination to clarify defendant’s theory of the case. The prosecution was in no way deterred from exposing defendant’s posi*313tion as, in the words of the majority, “incredible” and “inconsistent with the physical evidence.”
Defense counsel’s shortcomings allowed the prosecution to argue effectively that defendant’s testimony was a figment of his imagination, undermining his credibility in the eyes of the jury. The presentation of his client’s testimony was indispensable to the creation of the defense’s theory of the case. Counsel's role in its presentation failed to meet the objective requirements for reasonable assistance of counsel when compared to professional norms. In fact, he was responsible in large part for the unintelligibility of defendant’s testimony.
B. REASONABLE PROBABILITY OF A DIFFERENT OUTCOME
Defendant’s description of the night’s events was coherent and internally consistent when it was clarified at the Ginther hearing. The people defendant listed as present are largely the same as the prosecution listed. Defendant’s version of the events names the four key prosecution witnesses and explains their motivation to lie and implicate him in the shooting.
The jury deliberated for approximately two and a half days, became deadlocked, and asked to hear defendant’s testimony again. Ultimately, it did not find defendant guilty of the two counts of assault with intent to commit murder, nor of the felony-firearm charges based on those assaults.4 These facts support *314a finding that the errors of counsel were outcome determinative.
At the Ginther hearing and on appeal, the prosecution argues that defense counsel’s errors did not affect the jury’s verdict, because the evidence against defendant was overwhelming. I disagree. This was no “open-and-shut” case. Not only did the errors of counsel prevent defendant from intelligibly presenting his theory of the case, they actually bolstered the prosecution’s case. They permitted the people to argue that defendant was imagining or fabricating his version of the events.
This is not a case where the evidence against the defendant was overwhelming. Instead, it is one in which there was a complete failure of the adversarial process, rendering it inevitable that the prosecutor’s proofs would seem overwhelmingly persuasive.
C. FUNDAMENTALLY PREJUDICIAL PROCEEDING
Federal law, explicitly, and Michigan law, by implication in reliance on federal law,5 allow for reversal *315without considering whether ineffective assistance of counsel amounted to outcome-determinative prejudice. This occurs when the errors of defense counsel render the proceeding fundamentally unfair.
In this case, the errors violated defendant’s Fifth Amendment right to testify6 and his Fourteenth Amendment right to due process,7 as well as his Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
[F]ailure to afford the petitioner a reasonable opportunity to defend himself against the charge . . . was a denial of due process of law. A person’s . . . opportunity to be heard ip his defense—a right to his day in court—are basic in our system of jurisprudence; and [this] . . . include [s], as a minimum, a right ... to offer testimony, and to be represented by counsel. [In re Oliver, 333 US 257, 273; 68 S Ct 499; 92 L Ed 682 (1948).]
*316Defense counsel’s failure to clarify defendant’s testimony so aided the prosecution that it would have been better had defendant not testified at all. Improper translation and clarification made the trial fundamentally unfair in that defendant was unable to put on an intelligible defense. “There are . . . circumstances that are so likely to prejudice the accused that the cost of litigating their effect in a particular case is unjustified.” United States v Cronic, 466 US 648, 658; 104 S Ct 2039; 80 L Ed 2d 657 (1984). “[I]f the process loses its character as a confrontation between adversaries, the constitutional guarantee [to the effective assistance of counsel] is violated.” Id. at 656-657.
Reversible prejudice resulting from ineffective assistance of counsel rendered a criminal defendant can be found without a determination that the errors were outcome determinative under the second prong of Strickland v Washington, 466 US 668, 696; 104 S Ct 2052; 80 L Ed 2d 674 (1984):8
[T]he principles we have stated do not establish mechanical rales. . . . [T]he ultimate focus of inquiry must be on the fundamental fairness of the proceeding whose result is being challenged. In every case the court should be concerned with whether, despite the strong presumption of reliability, the result of the particular proceeding is unreliable because of a breakdown in the adversarial process that our system counts on to produce just results.
The Michigan Supreme Court in Pickens adopted the Strickland version of what constitutes error *317requiring reversal from ineffective assistance of counsel.9 Defendant was unable to put on any meaningful defense as a result of his counsel’s ineffective assistance. He was deprived of a fair trial. This Court need only affirm its past strong reliance on Strickland to uphold the Court of Appeals finding of prejudice on the basis of the facts of this case.
n. THE VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION 20a(5) WAS CONSTITUTIONAL ERROR
“Insanity is everywhere a defense to a charge of crime, for without a sound mind there can be no criminal intent.” 2 Underhill, Criminal Evidence (5th ed), § 450, pp 1128-1129.
[It is a] humane principle, existing at common law . . . that to make a complete crime cognizable by human laws, there must be both a will and an act; and as a vicious will without a vicious act is no civil crime, so, on the other hand, an unwarrantable act without a vicious will is no crime at all. So that, to constitute a crime against human laws, there must be, first, a vicious will, and, secondly, an unlawful act, consequent upon such vicious will. [Davis v United States, 160 US 469, 484; 16 S Ct 353; 40 L Ed 499 (1895) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 4 Blaclcstone, Commentaries 21).]
The Michigan Legislature enacted the present form of this state’s insanity defense in 1975.10
*318[I]nsaiúty and mental illness are separate defenses with different consequences. . . . “The very definition of legal insanity contained in MCL 768.21a; MSA 28.1044(1),[11] refers to the term ‘mental illness.’ Insanity by definition is an extreme of mental illness. When a person’s mental illness reaches that extreme, the law provides that criminal responsibility does not attach. To put it alternatively, the statutes provide that all insane people are mentally ill but not all mentally ill people are insane.” . . . Thus, if a defendant is found to be mentally ill, he may be found not guilty, guilty but mentally ill, or, if he lacks substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law, not guilty by reason of insanity. [People v Smith, 119 Mich App 91, 95-96; 326 NW2d 434 (1982).]
A defendant wishing to establish insanity at the time of the offense must notify the court and the prosecuting attorney of that intention thirty or more days before trial. MCL 768.20a(l); MSA 28.1043(1)(1). The notice serves to forewarn the prosecutor. People v Blue, 428 Mich 684, 690; 411 NW2d 451 (1987). It *319also triggers the defendant’s required examination by personnel at a center for forensic psychiatry or by other qualified personnel. MCL 768.20a(2); MSA 28.1043(1)(2).
Failure to submit to the forensic examination and to fully cooperate in it bars a defendant from presenting an insanity defense. MCL 768.20a(4); MSA 28.1043(1)(4). Such preclusion does not violate a defendant’s state and federal constitutional rights to present a defense. People v Hayes, 421 Mich 271, 283; 364 NW2d 635 (1984).
That right is not absolute, but is subject to the “established rules of procedure and evidence designed to assure both fairness and reliability in the ascertainment of guilt and innocence.” Chambers v Mississippi, 410 US 284, 302; 93 S Ct 1038; 35 L Ed 2d 297 (1973). “The defendant is required to fully cooperate so that the examining psychologist can accurately determine the defendant’s competency to stand trial and criminal responsibility at the time of the offense. . . . When . . . the integrity of the evidence of insanity is threatened, the preclusion sanction is warranted.” Hayes, supra at 282-283.
The limitations of § 20a do not unconstitutionally infringe upon a defendant’s right to present a defense if courts comply with them. If they do, defendants have notice of the definitive boundaries of the limitations. Section 20a forbids forensic examiner testimony on issues other than insanity, or on any issue at all, if the insanity defense is not ultimately raised.
The truth-seeking function of trial courts would be substantially impaired if a defendant could raise an insanity defense, then assert the psychologist-patient privilege and preclude an examiner’s testimony. Peo*320pie v Howe, 445 Mich 923, 925; 520 NW2d 338 (1994) (Boyle, J., dissenting). By raising an insanity defense, the defendant has placed his mental state at issue and waived the privilege in that regard.12 Id.
However, the integrity of evidence of insanity is likewise threatened if the examining forensic psychologist is permitted to testify about matters other than the issue of defendant’s insanity. If that were allowed, a defendant would be justified in refusing to provide full disclosure to the examiner, fearful that incriminating information revealed would be used against him at trial. If the statute is ignored, the protections it affords are lost.
When, as here, a court allows an examiner to impeach on an issue other than a defendant’s mental state, it violates the defendant’s constitutional right to *321due process of law.13 To permit such testimony is to place the defendant between Scylla and Charybdis. The defendant must either forfeit his constitutional right to assert the insanity defense14 or forfeit his constitutional right not to incriminate himself.15 These alternatives are equally perilous.
In Colorado v Connelly,16 the United States Supreme Court considered the confession of a mentally ill defendant who voluntarily admitted to having perpetrated a murder. It found that admission of the confession did not deny him due process, because there was no “essential link between coercive activity of the State, on the one hand, and a resulting confession by a defendant, on the other.” Id. at 165. Connelly confessed without the state exerting any coercion or other action on him. Id. at 160, 165.
Here, by contrast, the state placed defendant in a coercive situation. The statute required him to fully cooperate with the examiner in a forensic interview in order to pursue his insanity defense. MCL 768.20a(2) and (4); MSA 28.1043(1)(2) and (4). Then, the court permitted the examiner to testify about matters other than defendant’s mental state at the time the crime was committed.
A plea of insanity is in the nature of confession and avoidance. By asserting it, defendant admits the charge but denies criminal culpability. But such admission extends only to the consideration of such plea; beyond that it has no *322efficacy in a criminal case. [2 Underhill, Criminal Evidence (5th ed, Supp 1970), § 450, p 370.]
The admission of defendant’s involuntary confession violated his right to due process of law. “The aim of the requirement of due process is ... to prevent fundamental unfairness in the use of evidence whether true or false.” Lisenba v California, 314 US 219, 236; 62 S Ct 280; 86 L Ed 166 (1941). “[F]ailure to afford the petitioner a reasonable opportunity to defend himself against the charge . . . [is] a denial of due process of law.” In re Oliver, supra at 273.
Restricting the use of statements made to a forensic examiner to those pertinent to a defendant’s sanity is a measure to ensure a fair and reliable adjudication of the issue. The potential chill to a defendant’s exercise of the right to present an insanity defense outweighs any potential gains to the truth-seeking process in discouraging or disclosing perjured testimony. James v Illinois, 493 US 307, 317; 110 S Ct 648; 107 L Ed 2d 676 (1990).
Thus, I disagree with the majority’s opinion that the statutory preclusion of the forensic examiner’s testimony involved only a privilege and that its violation was only an evidentiary error. This reasoning ignores the nature of the rights protected by the statute.
The situation was coercive in that defendant’s statements were coaxed from him in an interview that was a prerequisite to his ability to raise the insanity defense. By dint of the statute, the government promised that the evidence produced would be admitted only for a limited purpose. To permit it to use defendant’s incriminating statements breaks the promise and implicates the Fifth Amendment prohibition against *323compelled self-incrimination.17 See People v Wyngaard, 226 Mich App 681, 695; 575 NW2d 48 (1997) (Markman, J., dissenting), People v Reagan, 395 Mich 306; 235 NW2d 581 (1975).
m. CONSTITUTIONAL ERROR ANALYSIS
A. ISSUE PRESERVATION
“To preserve an evidentiary issue for appellate review, a party must object timely at trial and specify the same ground for objection as is asserted on appeal.” People v Considine, 196 Mich App 160, 162; 492 NW2d 465 (1992). “[Requiring a contemporaneous objection provides the trial court an opportunity to correct the error, which could thereby obviate the necessity of further legal proceedings and would be by far the best time to address a defendant’s constitutional and nonconstitutional rights.” People v Carines, 460 Mich 750, 764-765; 597 NW2d 130 (1999) (internal quotation marks omitted).
In this case, defense counsel objected to the testimony of the forensic examiner on the ground that the communication was privileged. The testimony was in fact privileged and inadmissable. MCL 768.20a(5); MSA 28.1043(1)(5); People v Jacobs, 138 Mich App 273, 276-278; 360 NW2d 593 (1984). That defense counsel did not name the pertinent statute when voicing the objection did not render it lacking in adequate specificity to preserve the issue. The trial court was *324sufficiently put on notice of the grounds for objection to prevent the error by precluding the testimony.
B. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
An error that violates the federal constitution obliges us to look to federal precedent for the harmless error rule. The United States Supreme Court has set forth a two-part inquiry. First, a court must ask if the error is a structural defect in the constitution of the trial mechanism, which defies analysis by harmless-error standards. . . .
At the other end of the spectrum . . . are trial errors that occur during the presentation of the case to the jury, and which may therefore be quantitatively assessed in the context of other evidence presented in order to determine whether its admission was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. This requires the beneficiary of the error to prove, and the court to determine, beyond a reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction. [People v Anderson (After Remand), 446 Mich 392, 404-406; 521 NW2d 538 (1994) (internal quotations marks, brackets and citations omitted); see also Arizona v Fulminante, 499 US 279, 307-309; 111 S Ct 1246; 113 L Ed 2d 302 (1991); Chapman v California, 386 US 18, 23-24; 87 S Ct 824; 17 L Ed 2d 705 (1967).]
In this case, the error in admitting the testimony of the forensic psychologist was preserved, nonstructural constitutional error. The prosecution bears the heavy burden of showing that the admission of the forensic examiner’s testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
[T]he Court has been faithful to the belief that the harmless-error doctrine is essential to preserve the “principle that the central purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual question of the defendant’s guilt or innocence, and *325promotes public respect for the criminal process by focusing on the underlying fairness of the trial rather than on the virtually inevitable presence of immaterial error.” [Fulminante, supra at 308 (citation omitted).]
[W]hether . . . the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt ... in a particular case depends upon a host of factors, all readily accessible to reviewing courts. These factors include the importance of the witness’ testimony in the prosecution’s case, whether the testimony was cumulative, the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or contradicting the testimony of the witness on material points, . . . and, of course, the overall strength of the prosecution’s case. [Delaware v Van Arsdall, 475 US 673, 684; 106 S Ct 1431; 89 L Ed 2d 674 (1986).]
C. APPLICATION OF THE HARMLESS ERROR DOCTRINE
The error in this case was an egregious denial of the defendant’s fundamental right to due process of law. Despite the majority’s claim that the overwhelming weight of the evidence was in the prosecution’s favor, I would hold that it nonetheless failed to carry the burden required by Anderson, supra. There is a distinct, reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
That defendant promised to visit Margo DeVita daily to persuade her to leave his house and that that explains his frequent presence at her apartment does not defy common sense. Defendant is essentially alleging that Margo was obsessive and dependent on him for money and would not leave without assurances of his continued presence and her continued financial security.
Margo testified that someone kicked open her front door from outside. Yet, the only damage to the front door is consistent with someone inside trying to get out.
*326The majority makes much of defendant’s testimony that he heard “Cherry” say “John kill Steve,” an inaccurate statement to the extent that Steve remained alive for hours after being wounded. However, the statement’s inaccuracy does not discredit defendant’s testimony. According to defendant, Cherry witnessed Steve being shot in the face and bleeding profusely. In such a circumstance, any witness might exclaim that the person had been killed.
The majority is skeptical of defendant’s testimony that he struggled with men near Margo’s house, broke away, got into his car parked next door at John’s house, and drove off. However, according to defendant, Margo had told him that John had his car, correcting her earlier story. Defendant likely knew that John lived next door to Margo, and so it is quite plausible that he would find his car there and use it to effect his escape.
Finally, the majority finds unbelievable defendant’s testimony that he engaged in routine behavior after escaping, rather than calling the police. But, defendant easily could have avoided calling the authorities out of fear of repercussions from the real killers because of shock or mental imbalance or because he distrusted the police.
I refute the majority’s interpretation of defendant’s unsolicited statement: “They count five. They say I killed five people. I only kill one. Why do they count five now?” This does not necessarily amount to admission of the crime. The statement could be interpreted in an innocuous manner, especially given defendant’s poor command of the English language. The outburst could have been an expression of his incredulity that he could be charged with three *327counts of murder and two counts of assault with intent to commit murder when only one man died.18
A forensic examiner is a professional, likely a coherent and persuasive witness. For such a witness to testify that a defendant, in interviews before trial, contradicted his testimony in front of the jury would be greatly destructive of the defendant’s credibility.19 This is particularly true here, because defendant was deprived of effective assistance of counsel, his theory of the case having been presented in a vague and confusing manner.
Allowing the forensic examiner’s testimony more likely than not resulted in the jury largely disbelieving defendant’s testimony. As the jury was, in essence, presented only with the prosecutor’s proofs, it is inevitable that the evidence of defendant’s guilt would seem overwhelming. Even so, the jury did not convict defendant on the two counts of assault with intent to murder and the felony-firearm counts supported by those assaults. See supra note 4. If the evidence of guilt was truly overwhelming, it is curious that the jury failed to convict on all charged counts.
*328It was defendant’s testimony alone that rebutted the prosecution’s case. On the basis of the jury’s two and a half days of deliberation, one could reason that the juiy was reluctant to convict. Therefore, it is questionable whether the error in admitting the forensic examiner’s testimony could have been harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Criminal defendants have a constitutional right to raise a defense. US Const, Ams VI, XTV; Const 1963, art 1, §§ 13, 17, 20. Yet, access to the defense of insanity is chilled if, in asserting it, defendants expose themselves to impeachment for every inconsistency between their trial testimony and their forensic interviews. The Court of Appeals correctly reversed defendant’s convictions on this ground.
IV. CONCLUSION
Unlike the majority, I find that defendant is entitled to a reversal of his convictions, because he was deprived of effective assistance of counsel. The majority errs in finding that the trial court’s admission of the forensic examiner’s testimony to impeach the defendant was not constitutional error. Furthermore, the trial court’s error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. To allow defendant’s convictions to stand makes a mockery of the law’s concern for a fair trial and damages public respect for the judicial process. I would affirm the holding of the Court of Appeals.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Young, J., took no part in the decision of this case.
In relevant part, the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy . . . the Assistance of counsel for his defence. [US Const, Am VI.]
This two-pronged test for ineffective assistance of counsel is derived from the standard set forth by the United States Supreme Court in Strickland v Washington, 466 US 668, 687; 104 S Ct 2052; 80 L Ed 2d 674 (1984); see n 8.
People v Ginther, 390 Mich 436; 212 NW2d 922 (1973).
The majority correctly notes in footnote 1 that the prosecution brought ten counts against the defendant and the jury convicted him on six of them. However, the counts of first-degree murder and felony-murder based on two different underlying felonies were cumulative, alternative theories of conviction for the murder of Steven Burge. Double jeopardy would permit conviction on only one of the three counts. Likewise, *314only one of the three counts of felony-firearm based on the underlying murder theories could be upheld. Ultimately, the jury could have convicted the defendant on only six charges: (1) murder or felony-murder, (2) felony-firearm based on the murder, (3) assault with intent to commit murder (Danny Parenteau), (4) felony-firearm based on that assault, (5) assault with intent to commit murder (Russell Parenteau) and (6) felony-firearm based on that assault. The jury convicted the defendant on two of the six noncumulative counts.
This Court recently noted that “the Fourteenth Amendment incorporated and made applicable to the states numerous protections contained in the Bill of Rights." People v Sierb, 456 Mich 519, 526; 581 NW2d 219 (1998). These rights include the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, see Gideon v Wainwright, 372 US 335; 83 S Ct 792; 9 L Ed 2d 799 (1963), and the Fifth Amendment’s privilege against sefi-incrimination, see Malloy v Hogan, 378 US 1; 84 S Ct 1489; 12 L Ed 2d 653 (1964). “This Court has not hesitated to enforce as strictly against the States as it does against the *315Federal Government the right[] ... to a fair, public trial[.]” Mapp v Ohio, 367 US 643, 656; 81 S Ct 1684; 6 L Ed 2d 1081 (1961).
The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in relevant part:
No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himselff.] [US Const, Am V.]
While the Fifth Amendment does not expressly include a criminal defendant’s due process right to testify in his own behalf, the United States Supreme Court has repeatedly “suggested that such a right exists as a corollary to the Fifth Amendment privilege against compelled testimony ...” Nix v Whiteside, 475 US 157, 164; 106 S Ct 988; 89 L Ed 2d 123 (1986).
In pertinent part, the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
No State shall . . . deprive any person of . . . liberty. . . without due process of law[.] [US Const, Am XIV, § 1.]
Although this Court has never explicitly held that a criminal defendant has a due process right to testify in his own behalf, . . . the right has long been assumed. [Nix v Whiteside, n 6 supra at 164.]
Strickland v Washington, supra. To satisfy the two-pronged Strickland test for ineffective assistance, “the defendant must show that counsel’s performance was deficient. . . [and] that the deficient performance prejudiced the defense.” Id. at 687.
Michigan courts “require a fair trial, not a perfect trial.” Pickens, supra at 314.
1975 PA 180. The statute was amended slightly in 1983. The amendment makes the statute gender neutral and states that “other qualified personnel” aside from personnel at a center for forensic psychiatry can conduct the examination required by MCL 768.20a(2); MSA 28.1043(1)(2). 1983 PA 42, MCL 768.20a; MSA 28.1043(1).
11 (1) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a criminal offense that the defendant was legally insane when he or she committed the acts constituting the offense. An individual is legally insane if, as a result of mental illness as defined in section 400a of the mental health code, Act No. 258 of the Public Acts of 1974, being section 330.1400a of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or as a result of being mentally retarded as defined in section 500(h) of the mental health code, Act No. 258 of the Public Acts of 1974, being section 330.1500 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, that person lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the nature and quality or the wrongfulness of his or her conduct or to conform his or her conduct to the requirements of the law. Mental illness or being mentally retarded does not otherwise constitute a defense of legal insanity.
(2) An individual who was under the influence of voluntarily consumed or injected alcohol or controlled substances at the time of his or her alleged offense is not considered to have been legally insane solely because of being under the influence of the alcohol or controlled substances. [MCL 768.21a; MSA 28.1044(1).]
The statute defining the psychologist-patient privilege, in relevant part, provides:
A psychologist licensed or allowed to use that title under this part or an individual under his or her supervision cannot be compelled to disclose confidential information acquired from an individual consulting the psychologist in his or her professional capacity if the information is necessary to enable the psychologist to render services. Information may be disclosed with the consent of the individual consulting the psychologist, or if the individual consulting the psychologist is a minor, with the consent of the minor’s guardian .... [MCL 333.18237; MSA 14.15(18237).]
“The privilege of confidentiality belongs to the patient; it can be waived only by the patient.” Dorris v Detroit Osteopathic Hosp, 460 Mich 26, 34; 594 NW2d 455 (1999).
Privileged communications shall be disclosed upon request. . . . (e) If the privileged communication was made during an examination ordered by a court, prior to which the patient was informed that a communication made would not be privileged, but only with respect to the particular purpose for which the examination was ordered. [MCL 330.1750(2); MSA 14.800(750)(2).]
US Const, Am XIV; Const 1963, art 1, § 17.
US Const, Ams VI, XIV; Const 1963, art 1, §§ 13, 17, 20. “There is no question that a criminal defendant has a state and federal constitutional right to present a defense.” Hayes, supra at 278.
US Const, Am V; Const 1963, art 1, § 17.
479 US 157; 107 S Ct 515; 93 L Ed 2d 473 (1986).
Contrary to the assertion of the majority, I am not advancing the position “that every trial error effectively presents a constitutional violation.” Ante at 296. The error in admitting the forensic examiner’s testimony in violation of the statute implicates constitutional rights far more directly and offensively than many other trial errors.
The majority argues “[a] brick is not a wall, and the credibility of defendant’s story cannot be measured by viewing its elements in isolation.” Ante at 301, n 14. Yet the majority also views each element of the defendant’s story in isolation and concludes that it is implausible or that the prosecutor’s version is more plausible. It then piles “pro-guilt” inference upon pro-guilt inference until, together, they constitute “the entire panoply.” The majority’s analysis is equally subject to the criticism it aims at this dissent.
The majority asserts that little additional prejudice resulted from the jury learning that, in his forensic interview, defendant claimed he was never at Margo DeVita’s house the day of the lolling. Ante at 300. I disagree. As already discussed, defendant’s testimony about his “postkilling conduct” was not necessarily prejudicial to him. In any event, the impeachment testimony directly implicating defendant in a lie was far more damaging.

=== CASE 2221693 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:17.992497+00 ===

44 Ill. App. 2d 1 (1963)
193 N.E.2d 862
James Shipley, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Southern Pacific Company, a Corporation, and the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, a Corporation, Defendants-Appellees.
Gen. No. 48,633.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Third Division.
September 18, 1963.
*2 James A. Dooley, of Chicago, for appellant.
Nygren & Holloway, William S. Jacobs, and John N. Kern, all of Chicago, for appellee, Southern Pacific Company, and Robert H. Bierma, A.L. Foster, and Kirkland, Ellis, Hodson, Chaffetz and Masters, all of Chicago (Max E. Wildman and Frederick W. Temple, of counsel), for appellee, the Pennsylvania Railroad Company.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE SCHWARTZ delivered the opinion of the court.
This is an appeal from a judgment on a verdict of not guilty in a personal injury suit. Plaintiff sued to recover for injuries incurred when sheets of plywood fell on him while he was unloading a boxcar on November 26, 1952 at the Washington, D.C. yards of his employer, United States Plywood Corporation, which was both consignor and consignee of the shipment. Originally named as defendants were four railroads  Southern *3 Pacific Company, Pennsylvania Railroad Company, Texas and New Orleans Railroad Company and the St. Louis Southwestern Railway Lines. Each had carried the car for a portion of the journey from the plywood company's yards in Mapleton, Oregon, where it had been loaded on November 5, 1952, to its siding in Washington, D.C., where it arrived on November 21st and was unloaded on November 26, 1952. After the trial had commenced, plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the action as to defendants Texas and New Orleans Railroad Company and St. Louis Southwestern Railway Lines.
It is plaintiff's theory that the car was properly loaded prior to its delivery to the Southern Pacific Company in Oregon; that the plywood fell on plaintiff because the load had shifted during transit; that such shifting was caused by one violent impact, in the opinion of plaintiff's expert witness, or as plaintiff's counsel suggests, by a series of violent impacts; that such impact or impacts occurred when the Southern Pacific Company and the Pennsylvania Railroad Company humped[1] the car; that defendants' negligence, as plaintiff states it, lies in the fact that this humping was done despite the fact that the car was posted on both ends with signs which warned "Do Not Hump." While the foregoing is plaintiff's basic and principal argument, he also argues that it was negligence for defendants to hump a car of lumber, even if it had not been posted with a "Do Not Hump" sign, and that the terminal carrier, Pennsylvania Railroad Company, was negligent in failing to break the seal and inspect the condition of the load to determine whether it was safe to unload.
*4 The boxcar was loaded with 78,000 pounds of plywood by the United States Plywood Corporation at its Mapleton, Oregon yards. The sheets were 8 feet long and 4 feet wide and varied in thickness from 1/4 to 3/4ths of an inch. They were loaded in bundles 32 inches high each, four bundles making one stack. Nine stacks, each approximately 10 feet 8 inches high, were placed in the car. Between the last two stacks there remained a space of about 42 inches in which timbers were securely wedged so as to buttress the stacks and keep them from shifting. After the car had been loaded, an "Unload from This Side Only" sign was placed on it near the door through which it had been loaded and an "Unload Other side" sign was placed on the opposite side of the car. As to any other signs being placed on the car at Mapleton, Oregon, the superintendent employed by the plywood company at that plant testified, as plaintiff's witness, that "Do Not Hump" signs were not placed on the car there and that he never had a supply of such signs at Mapleton. The head car loader of the plywood company testified by deposition that he was in charge of whatever cards mights have been placed on the car at Mapleton and that he never placed any "Do Not Hump" cards on any car shipped out of Mapleton, nor was there any supply of such cards there. The testimony of these two witnesses remained uncontroverted.
On November 5, 1952 the boxcar was turned over to defendant Southern Pacific Company, which humped the car in a retarder yard[2] at Los Angeles on November *5 11, 1952 and which flat-switched the car on five other occasions before turning it over to the Texas and New Orleans R.R. Co. at El Paso, Texas. The Texas and New Orleans switched the car at San Antonio and at Hearne, Texas before turning it over to the St. Louis Southwestern at Corsicana, Texas. The latter moved the car to East St. Louis, where it came under the control of defendant Pennsylvania Railroad, which delivered it to the plywood company's siding at its yard in Washington, D.C. Enroute, the Pennsylvania flat-switched the car at Rose Lake, Illinois and at Indianapolis, Indiana and humped it at its Enola yard at Harrisburg, Pa., which is equipped with automatic retarders.
Five days after the car had been delivered to the plywood company's yard at Washington, D.C., plaintiff and his foreman broke the seal and opened the door. They saw that some of the timbers intended to buttress the stacks were broken. Nevertheless the two men proceeded to unload the plywood. They did so from the side containing the "Unload Other Side" sign; that is, from the wrong side. They first removed some of the broken bracings. They next unloaded by hand, a sheet at a time, the top two bundles of a stack situated in front of the door. They removed the last two bundles by using a fork lift. Plaintiff then entered the car to take out some stripping which had been under the stack they had removed. While doing so, he was injured when plywood from one of the other stacks fell on him.
Plaintiff testified that when he was unloading the car, he saw a "Do Not Hump" sign on it. His foreman who was with him during the unloading testified on direct examination that he did not remember seeing such a sign on the car, and on cross-examination, that he did not see such a sign on the car. Plaintiff's further evidence is that a force of 15,400 pounds was required *6 to break each one of the timbers used for bracing the stacks and that such a force would not be generated in a normal and reasonable handling of the car.
Plaintiff argues that the court should have granted his motion for a judgment n.o.v. Defendant Southern Pacific Company argues that the record does not show any evidence of negligence on its part which justified the submission of the case against it to the jury. Defendant Pennsylvania Railroad Company urges that there is no evidence against either defendant which justified submission of the case to the jury and that a directed verdict should have been granted as to both defendants. If the argument of defendants is sound, it will dispose of the entire case. We will therefore proceed to consider whether plaintiff made a prima facie case of negligence on the part of either or both of the defendants.
[1] The question presented for this purpose is whether there is any evidence, which taken with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom in its aspects most favorable to plaintiff, tends to prove the essential elements of his case. There is a qualification to this general statement, and that is, that the court may consider the material facts established by the uncontroverted evidence in the case. Wasson v. Insurance Co. of North America, 25 Ill. App. 2d 35, 165 N.E.2d 528; Gardner v. International Shoe Co., 386 Ill. 418, 54 NE2d 482; Dixon v. Smith-Wallace Shoe Co., 283 Ill. 234, 119 N.E. 265; Paulsen v. Cochfield, 278 Ill. App. 596; Friesland v. City of Litchfield, 24 Ill. App. 2d 390, 164 NE2d 606.
[2] Defendants are not joint tort feasors. Neither is liable for the acts of the other. As to plaintiff's principal theory of his case, there must be some evidence as to where the humping which caused the load to shift occurred, and that at that time there were "Do *7 Not Hump" signs on the car. For that purpose we must accept as true plaintiff's testimony that he saw a "Do Not Hump" sign on the car on November 26, 1952, even though this was contradicted by the testimony of his foreman. As we have pointed out, however, there must also be considered the uncontradicted testimony of plaintiff's own witnesses, the plywood company superintendent and the head car loader at Mapleton, Oregon. They testified that "Do Not Hump" signs were not put on the car at Mapleton; that they never used such signs; and never had a supply of them on hand.
Accepting the fact established by plaintiff himself, the question which arises is where were the signs placed on the car? Plaintiff has offered no direct evidence with respect thereto. Unless the presence of the signs on the car during the humping operations can be established by presumption or by an inference from the subsequent existence of such signs on the car, there is no proof, either direct or circumstantial, that when defendants humped the car, it was posted with a "Do Not Hump" sign.
Defendants argue that while a fact once shown to exist may be projected forward in time, it is not proper to draw an inference that it existed at a prior date, because there always arises the disturbing contingency that some circumstances operating in the interval may have been the source of the subsequent existence. More recent cases however have rejected the view that there can never be presumptions back. Gass v. Carducci, 37 Ill. App. 2d 181, 185 NE2d 285. They are allowed when surrounding circumstances are such as to allow a reasonable inference that the condition subsequently established existed at a material prior time. Gass v. Carducci, supra.
The car traveled approximately 3500 miles and was on the road sixteen days before it arrived in the plywood *8 company yard at Washington, D.C. This was approximately nine days after it had been humped by the Southern Pacific. After such humping it traveled approximately 3000 miles, during the course of which it was carried by three railroads, two of which were dismissed out of this suit and concerning whom there is no evidence except that they did not hump the car. Plaintiff did not see the car until some five days after it had been humped by the Pennsylvania. Thus the uncontroverted fact that there was no such sign on the car when it left Oregon, together with the inference that this condition continued forward to a point and time unknown, must be considered in connection with the inference that there was such a sign on the car at some time and place unknown before it was unloaded in Washington, D.C. But where and when such sign was put on the car can only be arrived at by speculation, imagination or conjecture, which cannot be made the basis of liability. Tiffin v. Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co., 18 Ill. 2d 48, 162 NE2d 406; Lashmett v. Country Mut. Ins. Co., 29 Ill. App. 2d 281, 172 NE2d 394; Olinger v. Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co., 26 Ill. App. 2d 88, 167 NE2d 595; McKinney v. Illinois Power Co., 26 Ill. App. 2d 193, 167 NE2d 249. It is our conclusion that there is no evidence either direct or circumstantial that such signs were on the car when it was humped by either defendant.
While, as we have said, plaintiff has based his argument principally on the ground that "Do Not Hump" signs were on the car and that therefore it was negligence for defendants to hump the car, he has also argued that the fact that the car was loaded with lumber was in itself sufficient notice to defendants that it should not be humped. It was incumbent upon plaintiff to show not only that a violent impact caused the the load to shift, but also which carrier caused the impact or series of impacts. Again, there is no testimony *9 from which it may be determined on which carrier, if any, the impact or impacts which caused the injury occurred. No recovery can be had in a tort action where there are several possible causes of injury, some not involving the negligence of the party charged, if there is no evidence from which it can be determined which of several possible parties produced the injury. Yeazel v. Alexander, 58 Ill. 254; Magnolia Petroleum Co. v. Williams, 222 Miss 538, 76 So. 2d 365 (1954); McCain v. Wade, 181 Miss 664, 180 So 748 (1938).
Plaintiff has failed to establish a case based on the theory that either defendant negligently handled the car. This is so, not because we reject plaintiff's valid position that one can establish a case completely on circumstantial evidence, but because we find that there is no evidence, direct or circumstantial, which fairly tends to prove that either of the defendants humped the car when it was posted with a "Do Not Hump" sign, or that humping of the car by either defendant caused the violent impact or impacts which broke the bracings.
[3] Plaintiff also argues that defendant Pennsylvania is liable for failing to deliver the car in a reasonably safe condition for unloading, citing Rylander v. Chicago Short Line Ry. Co., 19 Ill. App. 2d 29, 153 NE2d 225; and Erie Railroad Co. v. Murphy, 108 F.2d 817 (Ohio, 1940). These cases involve the duty of the carrier to inspect and discover a defect in the car itself. They do not deal with the problem before us, that is, whether a carrier which did not load a boxcar and which received it sealed and then delivered it to the consignee for unloading, had a duty to inspect the condition of the load to determine whether it was safe for unloading. Those cases which have considered this issue have held that no such duty is imposed on the carrier. See Rocco v. New York Central System, 7 Misc2d 286, 166 NYS2d 371 (1957); Lewis v. New York, *10 Ohio & W. Ry. Co., 210 NY 429, 104 N.E. 944 (1914); Seeden v. Great Northern R. Co., 242 Minn 360, 65 N.W.2d 178 (1954); Butler v. Norfolk Southern Ry. Co., 140 F Supp 601 (NC, 1956); Reed v. Missouri-Kansas-Texas R. Co., 362 Mo 1, 239 S.W.2d 328 (1951).
In Rocco v. New York Central System, supra, the plaintiff was employed by the consignee of a load of tile pipe contained in the car. He and a fellow worker were opening the car door preparatory to unloading the car when a pipe weighing over 100 pounds rolled out of the car and struck him on the foot. The car in question had been loaded with the pipe by the shipper at Mogador, Ohio, and was there sealed. It was picked up by another railroad and carried to New London, Ohio, where it was transferred to the defendant for carriage and delivery to the consignee at Mt. Vernon, Ohio. The car remained sealed at all times and was delivered to the consignee on its switch, sealed and in good condition so far as could be ascertained by external examination of the car. The plaintiff broke the seal of the car door shortly before the accident. After setting forth the above facts, the court said: "[u]nder the circumstances, the duties of the defendant with respect to the load of tile pipe had solely to do with the transportation and the manner of transportation. It owed no absolute duty to the employees of the consignee to see to it that the load was safe for the purpose of unloading." We accept this position as controlling in the case before us. Under the circumstances in the instant case, defendant Pennsylvania Railroad Company was not required to inspect the load to determine whether it was in a condition safe to unload.
It is our conclusion that plaintiff failed to make a case against either of the defendants and therefore there is no need to consider the other errors which plaintiff has charged in his brief.
*11 [4] Sometime after the oral hearing plaintiff presented a motion for the submission of additional authorities which he cited with his motion. Defendants filed counter-suggestions, urging us not to allow the motion, but nevertheless answering the points and distinguishing the cases cited. The citing of additional authorities or the making of new points after oral argument is ordinarily improper. This is especially so where the authorities are merely cumulative. This does not apply to the submission of an authority which is new and persuasive of the issue involved. In such a situation the court desires to be informed. Habit and curiosity have made compulsive an examination of the authorities submitted. This makes the action on the motion somewhat academic, but as a matter of precedent we are denying it.
Judgment affirmed.
McCORMICK and DEMPSEY, JJ, concur.
NOTES
[1]  "Humping" is a common railroad term defined as a switching operation, in which a car is pushed up a grade and then permitted to run free downgrade to the desired spot, without propulsion, except for gravity.
[2]  In a yard containing retarders, each car passes through three sets of retarders, a master, an intermediate and a final one. A retarder operator is located in a tower. He orders a brakeman to hop on any car which is shown to contain a load subject to damage. The brakeman rides the car down to see that there is no impact. The purpose is to control the speed with which the car goes down the grade.

=== CASE 2221698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:18.172395+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 730 (2000)
In re the Matter of Lisa Beth WITCHELL, petitioner, Respondent,
v.
Mathew F. WITCHELL, Appellant.
No. C3-99-1432.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
March 7, 2000.
*731 Kathryn A. Graves, Katz & Manka, Ltd., Minneapolis, for respondent.
J. Peter Wolf, Shelly D. Rohr, Wolf & Rohr, P.A., St. Paul, for appellant.
Considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, Presiding Judge, WILLIS, Judge, and ANDERSON, Judge.
OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
Appellant Mathew F. Witchell (husband) challenges the district court's order extending a harassment restraining order for two years, arguing that the district court erred in finding that there were reasonable grounds to believe that he had continued to engage in conduct constituting "harassment" under Minn.Stat. § 609.748 (1998). We reverse.
FACTS
Husband and respondent Lisa Beth Witchell (wife) have been separated since February 1998 and are currently involved in a dissolution proceeding. The parties agreed to a temporary visitation schedule for their two minor daughters. At the recommendation of a Ramsey County Family Court Officer, the parties began exchanging a "visitation notebook" for the purpose of communicating in writing any concerns that they had regarding the parenting of their children.
In the summer of 1998, wife sought and was granted a one-year harassment restraining order, which contained a no-contact provision. The basis for this harassment order was that husband had made numerous harassing telephone calls to her. Following trial on an alleged violation of the restraining order, the court concluded that husband was not guilty. The court criticized the restraining order as being "poorly worded," thereby leaving the parties to interpret the order themselves. Following a motion by husband, the restraining order was amended in April 1999, to read in part:
[Husband] shall have no contact with [wife] in person, by telephone, through a third party, directly or indirectly, except as follows: The [husband] may communicate in writing with [wife] on issues relating solely to the parties' minor children through the use of the visitation notebook. In addition, [husband] may leave messages solely concerning the parties' minor children on [wife's] business line, which is a voice mail only. [Wife] will check her voice mail on a regular basis to determine if there are any messages from [husband], and [wife] will confirm with [husband] that she has received the message.
In June 1999, wife filed a motion to extend the restraining order. Wife alleged several violations of the restraining order, including use of the parties' visitation notebook as a means to threaten and harass her. In July 1999, the district court issued an order extending the restraining order for two years based on a finding that there were reasonable grounds to believe husband had continued to harass wife by using the parties' visitation notebook to address non-children related issues and disputes. Husband appeals.
ISSUE
Did the district court err in finding that there were reasonable grounds to believe that husband continued to engage in conduct constituting "harassment" under Minn.Stat. § 609.748 (1998)?
ANALYSIS AND DECISION
A district court's issuance of a harassment restraining order is reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard. See Mechtel v. Mechtel, 528 N.W.2d 916, *732 920 (Minn.App.1995) (noting that relief granted in domestic abuse proceeding was within trial court's discretion). Additionally, a district court's findings of fact, whether based on oral or documentary evidence, shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. Minn. R. Civ. P. 52.01.
A district court may issue a restraining order if it "finds at the hearing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent has engaged in harassment." Minn.Stat. § 609.748, subd. 5(a)(3) (1998). Harassment includes:
(1) repeated, intrusive, or unwanted acts, words, or gestures that are intended to adversely affect the safety, security, or privacy of another, regardless of the relationship between the actor and the intended target;
(2) targeted residential picketing; and
(3) a pattern of attending public events after being notified that the actor's presence at the event is harassing another.
Id., subd. 1(a) (1998).
Husband contends that the written comments he made in the visitation notebook do not constitute harassment within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 609.748 because he did not make the comments with the intent "to adversely affect the safety, security, or privacy" of wife, but rather made the comments for the purpose of addressing issues regarding the parties' children.
The district court relied on the following four specific written statements made by husband as evidence of harassment. Husband's statement at page 15 of the notebook, "Joint legal and joint physical is what I want, and what you swore you would agree to for years and years if we got a divorce." Husband's statement at page 23 notebook, "Please stop telling me what I need to do. Where I choose to go, and who I choose to see is my decision * * * we are separated." Husband's statement at page 35 of the notebook, "Please do not use this book to threaten me." Husband's statement at page 50 of the notebook, "This is the intent and purpose of child support which I pay on a monthly basis at the maximum rate. I will have my lawyer call your lawyer sometime to explain."
Simply stated, we do not believe the statements made by husband in the notebook constituted harassment as defined by Minn.Stat. § 609.748. When husband's statements from the visitation notebook are read in context, it is apparent that husband was either responding to written comments that wife had previously made in the visitation notebook or was addressing his concerns regarding visitation and the upbringing of the children. Although husband's statements are inappropriate and argumentative, we cannot say that they were intrusive or that they were intended to adversely affect the safety, security, or privacy of wife. Therefore, we conclude that the district court abused its discretion in granting the amended harassment restraining order.
We do not by this opinion condone husband's immature conduct. His primary concern should be the welfare of his children rather than engaging in constant and long-term bickering with his estranged wife.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9739976 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:59.212948+00 ===

DIANE S. SYKES, J.
¶ 1. This case is before the court on certification from the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 821.01 (1997-98) and Circuit Rule 52. The essential question is: when is a dealership "situated in this state" under Wis. Stat. § 135.02(2),1 thereby entitling the dealer to protection under the Wisconsin Fair Dealership Law (WFDL)?2 Based upon the language of the statute, as well as its history and purposes, we adopt a test similar to the multiple factor test advanced *62in Ziegler Co. v. Rexnord, Inc., 139 Wis. 2d 593, 606, 407 N.W.2d 873 (1987), which considers the dealership's total involvement and investment in promoting and selling the grantor's products or services in the State of Wisconsin.
¶ 2. This case arises out of. the termination of a 56-year relationship between the Baldewein Company (Baldewein) and Tri-Clover, Inc. (Tri-Clover). Baldewein is an Illinois corporation with its principal place of business in Franklin Park, Illinois. Baldewein sells sanitary pumps, valves, fittings, and tubing for use in the food, dairy, and pharmaceutical industries. From 1940 until 1996, Baldewein was a distributor for Tri-Clover, a manufacturer of fittings, valves, pumps, and tubing. Tri-Clover is a Delaware corporation with its headquarters, distribution center, and principal place of business in Kenosha, Wisconsin.
¶ 3. Baldewein and Tri-Clover operated under oral agreements for most of their relationship. On May 24, 1985, the two entered into a written distributor agreement that amended the terms of the previous oral agreements and provided that Wisconsin law would *63govern the relationship. The agreement granted Baldewein a nonexclusive right to promote and sell TriClover products in a territory consisting of Baldewein's "normal marketing area," which included the entire United States and several foreign countries. Although Tri-Clover was later purchased by the Alfa-Laval Group, the agreement appears to have been unaffected by the change in Tri-Clover's ownership, and the parties continued to operate under it until Tri-Clover terminated the relationshp in June 1996.
¶ 4. Prior to the termination, Baldewein derived some 80 to 90 percent of its total revenue from the sale of Tri-Clover's products. The vast majority of that business, however, was conducted outside the State of Wisconsin, primarily in Illinois, where Baldewein was headquartered. In fact, based upon sales figures from both Baldewein and Tri-Clover, the district court concluded that although Baldewein always had some TriClover sales in Wisconsin, for at least the first 51 years of the parties' relationship, over 99 percent of Baldewein's Tri-Clover sales took place outside this state.
¶ 5. Between 1992 and 1996, when the relationship was terminated, Baldewein's Wisconsin sales of Tri-Clover products were showing slight increases, averaging between 3.9 and 4 percent of its total annual Tri-Clover sales during those years. This development appears to have coincided with the hiring of two Wisconsin residents who solicited sales for Baldewein in this state. It is not clear, however, whether these salespeople devoted all of their time to developing the Wisconsin market for Baldewein's Tri-Clover product line, or whether Wisconsin was only part of their assigned territory. At no time did Baldewein ever have *64an office, warehouse or other facility in Wisconsin, or invest in any physical plant or inventory in this state.
¶ 6. During the fiscal years 1993-1995, Baldewein spent approximately $40,000 per year on advertising. It is not clear from the record, however, how much of this advertising budget was devoted exclusively to Wisconsin or could be apportioned in some pro rata way to the development of the Wisconsin market. Nor is there any indication of how much Baldewein spent on advertising in the years prior to 1993, either generally or in Wisconsin in particular. There is a reference in the record to "advertising and mailings" being sent to some 111 customers and prospective customers in Wisconsin, but it is not specific as to time.
¶ 7. On June 29, 1996, Tri-Clover changed its nationwide distribution system and terminated its relationship with Baldewein. In March 1997, Baldewein brought a diversity suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin, claiming damages under the Wisconsin Fair Dealership Law. Tri-Clover counterclaimed, seeking damages based upon Baldewein's failure to pay for products it had purchased on account.
¶ 8. Both parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. The district court, the Honorable Rudolph T. Randa, granted Tri-Clover's motion, relying on Swan Sales Corp. v. Joseph Schlitz Brewing Co., 126 Wis. 2d 16, 374 N.W.2d 640 (Ct. App. 1985) and an unpublished federal district court opinion, Lewis Communications v. Athletic Business Publications, No. 97-C-132-S (W.D. Wis. Oct. 7, 1997). Judge Randa determined that in order to be "situated in this state" within the meaning of the WFDL, a dealership must have some meaningful connection with this state, as *65represented by a "not-insignificant amount of sales in Wisconsin compared to its overall sales" of the grantor's products. Baldewein Co. v. Tri-Clover, Inc., No. 97-C-213, slip op. at 19 (E.D. Wis. Mar. 9,1998).
¶ 9. Judge Randa concluded that to hold otherwise would mean "any nationwide or worldwide dealership could obtain for itself the protections of the WFDL by the simple trick of a Wisconsin choice-of-law provision and a single sale to the State." Baldewein, slip op. at 15. He found that Baldewein's sales of TriClover products in Wisconsin, which at no time were greater than 7.3 percent and which averaged 3.5 percent to 4 percent of its total Tri-Clover sales in the last five years of the parties' relationship, were not sufficient to qualify Baldewein as a dealership "situated in this state" under the WFDL.
¶ 10. Baldewein appealed the district court's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. The Seventh Circuit certified the case to us to interpret the "situated in this state" language in the statute. We are therefore presented with a question of law, which we review independently. Although we are not bound by the federal court's interpretation of Wisconsin law, Daanen & Janssen, Inc. v. Cedarapids, Inc., 216 Wis. 2d 395, 400, 573 N.W.2d 842 (1998), it is nonetheless helpful to our analysis.
¶ 11. In any case of statutory interpretation we must give effect to the intent of the legislature. Matter of Sullivan, 218 Wis. 2d 458, 464, 578 N.W.2d 596 (1998). We first look for that intent in the language of the statute itself. If we find that the language of the statute is ambiguous, we will look beyond it to the scope, history, context, subject matter, and object of the *66statute. State ex rel. Jacobus v. State, 208 Wis. 2d 39, 47, 559 N.W.2d 900 (1997). A statute is ambiguous if it is capable of being understood by reasonably well-informed persons in more than one way. Id.
¶ 12. The statutory definition of a "dealer" appears, on its face, to be quite simple: a "dealer" is "a person who is a grantee of a dealership situated in this state." Wis. Stat. § 135.02(2). The definition of a "dealership," on the other hand, is more complicated and is both extremely broad and highly nuanced:
'Dealership' means a contract or agreement, either express or implied, whether oral or written, between 2 or more persons, by which a person is granted the right to sell or distribute goods or services, or use a trade name, trademark, service mark, logotype, advertising or other commercial symbol, in which there is a community of interest in the business of offering, selling or distributing goods or services at wholesale, retail, by lease, agreement or otherwise.
Wis. Stat. § 135.02(3)(emphasis added).
¶ 13. "Community of interest" has been the most vexing phrase in the dealership definition for courts faced with applying this law. Our decision in Ziegler, 139 Wis. 2d at 606, established a multiple factor test that provides some contours for the concept. The "situated in this state" language has also been an interpretive challenge.
¶ 14. The only state court authority about the meaning of the "situated in this state" requirement is Swan, 126 Wis. 2d at 20-22. Swan held that the language was ambiguous because "a reasonably well-informed person might interpret it to mean either that *67the grantee (dealer) must be located in Wisconsin or that the dealership must be situated in Wisconsin." Id. at 21.
¶ 15. Having found an ambiguity, the Swan court consulted the legislative history of the statute, tracing the "situated in this state" language to a 1977 effort to amend the WFDL to limit its application to Wisconsin dealers. Id. 21-22. This was a legislative response to two federal cases, C.A. May Marine Supply Co. v. Brunswick Corp., 557 F.2d 1163 (5th Cir. 1977) and Boatland, Inc. v. Brunswick Corp., 558 F.2d 818 (6th Cir. 1977), which had applied the WFDL to non-Wisconsin dealers operating under agreements containing Wisconsin choice-of-law provisions. See Diesel Serv. Co. v. AMBAC Int'l Corp., 961 F.2d 635, 638 (7th Cir. 1992).
¶ 16. The Swan court concluded that the 1977 amendment adding the "situated in this state" language clearly established "the legislature's intent to make the WFDL apply exclusively to dealerships that do business within the geographic confines of the state of Wisconsin." Swan, 126 Wis. 2d at 22. The "doing business within Wisconsin" test articulated in Swan set off a disagreement in the federal courts about how much business in this state is enough to qualify.3
*68¶ 17. The facts of the Swan case did not help delimit the new test at all, since the putative dealer in that case did no business here; although it was physically located in this state, it was authorized to sell the grantor's products only in overseas markets. The Swan court simply concluded that under these circumstances, the "subject matter of this agreement is not 'situated in this state.'" Id. at 22. And so the problem of the applicability of the WFDL to multi-state dealers operating only partially in Wisconsin remained essentially unresolved, despite Swan.
¶ 18. Part of the problem is purely linguistic. The statute says the "dealership" — not the "dealer" — must be situated in this state, but defines "dealership" as a "contract or agreement," which can hardly be said to be "situated" anywhere, especially since the definition of "dealership" includes both written and oral agreements.4 Wis. Stat. § 135.02(2) and (3). The Swan court said the "dealership" must do business within the geo*69graphic confines of this state, but this is impossible, since (here we are again) a "dealership" is a "contract or agreement," which cannot "do business" at all, only "dealers" can. So we agree, at least, with the Swan court's conclusion that there is an ambiguity here, and turn to the statute's history, context, and purpose to help us interpret its language.
¶ 19. Prior to the enactment of the WFDL in 1974, Wisconsin had no regulatory scheme protecting dealerships or franchises, and so. the matter was left entirely to contract between the parties. California Wine Ass'n v. Wisconsin Liquor Co., 20 Wis. 2d 110, 121 N.W.2d 308 (1963). The oil embargo of 1973, and the strain it placed on state gasoline retailers, prompted the legislature to revive previous attempts to pass comprehensive dealer protection legislation. Michael A. Bowen & Brian E. Butler, The Wisconsin Fair Dealership Law § 1.3(2d ed. 1998). The WFDL was signed into law in April of 1974.
¶20. As originally enacted, the WFDL did not contain the "situated in this state" requirement. That language was added in 1977, as noted above, in response to the C.A. May Marine and Boatland cases, which had applied the WFDL to protect dealers operating entirely out of state based solely on Wisconsin choice-of-law provisions in the dealership agreements.
¶ 21. The legislature amended the WFDL to prevent similar applications of the WFDL in the future. Diesel Serv., 961 F.2d at 638. One option considered and ultimately rejected was a change in the definition of "dealership" to mean "a contract.. .by which a person in this state is granted the right to sell or distribute goods." Swan, 126 Wis. 2d at 21-22. Instead, the legislature focused on the definition of "dealer," amending it *70to include only "dealership[s] situated in this state." Id. at 22.
¶ 22. The Swan court concluded from this legislative history and the juxtaposition of terms that the phrase "situated in this state" modifies "dealership" rather than "dealer." Id. We agree. We note that the legislature's rejection of the "person in this state" language and adoption of the phrase "dealership situated in this state" is evidence that it wanted the focus to be on the substance of the dealership, not the location of the dealer. A "dealership" under the law is not a person or a partnership or a corporation.5 See Wis. Stat. § 135.02(3). A "dealership" is a "contract or agreement," generally between a supplier and a reseller, which is characterized by the "community of interest" concept embodied in the law. Id. In other words, a "dealership" is a contract or agreement establishing a particular sort of commercial relationship, defined in such a way as to "encompass an extraordinarily diverse set of business relationships not limited to the traditional franchise." Ziegler, 139 Wis. 2d at 602. And so the focus of the analysis must be on whether the business relationship at issue can be said to be situated in this state.
¶ 23. As we made clear in Ziegler, the "community of interest" concept serves to limit the application of the WFDL and requires a person seeking the protections of the law "to demonstrate a stake in the *71relationship large enough to make the grantor's power to terminate, cancel or not renew a threat to the economic health of the person (thus giving the grantor inherently superior bargaining power)." Id. at 605. Similarly, the "situated in this state" concept limits the application of the WFDL to commercial relationships that exist in some substantial way in this state (and otherwise satisfy the definition in the statute).
¶ 24. This interpretation of the statutory language is consistent with the stated purposes and policies of the WFDL. Wisconsin Statutes § 135.025(1) provides that the WFDL is to be "liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying remedial purposes and policies." Those policies are: 1) to promote the public interest in fair business relations between dealers and grantors; 2) to protect dealers from unfair treatment by grantors, who inherently have superior economic power and superior bargaining power in the negotiation of dealerships; 3) to provide dealers with rights and remedies in addition to those existing by contract or common law; and 4) to govern all dealerships to the full extent consistent with the constitutions of the state and the United States.6 Wis. Stat. § 135.025(2).
*72¶ 25. A dealership is a symbiotic relationship. The dealer benefits by generating income through sales, without having to undertake the expense of manufacturing. The grantor benefits by having the dealer undertake important marketing functions through investment in inventory, receivables and facilities, and by applying its efforts and experience in merchandising and selling the product.
¶ 26. The WFDL protects dealers who have made a substantial investment in the dealership and who are substantially dependent on the grantor's product line. Ziegler, 139 Wis. 2d at 605. The statute's requirement of a "community of interest" between the parties captures this concept and ensures that the WFDL's protections apply only to those business relationships that involve a higher level of financial interdependence than the typical vendor-vendee relationship. Id. at 604-05.
¶ 27. When a dealer sinks substantial resources into its relationship with a particular grantor — time, money, employees, facilities, inventory, advertising, training — or derives substantial revenue from the relationship (as a percentage of its total), or some combination of the two, the grantor's power to terminate, cancel, or not renew the relationship becomes a substantial threat to the economic health of the dealer and a community of interest can be said to exist. When a substantial part of this investment is made in Wisconsin, or the dealer's Wisconsin sales of the grantor's products account for a substantial percentage of the *73dealer's total sales of the grantor's products, or some combination of the two, the dealership relationship can be said to be situated here within the meaning of the WFDL.
¶ 28. The district court recognized the importance of a meaningful connection to Wisconsin in order to justify the application of the WFDL to a multi-state dealership. It adopted a "sufficiency of Wisconsin sales" test to determine that Baldewein's dealership was not situated in this state. We agree that Wisconsin sales are an important factor in determining whether a dealership is situated here. However, since the focus of the analysis is on the Wisconsin portion of the dealership relationship, broadly defined, the inquiry must extend beyond just Wisconsin sales. It must involve an analysis of the totality of the dealership investment that is specialized to the marketing of the grantor's products in this state; in other words, the amount of money and other resources the dealer has sunk into the development of the Wisconsin market, in addition to the amount of sales or revenue the dealer derives from this state.7
¶ 29. In Ziegler, we declined to create a minimum percent-of-sales test for determining whether a "community of interest" exists under the WFDL. Ziegler, 139 Wis. 2d at 602. Similarly, we decline to create a *74minimum percent-of-sales test for determining whether a dealership is situated in this state.8 We recognize, however, that Wisconsin sales percentages are highly significant to the analysis. In many cases, the dealer's level of sales in Wisconsin may be the single most influential factor in determining whether the dealership is situated here.9 However, as in the "community of interest" analysis, other factors indicative of an investment in the dealership relationship, and more particularly, other factors indicative of an investment in the relationship in Wisconsin, are also part of the "situated in this state" equation.
¶ 30. The multiple factor "community of interest" test in Ziegler can be adapted to this inquiry and is consistent with the legislative intent to protect investments in dealership relationships when the dealer makes a substantial investment in the Wisconsin mar*75ket, measured by facilities, inventory, employees and the like, or when the dealer derives a substantial percentage of its total sales or revenues from Wisconsin, or some combination of the two. Therefore, to determine whether a dealership is "situated in this state" under the WFDL, courts should examine the following factors: 1) percent of total sales in Wisconsin (and/or percent of total revenue or profits derived from Wisconsin); 2) how long the parties have dealt with each other in Wisconsin; 3) the extent and nature of the obligations imposed on the dealer regarding operations in Wisconsin; 4) the extent and nature of the grant of territory in this state; 5) the extent and nature of the use of the grantor's proprietary marks in this state; 6) the extent and nature of the dealer's financial investment in inventory, facilities, and good will of the dealership in this state; 7) the personnel devoted to the Wisconsin market; 8) the level of advertising and/or promotional expenditures in Wisconsin; and 9) the extent and nature of any supplementary services provided in Wisconsin.10 We do not intend this list to be all-inclusive. The inquiry should focus on the nature and extent of the dealership's development of, investment in and reliance upon the Wisconsin market.
*76¶ 31. It should be noted that the location of the grantor is not one of the factors we have listed. Baldewein argues that since Tri-Clover is headquartered in Kenosha, and risk of loss passed in Kenosha, 100 percent of its sales can be considered to have been made in Wisconsin, and thus the WFDL should apply. We disagree. The location of the grantor's business and the passing of risk have nothing to do with the policies underlying the WFDL. The law focuses on protecting investments in dealership relationships in Wisconsin; the location of the grantor is irrelevant to the analysis of whether a substantial investment has been made here or a substantial percentage of sales occurs here, or some combination of the two, so that the law's protections come into play. Any interpretation to the contrary would punish Wisconsin manufacturers for locating their facilities in this state, a result that the legislature can hardly have intended.
¶ 32. Furthermore, it is abundantly clear that a Wisconsin choice-of-law provision will not operate to trigger the application of the WFDL. Indeed, choice-of-law provisions in dealership agreements have nothing to do with the "situated in this state" analysis at all.
¶ 33. We recognize that our adaptation of the Ziegler test to the interpretation of the "situated in the state" language in the WFDL does not establish the brightest of demarcation lines between those dealerships that are situated here and those that are not. As with so much else under the WFDL, courts will have to sort out the applicability of this law case by case. But this approach has the best chance, of ensuring that the law will be applied to those dealership relationships it was intended to protect, and no others.
¶ 34. Because the record before us is undeveloped on at least some of the factors that are relevant to *77the test we have established, we do not decide whether the evidence is sufficient to conclude that Baldewein is "a grantee of a dealership situated in this state." Therefore, we remand this case to the Seventh Circuit for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
By the Court. — Question answered and cause remanded to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Wisconsin Stat. § 135.02(2) provides: " 'Dealer' means a person who is a grantee of a dealership situated in this state."
The Seventh Circuit certified two questions to this court:
1) Does the definition of dealer provided by Wis. Stat. § 135.02(2) include a substantiality requirement? And
*622) If there is a substantiality requirement, is the evidence in the record insufficient as a matter of law to establish substantiality?
The Seventh Circuit invited this court to reformulate the questions if "[we] feel that it would be helpful to do so." We believe that the reformulated question posed above more accurately reflects the question the court must address in this case.
We do not address the second question because we find that a court must consider a multitude of factors to determine whether a dealership is situated in this state for purposes of the WFDL, and the record before us is not adequately developed to properly apply the test. Instead, we remand the cause to the Seventh Circuit.
See CSS-Wisconsin Office v. Houston Satellite Sys. Inc., 779 F. Supp. 979 (E.D. Wis. 1991)("situated in this state" requirement satisfied as long as dealership conducts some business in Wisconsin; thus an Indiana corporation that made an unspecified number of sales in this state merited protection of WFDL); Diesel Serv. Co. v. AMBAC Int'l Corp., 961 F.2d 635 (7th Cir. 1992)WFDL applies to dealerships that do some business in state, including a Minnesota dealer which made 34 percent of its sales of the grantor's products in Wisconsin); *68Lewis Communications v. Athletic Bus. Publications, No. 97-C-132-S, slip op. at 15 (W.D. Wis. Oct. 7, 1997)(dealers must establish more than a de minimis connection with Wisconsin to be entitled to protection under WFDL; therefore, a California dealership that made some sales, but provided no evidence of the extent of dealership activities in Wisconsin, was not situated in this state); Baldewein Co. v. Tri-Clover, Inc., No. 97-C-213, slip op. at 16, 20 (E.D. Wis. Mar. 9, 1998)(dealer must meet some minimum level of sales in Wisconsin over the course of the entire relationship in order to justify application of the WFDL; thus dealer that never made more than seven percent of its sales in this state was not protected).
A written contract could conceivably be "situated" somewhere in a literal sense, but an interpretation of the statute that focused on the physical location of the document itself would be nonsensical. An oral contract or agreement clearly cannot be "situated" anywhere.
That would be too easy. The location of a person or a partnership or a corporation is generally readily ascertainable. But nothing has been easy in the interpretation of the WFDL's scope and reach, a task that has fallen mostly to the federal courts sitting in diversity.
We note, as the Seventh Circuit has, that any "extraterritorial application of the WFDL would, at the very least, raise significant questions under the Commerce Clause." Morley-Murphy Co. v. Zenith Elecs. Corp., 142 F.3d 373, 379 (7th Cir. 1998). Although the issue is not directly present in this certification, Baldewein's counsel implicitly acknowledged the potential constitutional problem when he suggested in oral argument that the "Wisconsin sales" test established by the district court might be appropriate in considering the measure of damages in multi-state dealer cases such as this. The suggestion essentially was that the problems associated with applying the WFDL to *72dealers operating largely out of state can be solved by limiting recovery to lost profits associated only with the Wisconsin market. We do not specifically address the constitutional issue, however, as it is not directly before us.
The district court's decision to require a minimum level of Wisconsin sales is logical and consistent with the history of the "situated in this state" language and the factual realities of these cases; it just does not take the analysis quite far enough. We agree with the district court's observation that the legislature cannot have intended to permit dealers to invoke the protections of the WFDL by a single sale or minimal sales into this state. The "situated in this state" language was adopted to close an applicability loophole, not open it wider.
Accordingly, we do not address Baldewein's argument that the district court's "percentage of sales" test violates both the Wisconsin and United States Constitutions.
This is consistent with the post -Ziegler reality that courts and counsel in WFDL cases often look to sales or revenue figures first to determine whether a community of interest exists. For "community of interest" analysis, the higher the percentage of overall sales or revenue generated from the grantor's products, the less important the other indicators of "investment" become, because the loss of a significant sales- or revenue-generating product line is more easily seen as a threat to the economic health of the dealer. For "situated in this state" analysis, the higher the percentage of Wisconsin sales or revenues generated from the grantor's products, the less important the other indicators of "investment" become, because a substantial level of sales activity in this state is more easily seen as' indicative of a substantial investment in and reliance upon the Wisconsin market.
By adapting the Ziegler "community of interest" test to the interpretation and application of the "situated in this state" requirement of the WFDL, we do not mean to suggest that the latter inquiry henceforward shall subsume the former. There will, of course, be cases in which multi-product line, multi-state dealers sue under the WFDL and will have to demonstrate a sufficient "community of interest" under Ziegler to meet the definition of "dealership" before any inquiry is made into whether enough of that "community of interest" exists in Wisconsin for the dealership to be "situated" here within the meaning of the statute.

=== CASE 9739977 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:24:59.217961+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
¶ 35. (concurring). I write separately to apply the multiple-factor test to the facts of this case. Rather than remand the cause, I conclude that there is sufficient evidence to hold that the dealership in question is indeed "situated in this state," so that the Wisconsin Fair Dealership Law (WFDL) is applicable.
¶ 36. Two overriding principles govern the applicability of the multiple-factor test to the facts. First, the legislature has declared that the purpose of the WFDL is remedial and has instructed the courts to interpret the law liberally.1 The legislature has further affirmed that the underlying purpose and policies of the law essentially are to promote fair business relations between dealers and grantors, recognizing that dealers must be protected against unfair treatment by grantors, who inherently have superior economic power and superior bargaining power.2 Moreover the *78legislature has provided that the law shall apply to all dealerships to the full extent consistent with the Wisconsin and U.S. constitutions.3 Thus if the WFDL can constitutionally apply to a dealership, the court should apply it.
¶ 37. Second, "community of interest" and "situated in this state" are not the same, although similar factors are used to determine both statutory elements. See majority op. ¶ 30 at n.10. The multiple factors set forth in the majority opinion are not the exclusive factors to determine "situated in this state."
¶ 38. The first factor is the percentage of the dealership's total sales in Wisconsin. During 1995 and part of 1996, the last two fiscal years of the dealership's existence before being terminated by Tri-Clover, sales to Wisconsin customers constituted over 7% of Baldewein's sales of Tri-Clover products. When I consider the last five years before termination, from 1992 through 1996, sales to Wisconsin customers constituted about 4% of Baldewein's sales of Tri-Clover products, for a total of over $200,000 in sales. These numbers are significant. Baldewein might be doing business in numerous states with sales of Tri-Clover *79products constituting 4% — 7% of its sales in each of the states. If each of those states had a fair dealership law like Wisconsin's, accepting Tri-Clover's position would mean that no state fair dealership law governs the dealership. This result cannot be correct.
¶ 39. The second factor listed is the length of the parties' dealings in Wisconsin. This factor strongly favors a finding that the WFDL applies to this dealership. The parties had a dealership relationship for 56 years, beginning in 1940, and Wisconsin sales were solicited and made every year.
¶ 40. The third factor identified is the extent and nature of the obligations imposed on the dealer regarding operations in Wisconsin. The record indicates that the dealership imposed significant requirements on Baldewein, including a minimum amount of annual sales of Tri-Clover products and maintenance of a minimum amount of Tri-Clover goods in stock at all times.
¶ 41. The fourth factor is the extent and nature of the grant of territory in Wisconsin. Tri-Clover granted Baldewein the non-exclusive right to distribute TriClover goods throughout the entire state of Wisconsin.
¶ 42. The fifth factor is the extent and use of TriClover's proprietary marks. Baldewein appears to have done significant advertising with Tri-Clover's name and corporate logo. Baldewein submitted into evidence copies of its ads in the Chicago Yellow Pages indicating that Baldewein carried Tri-Clover's products. The president of Baldewein, Valentin Baldewein, stated in his affidavit that he believed that these Yellow Pages are distributed in some parts of Wisconsin. In addition, Baldewein sent a calendar each year to its customers that showed Tri-Clover's logo and stated that Baldewein was an "authorized dealer" of Tri-Clover goods. Baldewein also sent solicitation letters to cus*80tomers and potential customers that stated, near the beginning of the letter, "As we are the oldest stocking distributor of Tri-Clover equipment. ..." The exact number of these letters sent to Wisconsin customers is not known.
¶ 43. The sixth factor is the extent and nature of Baldewein's financial investment in inventory, facilities, and good will in the state. Tri-Clover emphasizes that Baldewein never maintained an office in Wisconsin. However, Baldewein did purchase all of TriClover's goods "free on board" in Wisconsin and therefore the risk of loss transferred to Baldewein in Wisconsin.4 Furthermore, Baldewein employees on occasion traveled to Tri-Clover's office in Kenosha, Wisconsin, to pick up shipments. Baldewein's vice president also personally visited the Tri-Clover office in Kenosha to attend training sessions and to discuss business.
¶ 44. The seventh factor is the personnel devoted to the Wisconsin market. Throughout the 1990s Baldewein employed two Wisconsin residents to solicit business and make sales in Wisconsin.
¶ 45. The eighth factor is the level of advertising in Wisconsin. Baldewein sent advertisements and solicitations to 111 Wisconsin customers, largely promoting Tri-Clover products. The president of Baldewein owned a home in Wisconsin during the 1980s and personally solicited Wisconsin customers.
*81¶ 46. Regarding the ninth factor, we do not have evidence about supplementary services provided in Wisconsin.
¶ 47. Given that the legislature has directed the WFDL to be applied broadly and to the full extent of Wisconsin's constitutional powers, I conclude that the totality of facts demonstrates that the dealership is "situated in the state" under Wis. Stat. § 135.02(2). The multiple-factor test is properly aimed at excluding dealerships that have a de minimis relation with Wisconsin. Because the dealership in this case had substantial contacts with Wisconsin, the protections of the WFDL should apply.
¶ 48. For the reasons stated, I concur.
Wisconsin Stat. § 135.25(1) (1997-98) states:
(1) This chapter shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying remedial purposes and policies.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1997-98 version unless otherwise noted.
Wisconsin Stat. § 135.25(2) states:
*78(2) The underlying purposes and policies of this chapter are:
(a) To promote the compelling interest of the public in fair business relations between dealers and grantors, and in the continuation of dealerships on a fair basis;
(b) To protect dealers against unfair treatment by grantors, who inherently have superior economic power and superior bargaining power in the negotiation of dealerships;
(c) To provide dealers with rights and remedies in addition to those existing by contract or common law;
(d) To govern all dealerships, including any renewals or amendments, to the full extent consistent with the constitutions of this state and the United States.
Wisconsin Stat. § 135.25(2)(d).
Based on this fact and the fact that Wisconsin law governed the transactions between the parties, Baldewein argues that all the sales between the parties should be considered "Wisconsin sales," even if they were eventually sold by Baldewein in other states. This argument is rejected.

=== CASE 2221711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:18.517218+00 ===

137 Ind. App. 11 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 595
EVANS
v.
ENOCO COLLIERIES, INC.
No. 19,727.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed December 7, 1964.
Rehearing denied December 30, 1964.
Transfer denied March 9, 1965.
Paul P. Boyle, of Terre Haute, for appellant.
Howard T. Batman, James V. Donadio, Geoffrey Segar, and Ross, McCord, Ice & Miller, of counsel, of Indianapolis, for appellee.
*12 RYAN, J.
The appellant filed his Form 14 with the Industrial Board, requesting a review of a previous award for permanent partial impairment because of a change in condition. Appellee filed its motion to dismiss on the ground that the Form 14 was not timely filed and thus the Board was without jurisdiction to hear such cause. The motion to dismiss was sustained, and the appellant now appeals to this court.
The appellant had previously been awarded compensation for a thirty per cent (30%) permanent partial impairment to the man as a whole, and he was to receive one hundred and fifty (150) weeks compensation from September 24, 1956. The Form 14 application had been filed on December 9, 1960, and the payment of compensation under the award of the Board was paid for a period from September 24, 1956 to August 10, 1959. Appellant now contends that the Board had jurisdiction by virtue of Burns' § 40-1410, since he contends that his Form 14 was filed within one (1) year from the last date for which compensation was paid.
This section of the statute provides for the continuing jurisdiction of the Board:
"... except that applications for increased permanent partial impairment are barred unless filed within one (1) year from the last date for which compensation was paid."
In this case the Industrial Board had approved an agreement between the parties which provided:
"... that said compensation shall be payable for 150 weeks for 30% permanent partial impairment to the man as a whole, with credit for all compensation paid over 26 weeks, from and including the 24th day of Sept. 1956 until terminated in accordance with the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Law of the State of Indiana."
*13 Such agreement, upon approval by the Board, became binding upon the parties and was effectual as any award the Board might have made.
The controlling period which determines the jurisdiction of the Board was fixed by this award, under which the appellee was obligated to, and did pay, one hundred and fifty (150) weeks compensation from September 24, 1956, and ending on August 10, 1959. Thus the last day of the one hundred and fifty (150) week period expired on August 10, 1959. The appellant having filed his Form 14 on December 6, 1960, was not within the one (1) year period as provided for by the statute, and thus the Board had no choice but to dismiss such application upon a showing to it of the previous award and the payments which were made thereunder. Milner v. Radio Corporation of America (1964), 136 Ind. App. 218, 195 N.E.2d 875; Wilson v. Betz Corporation, et al. (1959), 130 Ind. App. 83, 159 N.E.2d 402.
While appellant further contends that there was error because he was not permitted to introduce additional evidence, there is no requirement that the Board permit additional evidence to be presented upon a review by the Full Board. This is discretionary, and unless such discretion is abused it is not subject to review. Ruegamer v. Haynes Stellite Company (1960), 130 Ind. App. 695, 167 N.E.2d 725. We are unable to see where this contention of appellant has any merit.
There being no reversible error, the decision is affirmed.
*14 Carson, Clements[*] and Cooper, JJ., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 202 N.E.2d 595.
NOTES
[*]  While Judge Clements participated in the hearing of oral argument and a conference of the judges, and concurred in the result at the time of the conference, his untimely death occurred before the adoption of this opinion.

=== CASE 2221714 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:18.571616+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 670 (2000)
In re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST Stephen W. SHAUGHNESSY, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C0-90-95.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
February 22, 2000.
ORDER
There is currently pending before the court a March 15, 1999, petition for disciplinary action against respondent Stephen W. Shaughnessy, that has been heard by a referee appointed by the court and is awaiting the completion of briefing.
The court has been informed that respondent has become disabled, is incapable of assisting his counsel with his defense, is incapable of practicing law and is not expected to be able to return to practice, if at all, any time within the next 12 months.
Rule 28(c), Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR), authorizes this court, upon the allegation of a disability during the pendency of a disciplinary proceeding, to, inter alia, stay the disciplinary proceedings and transfer the lawyer to disability inactive status.
The Director and respondent have submitted a stipulation to this court jointly recommending that the disciplinary proceedings be stayed and that respondent be transferred to disability inactive status until such time as it is shown that he is fit to resume the practice of law and assist in his defense.
The court accepts the parties' stipulation.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that respondent Stephen W. Shaughnessy is transferred to disability inactive status without further proceedings, effective immediately, and may not be reinstated to active status unless and until it is shown that he is fit to resume the practice of law in a proceeding and under the conditions as provided in Rule 18, RLPR. All further disciplinary proceedings are stayed until such time as respondent may petition for reinstatement to the practice of law, and respondent need not file a brief in response to the Director's brief until the proceedings are resumed.
BY THE COURT:
Alan C. Page
Alan C. Page
Associate Justice
STRINGER, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 2221719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:18.653392+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 351 (2000)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Matthew Scott HALLUM, Appellant.
No. 97-370.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
February 16, 2000.
*352 Linda Del Gallo, State Appellate Defender, and John P. Messina, Assistant State Appellate Defender, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, Julie H. Brown, Assistant Attorney General, Thomas S. Mullin, County Attorney, and Mark A. Campbell, Assistant County Attorney, for appellee.
Considered en banc.
TERNUS, Justice.
Defendant, Matthew Hallum, appealed his criminal convictions claiming error in the admission of his accomplice's videotaped, narrative statement. When his appeal was first before this court, we affirmed, concluding that the admission of the statement violated neither the ban on hearsay evidence nor the defendant's rights under the Confrontation Clause. State v. Hallum, 585 N.W.2d 249, 252 (Iowa 1998). Our decision was subsequently vacated by the United States Supreme Court, and the case was remanded to us for further consideration in light of Lilly v. Virginia, 527 U.S. 116, 119 S.Ct. 1887, 144 L.Ed.2d 117 (1999). Hallum v. State, ___ U.S. ___, 119 S.Ct. 2335, 144 L.Ed.2d 233 (1999). Upon consideration of *353 the parties' arguments, we find that the defendant forfeited his right to object to the admission of the statement in question because he procured the witness's unavailability at trial. Therefore, we affirm the defendant's convictions.
I. Factual and Procedural Background.
The defendant was convicted of first-degree murder, see Iowa Code §§ 707.1, .2, first-degree sexual assault, see id. §§ 709.1, .2, and assault with intent to commit serious injury, see id. §§ 708.1, .2. Our first opinion contains a review of the events leading to these convictions. See Hallum, 585 N.W.2d at 252-53. We will avoid repeating that discussion here except to the extent necessary to understand the issue that we decide today.
The defendant's convictions arose from the sexual assault and murder of Tanya Rubottom. The defendant admitted in his testimony at trial that he and his half-brother, Carlos Medina, had been at the apartment where Rubottom was murdered on the night of her death. He claimed, however, that she was alive when he and Medina left.
Medina, who was a minor and fifteen years younger than the defendant, gave a contrary rendition of these events in a videotaped interview conducted by law enforcement officials within a day after the murder. He told the authorities that he and the defendant sexually assaulted Rubottom and then strangled her. Later, while juvenile proceedings against Medina were still pending, Medina refused to give a deposition in the defendant's case, invoking his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. Shortly thereafter, Medina was adjudged guilty of two counts of assault causing bodily injury and received a suspended two-year sentence. Although he was then granted immunity as to the events surrounding Rubottom's death, he persisted in his refusal to testify in the defendant's case. The district court held Medina in contempt and confined him in the county jail pending his cooperation.
In response to the State's indication that it would seek to introduce Medina's statement if Medina continued to refuse to testify, the defendant sought a pretrial ruling that Medina's statement was inadmissible. He supported his motion with an affidavit from Medina in which Medina recanted his videotaped statement and said he was lying when he gave it. The defendant claimed that admission of Medina's prior statement would violate his right of confrontation as well as the hearsay rule. See U.S. Const. amend. VI; Iowa R. Evid. 802. The State resisted, asserting that much of Medina's statement was against his penal interest and therefore fell within the statement-against-interest exception to the hearsay rule. See Iowa R. Evid. 804(b)(3). The State argued that the remaining portions of Medina's statement had sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness to support their admission under the residual exception to the hearsay rule. See Iowa R. Evid. 803(24). The district court, Judge Dewie J. Gaul, ruled that "appropriate portions" of Medina's statement were admissible at trial, assuming his continued unavailability, under the statement-against-interest exception.
The State thereupon filed a motion seeking a ruling that Medina's entire statement was admissible. The State asserted that the defendant had procured Medina's unavailability by encouraging Medina not to testify and, therefore, the defendant could not rely upon the hearsay rule and the Confrontation Clause to prevent admission of Medina's statement. The State supported its argument with correspondence between the defendant and Medina. The specific content of this correspondence will be discussed in more detail below.
The court held an evidentiary hearing on the State's motion. Medina testified at this hearing that he would continue his refusal to testify and that this refusal was totally his own decision. He denied that the defendant had pressured him or *354 threatened him in any way. He also said that he would refuse to testify even if the defendant wanted him to testify.
The district court, Judge Phillip S. Dandos, ruled that the defendant had procured the unavailability of his brother, rendering Medina's statement admissible over the defendant's hearsay and confrontation objections. Accordingly, Medina's statement was admitted at trial, and the defendant was convicted.
When this court initially considered the defendant's appeal, we addressed the merits of the defendant's hearsay and confrontation objections and did not consider whether the defendant had forfeited his right to raise these objections by improperly influencing his brother not to testify. We held there was no merit to the defendant's objections and affirmed his convictions. Hallum, 585 N.W.2d at 252. The United States Supreme Court granted the defendant's petition for writ of certiorari, vacated the judgment, and, as noted earlier, remanded the case to this court for further consideration. Hallum, ___ U.S. at ___, 119 S.Ct. at 2335, 144 L.Ed.2d at 233. The State's primary argument on remand is that the defendant forfeited his right to object to the admission of his brother's statement. The State contends the defendant's convictions should be affirmed on this basis. We now proceed to address the forfeiture issue.
II. Scope of Review.
Because the defendant's alleged forfeiture involves a loss of the constitutional right to confront his accusers, our review is de novo. Cf. State v. Yaw, 398 N.W.2d 803, 805-06 (Iowa 1987) (reviewing de novo whether trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance by stipulating to admission of deposition "without first obtaining a valid waiver of [the defendant's] right to confront witnesses against him"); State v. Reid, 394 N.W.2d 399, 402 (Iowa 1986) (reviewing claimed waiver of constitutional right to not incriminate oneself de novo). In such a review, "[w]e independently evaluate the totality of the circumstances as evidenced by the whole record." State v. Fox, 491 N.W.2d 527, 530 (Iowa 1992). Notwithstanding the fact that our review is de novo, we give weight to the district court's findings of fact because that court had the opportunity to personally assess the credibility of the witnesses. See State v. Morgan, 559 N.W.2d 603, 608 (Iowa 1997); State v. Liggins, 524 N.W.2d 181, 186 (Iowa 1994).
III. Did the Defendant Forfeit His Right to Object to the Admission of Medina's Videotaped Statement?
A. Waiver versus forfeiture. Initially, we think it essential to identify the appropriate theory under which to analyze the State's argument that the defendant's actions in allegedly procuring Medina's unavailability prevented him from objecting to admission of Medina's statement. Ascertaining the appropriate theory is important because the applicable theory will determine the test to be applied and will provide a framework for our analysis.
The parties have discussed this issue in terms of the defendant's waiver of his rights. The use of this terminology finds some support in the case law. See, e.g., United States v. Balano, 618 F.2d 624, 626 (10th Cir.1979) (holding that defendant had waived his confrontation rights when his threats to witness caused witness not to testify); People v. Pappalardo, 152 Misc.2d 364, 576 N.Y.S.2d 1001, 1003 (Sup. Ct.1991) (holding that defendant who has participated in witness's feigned amnesia "is deemed to have waived his right to confront [the] witness"). We think, however, that the analytical framework employed by the courts, as well as the philosophical basis underlying the loss of the defendant's right to object, are more compatible with a forfeiture theory.
A waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right. See State v. Seager, 571 N.W.2d 204, 209 (Iowa 1997). *355 A forfeiture, on the other hand, is the loss of a right as a result of misconduct. See United States v. Goldberg, 67 F.3d 1092, 1100 (3d Cir.1995) (distinguishing "waiver" from "forfeiture" and defining "forfeiture" as "the loss of a right regardless of the defendant's knowledge thereof and irrespective of whether the defendant intended to relinquish the right"); State v. Cowen, 231 Iowa 1117, 1122-23, 3 N.W.2d 176, 179-80 (1942) (defining "forfeit" and "forfeiture" as a loss or penalty); Webster's Third New International Dictionary 891 (unabr. ed.1993) (defining "forfeit" as "to lose or lose the right to by some error, fault, offense, or crime" and defining "forfeiture" as "loss of some right, privilege, estate, honor, office, or effects in consequence of a crime, offense, breach of condition, or other act" and "the loss of something through one's own act"). As a review of the case law shows, the focus of the courts holding that a defendant has lost his right to object to the admission of an out-of-court statement falls more clearly within the common definition of a forfeiture.
The United States Supreme Court first recognized that a defendant could lose his right to object to secondary evidence of a witness's testimony in Reynolds v. United States, 98 U.S. 145, 158-59, 25 L.Ed. 244, 247-48 (1878). In that case, the defendant was charged with bigamy. Reynolds, 98 U.S. at 146, 25 L.Ed. at 245. When the prosecution sought to subpoena the defendant's second wife to testify at trial, she could not be located, and the defendant refused to reveal her whereabouts. Id. at 159, 25 L.Ed. at 248. The district court found that the defendant had procured the witness's absence, and as a result, the prosecutor could put into evidence her testimony at a previous trial, notwithstanding the defendant's objection that such a procedure violated his constitutional right to confront the witnesses against him. Id. at 158-60, 25 L.Ed. at 247-48.
On appeal to the Supreme Court, the Court affirmed, holding that, although the Constitution grants a defendant "the privilege of being confronted with the witnesses against him[,] if he voluntarily keeps the witnesses away, he cannot insist on his privilege." Id. at 158, 25 L.Ed. at 247. The Court stated that this "rule has its foundation in the maxim that no one shall be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong." Id. at 159, 25 L.Ed. at 248; accord United States v. Houlihan, 92 F.3d 1271, 1279 (1st Cir.1996); Balano, 618 F.2d at 629.
We think this discussion supports the conclusion that the loss of a defendant's right to object is based on a forfeiture theory because the loss rests on the defendant's misconduct, not on the defendant's intentional relinquishment of a known right. See Steele v. Taylor, 684 F.2d 1193, 1201 n. 8 (6th Cir.1982) (noting that waiver principles are not applicable); People v. Geraci, 85 N.Y.2d 359, 625 N.Y.S.2d 469, 649 N.E.2d 817, 821 & n. 2 (1995) (same); People v. Cotto, 169 Misc.2d 194, 642 N.Y.S.2d 790, 793 (Sup.Ct.1996) (referring to rule that "one not be permitted to profit from one's own misconduct" as "the venerable common law concept of forfeiture by misconduct"); see also United States v. White, 116 F.3d 903, 911-12 (D.C.Cir.1997) (holding that a defendant may forfeit his confrontation rights by misconduct). With this basic understanding, we now discuss the governing legal principles.
B. Applicable legal principles. In Reynolds, the Supreme Court held that the question of wrongful procurement is one of fact and therefore must be determined prior to the admission of secondary evidence. 98 U.S. at 159, 25 L.Ed. at 248; accord Balano, 618 F.2d at 629 (stating that "the judge must hold an evidentiary hearing in the absence of the jury"). The State bears the burden to prove that the defendant has wrongfully procured the witness's unavailability. See Pappalardo, 576 N.Y.S.2d at 1003. Although the defendant asks us to require proof by clear and convincing evidence, we align Iowa with the majority of jurisdictions that require *356 proof only by a preponderance of the evidence. See United States v. Emery, 186 F.3d 921, 927 (8th Cir.1999) (noting that the majority of federal courts of appeal have required proof by a preponderance of the evidence); White, 116 F.3d at 911-12 (same); see also Steele, 684 F.2d at 1201 (holding that preponderance-of-the-evidence standard "is constitutionally sufficient under the due process and confrontation clauses"). We now turn to the specific showing that is required.
The general rule of forfeiture is based on the defendant's wrongful conduct or misconduct. Although these terms on their face arguably imply the necessity for some illegality in the defendant's actions, the case law does not support such a restrictive interpretation. Misconduct sufficient to give rise to a forfeiture is not limited to the use of threats, force or intimidation. See Steele, 684 F.2d at 1202. "[I]t has also been held to include persuasion and control by a defendant, the wrongful nondisclosure of information, and a defendant's direction to a witness to exercise the fifth amendment privilege." Id. at 1201, 1203 (finding that defendants had procured witness's unavailability when one of the defendants had used "his influence and control over [the witness] to induce her not to testify"); accord Pappalardo, 576 N.Y.S.2d at 1004 ("As the cases in this area demonstrate, the specific method used by a defendant to keep a witness from testifying is not determinative."); see also Reynolds, 98 U.S. at 160, 25 L.Ed. at 248 (finding loss of right to object on basis that defendant failed to reveal the location of the witness, his wife).
The broad scope of conduct that may give rise to a forfeiture is consistent with the philosophy underlying the forfeiture rule:
The theory of the cases appears to be that the disclosure of relevant information at a public trial is a paramount interest, and any significant interference with that interest, other than by exercising a legal right to object at the trial itself, is a wrongful act.
Steele, 684 F.2d at 1201; see generally United States v. Carlson, 547 F.2d 1346, 1359 (8th Cir.1976) ("Nor should the law permit an accused to subvert a criminal prosecution by causing witnesses not to testify at trial who have, at the pretrial stage, disclosed information which is inculpatory as to the accused."). Thus, it is the fact that a defendant's conduct interferes with the interest in having witnesses testify at a public trial that makes the defendant's conduct wrongful. As a result, the nature of the defendant's conduct is not as important as the effect of that conduct on the witness's willingness to testify at trial.
When a court finds that a defendant has procured a witness's unavailability, the defendant is precluded from asserting his constitutional right to confront the witnesses against him as a basis to prevent the admission of prior statements given by the witness. See Emery, 186 F.3d at 926; Steele, 684 F.2d at 1202. Hearsay objections are also forfeited. See White, 116 F.3d at 912; United States v. Thevis, 665 F.2d 616, 632-33 (5th Cir.1982); Devonshire v. United States, 691 A.2d 165, 169 (D.C.Ct.App.1997).
C. Application of legal principles to facts of this case. As noted earlier the State submitted correspondence between the defendant and Medina to support its claim that the defendant had procured Medina's unavailability. The first letter upon which the State relied was written by the defendant to Medina after Medina was incarcerated for refusing to testify in the defendant's case. The defendant advised his brother to "hang in there.... [Y]ou only have two months left."[1] He told his brother, "Any judge with any respect for the law would not allow [the tape of Medina's *357 statement] to be used." He continued, saying that Medina should "calm down" and "not discuss anything of any importance over these f____ phones."[2]
The second letter put in the record by the State was written by Medina to the defendant eleven months later. In this letter, Medina begged the defendant to accept the State's plea offer, telling the defendant that he (Medina) "just can't handle it anymore." Medina implied that he was going to break down and testify if the defendant chooses to go to trial.[3] (At the time Medina wrote this letter, he had been incarcerated for fourteen months for his refusal to testify in his brother's trial.) Medina testified at the hearing on the State's pretrial motion that, at the time he wrote to the defendant, his girlfriend and baby had left him. He said he would have done anything to get them back, including testifying in his brother's case. He admitted that he was apologizing to his brother in the letter for the possibility that he would testify. Medina stated in his testimony, without elaboration, that, as it turned out, it was not necessary for him to take this action.
The district court made the following findings with respect to the State's allegation that the defendant had influenced Medina not to testify:
Although the [letter from the defendant to Medina] does not explicitly ask Medina to refrain from giving testimony, the court finds that this is the meaning of the quoted passage.[4] At the time he received the letter, Medina was incarcerated *358 for his refusal to testify in the defendant's case. By asking Medina to "kick back, relax ..., and wait" and by instructing him not to "discuss anything of importance" over the phones, the defendant is clearly instructing Medina not to testify or make any statements which could be used at the defendant's trial.
The court further finds that the defendant's influence, as demonstrated in the letter, has caused Medina's continued silence. Another letter written by Medina to the defendant indicates Medina at one point was on the verge of testifying in spite of the defendant's wishes. The fact Medina is apologetic, and the fact that he wrote to the defendant on the subject is evidence of the defendant's influence. Although Medina stated at the hearing that he would not testify even if requested by the defendant, the court does not find this statement to be credible. Medina's testimony would not subject him to further criminal proceedings, and there is no reason to believe he would refuse a sincere request by the defendant to testify.
We agree with the trial court's findings. It is naive to think that the defendant was not encouraging his brother to persist in his refusal to testify when the defendant told Medina to "hang in there" and, in the same paragraph, reassures him that the judge would not let the tape of Medina's statement into evidence, "[s]o calm down." We also agree with the trial court's assessment that Medina's later letter to his brother showed that Medina was influenced by the defendant and was concerned about how the defendant would feel about Medina if Medina broke down and testified. Although Medina denied that the defendant influenced Medina's decision not to testify, we agree with the trial court's conclusion that this testimony was not credible, particularly in view of Medina's letter to the defendant.[5]
IV. Conclusion and Disposition.
We hold that the defendant procured Medina's unavailability as a witness at trial by encouraging and influencing Medina not to testify. As a consequence, the defendant forfeited his right to object to the admission of Medina's videotaped statement. This forfeiture encompassed any hearsay objections as well as objections based on the defendant's confrontation rights. Therefore, the trial court properly admitted Medina's statement.[6] This ruling *359 makes it unnecessary to reach the merits of the defendant's hearsay and confrontation objections to this evidence. We affirm the defendant's convictions.
AFFIRMED.
All justices concur except SNELL, J., who concurs in the result.
NOTES
[1]  At the time of this letter, the defendant's trial was scheduled to start in two months. The defendant testified at trial that he understood once his trial was over, Medina would be released from jail.
[2]  The defendant's letter was written in response to a note that Medina had written to the defendant. The complete text of the relevant portion of the defendant's letter follows:
Hey babe, what's up? Are you alright? Hope so. All I can say to you is hang in there. I know this jail sucks but you only got 2 months left. Consider yourself a short. A short-timer. That I know. The idea you were kicking around on the phone with your winyan [woman] is not a wise move. Reason being, you would only make the wasicu [white man] seem more credible. So they would in turn get you 5 years and me all day. Just kick back, relax, read some more books, eat your commissary and wait. Its not likely they will be able to use the tape anyway. The federal law case that the DA is trying to use to support his use of that tape is weak. It has absolutely nothing in common with police using illegally obtained evidence from a minor. Any judge with any respect for the law would not allow it to be used. So calm down and do not discuss anything of any importance over these f____ phones.
The defendant went on in the letter to talk about some copies of Native American songs that belonged to the defendant, but that Medina had in his possession. (The defendant and Medina are Native Americans.) The defendant told Medina that he had decided to let Medina keep the songs. He also discussed his and Medina's changed feelings toward Native Americans from other tribes and the defendant expressed his approval of Medina's newfound tolerance of other tribes. He concluded with the closing, "Love ya bro."
[3]  The full text of Medina's letter to the defendant follows:
Well, I am not in "D" block no longer. They moved me to "I" block. Same old things go on in here as in the last block. I know that you heard about Antonite's ex and my ex. Boy, it hurts me so much. I just want to crawl into the earth and die. I am in a major, major depression as of yesterday. I'm sorry Matt, but I won't be able to handle another trial with all of this going on and on my mind. I am really, really sorry but if you don't take that thing I will have to do what I have to do. I'm really sorry, believe me because I am. I just can't keep going through all of this any longer. At first it was thinking about this case and Anthony. Thinking about that police interview, also about the time leading up to trial, and about that girl who died. It was driving me crazy, then Anthony got sick and then I lost him and now all of this. I just can't handle it anymore. If you went to trial I couldn't handle it, to [sic] much on my mind. I'm sorry Matt, but I am just telling you what I am going to do. Please forgive me for all of this. But my heart and spirit hurts so much. Please, I am begging you to take that thing, I don't want to see you get life or anything like that. If you don't understand I'm sorry, but deep down I know that you do. This is all I ask you, please take that. Don't do this because I can't take it anymore. I'm sorry.
[4]  The passage to which the court refers is the portion of the defendant's letter to Medina quoted in footnote 2 above.
[5]  The defendant's testimony at trial also supports the conclusion that he had influenced his brother not to testify. During cross-examination, the State asked the defendant about a letter he had written to his mother (who was also Medina's mother) shortly after he and his brother were arrested. The defendant stated in that letter, "My lawyer said not to let [Medina] testify against me at court .... Because if [Medina and I] get tried separately they won't be able to use anything he said against me unless he testifies in person." The defendant admitted at trial that this letter was "an instruction to [his] mother telling [his] mother not to let [his] brother testify against [him] in court."
[6]  Although the defendant has not specifically relied on the Due Process Clause, see U.S. Const. amend. V, as a basis to prevent admission of Medina's statement, some courts have included such an analysis as a prerequisite to the admission of an out-of-court statement even though the defendant has forfeited his right to object on hearsay or confrontation grounds. See e.g., Carlson, 547 F.2d at 1360 n. 14 (noting that loss of confrontation rights by misconduct does not avoid due process fairness requirements); State v. Keeton, 573 N.W.2d 378, 382 (Minn.Ct.App. 1997), overruled on other grounds by State v. Keeton, 589 N.W.2d 85 (Minn. 1998) (same). But see White, 116 F.3d at 913 (rejecting argument that reliability of statements must be established prior to admission where defendant has forfeited confrontation rights). Although we question whether such an inquiry is necessary, we nonetheless conclude that the Due Process Clause poses no obstacle to admission of Medina's statement. A defendant's due process rights are not violated when corroborative evidence indicates that the out-of-court statement was not "totally lacking" in reliability. See Thevis, 665 F.2d at 633. This test is easily satisfied here by several items of corroborating evidence. The events leading to Rubottom's death occurred in the apartment of her friend, Justin Cloud. Cloud testified at trial that Medina and the defendant beat him and then tied his hands behind his back with electrical cord. While Cloud "played dead," he could hear the brothers raping Rubottom and then he heard her gagging. A neighbor who encountered Cloud after Medina and the defendant left Cloud's apartment testified that when she saw Cloud, his hands were securely tied behind is back and his face was bruised and beaten. The defendant's fingerprints were found in the apartment, and an autopsy on the victim confirmed that she had been sexually assaulted (there was insufficient DNA material to identify the perpetrators), and had died of ligature strangulation. All of this evidence was consistent with the statement given by Medina. See Hallum, 585 N.W.2d at 252-53 (summarizing Medina's statement). Clearly his statement was not totally lacking in reliability so as to give rise to a due process violation.

=== CASE 9739978 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:06.599589+00 ===

Pfaff, J.
This is an appeal from an award favorable. to the appellee herein rendered by the Full Industrial Board of Indiana. In the action below the Board sustained a finding rendered by one of the members on, initial hearing of fifty per cent permanent impairment to the appellee’s left index finger, and in addition thereto, amended the original award to include medical expenses.
Error assigned for reversal is that the award of the Board is contrary to law. Such assignment raises the following questions:
1. Is there sufficient evidence in the record to sustain the findings of fact and award of the Board?
2. Did the Board commit harmful error in overruling appellant’s objection to certain evidence introduced by appellee?
The pertinent facts to this appeal as they, appear in the record may be briefly stated as follows:
Oh January 7, 1963, appellee sustained an injury to his left index finger while in the course of his employment at a plant owned and operated by the appellant. Medical attention was given at a plant first aid station on the day of the accident, and again oh the following day, at which time the company safety director sent the appellant to have an X-ray taken of the injury. *502On the following day, January 9, the appellee was sent by the safety director to Ball Memorial Hospital to have the injury examined by a surgeon, not the company doctor, but acting at the request of the company. The doctor examined the injury and applied a local anesthetic to relieve the pain. It was alleged that ■appellee asked the doctor at this time if he was going to remove the foreign body embedded in appellee’s finger. The doctor replied that removal at this time would be unwise because the surgical injury inflicted by removal is frequently more severe than the foreign body itself, and is' more apt to cause permanent impairment than the continued presence of the foreign body in the finger. The doctor then asked appellee to return in two days, at which time the appellee did return and complained, to the doctor that he was still having pain. The doctor again reiterated his reasoning for not performing surgery.
Appellee returned to the doctor’s office for a third and final visit on January 25, still bothered by pain, and again asked the doctor if he intended to remove the foreign body. At this point the evidence becomes conflicting as to the events that took place in the doctor’s office. However, it appears from the entire record that appellant’s doctor at this time arranged for surgery to be performed on February 12, 1963, eighteen days later,. at Ball Memorial Hospital, and appellee was informed of this fact before he left the doctor’s office! Appellee, apparently still bothered by the pain, then left the doctor’s office and returned to work.
On the following morning appellee called his personal physician and made an appointment to see him a few days later. On February 1, 1963, appellee’s physician, together with another physician, performed surgery *503on appellee’s finger, removing the foreign body. Appellee testified that he ^experienced relief from the pain about two or three^clays following the operation.
Appellee did not inform the appellant, nor appellant’s physician, that he was being treated by his personal physician. Appellee had been told by appellant’s safety director a short time after the accident that if he went to a doctor of his own choice he would do so at his own expense. Appellee’s finger was examined approximately two months later by another physician of his own choosing. A written report of the physician’s observations was sent to appellee’s attorney of record, and a copy of that report was forwarded to the appellant.
Thus, at the initial hearing the single Board member was faced with the ultimate factual question of dé* termining whether or not the appellee was justified in obtaining the services of his own doctor because of. the circumstances existing in :this cause.- In arriving at this ultimate conclusion it was necessary for the Board-member to determine a number of evidentiary facts, and to. draw reasonable inferences therefrom.
Appellant first argues that the responsibility of furnishing medical treatment for injured employees' is that of the employer, and the refusal of the employee to accept such medical attention furnished by the employer shall bar the employee from all compensation to which he would otherwise be entitled. Acts 1929, ch. 172, §25, p. 536, as amended in 1937¿ 1943, 1945 and 1947, being §40-1225, Burns’ 1952 Replacement. This section also provides in part as follows :
“If in an emergency or because of the employer’s failure to provide such attending physician or such surgical, hospital or nurse’s services, and supplies or such treatment by spiritual means or prayer, as herein specified, or for other good reason, a physi*504cian other than that provided by the employer treats the injured employee within the first one hundred eighty (180) days, or necessary and proper surgical, hospital, or nurse's services and supplies are procured within said period, the reasonable cost of such service and supplies shall, subject to approval of the industrial board, be paid by the employer.” (Our emphasis)
On the issue of whether or not a refusal on the part of the employee is reasonable, such a question is one of fact to be determined by the Industrial Board. Pipkin v. Continental Steel Corp. (1938), 105 Ind. App. 669, 16 N. E. 2d 984; Bloomfield Brick Co. v. Blaker (1932), 94 Ind. App. 230, 180 N. E. 501; Vonnegut Hardware Co. v. Rose (1918), 68 Ind. App. 385, 120 N. E. 608. Further, it is a well established rule that this court will not disturb a finding of fact made by the Industrial Board unless the evidence with all reasonable inferences deducible therefrom are of such conclusive nature as to force a contrary conclusion. Heflin v. Red Front Cash & Carry Stores, Inc. (1948), 225 Ind. 517, 75 N. E. 2d 662. It has also been stated by this court on numerous occasions that we cannot weigh the evidence, and if there is any evidence of probative value to sustain the award, considering only the evidence most favorable to the appellee, it is our duty to sustain the Industrial Board. Logan v. Acme Machine Products Div. (1942), 110 Ind. App. 556, 39 N. E. 2d 797; Wilson v. Betz Corp. et al. (1958), 128 Ind. App. 189, 146 N. E. 2d 570.
We are of the opinion that the evidence in the record and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom are sufficient to sustain the finding of the Board on the factual question of reasonableness.
*505*504Appellant’s second contention is that the Board *505committed error in allowing testimony of the examining physician concerning any percentage of impairment to become a part of the record. Appellant bases its objection to the admission of such evidence on the ground that appellee failed to furnish appellant a report from the examining physician stating any estimate of any permanent partial impairment as required by statute. Acts 1929, ch. 172, §27, p. 586, as amended in 1943, 1945, 1947, 1949 and 1963, being §40-1227, Burns’ 1964 Cum. Supp. This section requires that each side must provide the other side with a copy of the examining physician’s report at least ten days prior to hearing. We are here concerned with that part of the section providing:
“All statements of physicians or surgeons required by this section, whether those engaged by employee or employer, shall contain information regarding the history of the injury, claimed injury, as given by the patient, the physical or mental condition of such employee, and the nature and extent or amount of disability or impairment, if any, of such employee.” (Our emphasis)
A report was furnished by the appellee’s physician pursuant to the statute, but appellant argues that the report did not in any way provide any percentage of impairment as required by statute, §40-1227, supra.
The portion of the physician’s report pertinent to our present inquiry read as follows:
“Mr. Dishner now has a healed hand with the loss of fifty per cent motion of the index finger and fifty per cent loss of sensation with a total incapacity of ten per cent to the hand below the elbow.” (Our emphasis)
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,, Unabridged, defines “disability” in the following manner:.
*506“Disability ... (4): a physical or mental illness, injury, or condition that incapacitates in any way. . . .” (Our emphasis)
Referring back to that portion of §40-1227, supra, quoted above, it will be noted that the statute says “disability or impairment”. We are of the opinion that the medical report submitted by the appellee was sufficient to comply with the requirements of §40-1227, supra.
For the reasons given herein this court is of. the opinion that the award of the Full Industrial Board is not contrary to law.
Award affirmed.
Hunter, C. J., and Kelley, J., concur.
Mote, J., dissents with opinion to follow.

=== CASE 9739979 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:06.604276+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Mote, J.
I am unable to agree with my brethren who, .by a majority decision and opinion, have affirmed the Award of the Full Industrial Board of In-diana, because, in my opinion,.there is a total lack of evidence to support the Award. Although the Hearing Member, in his finding and award, did not find from the evidence that appellee was “justified in obtaining the services of his own doctor because of the circumstances in said cause”, the Full Board made such finding despite the fact that the record does not reveal any evidence or facts to support the same.
§40-1225, Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, in vogue at the time of the accidental injury on January 7,1963, provides in part as follow's:
“Sec. 25. After an injury and prior to an adjudication of permanent impairment, the employer shall furnish or cause to be furnished, free of charge to. the employee, an attending physician *507for the treatment of his injuries; .and in addition thereto- such surgical, hospital and nursing services and supplies as the attending physician or the Industrial Board may deem necessary; If the employee is requested or required by the employer to submit to treatment outside the county of employment, said employer shall also pay the reasonable- expense of travel, food and lodging necessary during the travel, but not to exceed the amount paid at the time' of said travel by the State of Indiana to its employees.
“During the period of temporary total disability resulting from the injury, the employer shall furnish such physician, services and supplies, and the industrial board may, on proper application of either party, require that, treatment by such physieian and such services and supplies be furnished by or on behalf of the employer as the industrial board may deem reasonably necessary. If after an employee’s injury has been adjudicated by agreement or award on the basis of permanent partial impairment and within the statutory period for review in such case as provided in section' 45 of this.'act, the employer may continue, to furnish a physician or surgeon and other medical services and supplies -and the industrial board may within such statutory period for review as. provided in section 45 of this act, on a proper application of either party, require that treatment by such physician or surgeon and other medical services and supplies be furnished by and on behalf of the employer as the industrial board may deem necessary to limit or reduce the amount and extent of such impairment. The refusal of the employee to accept such services and supplies, when so provided by or on behalf of the employer, shall bar the employee from all compensation otherwise payable during the period of such refusal and his right to prosecute - any proceeding under this act shall be suspended and abated until such refusal ceases; no compensation for permanent total impairment, permanent partial impairment, permanent disfigurement or death shall be paid or payable for that part or portion of such impairment, disfigurement or death which is the result of the *508failure of such employee to accept such treatment, services and supplies:...
“If an emergency or because of the employer’s failure to provide such attending physician or such surgical, hospital or nurse’s services and supplies or such treatment by spiritual means or prayer, as herein specified, or for other good reason, a physician other than that provided.by the employer treats the injured employee within the first one hundred eighty [180] days, or necessary and proper surgical, hospital, or nurse’s services and supplies are procured within said period, the reasonable cost of such service^ and supplies shall, subject to approval of the industrial board, be paid by the employer.” (Our emphasis.)
The record reveals the following pertinent facts as set forth in appellant’s brief to which appellee has hot objected.
“It was stipulated and agreed by the parties that the appellee had an accidental injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with appellant company on January 7, 1963, at which time he suffered a small laceration of imbedded steel in .the left second metatarsal of the left index finger.
“The accident occurred at approximately 10:00 P.M., on January 7, 1963. The appellee immediately went to the First Aid Department at which time he received treatment. He reported back the next day and was treated by the company nurse. At that time, Mr. Eckelman, the Safety Director for the company, made arrangements for X-rays which were taken by Dr. Imhoff. Arrangements were made by the company for employee to go to Ball Memorial Hospital on Janüary 9, 1963, where he was examined by Dr. Ralph O. Butz, surgeon of Muncie, Indiana. Both the testimony of the appellee and Dr. Butz agreed that at the time of this examination appellee complained of' pain in the area of the left index finger. Dr. Butz gave a local anesthetic which was introduced into the area of the foreign body and the appellee was told by the doctor to come back in two (2) days. He ré*509ported back in two days still complaining of pain, however he continued to work during this period of time. In the appellee’s testimony, he pointed out that he asked the doctor whether or not he was going to remove the foreign body and the doctor at that time told him no. The doctor, in his testimony, pointed out that he informed the appellee that the healing process took time and that it would be wise to wait and see whether or not it would take care of itself. Arrangements were made for the appellee to come on January 25, which he did, and he was still complaining of pain. The appellee was very insistent upon having the foreign body removed, and the doctor, in his testimony, pointed out the reasons that he felt that it would be best to wait; but due to the fact that the appellee wanted it removed, the doctor made arrangements for the appellee to go to Ball Memorial Hospital on February 12,1963, at which time they would prepare him for surgery on February 13. Arrangements were made in the presence of the appellee for this surgery; and on cross-examination of appellee, he admitted that at the time he left the doctor’s office on January 25, he knew that arrangements were made for surgery and, at this time, no objections were made to the doctor. The following day, he contacted a doctor of his own choice, Dr. Painter of Winchester, Indiana, and made arrangements for surgery on his own. On February 1, Drs. Painter and Jordan performed the surgery at the Randolph County Hospital in Winchester, Indiana. He did not notify the company that he was going to have the surgery performed nor did he notify Dr. Butz. During this entire period of time, the appellee only lost one day from work, that being the date of surgery on February 1.
“In the instant case, the employer immediately furnished treatment to the employee on the date of the injury at the First Aid Department. He was again seen the next day on January 8 by the company nurse in First Aid, and X-rays were taken by Dr. Imhoff. On January 9, 1968, the employee was treated by Dr. Ralph O. Butz at. the Ball .Memorial Hospital in Muneie. At the time that Dr. Butz testified in the case, appellee’s counsel *510admitted the • qualifications of Dr. Butz and no time .was. any evidence. introduced by the appellee showing that Dr. Butz was not competent to furnish medical treatment.”
Appellee insists that he was justified in changing physicians because surgery for the excision of a piece of metal from his hand was arranged on January 25, 1963, for February 12, 1963, in the Ball Memorial Hospital. Appellee made no objection to anyone connected with appellant to .the surgery set for February 12,1963, and we think he gave his tacit approval thereto. Thereafter, however, he went to a doctor of his own selection and had the surgery performed. Neither the doctors of his own selection, who performed the surgery, not any other expert, testified or presented any evidence that there was an emergency or that the proposed surgery should be performed prior to the time of the arrangements made by appellant’s physician. There is no evidence of an emergency and, in view of the admitted fact that appellee continued to work, even though he suffered 'pain, which is' a subjective symptom, in our opinion, does not supply necessary and essential evidence to support the finding that appellee was justified in changing doctors, i
I would reverse the Award of the Full Industrial Board.. !
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 180.

=== CASE 9739980 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:08.388609+00 ===

Cooper, J.
This is an appeal from a negative judgment rendered in the Hamilton Circuit Court wherein the appellant, the Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Carmel, Indiana, brought an action for a permanent injunction to enjoin appellees, Harry L. Parsons et al., from changing the contour of and constructing improvements on certain real estate alleged to be in violation of the Improvement Location Permit Ordinance of the Town of Carmel, Hamilton County, Indiana.
The cause was submitted to the court, and thereafter the court entered the following final judgment:
“This cause having been taken under advisement, the court now finds against the plaintiff upon its complaint and for the defendants, that the plaintiff take nothing by its complaint and that no. injunction be issued against the defendants as sought in plaintiff’s complaint; and further that defendants should recover costs.
“It is therefore considered, ordered, adjudged and decreed that the plaintiff take nothing by its complaint and that costs be and they are hereby taxed to the plaintiff.”
Thereafter, the appellant filed the usual motion for a new trial, charging (1) that the decision of the court is not sustained by sufficient evidence; (2) that the decision of the court is contrary to law; (3) that the decision of the court is not sustained by sufficient evidence and is contrary to law.
*522The court overruled said motion for new trial, and the overruling of the motion for new trial is the assigned error.
Being a negative judgment, specifications #1 and #3 of the appellant’s motion for a new trial present nothing for our consideration. The general rule of law under such circumstances is well stated in the case of Leckrone v. Lawler (1954) (T. D.), 125 Ind. App. 35, 37, 118 N. E. 2d 381, wherein we held: “As the finding was negative to appellants who had the burden of proof, they cannot challenge the insufficiency of the “evidence to sustain the finding, Myers v. Brane (1944), 115 Ind. App. 144, 57 N. E. 2d 594; Wilson, Admrx. v. Rollings et al. (1938), 214 Ind. 155, 158, 14 N. E. 2d 905.” See also Hinds, Executor Etc. v. McNair et al. (1955), 235 Ind. 34, 40, 41, 129 N. E. 2d 553.
The appellant also asserts the decision is contrary to law, which, as pointed out in the case of Leckrone v. Lawler, supra, they may do. However, “It is only where the evidence is without conflict and can lead to but one conclusion, and the trial court has reached an opposite conclusion, that the decision of the trial court will be set aside on the ground that it is contrary to law. Losche & Sons v. Williams & Associates (1948), 118 Ind. App. 392, 78 N. E. 2d 447, supra". Pokraka v. Lummus Co. (1952), 230 Ind. 523, 532, 104 N. E. 2d 669.
Our Supreme Court, in the Hinds, Executor, etc. v. McNair et al., case, supra, at p. 41, stated:
“If the undisputed evidence entitles the one who has the burden of proof to a verdict which has been denied him, such verdict is contrary to law. To determine this question we may consider only the evidence most favorable to the appellees, together with *523all reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom,.
“ Tt is only where the evidence is without conflict and can lead to but one conclusion, and the trial court has reached an opposite conclusion, that the decision of the trial court will be set aside on the ground that it is contrary to law.’ ” (our emphasis)
In reviewing the applicable statutes, it appears that ch. 174 of the 1947 Acts, §§53-701 and 53-794, 1951 Repl., is a comprehensive act covering the entire subject matter of zoning for urban and rural areas of the state, and prior city and county zoning acts were repealed, except as to certain acts, regulations and ordinances continued in force by specific provisions of the new act.
It would unduly extend this opinion to attempt any summary of the entire act or to set forth verbatim the sections material to the decisions of this appeal.
The general rule of law is so well established that we do not deem it necessary to cite authority that the General Assembly may confer upon the several counties, cities, towns, etc., powers of local legislative and administrative character, but it is also well settled that such powers are not self-executing, and where a statute provides the manner in which a power is to be exercised, the statutory directions must be followed to give validity to the act.
In reviewing the record now before us, it affirmatively appears that in 1957 the town of Carmel, under the authority of the 1947 Zoning Act, passed an ordinance designated as Carmel’s Master Plan which embraced only the town limits of Carmel.
In 1959, it appears that the town of Carmel decided to go the additional two miles beyond the town limits permitted by the 1947 Zoning Act, and amended its 1957 *524Master Plan by ordinance, thereby properly exercising its power to go the additional two miles. It also appears that the newly-zoned area was called its jurisdictional area and delineated that on its jurisdictional map appearing in the record.
It has been established by the stipulation of the parties appearing in the record that the appellees’ land, upon which construction was sought to be enjoined by the appellant herein (construction was begun on April 20,1961), was located considerably more than two miles from the town of Carmel’s corporate limits and is not within the jurisdictional area delineated on Carmel’s jurisdictional map of 1959.
It is the appellant’s contention that Carmel’s 1959 Master Plan was extended automatically beyond its express territorial scope by a purported and alleged joinder of the town of Carmel and Clay Township by virtue of a purported joinder resolution of the 2nd day of February, 1960, authorized by ch. 46, Acts 1959, Indiana General Assembly. We cannot agree with the appellant’s contention.
In reviewing §53-1214, 1964 Supp., Burns’ Ind. Stat., it is apparent that the Acts of 1959, the same being §§53-1201 to 53-1214, are supplemental to the general acts of 1947, ch. 174, the comprehensive act which covers the entire subject matter of zoning for urban and rural areas of the state, and merely confers authority upon any city, town or county to effect a joinder with a contiguous township.
In reviewing the Act of 1959, we note that the joinder statute does not authorize a town to extend its existing Master Plan by simple resolution, nor does the joinder statute refer to existing master plans or ordinances; all it does is extend, upon a proper *525joinder, “the planning and zoning jurisdiction, of the accepting town or city”. See §53-1209, Burns’ Ind. Stat., 1964 Supp. It is apparent that this provision gives, upon a proper joinder, jurisdiction to act, i. e., power to plan and zone. We do not believe that jurisdiction, or the power to act, is equivalent to the act itself. Obtaining jurisdiction certainly is not the same as exercising it. The joinder statute speaks of jurisdiction, not exercises of it. It is apparent the joinder statute extends “the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city” with a contiguous township under certain conditions, procedures and terms each being mandatory in its operation.
We find that §53-1205, Burns’ Ind. Stat., 1964 Supp., provides, in part:
“ ... If the common council is favorable they shall pass a resolution setting forth the terms of the joinder and shall send one (1) copy to the township trustee and shall file one (1) copy with the county recorder. The latter copy shall be filed in the miscellaneous records. In case the plan commission or the common council rejects the petition, it shall immediately notify the township trustee.”
It affirmatively appears from the record now before us by stipulation that the agreement of the terms between the town of Carmel and Clay Township of Hamilton County was not set forth by resolution or ordinance or agreement until on May 2, 1961, which was after construction had been started by the appellees herein. We are of the opinion that the joinder statute gives Carmel and Clay Township, upon a valid joinder, the jurisdiction and power to plan and adopt zoning together. The power now exists upon joinder to plan and zone for the township the same as it existed formerly for the town, i. e., by working out a master plan between the town of Carmel and Clay Town*526ship and putting it into effect by amending Carmel’s 1959 Master Plan as provided by the Acts hereinbefore cited. There is no automatic amendment of master plans in Indiana. We fail to find in the record now before us where the town of Carmel and Clay Township have exercised any power which may have been available to them under the above-cited Acts.
By reason of what we have heretofore stated, we are of the opinion that the trial court did not commit error in denying the appellant’s request for a permanent injunction.
Judgment affirmed.
Carson, and Ryan, JJ., concur.
Faulconer, C. J., concurs, with opinion.

=== CASE 9740293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:00.228478+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). I do not believe this to be a proper case for the entry of summary judgment.
The facts are set out in the majority opinion. Those that bear reiteration here are the tender by Kayko and rejection by Swain of corporate checks of Swain Industries, Inc., as the first semiannual option payment under the contract, and the fail*505ure of Kayko to make actual tender of the second semiannual option payment.
The trial judge relied on the latter fact in granting summary judgment in favor of Swain. The majority look to the former in affirming his decision.
The trial judge recognized, as does the majority of our Court, that actual tender may be excused where the other party has manifested his intent to refuse tender if made.1 The judge went on, however, to rule that there was nothing in the record to establish this as a genuine factual contention of defendant Kayko.
In so ruling, the judge erred. Kayko’s affidavit accompanying his answer to the amended motion for partial summary judgment includes the following statement:
"That on August 15, 1969 deponent [Kayko] did have in his possession a writing from plaintiff rejecting payment by corporate check and was further informed by plaintiff on that date that a corporate check would not be accepted even though in accordance with the said option agreement.”
This, in my view, established the existence of a genuine issue of fact on the material question of whether Swain had manifested an intent not to accept tender of payment if offered.
The majority, in affirming the judgment against the defendants, say that Swain was merely rejecting a mode of tender which was riot in accordance with the contract, that Swain was not obliged to accept the corporate check of Swain Industries, Inc.
*506No complaint is made about the manner of payment, viz., bank check. Swain’s complaint is to the party vfh.o olfered payment.
I cannot agree on this record that Swain had an unquestionable right to reject the corporate check of Swain Industries, Inc. The agreement between Swain and Kayko provides that, "[Kayko] shall have the power to utilize the company surplus account and the lending power of said corporation for the purpose of making all payments hereunder”. This language is subject to the construction that it permits the use of the corporate surplus by Kayko precisely as he sought to use it here.
Questions of interpretation are ordinarily to be decided by the court, but surrounding circumstances may make plain the meaning of the language adopted.2 At the very least, Kayko is entitled to an opportunity to establish the circumstances by competent testimony before this language, seemingly consistent with his construction, is construed against him.
The majority in affirming the summary judgment rely on cases holding that a creditor may refuse tender by a stranger to the transaction. An examination of these cases reveals that they concern tender by a person who is a stranger to both parties to the contract. They are not concerned with tender by a third person on behalf of the debtor3—nor do they reach the question whether *507Swain agreed that Kayko could use the corporate funds to make the option payments. The full expression of the rule found at 52 Am Jur, Tender, § 14, p 224, reads:
"The courts generally take the position that a mere stranger to the obligation cannot make an effectual tender of payment of such obligation. But one who has an interest in the property which secures the obligation in question is not a stranger to the obligation. And a tender by one who is privy to the debtor in relation to the obligation in question and acts for and on behalf of the debtor is, in legal effect, a tender by the debtor himself and not by a stranger. A tender made by a stranger is good where subsequently ratified in good time by the party in whose interest it was made. It is an ancient rule, too, that any person may make a legal tender for an incompetent person or an infant.” (Emphasis supplied, footnotes omitted.)
I can visualize circumstances in which a creditor could properly refuse tender by a third person, but no such circumstances have as yet been shown in this case.
See Weinburgh v Saier, 303 Mich 640, 645 (1942); Ranck v Springer, 333 Mich 671, 674 (1952); Frakes v Eghigian, 358 Mich 327, 333 (1960).
See Seaboard Surety Co v Bachinger, 313 Mich 174, 179 (1945); Stark v Budwarker, Inc, 25 Mich App 305, 314-315 (1970).
See Gibson v Lyon, 115 US 439, 445; 6 S Ct 129, 131-132; 29 L Ed 440, 442 (1885); Forderer v Schmidt, 154 F 475, 477 (CA 9, 1907); Mathews v Union Central Life Insurance Co, 107 Kan 669, 673; 193 P 337, 339 (1920); 52 Am Jur, Tender, § 14, p 224, n 14.
Bator v Ford Motor Co, 269 Mich 648, 670 (1934), and Riber v Morris, 279 Mich 344 (1937), are not in point because here it is the claim of Kayko that Swain agreed that Kayko could use the corporate funds of Swain Industries, Inc., to make the option payments to Swain.

=== CASE 2222868 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:48.339593+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 336 (1973)
B. F. KASTNER, Administrator of the Estate of Laurel Nyberg, Deceased, d. b. a. Lamberton Hatchery, Respondent,
v.
Walter WERMERSKIRSCHEN, d. b. a. Albert Bay Egg Farm, Park Rapids, Appellant.
No. 43713.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
March 2, 1973.
*337 I. L. Swanson, Elbow Lake, for appellant.
G. F. Fillenworth, Lamberton, Berens Rodenberg & O'Connor, New Ulm, for respondent.
Heard before KNUTSON, C. J., and OTIS, ROGOSHESKE, and OLSON, JJ.
O. RUSSELL OLSON, Justice.[*]
Defendant appeals from a judgment entered pursuant to a verdict directed against him on a counterclaim. The issue on this appeal is whether the trial court properly exercised its discretion in excluding proffered expert opinion testimony from a witness who had no significant formal education in the pathology of chicken diseases and whose qualifications rested on experience and practical knowledge.
The plaintiff initiated the lawsuit to recover $4,500, representing the undisputed and unpaid portion of the initial purchase price of nearly $24,000 for 20-week-old pullets delivered to the defendant. The defendant's counterclaim alleges breach of implied warranty as to the fitness of the pullets for the purpose for which they were sold; specifically, the defendant claims that the pullets were diseased when delivered. The trial court directed a verdict for plaintiff on his claim and directed a verdict against defendant on his counterclaim.
On November 18 and 19, 1969, plaintiff delivered to defendant 13,800 pullets, then 20 weeks of age, for defendant's egg-laying operation. According to defendant's testimony, the pullets manifested no symptoms of disease until a week to 10 days after delivery. Autopsies of the pullets were performed 7 to 10 days later by defendant, who was permitted to express the opinion at trial that the cause of death on that date was leukosis, a chicken disease apparently nontreatable with antibiotics or other poultry disease remedies. During the course of the next 13 months, the death rate of the chickens was abnormally high, i. e., about 25 percent over the period, whereas normally it is less than 1 percent per month, and egg production was below normal.
In January 1971, after the chickens had progressed through the normal laying-hen cycle of approximately 1 year and thus completed their owner's service in life, death came in the normal course of events to these birds; in final service to their *338 owner, they were led to slaughter for soup production. Of 265 then rejected by government inspectors for even this lowly last service, only 31 suffered from leukosis.
At trial, defendant attempted to qualify one Signer Rykhus as an expert witness on chicken diseases. The trial judge in chambers carefully elicited an offer of proof from the defendant's witness. Rykhus testified he was a chicken hatchery operator and pullet raiser of 25 years' experience, a student at 15 to 20 diagnostic clinics and lectures by veterinarians schooled in chicken diseases, and a performer of chicken autopsies covering several years, and that he had read literature in the field of chicken diseases. Unlike defendant, Rykhus had not performed any autopsies of the chickens here involved. Rykhus was offered as a witness not merely to testify to the existence of leukosis on the date of the autopsies performed by defendant but also to the presence of the disease 7 to 10 days earlier on the delivery date. Rykhus expressed his opinion that the "incubation" period of the leukosis disease was 5 to 6 months, that the disease was commonly called a cancer, and that he believed leukosis was a virus disease.
There is undisputed evidence in the record that defendant had experienced an abnormally high mortality rate in an earlier flock of hens. There was also undisputed evidence that a separate flock of laying hens, producing eggs simultaneously with the flock in question but in a separate henhouse, had a poorer egg production record than the claimed leukosis-infected flock.
With this state of the record, the trial judge determined the proffered witness was not competent to express an opinion as to the existence of the disease on the delivery date as distinguished from the autopsy date. The judge in his memorandum found Rykhus incompetent to testify regarding the cause of the disease or its "incubation" period. Further, the court found the witness to be deficient in knowledge concerning the specific symptoms which might eliminate some other diagnosis. Since there was no other evidence disclosing the existence of the disease on the delivery date, a verdict was directed against the defendant on his counterclaim.
We affirm the trial court's decision.
A directed verdict accepts the view of the entire evidence most favorable to the adverse party and admits the credibility (except in extreme cases) of the evidence in his favor and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Lovejoy v. Minneapolis-Moline Power Imp. Co., 248 Minn. 319, 79 N.W.2d 688 (1956); Hanson v. Homeland Ins. Co., 232 Minn. 403, 45 N. W.2d 637 (1951).
In an action for breach of implied warranty, the burden of proof is upon the party asserting the breach. In this case, the defendant had the burden of proving the chickens suffered from leukosis at the time they were delivered to him. Frame v. Hohrman, 229 Minn. 468, 39 N.W.2d 881 (1949).
The sufficiency of the foundation to qualify a witness as an expert and therefore to permit him to express an expert opinion is a determination resting largely in the discretion of the trial judge. This court will reverse only if the exercise of that discretion is clearly wrong. Swanson v. Chatterton, 281 Minn. 129, 160 N.W.2d 662 (1968).
A witness may qualify as an expert not only on the basis of knowledge which he has gained through formal education but also on the basis of knowledge gained through occupational experience. Wigmore defines "occupational experience" as "the kind which is obtained casually and incidentally, yet steadily and adequately, in the course of some occupation or livelihood." 2 Wigmore, Evidence (3 ed.) § 556. See, Alford v. Kruse, 183 Minn. 158, 235 N.W. 903 (1931); Wilson v. Lynard, 162 Minn. 135, 202 N.W. 713 (1925). The fact that the care of animals is generally in the hands of practical men *339 rather than professional men renders it necessary, when considering the admissibility of opinion testimony regarding diseases of animals, to apply a lower standard of qualification to witnesses giving opinion testimony on such matters than is generally applied to expert witnesses offering testimony as to the diseases and ailments of humans. See, 31 Am.Jur.2d, Expert and Opinion Evidence, § 169; Annotation, 49 A.L.R.2d 932.
In the Alford and Wilson cases, this court adopted the position that a formal education in animal diseases is not necessary to qualify a witness as an expert. In each of these cases, the plaintiff claimed breach of warranty because of the presence of contagious abortion (brucellosis, also known as Bang's disease) in cows purchased from the defendant. These cases held that farmers who had gained knowledge of Bang's disease through practical experience in the care of cows could testify that the cows were infected with the disease. In those cases the opinion testimony went to establish the presence of the disease. They do not hold that a so-called lay expert witness who is qualified to diagnose the presence of an animal disease necessarily qualifies also as an expert in the causation and onset of that animal disease. The instant case, however, requires evidence relative to the cause and onset of the disease as well as evidence which would establish that leukosis, rather than other factors, caused the loss of egg production and the increased mortality rate among the birds.
We find that the trial court properly exercised its judicial discretion in determining that the proffered expert witness was not shown to be sufficiently qualified in the pathology of the particular chicken disease in question here and in determining that insufficient foundation had been disclosed for his expert opinion concerning the onset of the alleged disease.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as Justice of the Supreme Court by appointment pursuant to Minn.Const. art. 6, § 2, and Minn.St. 2.724, subd. 2.

=== CASE 2222871 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:48.385071+00 ===

726 N.E.2d 764 (2000)
312 Ill. App.3d 319
244 Ill.Dec. 789
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Louis HRUZA, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-99-0389.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
March 17, 2000.
*766 Donald J. Ramsell, Ramsell & Armamentos, Wheaton, for Louis Hruza.
Joseph E. Birkett, DuPage County State's Attorney, Wheaton, Martin P. Moltz, Deputy Director, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Elgin, Barbara A. Preiner, Deitsch & Preiner, Wheaton, for the People.
Justice GALASSO delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Louis Hruza, appeals his conviction of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) (625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)(2), (d)(1)(D) (West 1998)) and felony driving while license revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303(a), (d) (West 1998)). He contends that (1) the trial court should have dismissed the indictment, which allegedly resulted from perjured testimony; (2) the trial court erred in applying retroactively an amended statute (625 ILCS 5/2-123 (West 1998)) regulating the transmission and evidentiary use of driver's license abstracts; and (3) he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
Gregory Compton of the Westmont police department was stopped at a red light at Naperville Road and Cass Avenue on August 7, 1997, when he saw a red Taurus make a wide left turn onto Cass Avenue. The car straddled two southbound lanes for about 100 feet. When the road narrowed to one lane, the car crossed the double yellow line for about 10 feet. The car continued weaving within its lane for about five blocks.
Compton followed the red car. He saw it change to the curb lane and continue to weave within that lane. It also straddled the white fog line for about 40 feet. At 55th Street, the officer activated his emergency lights. The driver of the car turned onto 56th Street and stopped the car without difficulty.
As Compton approached the car, he noticed that the driver, whom he identified as defendant, had red, bloodshot, and glassy eyes; red cheeks; and a strong odor of an *767 alcoholic beverage. Compton asked defendant for his driver's license and proof of insurance. After thumbing through his wallet for several minutes, defendant produced an Illinois state identification card. In response to the officer's question, defendant said that he did not believe his license was currently valid. Defendant also said that he had drunk several beers at a golf outing earlier in the day.
Defendant got out of the car, using the top of the door for support. Compton observed that defendant swayed slightly as he walked to the rear of the car. Defendant correctly recited the alphabet, "stopping briefly" between letters. Compton administered the horizontal gaze nystagmus (HGN) test. According to Compton, defendant's eyes did not follow smoothly, indicating a possibility that defendant was under the influence of alcohol.
Compton also administered the finger-to-nose test. Defendant started twice before the instructions were finished. On the left-handed rotations, he touched his face below the nostril and once he put his arms down. Compton concluded that defendant failed the test. Defendant declined to perform the one-leg-stand and walk-and-turn tests, citing a hip injury. Compton then arrested defendant for DUI. Defendant refused to take a breathalyzer test.
Defendant's brother, Alan Hruza, testified that he and defendant played golf from 11 a.m. until 4 or 4:30 p.m. that day. After the round, they each had one beer in the clubhouse. They went to Alan Hruza's house to change clothes and drop off their clubs. They proceeded to the Plantation restaurant for a banquet and then played cards. Defendant had beer during dinner but switched to coffee during the card game. They left the restaurant about 11 p.m., with defendant driving a rental car. Defendant's driving, speech, and gait seemed normal.
Defendant corroborated much of his brother's testimony. He testified that he has knee, back, and hip injuries. He denied driving erratically or being under the influence of alcohol that night.
Over defendant's objection, the State introduced his driver's license abstract, which had been electronically transmitted from the Secretary of State's office. The State introduced additional documentation of defendant's prior convictions to support the enhanced DUI charge. The trial court found defendant guilty of DUI and driving while license suspended.
Defendant moved to dismiss the indictment based on a due process violation and later filed a motion for a new trial. The trial court denied both motions and sentenced defendant to 15 months' imprisonment. Defendant filed a timely notice of appeal.
Defendant first contends that the court erred in denying his motion to dismiss the indictment. He argues that he was denied due process because Officer Compton committed perjury in his grand jury testimony. The factual basis for this claim is as follows.
At the grand jury hearing, Compton was asked whether defendant failed the field sobriety tests. He responded, "The ones he did perform for me, he did fail." At trial, Compton testified that defendant correctly recited the alphabet. He said that during such a test he listens to the suspect to determine whether his or her speech is slurred. As defendant performed the tests, Compton noticed some slurring and stuttering, as well as pauses between the letters. However, on cross-examination, Compton testified as follows:
"Q. So he passed the test?
A. Yes."
Defendant contends that Compton perjured himself before the grand jury when he testified that defendant failed all the field sobriety tests he took when in fact defendant had passed at least one. He further contends that because of this, all of Compton's grand jury testimony must be disregarded. He argues that, because *768 Compton was the only witness before the grand jury, there was no evidence to support the indictment, resulting in a denial of due process.
The State responds that Compton's testimony was not actually false because he clarified that he evaluates the test based on factors other than the suspect's ability to recite the alphabet correctly. The State also contends that, even if Compton's testimony was false, the remedy is to disregard only the false testimony and that the remainder of his testimony before the grand jury amply supports the indictment.
A trial court has the inherent power to dismiss an indictment where a clear denial of due process has occurred. People v. Lawson, 67 Ill.2d 449, 456, 10 Ill.Dec. 478, 367 N.E.2d 1244 (1977). However, the power should be used with great restraint and only when a violation is clearly established. People v. Torres, 245 Ill.App.3d 297, 300, 184 Ill.Dec. 311, 613 N.E.2d 338 (1993).
An indictment based on perjured testimony may be dismissed if a due process violation is established with certainty. People v. DeCesare, 190 Ill.App.3d 934, 944, 138 Ill.Dec. 483, 547 N.E.2d 650 (1989); see People v. Creque, 72 Ill.2d 515, 524, 22 Ill.Dec. 403, 382 N.E.2d 793 (1978). A court should not dismiss an indictment unless all of the testimony upon which the indictment is based is incompetent. DeCesare, 190 Ill.App.3d at 944, 138 Ill.Dec. 483, 547 N.E.2d 650; People v. Schulz, 154 Ill.App.3d 358, 367, 107 Ill.Dec. 288, 506 N.E.2d 1343 (1987). Generally speaking, the validity of an indictment is not affected by the character of the evidence considered. People v. J.H., 136 Ill.2d 1, 10, 143 Ill.Dec. 889, 554 N.E.2d 961 (1990).
It appears that Compton's statement to the grand jury that the defendant had failed all the field sobriety tests was incorrect. Compton clearly stated at trial that defendant "passed" the alphabet test. Nevertheless, even if that statement is disregarded, the additional evidence before the grand jury was sufficient to support the indictment. Compton said that he stopped defendant after he saw him swerving and described his physical appearance. We emphasize that, according to the above-cited cases, the courts' role in reviewing grand jury proceedings is extremely limited. Courts may dismiss an indictment that is based solely on perjured or otherwise incompetent evidence, but they are not to scrutinize the proceedings to evaluate the weight and quality of the evidence. Therefore, the trial court did not err in sustaining the indictment.
Defendant next contends that the court erred in applying retroactively amended section 2-123 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/2-123 (West 1998)). He argues that the retroactive application of the statute changed the State's burden of proof in violation of the ex post facto clauses of the federal and state constitutions (U.S. Const., art. I, § 10; Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 16). The State responds that the changes wrought by the amendments were merely procedural and may therefore be applied retroactively.
A law is ex post facto if it is both retroactive and more onerous than the law in effect on the date of the offense. People v. Shumpert, 126 Ill.2d 344, 351, 128 Ill.Dec. 18, 533 N.E.2d 1106 (1989). Thus, a law is ex post facto if it alters the rules of evidence to make conviction easier. People v. Anderson, 53 Ill.2d 437, 441, 292 N.E.2d 364 (1973). A law that decreases the degree of proof necessary to convict a defendant is ex post facto if applied retroactively. Thompson v. Missouri, 171 U.S. 380, 385, 18 S.Ct. 922, 924, 43 L.Ed. 204, 207 (1898); Shumpert, 126 Ill.2d at 351, 128 Ill.Dec. 18, 533 N.E.2d 1106. However, the ex post facto clause does not limit the legislature's control of remedies or modes of procedure if they do not affect matters of substance. People v. Kotecki, 279 Ill.App.3d 1006, 1011, 216 Ill.Dec. 869, 666 N.E.2d 37 (1996).
*769 Defendant was arrested on August 7, 1997. Section 2-123 was amended shortly thereafter. The statute, with the language added by the amendment italicized, now reads as follows:
"The Secretary may also furnish the courts a copy of an abstract of a driver's record, without fee, subsequent to an arrest for a violation of Section 11-501 or a similar provision of a local ordinance. * * *
6. Any certified abstract issued by the Secretary of State or transmitted electronically by the Secretary of State pursuant to this Section, to a court or on request of a law enforcement agency, for the record of a named person as to the status of the person's driver's license shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated and if the name appearing in such abstract is the same as that of a person named in an information or warrant, such abstract shall be prima facie evidence that the person named in such information or warrant is the same person as the person named in such abstract and shall be admissible for any prosecution under this Code and be admitted as proof of any prior conviction or proof of records, notices, or orders recorded on individual driving records maintained by the Secretary of State." 625 ILCS 5/2-123 (g)(5), (g)(6) (West 1998).
Defendant's argument is difficult to follow. He appears to argue that the amended statute lessens the State's burden of proof because it makes an electronically transmitted copy of a driver's abstract, rather than a certified paper copy, prima facie evidence of the facts therein recited. We fail to see how this amendment eases the State's evidentiary burden. The amended statute provides, as before, that the abstract is prima facie proof of the facts it contains. If anything, the statute arguably eases the burden on the Secretary of State, who may transmit the document electronically rather than take it to the post office for mailing, but this does not in any way make convictions easier. The amendment is clearly procedural and may be applied retroactively.
We acknowledge that the provision for electronic transmission may in some cases make tampering with the records easier, but defendant does not allege that that occurred here. Neither in the trial court nor in this court has defendant contended that anything in his driving abstract is incorrect. Thus, even if the trial court somehow erred in applying the statute retroactively, defendant was not prejudiced.
Although defendant does not specifically raise this argument, the State points out that the amendment to section 2-123 also added the language providing that the abstract shall be admissible and shall be deemed "proof of any prior conviction" (625 ILCS 5/2-123(g)(6) (West 1998)). The State argues that defendant could not succeed on this point in any event because the amendment merely clarifies what had been the common practice before the amendment and is merely procedural. We agree.
Not every alteration of the law existing at the time of the offense violates the ex post facto clause. People v. Dorff, 77 Ill.App.3d 882, 884, 33 Ill.Dec. 300, 396 N.E.2d 827 (1979). In Kotecki, this court upheld the retroactive application of an amendment allowing the admission in a DUI prosecution of the results of a blood-alcohol test given in conjunction with emergency medical treatment. Kotecki, 279 Ill.App.3d at 1013, 216 Ill.Dec. 869, 666 N.E.2d 37; see 625 ILCS 5/11-501.4 (West 1994). We held that the amendment did not alter the law to require less proof, in amount or degree, to convict. Therefore, the law was merely procedural and could be applied retroactively. Kotecki, 279 Ill. App.3d at 1013, 216 Ill.Dec. 869, 666 N.E.2d 37. The same conclusion applies here. The amendment merely clarifies the manner in which an element of the offense may be proved. Moreover, as the State argues, the amendment seems merely to *770 have codified the existing law and practice. We note that no contention is made that the amendment creates an irrebuttable presumption that the information in the abstract is correct. Rather, the amended statute simply provides that the abstract may be offered as "proof" the same as any other evidence. Here, defendant had the opportunity to rebut the facts in the abstract but did not do so.
Defendant finally contends that he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of DUI. We disagree. Where the sufficiency of the evidence is challenged on appeal, the relevant question is whether, after viewing all the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution, a rational trier of fact could have found all the elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Collins, 106 Ill.2d 237, 261, 87 Ill.Dec. 910, 478 N.E.2d 267 (1985). A criminal conviction will not be set aside unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it creates a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt. People v. Brackett, 288 Ill.App.3d 12, 19, 223 Ill.Dec. 512, 679 N.E.2d 1285 (1997). A reviewing court is not permitted to substitute its judgment for that of the trier of fact on questions involving the weight of the evidence, the credibility of the witnesses, or the resolution of conflicting testimony. People v. Campbell, 146 Ill.2d 363, 375, 166 Ill.Dec. 932, 586 N.E.2d 1261 (1992).
Here, Officer Compton testified that he saw defendant driving erratically. After he pulled him over, Compton saw that defendant exhibited the usual signs of intoxication. Although defendant correctly recited the alphabet, he failed two other field sobriety tests. He refused to take two others. While defendant claimed that numerous injuries prevented him from taking the tests, he also testified that he had played golf earlier in the day. Defendant admitted he had been drinking beer.
Defendant points to, at most, several minor inconsistencies in Compton's testimony. These merely affect the weight of the evidence. On the whole, the evidence amply supports the trial court's finding that defendant was guilty of DUI.
The judgment of the circuit court of DuPage County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BOWMAN, P.J., and COLWELL, J., concur.

=== CASE 2222959 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:50.883742+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 686 (1973)
Kenneth E. VANDER LINDEN, Appellant,
v.
Paul CREWS et al., Appellees.
No. 55348.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 28, 1973.
Bert A. Bandstra, Knoxville, for appellant.
Richard C. Turner, Atty. Gen., and Larry M. Blumberg, Asst. Atty. Gen., Des Moines, for appellee Paul Crews.
Heard by MASON, RAWLINGS, LeGRAND, REES, UHLENHOPP, HARRIS and McCORMICK, JJ.
*687 REES, Justice.
This appeal is from an order of the trial court sustaining motion for summary judgment of defendant and sole appellee, Paul Crews, who with the other defendants had been sued by plaintiff for damages based upon plaintiff's claim he had been maliciously prosecuted by defendants.
Defendant Crews, on October 19, 1969, was Secretary of the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners, and was designated as Director of Drug Law Enforcement. His duties embraced planning, organizing and directing field operations necessary to control illegal narcotic and dangerous drug traffic, to investigate complaints or incidents of pharmacy law violations, and to gather evidence and assist in the preparation of court cases against violators. Plaintiff Vander Linden was the owner and proprietor of a pharmacy in Pella. On October 19, 1969 he was arrested by defendant Crews without a warrant and taken before a justice of the peace where Crews executed and filed a preliminary information charging plaintiff with the sale of stimulant drugs without a prescription in violation of chapter 189 of the Acts of the 62nd General Assembly (now chapter 204A, Code of Iowa, 1971).
Plaintiff was indicted by the grand jury of Marion County, and was later tried to a jury which returned a verdict of acquittal; thereafter, plaintiff instituted his action against defendants based upon his claim of malicious prosecution.
Defendant-appellee Crews filed his motion for summary judgment, supported by affidavit, in which he alleged he was a public officer in his capacity as Secretary of the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners, and was immune from suit under the doctrine of judicial immunity. Motion for summary judgment was sustained by trial court and plaintiff appeals.
In his petition, plaintiff alleged defendant Crews, between the dates of October 14, 1969 and October 19, 1969, maliciously conspired with defendant Snyder and arranged for the wrongful and malicious arrest and prosecution of the plaintiff, and further asserts that at the time the arrest without warrant of the plaintiff was made, that the defendants nor any of them had any reasonable grounds or probable cause for making said arrest. In his answer, defendant Crews denies the absence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for making the arrest and further denies he was activated by malice in the conduct of his duties including the arrest and detention of plaintiff.
In ruling upon defendant Crews' motion for summary judgment, the court found Crews, as Secretary of the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners, occupied a position created by section 147.98 of the Code, 1971, and that he was designated as Director of Drug Enforcement under sections 147.95 and 147.99, The Code. The court found that as such secretary and director, defendant Crews is a public officer within the meaning of that term and as defined by this court in State v. Taylor, 260 Iowa 634, 144 N.W.2d 289.
Trial court further found defendant Crews should be granted immunity from suit where he was acting within the scope of his duties and the motion of said defendant for summary judgment was sustained, and as against said defendant plaintiff's petition was dismissed.
Plaintiff advances two errors upon which he relies for reversal: (1) that trial court erroneously held that defendant Crews was a "public official" and not a "peace officer", and (2) trial court erroneously extended to defendant Crews judicial immunity from civil suit bottomed on false arrest and malicious prosecution.
I. Insofar as the matter now before us is concerned, we feel whether Crews was a "public officer" or a "peace officer" is a distinction without a difference.
Section 147.98, The Code, provides that the Board of Pharmacy Examiners shall *688 have the right to employ a full-time secretary who shall not be a member of the examining board, and at such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the biannual salary act. Section 147.99 provides the secretary of the pharmacy examiners shall, upon the direction of said examiners, make inspections of alleged violations of the provisions of the act creating the Board of Pharmacy Examiners, and shall be allowed necessary traveling and hotel expenses in making such inspections.
Section 147.95 provides that the practice act insofar as it affects the practice of pharmacy shall be enforced by the Board of Pharmacy Examiners, and that officers, agents, inspectors and representatives of the Board of Pharmacy Examiners shall have all the powers and status of peace officers when enforcing the act.
Section 204A.8, The Code, 1971, is embraced in the statute which is designed to regulate traffic in depressant, stimulant, counterfeit and hallucinogenic drugs. The duties of enforcing the statute are imposed upon the Board of Pharmacy Examiners. Section 204A.8 provides:
"Any officer or employee of the board designated by the secretary of the board to conduct examinations, investigations, or inspections under this chapter relating to depressant, stimulant or counterfeit drugs shall have all the powers of other peace officers and may arrest without warrant for offenses under this chapter committed in his presence, or, in the case of a felony, if he has probable cause to believe that the person arrested has committed or is committing such offense. Such officers and employees shall have the same powers as other peace officers to seize drugs or articles used in the manufacture or sale of drugs which they have reasonable grounds to believe are in violation of this chapter. Such drugs or articles shall be subject to condemnation."
We agree with trial court defendant Crews was a public officer. This court considered fully the question of the status of one holding a public position in our early case of State v. Spaulding, 102 Iowa 639, 72 N.W. 288, 289. Also, in State v. Taylor, 260 Iowa 634, 144 N.W.2d 289, 292, we said five essential elements are required by most courts to make a public employment a public office, namely: (1) the position must be created by the constitution or legislature, or through authority conferred by the legislature; (2) a portion of the sovereign power of government must be delegated to that position; (3) the duties and powers must be defined directly or impliedly by the legislature or through legislative authority; (4) the duties must be performed independently and without control of a superior power other than the law; and (5) the position must have some permanency and continuity and not be only temporary and occasional. See also cases cited in State v. Taylor, supra.
We note, also, section 748.3, The Code, 1971, defines "peace officers". Said section provides:
"The following are `peace officers':
"1. Sheriffs and their deputies.
"2. Constables.
"3. Marshals and policemen of cities and towns.
"4. All special agents appointed by the commissioner of public safety and all members of the state department of public safety excepting the members of the clerical force.
"5. Such persons as may be otherwise so designated by law."
Irrespective of the foregoing statute, we hold defendant Crews came within the guidelines laid down in State v. Taylor, supra, and that as Secretary of the Board of Pharmacy Examiners he is a "public officer".
II. Appellant and appellee concede the question as to whether defendant Crews is protected by the cloak of judicial or governmental *689 immunity is a matter of first impression here. This is virtually correct insofar as the question of governmental immunity pertains to a person who does not occupy a judicial position.
We have had occasion to consider the question of judicial immunity as it applies to judicial officers, particularly, justices of the peace. In Huendling v. Jensen, 168 N.W.2d 745, 749 (Iowa 1969), we have said justices of the peace are immune from civil liability even though they act in excess of their jurisdiction. At page 751 of 168 N.W.2d (in quoting from Bradley v. Fisher, 13 Wall. 335, 347, 80 U.S. 335, 347, 20 L.Ed. 646), this court said:
"For it is a general principle of the highest importance to the proper administration of justice that a judicial officer, in exercising the authority vested in him, shall be free to act upon his own convictions, without apprehension of personal consequences to himself. Liability to answer to everyone who might feel himself aggrieved by the action of the judge, would be inconsistent with the possession of this freedom, and would destroy that independence without which no judiciary can be either respectable or useful."
We have more recently, in Osbekoff v. Mallory, 188 N.W.2d 294 (Iowa 1971), reiterated our stand that the doctrine of judicial immunity extends to courts of limited jurisdiction, but have also announced the rule that when a minor magistrate acts wholly without jurisdiction, civil liability attaches for his malicious and corrupt abuse of process, and his willful and malicious oppression of any person under the pretense of acting in his official capacity. See Osbekoff v. Mallory, supra, at page 300 of 188 N.W.2d. We have not, however, extended the doctrine of judicial or governmental immunity to other offices of a nonjudicial character, and decline to do so now.
We have reviewed authorities from other jurisdictions, and find the troublesome question of the extension of judicial or governmental immunity to nonjudicial officers to be obscured by a considerable penumbra. We are aware the federal courts and the courts of sister jurisdictions, notably California, have extended the protection of the doctrine to all sorts of minor functionaries. Judicial immunity has been extended in the following cases: Barr v. Matteo, 360 U.S. 564, 79 S.Ct. 1335, 3 L. Ed.2d 1434 (1959) (Acting director of Office of Rent Stabilizationmalicious defamation); Howard v. Lyons, 360 U.S. 593, 79 S.Ct. 1331, 3 L.Ed.2d 1454 (1959) (Commander, Boston Navy Yarddefamation); Ove Gustavsson Construction Co. v. Floete, 299 F.2d 655 (2d Cir. 1962), cert. den., 374 U.S. 827, 83 S.Ct. 1862, 10 L.Ed. 2d 1050 (Contracting Officer of General Services Administration); Blitz v. Boog, 328 F.2d 596 (2d Cir. 1964) (Government psychiatristfalse imprisonment); Brownfield v. Landon, 113 U.S.App.D.C. 248, 307 F.2d 389 (1962), cert. den., 371 U.S. 924, 83 S.Ct. 291, 9 L.Ed.2d 232 (Air Force inspectordefamation); Bershad v. Wood, 290 F.2d 714 (9th Cir. 1961) (Internal Revenue Service Officers); Koch v. Zuieback, 194 F.Supp. 651 (S.D.Cal.1961), aff'd., 316 F.2d 1 (9th Cir.) (local draft board officials); Gamage v. Peal, 217 F. Supp. 384 (N.D.Cal.1963) (Air Force doctor); Toscano v. Olesen, 189 F.Supp. 118 (S.D.Cal.1960) (postal inspector).
At state levels, the doctrine has been extended in: Jones v. Czapkay, 182 Cal.App. 2d 192, 6 Cal.Rptr. 182 (1960) (health officerfailure to quarantine); List v. O'Connor, 21 Ill.App.2d 399, 158 N.E.2d 103 (1959) (park district employeenegligently allowing motorcycle racers on ice); Weast v. Budd, 186 Kan. 249, 349 P.2d 912 (1960) (city manager for instituting eminent domain proceedings); Carder v. Steiner, 225 Md. 271, 170 A.2d 220 (1961) (prison warden and guard in the absence of malice); Peterson v. George, 168 Neb. 571, 96 N.W.2d 627 (1959) (state veterinarian); Bedrock Foundations, Inc. v. Brewster, 31 N.J. 124, 155 A.2d 536 (1959) *690 (highway supervisor); Jarrett v. Wills, 235 Or. 51, 383 P.2d 955 (1963) (superintendent of home for mentally deficient); Torres v. Owens, 380 S.W.2d 30 (Tex.Civ. App.1964) (county navigation commissioners); and, Corrao v. Mortier, 7 Wis.2d 494, 96 N.W.2d 851 (1959) (licensing official at least if no malice).
In concluding defendant Crews was protected by the mantle of judicial immunity, trial court relied upon and in its order sustaining defendant's motion for summary judgment, cited extensively from the case of Gregoire v. Biddle, 177 F.2d 579 (2d Cir., 1949). This action was for damages, plaintiff contending he had been arrested by the defendants, two United States Attorneys General, two Directors of the Enemy Alien Control Unit, and the District Director of Immigration at Ellis Island, on the pretense that he was German and an enemy alien. He had been kept in custody from 1942 to 1946, although the Enemy Alien Hearing Board had ruled he was a Frenchman and not an enemy alien. In Gregoire, at page 581 of 177 F.2d, the court said:
"It does indeed go without saying that an official, who is in fact guilty of using his powers to vent his spleen upon others, or for any other personal motive not connected with the public good, should not escape liability for the injuries he may so cause; and, if it were possible in practice to confine such complaints to the guilty, it would be monstrous to deny recovery. The justification for doing so is that it is impossible to know whether the claim is well founded until the case has been tried, and that to submit all officials, the innocent as well as the guilty, to the burden of a trial and to the inevitable danger of its outcome, would dampen the ardor of all but the most resolute, or the most irresponsible, in the unflinching discharge of their duties. Again and again the public interest calls for action which may turn out to be founded on a mistake, in the face of which an official may later find himself hard put to it to satisfy a jury of his good faith. There must indeed be means of punishing public officers who have been truant to their duties; but that is quite another matter from exposing such as have been honestly mistaken to suit by anyone who has suffered from their errors. As is so often the case, the answer must be found in a balance between the evils inevitable in either alternative. In this instance it has been thought in the end better to leave unredressed the wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject those who try to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation. Judged as res nova, we should not hesitate to follow the path laid down in the books."
We are unimpressed by the fears expressed by Judge Hand in Gregoire set out above. We believe it possible to determine whether claims for damages for malicious prosecution are well founded, and agree with certain language quoted above that to deny a person claimed to be injured by the malicious action of an officer not occupying a judicial position, to be "monstrous".
The courts of Michigan had not come to grips with the question of police immunity from civil suit for malicious prosecution until the pronouncement of the Court of Appeals of Michigan in Belt v. Ritter, 18 Mich.App. 495, 171 N.W.2d 581. In Belt, plaintiff was the owner and operator of a truck-leasing business, and the defendants were enforcement officers for the Michigan Public Service Commission. The defendants caused the arrest and prosecution of plaintiff several times between October 1961 and March 1964 on the charge of hauling for hire without public service commission authorization. Two of the prosecutions resulted in acquittal for plaintiff, and based on them plaintiff brought civil actions against the defendant officers, charging malicious prosecution, false arrest and false imprisonment. All of the claims were disposed of except plaintiff's claim for damages for malicious prosecution. Defendants' primary contention was that they *691 should have been granted summary judgment because police officers in Michigan should have immunity from suit for malicious prosecution, and placed reliance on White v. Towers, 37 Cal.2d 727, 235 P.2d 209, 28 A.L.R.2d 636.
In White, supra, the California court declared full immunity for peace officers. In that case, a fish and game investigator was granted immunity from civil suit even where the officer acted maliciously and without probable cause so long as he acted within the scope of his authority. They based such result on the central philosophical problem that it should be the public policy to protect individual citizens from oppressive official action, but, on the other hand, there was a real need of promoting the fearless and effective administration of the law for the whole people by protecting public officers from vindictive and retaliatory damage suits. The California court decided that the latter consideration was the more important, and it justified its denial of civil redress to citizens claiming injury by oppressive official action by saying that a criminal prosecution for official misdeeds would vindicate the victim to some extent and would serve the public better than a civil damage action.
In refusing to follow the lead of the California court in White, the Michigan Court of Appeals said,
"We certainly agree with the proposition that our police officers should be encouraged to enforce the law vigorously. However, we do not share the fear stated in White v. Towers, supra, and other cases, that a limited liability for malicious prosecution would force policemen to become timid in doing their job. No evidence other than judicial supposition has been presented for such a view."
Belt v. Ritter, supra, 171 N.W.2d at page 585. The decision of the Court of Appeals in Belt v. Ritter was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Michigan in 385 Mich. 402, 189 N.W.2d 221. In so affirming the Court of Appeals, the Michigan Supreme Court, at page 223 of 189 N.W.2d, quoted from the dissent of Justice Carter in White v. Towers, supra:
"`The majority opinion states that public officers should be protected from "vindictive and retaliatory damage suits." The reverse situation is presented here: any employee, clerk, assistant, investigator, inspector, or deputy is, by this holding protected when he has instigated the commencement and prosecution of a vindictive and malicious suit. This is true because the allegations of plaintiff's complaint must be taken as true, and he has alleged that the action was brought with malice and without probable cause.'"
"* * *
"With that reasoning, we agree. Extension of immunity to virtually any peace officer or law enforcement officer would result in a practical nullification of the tort of malicious prosecution. We conclude that assurance of full compensatory justice to the damaged individual should be paramount, and that the interest of the individual and protection from mala fide prosecutions is best assured by making the putative tortfeasor civilly liable for malicious prosecution."
In summary, we conclude that the doctrine of judicial immunity shall not be further extended to protect and shield nonjudicial officers from civil suits where actual malice is alleged. The action of the trial court in sustaining the motion for summary judgment of defendant Crews is, therefore, reversed.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9740335 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:39.711349+00 ===

HANSON, Justice.
This is an action by a judgment creditor against an insurer to recover the balance remaining unpaid on a wrongful death judgment. The amount sought is an excess of the insured’s policy limits.
The defendant insurer, National Indemnity Company, had issued an automobile liability insurance policy to Sylvester Wade, with a limitation on liability of $10,000 for the death or injury of one person. On May 27, 1966, while the policy was in effect, Wade was involved in a motor vehicle-pedestrian accident which resulted in the death of John A. Ripple. Wade was thereafter charged with and found guilty of second degree manslaughter alleged to have been committed while operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner and while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The conviction was affirmed by this Court on June 12, 1968, in State v. Wade, 83 S.D. 337, 159 N.W.2d 396.
On November 13, 1967, the plaintiff, Samuel W. Crabb, as special administrator of the Ripple estate, commenced a wrongful death action against Wade, seeking damages in the amount of $30,000. National Indemnity retained William G. Porter of Rapid City, as legal counsel. Mr. Porter informed Wade the wrongful death action involved a claim for damages in excess of the policy limits and he had a right to retain personal counsel. At the time Wade was represented in the criminal action by William Rensch as court-appointed counsel. Mr. Rensch was also authorized to communicate and cooperate with Mr. Porter in the defense of the *226wrongful death action. In the criminal action Wade was instructed to invoke the Fifth Amendment. It was also decided by Mr. Rensch and Mr. Porter that Wade would not appear and testify in the civil action.
Prior to the trial of the wrongful death action plaintiff submitted oral and written offers to settle the action for the policy limit of $10,000. These offers were refused by the insurer.
During the trial of the wrongful death action defendant’s motion for a directed verdict was denied and the issues were submitted to a jury which returned a verdict for plaintiff in the amount of $20,000. After the trial, defendant’s motion for judgment n. o. v. was denied. Thereafter, plaintiff again offered to settle the action within the policy limits. Wade and his counsel both demanded that National Indemnity accept the offer. Upon the advice of its counsel the insurer refused the settlement demand and an appeal was perfected. National Indemnity’s intention to appeal was not communicated to Wade or his counsel.
On April 30, 1969, this Court affirmed the wrongful death judgment in Crabb v. Wade, 84 S.D. 93, 167 N.W.2d 546. National Indemnity partially satisfied the judgment by paying $10,000, the limits of its policy, plus interest and costs, on May 23, 1969. On June 26, 1969, Wade assigned all the claims, demands, and causes of action which he might have against the insurer to the Special Administrator of the Ripple Estate.
The present action was instituted by the Special Administrator against National Indemnity to recover the unpaid balance of $10,000 on the judgment rendered in Crabb v. Wade because of the insurer’s alleged wrongful refusal to settle the wrongful death action within the policy limits. The issues were submitted to a jury which returned a verdict for the Special Administrator in the amount of $10,000. The defendant insurer appeals from the judgment. The plaintiff also cross appeals from an order denying the allowance of attorney’s fees and prejudgment interest.
The principal issue is whether the defendant insurer is liable for the excess judgment because of its refusal to settle *227within the limits of the insured’s liability policy. Cases from other jurisdictions involving this subject range from no liability to absolute liability. Where recovery is permitted it is usually allowed upon the grounds of negligence, or bad faith, or a fusion of the two. This Court in harmony with the majority view, approved recovery under the bad faith rule in Kunkel v. United Security Ins. Co. of New Jersey, 84 S.D. 116, 168 N.W.2d 723. In an extensive opinion on the subject the Court pointed out that good faith is a broad and comprehensive term which has to be determined by the particular facts and circumstances in each case. In considering what constitutes good or bad faith the interests of the insured must be given “equal consideration” with those of the insurer and in making a decision to settle or try a case “the insurer must in good faith view the situation as it would if there were no policy limits applicable to the claim”. Various factors were then set forth which should be considered in determining the issue.
Tested by the above standards there is ample evidence in the record, viewed in a light most favorable to the verdict, to sustain the excess judgment rendered against the insurer in this case. The facts surrounding the accident as reported in Crabb v. Wade, supra, show that decedent Ripple was an airman stationed at the Ellsworth Air Force Base. He was 22 years of age, single, and an exceptionally bright, intelligent, and capable young man. About 9:00 in the evening of May 27, 1966, he was returning to the Base walking north on the right-hand shoulder of the access road leading to the Main Gate. He was wearing suntan trousers and a green jacket. While so walking he was struck and killed by a hit-and-run driver.
There were two eyewitnesses to the accident. They testified a 1962 or 1963 black Chevy II station wagon was being driven fast, and weaved back and forth from one side of the road to the other. As they followed the station wagon on the access road leading to the Main Gate of the Air Base they observed it drift from the center of the road to the right until it appeared to strike a pedestrian. The station wagon did not stop after the accident and Ripple’s body was not discovered in the ditch until the next morning. Wade did not appear or testify at the trial of the *228wrongful death action but he did admit, in his answer, that a 1963 Chevy II black station wagon struck and caused Ripple’s death. There was ample proof in the record to show Wade was operating the station wagon and was under the influence of intoxicating liquor at the time of the accident. In comparison, decedent Ripple violated a statutory rule of safety by walking on the right-hand shoulder of the road instead of the left-hand side.
In evaluating all of the salient facts, including a review of testimony in the manslaughter trial, Mr. Porter was of the opinion the plaintiff could not prevail in the wrongful death action. In his judgment the decedent Ripple was guilty of negligence more than slight, as a matter of law, and such negligent conduct was a contributing cause of his death. It is now the position of the insurer that it cannot be held liable for the excess for its alleged wrongful refusal to settle within the policy limits as it “simply and purely” relied upon the professional advice of counsel on a question of local law.
While the insurer’s position was recognized in Ferris v. Employers Mutual Casualty Company, 255 Iowa 511, 122 N.W.2d 263, we do not agree that reliance on counsel is the sole decisive test of good faith in the present action. It is merely one factor to be considered. An insurer cannot discharge its entire responsibility to an insured “by simply employing a competent attorney and abiding by his decision concerning advisability of settlement”. Keeton, “Liability Insurance and Responsibility for Settlement”, 67 Harvard L.Rev. 1168. All the relevant factors bearing on the issue must be considered. Dumas v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity, 94 N.H. 484, 56 A.2d 57; Board of Ed. of Bor. of Chatham v. Lumbermen’s Mut. Cas. Co., D.C.N.J., 293 F.Supp. 541; Potomac Insurance Company v. Wilkins Company, 10 Cir., 376 F.2d 425.
Before and during the trial the insurer was advised of the strength of claimant’s case on the issues of liability and damages and in the event the issues were submitted to a jury a verdict in excess of the policy limits would no doubt be rendered. This is evident from the following: (1) the complaint alleged damages in the amount of $30,000 for the wrongful death of a bright young man; (2) the answer admitted the insured’s car struck and killed *229Ripple; (3) the insured Wade had been convicted of manslaughter in connection with the death; (4) the insured was intoxicated and driving recklessly at the time of the accident; (5) the issues of proximate cause and comparative negligence would be submitted to the jury; (6) before trial in a letter to the insurer Mr. Porter summarized the prospect “So the picture from the insured’s point of view is a bleak one if his conduct, and his conduct alone, is to be considered * * * It’s a fair bet that if we go to a jury on this case, we’re going to get stuck”; (7) a reserve in the amount of $10,000 was set up to cover the loss, and (8) during the trial Mr. Porter again advised the insurer the situation looked bleak as reflected in his notation of a telephone call on February 20, 1968, “2-20-68 — Call to Bill Lyons — advised status of trial (bad— booz — etc.)—don’t settle he says — go forward.”
After the judgment in excess of the policy limits had been entered and defendant’s motion for judgment n. o. v. had been denied the insurer again flatly refused to consider an offer to settle within the policy limits. At this juncture the insurer sought an independent appraisal and evaluation of the case from an attorney at law in Minneapolis. However, before receiving this opinion the claims manager for the insurer directed Mr. Porter to appeal. The appeal was taken without ever consulting or advising the insured. These are “added factors” bearing on the issue of bad faith. Wasserman v. Buckeye Union Casualty Co., 29 Ohio App.2d 7, 277 N.E.2d 569.
We recognize an insurer’s duty to settle does not become absolute upon rendition of an adverse verdict and judgment and the right to appeal ought not be automatically foreclosed. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Brewer, 9 Cir. 1968, 406 F.2d 610. However, the good faith test has been held to be more exacting at the appeal stage than prior to or during trial. After a jury verdict in excess of the policy limits, the insurer has an even greater duty to the insured. Hazelrigg v. American Fidelity & Casualty Co., 10 Cir. 1957, 241 F.2d 871; Foundation Reserve Ins. Co. v. Kelly, 10 Cir. 1968, 388 F.2d 528; State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Brewer, supra; United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co. v. Evans, 116 Ga.App. 93, 156 S.E.2d 809, aff’d 223 Ga. 789, 158 *230S.E.2d 243; Bowers v. Camden Fire Ins. Assoc., 51 N.J. 62, 237 A.2d 857; Wasserman v. Buckeye Union Casualty Company, supra; 40 A.L.R.2d 168.
In refusing to consider a settlement after the excess judgment was rendered the insured was exposed to a far greater financial risk than the insurer by an appeal. “[Wjhere the insurer alone can profit from a refusal to settle, the facts must point to the probability of a reversal. If such a likelihood does not appear, good faith can be demonstrated only by making the proposed settlement.” Bowers v. Camden Fire Ins. Assoc., supra. When the appeal is lost the issue of good faith is one for the jury.
We conclude the jury in this case could reasonably find from all the existing circumstances that the insurer violated its fiduciary relationship by not giving “equal consideration” to the interests of the insured in its constant refusal to discuss or consider a settlement within the policy limits before and after the trial of the wrongful death action.
The defendant insurer also contends that before an insured under a liability insurance policy, or his assignee, may recover an excess judgment it must first be shown the insured was damnified by payment of the judgment or has property or money subject to execution and levy. A similar contention was fully answered by the Minnesota Court in Lange v. Fidelity & Casualty Company of New York, 290 Minn. 61, 185 N.W.2d 881,* as follows:
“Defendant contends that even if there was no reasonable tactical or economic consideration justifying its refusal to settle, its refusal was justified by the fact that the insured was not injured by the excess judgment since he was insolvent. In this regard, defendant cites Norwood v. Travelers Ins. Co., 204 Minn. 595, 598, *231284 N.W. 785, 786, in which there is language which arguably might be interpreted as indicating that a judgment-proof insured does not suffer any resulting injury from his liability insurer’s ‘bad faith’ refusal to settle.
Because we believe that a judgment-proof insured does indeed suffer injury when a claimant obtains a judgment against him in excess of liability insurance policy limits, we now overrule language in the Nor-wood case to the contrary, and hold, as most states hold, that an insured may bring an action against his insurer for ‘bad faith’ refusal to settle whether or not the insured has paid, or can pay, that part of the judgment which exceeds the policy limits. A judgment-proof insured suffers injury from a judgment against him in excess of policy limits because such a judgment will potentially impair his credit, place a cloud on the title to his exempt estate, impair his ability to successfully apply for loans, and may eventually require him to go through bankruptcy. Further, if the rule were that a judgment-proof insured suffers no injury from an excess judgment, an insurer’s responsiveness to its well-established duty to give equal consideration to an insolvent insured’s interests would tend to become meaningless.”
It is the entry of a final judgment in excess of the policy limits, rather than its satisfaction, which harms the insured and gives rise to a cause of action against the insurer for a wrongful or unreasonable refusal to settle within the policy limits. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Brewer, 1968, 9 Cir., 406 F.2d 610; Terrell v. Western Casualty Company, Ky., 427 S.W.2d 825. Therefore, the present action could properly be brought without prior payment or proof of ability to pay the excess judgment by Wade. See 7A Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 4712, at p. 574; Lange v. Fidelity & Casualty Company of New York, 290 Minn. 61, 185 N.W.2d 881; Brown v. Guarantee Insurance Company, 155 Cal.App.2d 679, 319 P.2d 69, 66 A.L.R.2d 1202. As to assignability see also General Accident Fire & Life Assur. Corp. v. Little, 103 Ariz. 435, 443 P.2d 690; Groce v. Fidelity General Insurance Company, 252 Or. *232296, 448 P.2d 554, and annotation “Assignability of insured’s right to recover over against liability insurer for rejection of settlement offer” in 12 A.L.R.3d 1158.
Wade testified that when he assigned his cause of action to plaintiff he was relieved, by agreement, from further responsibility toward the satisfaction of the judgment. The record does not indicate whether this “agreement” was oral or written or its nature and extent. In any event, it does not defeat the assignment. The judgment remains of record against Wade. It constitutes a lien against his real property, if any, and obviously has an adverse effect on his credit record. Dumas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins. Co., 111 N.H. 43, 274 A.2d 781. The agreement by plaintiff to attempt collection of the balance due on the judgment against National Indemnity instead of Wade was the whole purpose and consideration for the assignment. See Bailey v. Prudence Mutual Casualty Co., 7 Cir., 429 F.2d 1388, and Gray v. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, 422 Pa. 500, 223 A.2d 8.
The insurer’s final contention relative to the admission of expert testimony is without merit and does not warrant an extended discussion.
CROSS APPEAL
Following entry of judgment plaintiff cross appellant filed a statement of costs and disbursements which included attorney’s fees in the amount of $5,660.55 and prejudgment interest on the $10,000 balance remaining unpaid from May 23, 1969 to June 3, 1970, at the rate of 6% for the total of $1,216.66. The trial court disallowed the two items as taxable costs.
The attorney’s fees are claimed to be taxable under the provisions of SDCL 58-12-3 which provides:
“In all actions hereafter commenced against any insurance company * * * on any policy or certificate of any type or kind of insurance, if it appears from the evidence that such company * * * has refused to pay *233the full amount of such loss, and that such refusal is vexatious or without reasonable cause, the court, if judgment is rendered for plaintiff, shall allow the plaintiff a reasonable sum as an attorney’s fee to be recovered and collected as a part of the costs”.
The trial court properly disallowed this item as part of the taxable costs. This is not an action against an insurance company on a policy of insurance within the contemplation of our statute. The gist of the action is tortious in nature i. e., for the wrongful refusal to settle within the policy limits of its insured. As explained in Kunkel v. United Security Ins. Co. of New Jersey, 84 S.D. 116, 168 N.W.2d 723, 733, “a breach of duty may arise from a contractual relationship, and while matters complained of may have their origin in contract, the gist of (the) action may be tortious.”
In addition a finding that an insurer lacked good faith does not signify its conduct was “vexatious or without reasonable cause”, as a matter of law. It merely means the insurer failed to discharge its fiduciary obligation to act in good faith in the defense and settlement of a claim against the insured. The situation here is unlike Tracy v. T & B Const. Co. et al., 85 S.D. 337, 182 N.W.2d 320, which was a direct action on a performance bond and the trial court expressly found the insurer’s refusal to pay was vexatious or without reasonable cause.
It is impossible for us to review or determine whether or not the insurer is liable for prejudgment interest. The policy of insurance is not part of the record. In the preliminary summary to an extensive annotation on the subject of “Liability insurer’s liability for interests and costs on excess of judgment over policy limit” appearing in 76 A.L.R.2d 983, the annotator points out that “In general, the determination of the question whether a liability insurer is liable for interest and costs on that part of a judgment recovered against the insured by a third party which is in excess of the amount limited by the policy depends upon the language employed by the parties in their contract”.
Accordingly, the judgment appealed from by defendant is affirmed and the order denying taxation of attorney’s fees as costs and prejudgment interest appealed from by plaintiff is likewise affirmed.
*234BIEGELMEIER, C. J., and WINANS and DOYLE, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, J., dissents.
In this decision the Minnesota Court expressly overruled the case of Norwood v. Travelers Ins. Co., 204 Minn. 595, 284 N.W. 785, which was cited in defendant insurer’s brief. Likéwise, the case of Universal Automobile Ins. Co. v. Culberson, 126 Tex. 282, 86 S.W.2d 727, which was also cited and relied upon in the defendant insured’s brief on this point was subsequently overruled by the Texas Court in Hernandez v. Great American Insurance Co. of New York, Tex., 464 S.W.2d 91.

=== CASE 2223120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:55.101743+00 ===

332 Mich. 210 (1952)
50 N.W.2d 762
STORNANT
v.
LICARI-PACKARD GROSSE POINTE, INC.
Docket No. 45, Calendar No. 45,076.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided January 7, 1952.
*211 Lacey, Scroggie, Lacey & Buchanan, for plaintiff.
Cary & BeGole, for defendants.
BOYLES, J.
Plaintiff was awarded workmen's compensation by the commission and the defendants appeal. The only question involved is whether plaintiff's injury arose out of and in the course of his employment. More precisely, the issue is whether the injury occurred in the course of his employment.
Plaintiff was employed by the defendant Packard automobile service garage as a bumper or metal finisher and furnished all his own tools except a grinder. His tools included different sets of socket and end wrenches and air hammer, dolly blocks, and hammers of different descriptions. While not working he kept these tools at his home and took them with him in his automobile for his own use in doing his work, which was collision work, bumping and straightening out fenders and doors, et cetera. For his services he was paid 50% of whatever said defendant charged for his work. He parked his automobile with his tools in it wherever he chose when he drove to work, usually on the street, but if he were going to use his heavier tools he often parked for convenience on the defendant's used-car parking lot. On the day of his injury he had parked his automobile and tools on a lot owned by said defendant adjacent to its service garage building.
On that date he had completed his work for said defendant, had punched the time clock, washed up, and had left the building to go to his automobile, carrying with him some of his tools to place in his *212 automobile, when he slipped and fell and was injured. He testified:
"Q. Mr. Stornant, you own and furnish certain tools that you used in your work as a metal finisher, including this air hammer?
"A. That's right.
"Q. And you regularly took these tools in your car with you and took them home at night for protection as your own property?
"A. That's right.
"Q. If you were going to need them in your work during the day, you either took them in, or went out to your car during the day?
"A. That's right.
"Q. And then you took them out to your car, so you wouldn't lose them in the shop?
"A. That's right."
To support his claim that his injury occurred in the course of his employment plaintiff relies on DeMann v. Hydraulic Engineering Co., 192 Mich. 594. In that case the plaintiff was employed as a common laborer by the defendant company. He had been at work in the basement of a theater building connecting water meters. The tools which he used belonged to his employer and when not in use were stored on the stage of the theater above the basement. It was one of DeMann's duties to look after his employer's tools and see that they were properly put away when the day's work was ended. He was injured while ascending or descending a flight of stairs leading from the basement to the stage floor. The Court said:
"It is undoubtedly true that the deceased was on his way from the basement to the stage for the purpose of getting his clothing, or to look after the tools, or both. There is no other apparent reason for his having been on the stairway. If his purpose was to look after the tools, that was clearly within the line of his employment."
*213 In the instant case the facts are different. At the time plaintiff slipped and fell on the way to his automobile he was not performing any service or duty he owed to his employer but was doing something solely for himself and for his own convenience. His injury did not arise out of and in the course of his employment.
"It is well settled that, to justify an award, the accident must have arisen `out of' as well as `in the course of' the employment, and the 2 are separate questions to be determined by different tests, for cases often arise where both requirements are not satisfied. An employee may suffer an accident while engaged at his work or in the course of his employment which in no sense is attributable to the nature of or risks involved in such employment, and therefore cannot be said to arise out of it. An accident arising out of an employment almost necessarily occurs in the course of it, but the converse does not follow." Appleford v. Kimmel, 297 Mich. 8.
In Hickman v. City of Detroit, 326 Mich. 547, the plaintiff suffered a broken leg when run over by one of the defendant's buses on its premises after he had slipped and fallen while en route to turn off the motor of his parked car. He was held (syllabus) "not to have suffered a compensable injury, since it was sustained while on a mission of his own, wholly personal in character."
"An injury to an employee while merely on his way to or from work, without any causal connection between his injury and his work, and without any duty to perform at that time for the employer, does not arise out of and in the course of the employment (CL 1948, § 412.1)." State Treasurer v. Kaiser-Frazer Corporation (syllabus), 326 Mich. 715.
To the same effect, see Rucker v. Michigan Smelting & Refining Co., 300 Mich. 668; Rector v. Ragnar-Benson, Inc., 313 Mich. 277; Luteran v. Ford Motor *214 Co., 313 Mich. 487; Daniel v. Murray Corporation of America, 326 Mich. 1; Roblyer v. City of Kalamazoo, 327 Mich. 392; Gonter v. L.A. Young Spring & Wire Corp., 327 Mich. 586; Pilgrim v. Menthen, 327 Mich. 714; Tegels v. Kaiser-Frazer Corp., 329 Mich. 84; Nelson v. Country Club of Detroit, 329 Mich. 479; Lyons v. Ford Motor Co., 330 Mich. 684.
The award is reversed and set aside and the case remanded for entry of an order denying compensation.
NORTH, C.J., and DETHMERS, CARR, BUSHNELL, SHARPE, and REID, JJ., concurred. BUTZEL, J., did not sit.

=== CASE 2223123 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:55.225844+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 797 (1951)
CITY OF SIOUX FALLS
v.
KADINGER.
CITY OF SIOUX FALLS
v.
CHAPMAN.
Nos. 9249, 9250.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
December 28, 1951.
*798 Blaine Simons, Sioux Falls, for defendants and appellants.
Thomas J. Barron, John E. Burke, Sioux Falls, for plaintiff and respondent.
ROBERTS, Judge.
These two cases involve the same question and were by stipulation consolidated for the purpose of appeal. The complaint in each action contains a charge that defendant had engaged in the business of contracting for plumbing work in the City of Sioux Falls without first having procured a license as required by ordinance. They contended that the ordinance is unconstitutional in that it violates Sections 1 and 2, Article VI, of the state Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the federal Constitution. Trial to the court without a jury resulted in convictions and each of the defendants was fined $200 and costs.
The ordinance in question requires that a person desiring to engage in the business of a contracting or master plumber or do work as a journeyman plumber shall first make application for and secure a license from the Board of Plumbing Examiners. The board consisting of the plumbing inspector of the city, a master plumber and a journeyman plumber is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the examination of applicants for licenses, and the same shall become effective upon approval of the Board of City Commissioners. The ordinance provides that the board shall examine all applicants "as to their knowledge of the rules and regulations governing plumbing" and "determine the qualifications and fitness" of all applicants. The ordinance further specifically provides that the examinations "shall be of such a character as to test and determine the fitness and qualifications of the applicants for the class of license applied for and their ability to properly carry on the plumbing business and work authorized under the license applied for in such manner as to safeguard and preserve the public health, safety and general welfare and in compliance with the regulations and ordinances governing such work." An applicant for a license must establish by the affidavit of a master or journeyman plumber that he has served at least three years as an apprentice. The license fee for a contracting or master plumber is $100. The annual renewal fee is $50. The license fee for a journeyman plumber is $1. After a license is once issued to a journeyman plumber, he can renew it by paying an annual fee of $1. An applicant aggrieved by action of the board of examiners may apply to the city commission to have the action reviewed and the commission may affirm, modify or reverse the action and may for good cause order the issuance of a license.
*799 SDC 45.0201(64) provides that a municipality shall have power "to license, tax, and regulate plumbers". The purport of this provision is that the power shall be exercised in such manner as municipal officials in their discretion shall determine. The mode of exercise is not prescribed. It is conceded that a municipality acting pursuant to this grant of power may in the interest of the public health require the examination and licensing of persons engaged in the business or occupation of plumbing. In 41 Am.Jur., Plumbers, Electricians, and Other Artisans, § 7, we find this statement of the law: "Although the business and trade of a plumber may not require the same training and experience as some other pursuits in life, yet a certain degree of training is absolutely necessary to qualify one as a competent and skilful workman, and it is within the legislative police power to require examination or licensing, or both, of those engaging in the plumbing business as master plumbers, employers of plumbers, or journeyman plumbers, for the protection of the public from the incapacity or ignorance of such persons. Important plumbing work calls for plans and designs and requires skilled supervision, and it is some guaranty of the fulfilment of these requirements if the public authorities require that the plumber employed upon the particular work and his assistants in carrying out the work engaged upon be competently certified and therefore held out to be skilled and capable in that business."
It is well recognized that if a business or occupation is so concerned with public health, safety and welfare as to come within the police power, the limit of the legislative power is regulation and its exercise cannot unduly abridge the right of a citizen to pursue a lawful vocation. The exercise of the power must be reasonable. The doctrine was thus stated by this court in Mundell v. Graph, 62 S.D. 631, 256 N.W. 121, 125: "If it be once conceded that the business or occupation of barbering is a proper field for the exercise of the police power and that the classifications made by the Legislature are reasonable, then what the Legislature sees fit to do by way of regulation and control lies very largely in the legislative discretion so long as its requirements are not unreasonable or arbitrary. * * * It is not material, even if it should be conceded to be true, that the public health and welfare might have been better served by establishing different requirements or by placing the regulation and control of the barbering business under the supervision of some other or different board, body, or person. Methods, requirements, and machinery are for the Legislature up to the point of unreasonable or arbitrary action." The fact then that a business or occupation comes within the police power does not subject it to unlimited regulation. The reasonableness of the restrictions imposed is a judicial question.
Appellants contend that the requirement of the ordinance that an applicant shall have served an apprenticeship for at least three years as shown by an affidavit of a master or journeyman plumber imposes an unreasonable and arbitrary restriction upon a lawful occupation; that the ordinance is not definite and certain and does not specify the nature or subject matter of the examination, but vests the examining board with arbitrary power to determine the extent and the nature of the examination and without regard for uniformity; and that the variability of the fees prescribed has no reasonable relation to the public health, safety and welfare and the same are not imposed in exercise of the police power and are disproportionate to the expense incidental to licensing and regulation.
The section of the ordinance relating to apprenticeship cannot be otherwise construed than as intended to bestow upon master and journeyman plumbers the exclusive right to instruct apprentices. The only permissible proof of competency to take an examination is an affidavit of a master or journeyman plumber showing that applicant has served as an apprentice for at least three years. An applicant otherwise qualified by instruction and training and competent to engage in the business or to pursue the occupation of a plumber is denied the right to take an examination and obtain a license. In People v. Brown, 407 Ill. 565, 95 N.E.2d 888, 893, the Supreme Court of Illinois found a similar requirement *800 invalid. Under the statute of that state, an application to a licensing board was necessary to become an apprentice, journeyman, or master plumber. Accompanying the application, an affidavit attesting to the employment of the applicant by a master plumber was required. The court discussed several tests of reasonableness which the court applies in determining the validity of an occupational licensing statute. The court said in considering the authority of the legislature to limit the right to apply for a license to persons who have attained their skill in a particular manner: "Obstacles are interposed by the act to a person freely and of his own choice engaging in the occupation of master plumber, the trade of journeyman plumber, and the activity of learning the trade by apprenticeship. One cannot be a licensed master plumber unless he has prior thereto been a licensed journeyman plumber, and before that a certified registered plumber's apprentice. No matter how well qualified a person may be by instruction and training, he can never of his own free will and choice become a certified registered plumber's apprentice, a journeyman plumber or master plumber, unless a licensed master plumber so wills. The act does not load a licensed master plumber with the obligation of employing a person who desires to enter into an apprenticeship. The refusal to employ one as an apprentice need not be based upon any valid reason. It may be an arbitrary refusal, it may be a refusal predicated upon an understanding between master plumbers to limit the number of apprentices learning the trade, and it may be upon one, or some, of the facts of race, color or creed. The act does not allow a person to learn the trade of journeyman plumber by acquiring the necessary instruction and training in any way, other than as an apprentice to a licensed master plumber. Just the refusal to employ will effectually bar the way to an apprenticeship. The licensed master plumber is in full and absolute control of the situation, a private citizen exercising a power under the protection of the State which the State cannot lawfully exercise, i. e., the arbitrary denial to a citizen of his inherent and inalienable right to engage in a legitimate activity by his own free will and choice."
The constitutionality of similar provisions with respect to the examination and licensing of undertakers was presented for judicial determination in People v. Ringe, 197 N.Y. 143, 90 N.E. 451, 27 L.R.A.,N.S., 28, 18 Ann.Cas. 474. The court declared that the provision that no one shall be licensed unless he shall have been employed as an assistant to a licensed undertaker continuously for three years was unreasonable in that it makes essential a particular form of acquiring skill and knowledge. People v. Harrison, 170 A.D. 802, 156 N.Y.S. 679; Id., 219 N.Y. 562, 114 N.E. 1076; State v. Walker, 48 Wash. 8, 92 P. 775, 15 Ann.Cas. 257, and Smith v. Texas, 233 U.S. 630, 34 S. Ct. 681, 58 L. Ed. 1129 are additional authorities to the effect that it is not within the legislative province to provide that an applicant for an occupational license shall have attained his competency in a particular manner.
A municipality has authority to require that a person shall not be granted a license to engage in the business or occupation of plumbing without first passing an examination to determine his competency. We hold, however, that the provisions limiting the right to an applicant furnishing an affidavit attesting to his apprenticeship cannot be sustained as a reasonable and valid exercise of the police power. This provision prescribing qualifications of applicants being invalid, the entire act must fail. The convictions cannot, therefore, be sustained. It is not necessary to express an opinion concerning the other asserted claims of invalidity.
The judgments appealed from are reversed.
All the Judges concur.

=== CASE 9739981 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:08.393049+00 ===

Concurring Opinion.
Faulconer, C. J.
The only question in this appeal is whether the resolution passed by the Board of Trustees of Carmel on August 9, 1960, granting the petition for joinder filed by Clay Township automatically extended the Master Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Carmel to all of Clay Township.
The statute authorizing joinder and setting up the procedure therefor, being Acts 1959, ch. 46, §53-1201, et seq., Burns’ 1963 Cum. Supp., states, in pertinent part, as follows:
“If the petition is accepted, the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city, . . . shall be extended to the township with the same effect as if the township was a part of the city . . . .” Acts 1959, ch. 46, §9, p. 111, §53-1209, Burns’ 1963 Cum. Supp.
The resolution passed by the Town of Carmel Plan Commission recommending to the Board of Trustees of *527the Town of Carmel that the petition of the trustees and advisory board of Clay Township be granted stated, in part, “and said Township be joined with the Town of Carmel for the purposes of planning and zoning ....” (Emphasis supplied.)
And the resolution passed by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Carmel, Indiana, in granting said petition stated, in part, as follows:
“Therefore, be it resolved by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Carmel that the petition of the Trustee and Advisory Board of Clay Township, Hamilton County, be granted and said Clay Township be and the same hereby is joined with the Town of Carmel for the purpose of planning and zoning pursuant to Chapter 46 of the Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of 1959.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Whether under this statute resolutions of joinder could be so drawn as to effect an extension of a master zoning ordinance of a city to the contiguous township without further specific zoning of the new area, is not a controlling issue for determination in this case.
I feel that considering the wording of the various resolutions used here and the surrounding circumstances, the only logical conclusion we can reach is that the joinder extended only the jurisdiction to zone and plan. If the Township or Town Boards intended otherwise, they could have so stated. We can only review what action the Boards took and can only construe their words in their ordinary meaning and to hold that said resolutions automatically extended the Carmel Master Zoning Ordinance to all of Clay Township would, I feel, be contrary to the language they used since we have no clear, statutory language to that effect. .
Note.—Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 589.

=== CASE 2221747 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.369627+00 ===

348 Mass. 87 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 255
GEORGE R. GARNHUM'S CASE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
October 9, 1964.
October 30, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, CUTTER, KIRK, & SPIEGEL, JJ.
George Waldstein for the employer.
Stanley S. Lewenberg (Meyer H. Goldman with him) for the claimant.
SPIEGEL, J.
This is an appeal by the employer from a final decree of the Superior Court awarding double compensation to the claimant in accordance with a decision of the reviewing board which adopted the findings and decision of the single member. G.L.c. 152, § 10, as amended through St. 1947, c. 546.
*88 We herewith summarize the relevant facts found by the single member. On June 22, 1962, the claimant, who "wanted a job for the summer," filed an "Application for Employment" form with the employer (a manufacturing concern) in which the claimant stated that he had lived in the State for sixteen years. He also filed a "Report of Physical Examination" in which he had asserted his age to be sixteen years and nine months, although he was actually less than sixteen years of age. In a subsequent interview with one Frederick K. Whiting, vice-president and treasurer of the employer, in response to a question as to whether he was "sixteen, going on seventeen, he replied in the affirmative." No birth or employment certificates were ever obtained from the claimant or any other source. The claimant began his employment on June 25, 1962, and was "assigned jobs on various machines between June 25 and July 11, 1962." On July 11, 1962, the claimant was assigned to work on a "hydraulic machine" with "electric controls" and while operating it he injured his left hand. A claim for compensation was filed alleging, inter alia, that the employer unlawfully permitted the claimant to operate the machine while he was under sixteen years of age.
The single member concluded that the employer "had acquired sufficient information to apprise him of the minority of the ... [claimant] at the time of his being hired," and that "the employment of [the] claimant ... was in violation of provisions of Chapter 149 and constitutes serious and wilful misconduct on the part of the employer...." Double compensation under G.L.c. 152, § 28 (as amended through St. 1943, c. 529, § 9), was awarded to the claimant. It was agreed that the claimant "was injured in the course of his employment ... and that as a result of the injury he is still disabled."
1. The employer contends that the claimant "is barred from recovery under the act[1] because he was not an `employee,'" *89 since "his contract of employment was void." We do not agree.
General Laws c. 149, § 60 (as amended through St. 1947, c. 109, § 1), provides in part that "No person shall employ a child under sixteen years of age, or permit him to work in, about or in connection with any factory, workshop, manufacturing or mechanical establishment at any time." Similarly, G.L.c. 149, § 61, relied on by the employer, provides that "No person shall employ a minor under sixteen or permit him to work in operating or assisting in operating any of the following machines: ... (17) power punches or shears, ... (21) upon or in connection with any dangerous electrical machinery or appliances, ... or in proximity to any ... machinery or gearing while such machinery or gearing is in motion." According to the employer, it is the illegality of the employment under these provisions which denies any recovery to the claimant.
However, under G.L.c. 152, § 28 (as amended through St. 1943, c. 529, § 9), "If the employee is injured by reason of the serious and wilful misconduct of an employer or of any person regularly intrusted with and exercising the powers of superintendence, the amounts of compensation hereinafter provided shall be doubled.... The employment of any minor, known to be such, in violation of any provision of sections sixty to seventy-four, inclusive, or of section one hundred and four of chapter one hundred and forty-nine shall constitute serious and wilful misconduct under this section" (emphasis supplied). It seems obvious that violation of the very statutory provisions upon which the employer relies, in contending that the claimant cannot recover, operates by virtue of this section to qualify him for double recovery. The necessary implication of this section is that a minor employed as a consequence of the employer's unlawful conduct[2] is an "employee" with all the rights incident to that status under the act. Cf. Pierce's *90 Case, 267 Mass. 208, 211-212; West's Case, 313 Mass. 146, 148. See generally Larson, Workmen's Compensation Law, § 47.52(a)-47.52(b).
2. The employer also contends that the claimant is barred from receiving compensation because of his "serious and wilful misconduct" in misrepresenting his age. The employer relies on G.L.c. 152, § 27, which provides that "If the employee is injured by reason of his serious and wilful misconduct, he shall not receive compensation."
"In order to bar the employee his conduct must be both serious and wilful. The word serious refers to the conduct itself and not to its consequences. Wilful implies intent or such recklessness as is the equivalent of intent. This subject was ... discussed and the cases collected in Scaia's Case, 320 Mass. 432. In that case we directed attention to the definition of `reckless disregard of safety' in § 500 of the Restatement: Torts as involving not only the intentional doing of the act charged, but also an easily perceptible danger of substantial bodily harm or death and a great chance that such harm will result." Dillon's Case, 324 Mass. 102, 110. See Thayer's Case, 345 Mass. 36, 40. The act of the minor claimant in misrepresenting his age because he "wanted a job for the summer" does not rise to the level of "serious and wilful misconduct" as that standard is defined in Dillon's Case, supra. There is not implicit in that act of misrepresentation "an easily perceptible danger of substantial bodily harm or death and a great chance that such harm will result." It is not like assaulting a fellow employee with a fork and thereby suffering a stab wound in return, Houston's Case, 344 Mass. 754, or like a roofer's deliberate failure to work with a staging. Silver's Case, 260 Mass. 222. See generally Larson, Workmen's Compensation Law, § 32.
3. The employer would also deny the claimant recovery on grounds of public policy. In this connection, it is arguable that a possible hazard arising from a minor's misrepresentation of his age when applying for work is that he may be assigned to tasks which are too dangerous for him. *91 It may be conjectured that the employer would not have assigned the claimant to work on the machine had the employer known the claimant's true age and therefore would not have violated G.L.c. 149, §§ 60-61. But this hardly furnishes a basis for avoiding the effect of G.L.c. 152, § 28, quoted above. "[T]he plain intent of § 28 ... is to make the employer liable if he hires one, for the performance of the prohibited occupations, who he knows is a minor, even if he does not know that he is under the age at which he could lawfully be employed for the performance of such work. This accords with other provisions of the child labor law, imposing duties upon employers hiring minors to procure permits and educational certificates. G.L.... c. 149, §§ 86, 95. Restrictions upon the freedom of contract imposed in the interests of society in general and for the benefit of minors in particular must be observed by those seeking to avail themselves of the services of those under age." West's Case, 313 Mass. 146, 150. Juozapaitis's Case, 335 Mass. 137, 140.
In the case at bar the employer knew the claimant was a minor and could have avoided the effect of § 28 by demanding and obtaining the employment permits required by G.L.c. 149, §§ 86 and 95,[3] before engaging the claimant to work in the manufacturing establishment.
*92 We are of opinion that the clear intent of the statutory provisions is to protect minors from employment in hazardous jobs and that the claimant is not barred from recovery despite the fact that he misrepresented his age to his employer. Villapando v. Industrial Commn. 70 Ariz. 55, 56-57. Halfacre v. Paragon Bridge & Steel Co. 368 Mich. 366, 375, 381. Sackolwitz v. Charles Hamburg & Co. Inc. 295 N.Y. 264, 268-270. Bloomer Brewery, Inc. v. Industrial Commn. 239 Wis. 605, 606-609. Hertz Drivurself Stations, Inc. v. Industrial Commn. 254 Wis. 308, 309. Schneider, Workmen's Compensation, § 1177 (b).
The decree is affirmed. Costs of this appeal are to be determined by the single justice.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  General Laws c. 152, § 1 (4), defines "employee" as "every person in the service of another under any contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written...."
[2]  General Laws c. 149, § 78 (as amended through St. 1954, c. 240, § 3), imposes a penalty for the violation of G.L.c. 149, §§ 60-74.
[3]  General Laws c. 149, § 86 (as amended through St. 1947, c. 109, § 2), provides, in relevant part: "No person shall employ a child under sixteen years of age, other than a child over fourteen granted an employment permit by the superintendent of schools when such superintendent determines that the welfare of such child will be better served through the granting of such permit, or permit him to work in, about or in connection with any mercantile establishment or in any employment mentioned in section sixty, ... and provided, further, that no permit shall be issued to any child under sixteen to work in, about or in connection with any manufacturing or mechanical establishment, factory or workshop." A penalty for violation of this section is imposed under G.L.c. 149, § 90, as amended through St. 1945, c. 133, § 8.
General Laws c. 149, § 95, as amended through St. 1956, c. 234, § 1, provides, in relevant part: "No minor over sixteen and under eighteen shall be employed in a factory, workshop, manufacturing, mechanical or mercantile establishment ... except as provided for pupils in co-operative courses, unless his employer procures and keeps on file an educational certificate showing the age of the minor and whether or not he meets the requirements for the completion of the sixth grade of the public schools of the town where he resides." A penalty for violation of this section is imposed under G.L.c. 149, § 97.

=== CASE 9739984 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:15.793309+00 ===

Landis, J.
The appeal in this case stems from the judgment of appellant’s conviction for grand larceny upon an affidavit charging him with the commission of a crime while armed with a deadly weapon. Appellant was sentenced for a term of one to ten years in the Indiana Reformatory.
The sole question of error presented by the motion for new trial is that the trial court erred in overruling *18appellant’s motion for a mistrial due to separation of the jury while they were deliberating on their verdict. The motion concerned the propriety of the trial judge giving one juror permission to make a five or ten minute telephone call home to arrange for the caring of his livestock.
The record shows that on February 13, 1963, the jury returned its verdict into open court. The trial judge ordered a pre-sentence investigation by the probation officer, and fixed February 21, 1963, as the date for the passing of sentence. On February 21, just prior to the sentencing of the accused, counsel for the accused for the first time questioned the propriety of the separation of the juror by an oral motion for a mistrial. The record in this respect shows:
“Comes now the State of Indiana by Franklin Bridenhager, Prosecuting Attorney and the defendant herein by Rober [sic] Smith, and Frederick F. McClellan, his attorneys. And now, before the passing of sentence by the Court on the verdict of the jury, the defendant moves for a mistrial on the basis that one of the jurors was separated from the remaining jurors and made a telephone call to person or persons unknown, was out of the jury room approximately five to ten minutes and shortly after which the jury returned their verdict, and that the defense counsel did not have at the time sufficient time to make objections, which motion the Court NOW DENIES, PERMISSION HAYING BEEN given by the Court for the juror to call home to arrange for the caring of his stock. The Court now pronounces sentence on the verdict of the jury.”
Appellant cites Burns’ §9-1810 (1956 Repl.),1 providing:
“After hearing the charge, the jury may either decide in court or retire for deliberation. They may retire under the charge of an officer, who *19must be sworn by the clerk to keep them together in some private and convenient place, and furnish them food as directed by the court, and not permit any person to speak or communicate with them, nor do so himself unless by order of the court, or to ask them whether they have agreed upon their verdict, and return them into court, when so agreed, or when ordered by the court. The officer shall not communicate to any person the state of their deliberations; and if he does he shall be punished as for a contempt, and shall not be further employed as a bailiff in such court.” (Our italics.)
Burns’ §9-1903 (1956 Repl.),2 provides:
“The court shall grant a new trial to the defendant for the following causes, or any of them:
“Second. When the jury has separated without leave of the court, after retiring to deliberate upon the verdict.” (Our italics.)
Appellant has asserted that the permission here given the juror by the trial judge authorizing him to call home for the stated purpose was not in the presence of appellant or the attorneys and that all communications by the court with the jury after the submission of the cause must be in open court, citing: Hall v. State (1857), 8 Ind. 439, 444; Fish and Another v. Smith (1859), 12 Ind. 563, and Danes et al. v. Pearson (1893), 6 Ind. App. 465, 471, 33 N. E. 976, 978. Appellant further argues that the trial judge had no power to allow the juror to separate.
The foregoing statute (Burns’ §9-1903, supra)3 providing a new trial shall be granted upon the separation of the jury without leave of court after retiring to deliberate, of course is not applicable to cases where the separation occurred after granting leave. Appellant *20has not argued that the permission here granted the juror was different from leave being granted to such juror, nor that the purpose for which separation was allowed was improper nor that appellant was harmed by the separation.
The above cases cited by appellant are not in our judgment controlling of the case at bar as the facts are entirely distinguishable.
If the separation by a juror is requested, the court if at all possible should hear the merits of such request in open court in the presence of the parties or their counsel with opportunity to make seasonable objection, if desired. Such practice is fair to the litigants and their attorneys and should be adhered to in order to avoid improper influences reaching the jury and to prevent the commission of error prejudicial to a party litigant. We know, however, that emergencies do arise during the deliberations of a jury when there is not opportunity for the court to delay acting until the parties or their attorneys can be reached and brought into open court. Such a situation occurred in Smith, Peak v. State (1961), 241 Ind. 311, 325, 170 N. E. 2d 794, 801, where the separation of the woman juror from the remaining jurors grew out of her sudden severe illness at a restaurant where the jury had gone for supper. We there stated that in such an emergency it could not be contended with reason that before the juror could be separated she must, regardless of her physical condition, be taken back to the court room for a hearing in the presence of the parties, and inasmuch as it appeared no harm had been caused to appellants, that they had no cause to complain.
It is difficult for us to perceive that such a situation existed in the case at bar as would call for action by the court before a hearing could be had in open court, but that matter is not argued, nor is it urged by ap*21pellant that he was harmed by the failure to have such a hearing before separation of the juror. In Posey, Michael v. State (1956), 234 Ind. 696, 131 N. E. 2d 145, 54 A.L.R. 2d 706, we pointed out that it was irregular for jurors to have access to law books during deliberations on a verdict and that we could not be deemed to approve such a practice, although we refused to reverse where there was no indication of harm to appellants.
In the instant case we condemn any irregularities during the deliberations of the jury, but as it appears the jury separation did not concern or involve a matter connected with any issue in the case, but solely dealt with a juror’s request to telephone about his personal affairs at home, which was entirely collateral and unrelated to the subject matter of the cause on trial and therefore could not have prejudiced appellant in any way, we do not believe there is error sufficient to reverse the cause. See also: Barker v. State (1958), 238 Ind. 271, 278, 150 N. E. 2d 680, 683; Badgley v. State; Brown v. State (1949), 226 Ind. 665, 677, 82 N. E. 2d 841, 846.
There appearing no injury to appellant’s substantial rights by the separation of the jury, which is the only error here asserted, the judgment is affirmed.
Achor, C. J., and Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur; Jackson, J., concurs with opinion.
. Acts 1905, ch. 169, §265, p. 584.
. Acts 1905, ch. 169, §282, p. 584.
. Ibid.

=== CASE 9739985 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:25:15.798553+00 ===

Concurring Opinion
Jackson, J.
I concur in the result of the majority opinion herein, but wish to point out certain facts which, in my opinion, require limited discussion.
The separation of the juror without a hearing, out of the presence and without consent of the defendant’s counsel, is always fraught with peril. The alleged permission granted the juror was such that had a proper *22attack thereon been mounted, it is possible a different result might have been obtained. The ostensible request of the juror to be permitted to leave his fellows after the jury had been finally instructed, and after deliberations had commenced, to make arrangements for the care of his livestock, could easily have been made through the bailiff without the necessity for separation of the juror.
Ordinarily prejudice and injury to the defendant would be presumed by the juror being separated from his fellow jurors under the circumstances here delineated. In the instant case, however, appellant makes no allegation of injury by reason of the action herein complained of.
The citation of Smith, Peak v. State (1961), 241 Ind. 311, 170 N. E. 2d 794, in my opinion, is distinguishable on the facts and therefore is not pertinent to the issues herein raised, consequently it lends no substantial support to the majority opinion.
In view of the failure to allege specifically that the defendant was injured by the separation, and failure of appellant to follow certain procedural requirements, the judgment must be affirmed.
Note. — Reported in 202 N. E. 2d 161.

=== CASE 2221758 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:19.646798+00 ===

348 Mass. 233 (1964)
202 N.E.2d 799
POWERS REGULATOR COMPANY
vs.
JOSEPH RUGO, INC. & others.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
November 5, 1964.
December 8, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, & SPIEGEL, JJ.
*234 George H. McDermott for Joseph Rugo, Inc. & others.
Thomas L. Mackin, for Powers Regulator Company, submitted a brief.
WHITTEMORE, J.
The petitioner (Powers) by intervention in pending proceedings in the Superior Court under G.L.c. 149, § 29, sought and obtained an adjudication of its right as sub subcontractor to be paid from the statutory bond given by Joseph Rugo, Inc. (Rugo), under § 29 as the general contractor for the construction for the Massachusetts Port Authority of a hangar at Logan Airport. Rugo and the two sureties on the bond have appealed from the final decree on the ground that the decree does not establish the indebtedness of the subcontractor S.D. Shaw & Sons, Inc. (Shaw), to Powers and thereby establish the rights of Rugo against Shaw. Shaw was a party to the proceedings and the final decree dismissed the petition as to Shaw without prejudice. The decree ruled that the sum of $4,022.40 is due Powers from Rugo with interest of $392.16, ordered Rugo to pay and, in the event of Rugo's default, that the sureties do so.
There is a report of material facts. The evidence is not reported.
Although Shaw was not an indispensable party, Shaw's presence in the proceedings was highly advisable. Philip Carey Mfg. Co. v. Joseph Rugo, Inc. 346 Mass. 206, 208 (a case involving the rights of another subcontractor of Shaw in the same security). An appropriate final decree, assuming that the indebtedness of Shaw to Powers was shown by the evidence, would have been to the effect that Shaw was indebted to Powers in the sum found, with interest, and that Rugo and the sureties were obligated to pay the sum if Shaw did not. See Carroll Hunnewell, Inc. v. Southboro Constr. Corp. 343 Mass. 667, 668.
The answers of Shaw and Rugo disclosed a suit brought by Shaw against Rugo to recover for the work done by Shaw and Shaw's subcontractors and the claim of Shaw that all work done by Powers after a certain date was *235 done directly for Rugo, under a contract with Rugo, made after Shaw had been enjoined from entering the site of the work; also Shaw's assertion that a decision in that other suit had credited Rugo with $22,793.60 as payments by Rugo to Powers for Shaw's account. This sum, as appears from the judge's findings herein, is eighty-five per cent of the contract price in the Shaw-Powers contract. In the circumstances of this other litigation directly between Rugo and Shaw it was appropriate to adjudicate Powers' rights in the statutory security with no more concern with the Shaw-Rugo controversy than such adjudication required in the light of the facts established.
The report of material facts sets out that Rugo made a plumbing and heating subcontract with Shaw and that Shaw in turn contracted with Powers for the latter to install the temperature controls for $26,816; Powers began its work, temporarily delayed performance when it learned that Shaw had been enjoined from performing its contract with Rugo, but subsequently, at the request of Rugo, completed the temperature controls in the manner agreed upon in its contract with Shaw. Further, that Powers had been paid nothing by Shaw but by Rugo had been paid the contract price less the fifteen per cent retainage provided for in the contract; that Powers had duly filed its sworn statement of claim under G.L.c. 149, § 29; and that Rugo was indebted to Powers in the sum of $4,022.40 with interest from September 30, 1961, the date of demand.
The findings and the decree do not expressly resolve the issue whether some of the $4,022.40 was owed directly by Rugo. That, however, does not affect Powers' right to recover from the security. Philip Carey Mfg. Co. v. Joseph Rugo, Inc. 346 Mass. 206, 209. In the absence of the evidence we do not know what adjudication in that respect would have been justified. Rugo and the sureties, nevertheless, are entitled to a decree that will preserve as against Shaw the effect of the findings of the judge in this proceeding to which Shaw was a party. The decree is to be modified to express this.
*236 The appellants allude briefly to the denial of the motion to consolidate the petition with the petition of the Philip Carey Mfg. Co. See 346 Mass. 206. No prejudice is shown, there being no suggestion that the security is inadequate.
No error is shown in the allowance of interest. The appellants object to the computing of interest from "September 30, 1961, the date of demand" rather than the date of the later filing of the petition. It is not error to allow interest from the date of filing of the claim. Philip Carey Mfg. Co. v. Joseph Rugo, Inc. 346 Mass. 206, 207. This is necessarily a date prior to the filing of the petition. There is no basis for concluding that September 30, 1961, was prior to the filing of the claim.[1]
The final decree is modified by striking therefrom paragraph (4) which dismissed the claim against Shaw without prejudice and substituting therefor the substance of the following paragraph (4): Any accounting between Rugo and Shaw hereafter made is to reflect that Rugo and its sureties have by this decree become obligated to pay Powers, for performing work originally specified to be done by Powers in its contract with Shaw, the amount of the retained percentage under the Shaw-Powers contract, that is, fifteen per cent of the original contract price of $26,816, or $4,022.40 with interest from September 30, 1961.
As so modified the decree is affirmed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The plaintiff alleged that the claim was filed on June 26, 1961. The answers of Rugo and the sureties stated that they were without knowledge as to the allegation.