=== CASE 9737681 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:09.508248+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I cannot join the majority’s disposition of plaintiff’s claim of quid pro quo sexual harassment. Plaintiff has established a prima facie case of such harassment, pursuant to the Michigan *327Civil Rights Act (MCRA)1 and Champion v Nation Wide Security, Inc, 450 Mich 702; 545 NW2d 596 (1996). But, the majority has misinterpreted Champion and added an element, one not found in the MCRA.
I. THE PRIMA FACIE REQUIREMENTS FOR QUID PRO QUO SEXUAL HARASSMENT CLAIMS
The MCRA specifically includes sexual harassment as a form of discrimination because of sex. MCL 37.2103(f); MSA 3.548(103)(i). “Sexual harassment” is defined as:
(i) . . . unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical contact or communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions:
(i) Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations or public services, education, or housing.
(ii) Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual’s employment, public accommodations or public services, education, or housing.
(üi) The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual’s employment, public accommodations or public services, education, or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, public services, educational, or housing environment.
MCL 37.2103(i)(i) and (ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(i) and (ii) present two separate theories under which a party may make out a claim for quid pro quo sexual harassment. Champion, supra at 708. In Champion, we *328summarized the elements that a plaintiff must establish under MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii):
(1) that she was subject to any of the types of unwelcome sexual conduct or communication described in the statute, and (2) that her employer or the employer’s agent used her submission to or rejection of the proscribed conduct as a factor in a decision affecting her employment. See also Kauffman v Allied Signal, Inc, 970 F2d 178 (CA 6, 1992). [Champion, supra at 708-709.]
Champion also adopted the nearly unanimous view that imposes close to strict liability for such harassment committed by supervisory personnel. Id. at 712. This rule is based on the responsibility of an employer to remedy the harm caused by a supervisor’s unlawful exercise of authority delegated by the employer. Id.
H. PLAINTIFF HAS ESTABLISHED THE ELEMENTS FOR A PRIMA FACIE CLAIM OF QUID PRO QUO SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The majority determines that the trial court erred in denying defendant’s motion for a directed verdict on plaintiff’s claim. According to the majority, in order to establish such a claim, plaintiff must show the existence of a tangible employment action. Ante, p 317.
Neither MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(n) nor Champion requires plaintiff to prove a tangible employment action2 in order to proceed with a claim *329of quid pro quo sexual harassment. They require only a showing that the plaintiffs submission or rejection was “a factor in decisions affecting [her] employment.” MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii). Champion, supra at 708-709.
In Champion, we recognized that a supervisor has authority to make decisions affecting an individual’s employment:
It is this Court’s opinion that Mr. Fountain’s [Ms. Champion’s supervisor] decision to rape Ms. Champion constituted the requisite “decision affecting . . . employment.” In addition, this was a decision taken in response to Ms. Champion’s refusal to voluntarily submit to Mr. Fountain’s sexual requests. [Id. at 709-710.]
Thus, pursuant to Champion, the proper point of focus is the supervisor’s conduct, not plaintiff’s or defendant’s actions after the incident:
The decision to use force, in other words, was the equivalent of a decision to discharge because Mr. Fountain should have expected that it would lead to Ms. Champion’s resignation. This “decision affecting . . . employment” is actionable under MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii) because Ms. Champion’s refusal to comply with Mr. Fountain’s requests for sexual favors led to his decision to use force. [Id. at 711.]
Because the majority determines that there was no constructive discharge in this case, it concludes that plaintiff did not suffer a tangible employment action.3 *330But, a claim of quid pro quo sexual harassment under the facts of this case is not precluded:
As previously noted, even without the discharge, the decision to rape was, in all respects, “a decision affecting [Ms. Champion’s] employment” taken in response to her refusal to submit to Mr. Fountain’s sexual requests. It can hardly be disputed that, even if Ms. Champion had returned to work, the rape would have “affected” her employment in some way. [Champion, supra at 711, n 5 (emphasis added).]
*331Thus, Champion recognizes that the decision to rape a subordinate is the decision affecting employment. A victim’s response to the decision affecting employment is irrelevant. Champion’s holding would not have been different if Ms. Champion continued to work for defendant after her supervisor raped her.
The majority insists that an employee who quits is in a different position than one who continues to work after her supervisor makes a decision affecting her employment. In so doing, the majority draws an arbitrary distinction between rape and a week of sexual intimidation and humiliation. It appears to be straining to avoid applying the rule we enunciated in Champion to the facts of this case.
A correct application of Champion requires the conclusion that Mr. Wolshon’s decision to make sexual contact with Mrs. Chambers without her consent was, in and of itself, a decision affecting her employment. By focusing on Mrs. Chambers’ actions after her employment had been adversely affected, the majority misapplies Champion.
In Champion, the defendant tried to argue that it had not given its supervisor authority to rape a subordinate. We rejected the argument, noting that
[t]Ms construction of agency principles is far too narrow. It fails to recognize that when an employer gives its supervisors certain authority over other employees, it must also accept responsibility to remedy the harm caused by the supervisors’ unlawful exercise of that authority. Henson v City of Dundee, 682 F2d 897, 909 (CA 11, 1982). From his scheduling decisions that allowed him to work alone with Ms. Champion to his ordering of her into a remote part of the building, Mr. Fountain used his supervisory power to put Ms. Champion in the vulnerable position that led to her rape. In fact, there is little doubt that Mr. Fountain would *332have been unable to rape Ms. Champion but for his exercise of supervisory authority. [Id. at 712.]
Similarly, in this case, Mr. Wolshon used his authority as a supervisor to linger in Mrs. Chambers’ work area.4 Because Mr. Wolshon was their supervisor, Mrs. Chambers and her co-worker felt that they could not speak freely about his abusive behavior.
I agree with the majority when it characterizes an employer’s liability as hinging on “whether it can be fairly said that the employer committed the violation — either directly or through an agent.” Ante, p 312. By giving Mr. Wolshon the authority he used to assault Mrs. Chambers, defendant committed the violation through its agent. This is consistent with our holding in Champion:
Our ruling today does not extend unlimited liability to employers whose supervisors rape subordinates. However, we hold an employer strictly liable where the supervisor accomplishes the rape through the exercise of his supervisory power over the victim. The rule we fashion is fully consistent with the results reached by other courts addressing this issue and with the legislative intent that employers, not the victims of sexual harassment, bear the costs of remedying and eradicating discrimination. [Champion, supra at 713-714.]
The flaw in the majority’s overall treatment of this case is that, in analyzing whether Mr. Wolshon’s con*333duct was quid pro quo sexual harassment, it focuses on plaintiffs reaction. As we pointed out in Champion, this is incorrect, because it blames the victim. Id. at 711.
Instead, the analysis should concentrate on what defendant and its agent did. This focus would comport “with the legislative intent that employers, not the victims of sexual harassment, bear the costs of remedying and eradicating discrimination.” Id. at 714.
Here, defendant gave Mr. Wolshon supervisory authority over plaintiff. Mr. Wolshon, acting :as defendant’s agent, then used that authority to lewdly proposition and sexually assault Mrs. Chambers for four days.
Had Mr. Wolshon not been the supervisor, he would not have been able to continue this pattern of behavior. Someone having authority over him would have stopped it after the first instance.5 Instead, matters escalated to the point where, on the third and fourth day that Mr. Wolshon harassed her, Mrs. Chambers actually slapped him. In response, Mr. Wolshon merely laughed.
Because of his position with defendant, Mr. Wolshon was able to sexually intimidate and humiliate Mrs. Chambers repeatedly. Her attempts to alert the regional manager were unavailing. She did not realize *334this until her week of abuse was over.6 In inflicting this sexual humiliation, Mr. Wolshon made a decision affecting her employment. He decided to treat her in such a way that her only choice was to submit to the assault or not come to work at all.7
Mr. Wolshon could force Mrs. Chambers into this dilemma only because he was the supervisor.8 Had it been only a co-worker treating her this way, Mrs. Chambers could have simply brought the problem to the supervisor on site. When she tried to complain to Mr. Wolshon’s supervisor, Mr. McLaughlin, Mr. Wolshon could and did effectively prevent it.
There is a critical difference between quid pro quo and hostile work environment sexual harassment claims. In quid pro quo claims, the victim’s employment must be adversely affected in some manner.
*335In hostile work environment claims, it need not be affected. I disagree with the majority’s assertion that the effect on employment must be “tangible.” It can be, as it was here, tacit. Because he was the supervisor, and she the subordinate, Mr. Wolshon could sexually threaten and humiliate Mrs. Chambers; all she reasonably could have done to avoid the degrading behavior was to quit.
In deciding to treat her in this manner, Mr. Wolshon made submitting to his sexual misconduct a term of Mrs. Chambers’ employment. He could do this only because defendant gave him supervisory authority over her.
Thus, quid pro quo sexual harassment occurs when the employer’s agent misuses his supervisory authority in a way that affects a subordinate’s employment. In hostile work environment claims, the harasser does not affect the victim’s employment. Either, he does not have the authority to do so, or he does not accomplish the harassment through the use of supervisory authority over the victim.
To require plaintiffs to prove that they suffered a tangible employment action is to introduce an element that cannot be derived from the statutory language of MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii). It is also an element that may foreclose relief in situations where, as here, there clearly has been sexual discrimination. Another instance would arise if a woman’s supervisor threatened to jeopardize her job unless she submitted to his sexual advances. If she submitted, she would be further sexually harassed, although suffering no tangible employment action. Under the majority’s analysis, the employer would not be held vicariously liable, because its agent did not make a decision affecting her employment.
*336The majority creates a loophole in the sexual harassment provisions of the MCRA. It will allow an employer to sexually harass an employee without adverse legal consequences if the employee chooses to submit, rather than risk potential job injury. It also places the burden on employees to complain about their supervisor’s sexually harassing conduct, rather than encouraging employers to take the initiative to prevent such occurrences.
m. PLAINTIFF’S HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT CLAIM
I disagree with the decision to remand this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration of plaintiff’s claim of hostile work environment sexual harassment. Specifically, the majority instructs the Court of Appeals to consider “whether plaintiff presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate that defendant ‘failed to rectify a problem after adequate notice.’ ” Ante, pp 318-319.
Although the Court of Appeals majority analyzed whether Burlington Industries, Inc v Ellerth,9 and Faragher v Boca Raton,10 should be adopted, it also observed that “the jury specifically found that defendant failed to take prompt remedial action after it knew or should have known that plaintiff had been sexually harassed, a finding that is supported by the evidence presented at trial.”11 The jury was instructed under Champion and Radtke v Everett, 442 Mich 368; 501 NW2d 155 (1993). The Court of Appeals has already concluded that there is sufficient evidence for *337the jury’s finding that defendant knew or should have known that plaintiff had been sexually harassed.
IV. THE EVIDENCE PRESENTED IN THIS CASE
I feel compelled to point out that the majority seems to assume that Mrs. Chambers knew of defendant’s sexual harassment policy and the procedures outlined thereunder. Ante, p 305. However, at trial, the evidence presented to the jury suggests that the policy was never communicated to her.
Mrs. Chambers was hired on June 27, 1995. Mr. Wolshon was her supervisor and sexually harassed her between July 5 and 8. At trial, defendant’s regional manager explained in detail the company’s sexual harassment policy. He also testified that new hires are supposed to sign an acknowledgment form contained in an employee handbook distributed to them. The handbook contains defendant’s sexual harassment policy. According to Mr. McLaughlin, “[a]n employee will not be paid unless that acknowledgment sheet is received in our office.”
But, defendant offered no tangible evidence showing that Mrs. Chambers actually received and signed the handbook. She testified that she did not receive the handbook and that she was not aware of defendant’s sexual harassment policy.
According to Mr. McLaughlin, defendant should have had in its records a form signed by Mrs. Chambers. A signed form indicating that Mrs. Chambers received and read defendant’s sexual harassment policy was never produced at trial.
The majority attempts to cast responsibility on plaintiff for the fact that she was not actually aware of defendant’s sexual harassment policy. According to *338the majority, “it matters little to the issue of vicarious liability if, for reasons not attributable to defendant, plaintiff was not actually aware of the policy.” Ante, p 325.
In taking this position, the majority usurps the role of the jury by deciding that defendant did communicate the policy to plaintiff. The evidence presented permitted the jury to infer that defendant never communicated the policy to plaintiff. If the jury did so infer, the fact that defendant had a sexual harassment policy becomes irrelevant. Of what value is a sexual harassment policy if the employer fails to ensure its employees are actually aware of it? The majority seems to suggest that employees have a duty to discover employers’ policies when they begin working.
The majority also impermissibly credits defendant’s version of why Mrs. Chambers was fired, as opposed to her version. Ante, p 306 (“Plaintiff was eventually discharged in September 1995 when she failed to show up for work for several consecutive days”). Mrs. Chambers testified that she was told to go home and wait for a telephone call informing her where her next assignment would be. It is the function of the jury to decide whose testimony to believe, not the function of the Court.
Throughout this case, the majority decides facts and makes inferences favoring the defendant. The jury, however, found in favor of the plaintiff. In determining whether the trial court should have granted a directed verdict in favor of the defendant, this Court is supposed to view all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor. Kubczak v Chemical Bank & Trust Co, 456 Mich 653, 663; 575 NW2d 745 (1998). The majority fails to do so.
*339This case illustrates why we should proceed with great reluctance when asked to disturb a jury’s findings of fact. In concluding that defendant failed to take prompt remedial action once it knew that Mrs. Chambers had been sexually harassed, the jury may have credited Mrs. Chambers’ testimony over defendant’s. We cannot know what factors the jury took into account when returning a verdict in plaintiff’s favor.
V. CONCLUSION
Neither the MCRA nor case precedent requires a plaintiff alleging quid pro quo sexual harassment to prove she suffered a tangible employment action. The statute requires only that she show that a decision was made adversely affecting her employment. In Champion, we held that, when a supervisor uses authority given by an employer to rape a subordinate, he makes a decision affecting that subordinate’s employment. The decision is imputed to the employer because it is the employer that gives the supervisor the authority to make the decision.
The majority cannot successfully distinguish this case from Champion. Instead of straining to avoid the rule we pronounced there, I would simply apply it to this case.
I do not propose a rule imposing automatic liability on employers whenever a supervisor sexually assaults a subordinate. Champion itself did not impose such a rule. But, Champion did indicate there is a line which, if crossed, results in an automatic imputation to the employer of a supervisor’s sexual misconduct, if performed in his capacity as a supervisor. Clearly, the rape of Ms. Champion crossed the line.
*340Mr. Wolshon’s behavior, also, crossed it. By finding that it did not, the majority draws an arbitrary distinction between rape and a week of unwelcome sexual contact.
This case cannot be distinguished from Champion, either, merely because Mrs. Chambers did not quit after her supervisor sexually harassed her. The majority treats employees who continue to work after being sexually harassed by a supervisor differently from those who quit. In so doing, it misinterprets Champion.
Champion makes it clear that it is not the victim’s conduct, but the supervisor’s conduct, that is scrutinized. The majority’s holding shifts responsibility for a decision made by its agent from the employer to the victim. If the victim does not respond as the majority today deems appropriate, she loses her claim of quid pro quo sexual harassment. This position clearly subjects victims of sexual harassment to burdens not contemplated by either Champion or the MCRA.
I cannot agree, either, with the majority’s decision to establish a new element for quid pro quo sexual harassment claims. By doing so, the majority has altered the holding in Champion.
Finally, it is inappropriate to remand this case to the Court of Appeals to assess the sufficiency of the evidence presented regarding whether defendant had adequate notice of hostile work environment sexual harassment. The jury and the Court of Appeals determined that the evidence was sufficient. Consequently, I would affirm both the jury’s verdict in favor of plaintiff and the Court of Appeals decision.
MCL 37.2101 et seq.; MSA 3.548(101) et seq.
Champion refers to tangible job benefits or injuries only in terms of defining individuals who have the ability to impose quid pro quo sexual harassment on employees:
[T]he party engaged in quid pro quo harassment is almost always, by definition, a supervisor. That is, quid pro quo harass*329ment occurs only where an individual is in a position to offer tangible job benefits in exchange for sexual favors or, alternatively, threaten job injury for a failure to submit. That individual is most often a person with supervisory powers. [Id. at 713.]
Even if a tangible employment action were a necessary element in quid pro quo sexual harassment claims, Mrs. Chambers presented suffi*330cient evidence of quid pro quo sexual harassment. At trial, she argued that she did suffer an employment consequence. She was a temporary employee and was sent to different locations throughout her employment with defendant. Defendant testified that Mrs. Chambers was terminated on September 11, 1995, after failing to appear for work. Mrs. Chambers testified that the regional manager’s assistant told her to go home and that, when the company had a new assignment for her, someone would telephone her. According to Mrs. Chambers, no one called her and no one returned her calls when she attempted to find out where her next assignment would be.
The majority does not credit this evidence because Mrs. Chambers dismissed her retaliatory discharge claim. But the majority presents no authority that, when a plaintiff declines to pursue one claim, this Court may disregard evidence that also supports another. Here, whether plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action. Merely because Mrs. Chambers, perhaps as a matter of trial strategy, chose not to pursue her retaliatory discharge claim does not mean she did not suffer an adverse employment action.
At trial, the jury was asked to answer two specific interrogatories: 1) whether Paul Wolshon sexually assaulted or molested Robyn Chambers through the use of his supervisory powers over her, and 2) whether defendant failed to take prompt remedial action after it knew or should have known that she had been sexually harassed. The jury answered both questions in the affirmative.
Given the specific verdict rendered, there is no way to tell whether the jury credited defendant’s version of why Mrs. Chambers was fired or her version. Thus, even if I agreed with the majority’s legal analysis, the procedural history prevents me from concluding that it was error to deny defendant’s motion for directed verdict. If it disagrees with how the trial judge legally analyzed Champion, the majority should remand this case for a new trial, not decide credibility and factual issues for itself.
As Mrs. Chambers’ supervisor, Mr. Wolshon could and did spend his time in the area where Mrs. Chambers worked, instead of remaining in the office as did Mrs. Chambers’ regular supervisor, Jennifer Hostutler. Defendant’s regional manager, Kevin McLaughlin, informed Mrs. Chambers and her two co-workers that Mr. Wolshon was “in charge” while Ms. Hostutler was on vacation. There was no one in a higher position at the location where Mrs. Chambers worked who was authorized to curb Mr. Wolshon’s conduct.
Mrs. Chambers described the first incident as follows:
Well, it was the very first day and I was by the freezer, and he walked in and he rubbed my rear end.
Mrs. Chambers’ attorney asked her if she said anything in response. She replied that she said, “Excuse me.” According to Mrs. Chambers’ testimony, Mr. Wolshon then replied, “Oh, I’m sorry.”
On the second day that Mr. Wolshon was her supervisor, Mrs. Chambers alerted the regional manager that something was wrong. She was not more explicit in what she said because Mr. Wolshon was standing within earshot.
Mrs. Chambers had been an employee only one week when these events occurred. She testified that, at that point, she knew only Jennifer Hostutler, who was the supervisor Mr. Wolshon temporarily replaced, and Kevin McLaughlin, the regional manager. A card in the office showed where she could obtain Mr. McLaughlin’s telephone numbers, but that office was locked when the supervisor was not in it. Moreover, Mrs. Chambers relied on Mr. McLaughlin’s promise that he was going to come to the work site and talk to her. The jury could have reasonably inferred that she believed she had done what she could to stop the harassment she was experiencing.
During the week that Mr. Wolshon was her supervisor, Mrs. Chambers told co-workers she wanted to quit. She did not quit, because her employer promised not to leave her alone with Mr. Wolshon.
Mrs. Chambers testified that she felt that this situation differed from others when she had been subjected to sexual comments because the intimidator, here, was her supervisor. She also testified that, because Mr. Wolshon was a supervisor, he could go anywhere he wanted in the facility The week Mr. Wolshon was Mrs. Chambers’ supervisor, he spent most of his time in her work area.
524 US 742; 118 S Ct 2257; 141 L Ed 2d 633 (1998).
524 US 775; 118 S Ct 2275; 141 L Ed 2d 662 (1998).
232 Mich App 560, 568-569; 591 NW2d 413 (1998).

=== CASE 9737682 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:12.256534+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Jae Boon Lee, administratrix of the estate of Sang Yeul Lee, brought a wrongful death action in the circuit court of Cook County against defendant, Chicago Transit Authority (CTA), to recover damages for the death of her husband, who was electrocuted while on land owned by the CTA. Count I of plaintiff’s fourth-amended complaint alleged that the CTA was negligent in failing to guard and warn of the existence of its street-level electrified third rail; count II alleged willful and wanton conduct. The jury returned a verdict in the amount of $3 million for plaintiff on the negligence count, but reduced the award by 50% based on decedent’s own negligence. The CTA appealed, contending that the trial court erred in denying its motions for directed verdict and judgment notwithstanding the verdict; that insufficient and improper evidence and trial error compeUed a new trial; and that the jury’s apportionment of fault and award of damages were not supported by the evidence. The appellate court reversed (205 Ill. App. 3d 163), and entered judgment in favor of the CTA. This court granted plaintiff’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R 315). The Illinois Trial Lawyers Association, the Illinois Association of Defense Trial Counsel, and Commonwealth Edison have filed briefs as amici curiae. The Illinois Trial Lawyers Association urges this court to affirm the trial court’s decision; the Illinois Association of Defense Trial Counsel and Commonwealth Edison urge us to affirm the decision of the appellate court. The issue presented for review is whether the jury was properly instructed that the CTA owed a duty of ordinary care to the decedent. We hold that the CTA did owe such a duty. Accordingly, we reverse. FACTS The following facts were adduced at trial. Plaintiff’s decedent, Sang Yeul Lee (Lee), a 46-year-old Korean immigrant who was unable to read English, attended a party on the evening of October 21, 1977. On his way home, Lee entered a CTA right-of-way at the intersection of Kedzie Avenue and the Ravenswood railway line in Chicago, apparently, in order to urinate. The right-of-way was posted with signs, placed on a utility shed and on sawhorses at each side of the tracks, warning “Danger,” “Keep Out,” and “Electric Current.” Parallel to the tracks and approximately 6V2 feet from the sidewalk lay a street-level third rail. The purpose of the rail, which carried 600 volts of electricity, was to supply power to trains as they passed through the street-level crossing. The CTA had laid uneven-edged boards, about six inches apart, called “jaws” on its right-of-way next to the sidewalk in order to make pedestrians aware that they were not meant to walk in that area. The uneven surface of the boards, also known as “cattle boards,” makes it impossible for cattle and difficult for persons to walk atop them. The “jaws” at Kedzie Avenue extended between the end of the third rail and the sidewalk and were also placed on either side of the rail and between the tracks. Lee, whose blood-alcohol level of 0.341 placed him in the “stupor” classification of intoxication, made contact with the third rail and suffered fatal injuries. Thomas Wolgemuth, manager of facilities engineering and maintenance for the CTA, testified that Lee was neither permitted nor invited to be on the Kedzie Avenue CTA tracks at the time of his death.. Plaintiff did not rebut this testimony. Wolgemuth further testified that there are 19 grade, or street-level, crossings on the CTA transit lines where trains are powered by a third rail. At two of the grade crossings, located at Maple and Isabella Streets in Wilmette, the CTA installed safety measures consisting of automatic chain link fence-type gates across the track when the line was converted from overhead to third rail power in 1973. Before installing the “jaws” trespass system on the Ravenswood line in 1976, the CTA. considered three alternative protective systems: gates such as those at the Wilmette grade crossings, which would remain closed except when a train was in the station; boards, which would cover the third rail on all but the train side; and catenary lines, which would carry the electric current overhead. Plaintiff introduced evidence of 10 prior accidents which occurred between 1948 and 1975 on the 3.2-mile segment of track where the CTA’s third rail runs at grade level. One of the accidents occurred at the Ravenswood/Kedzie crossing in 1974, when a youth fell from a fence he was scaling onto the rail. The CTA offered to stipulate that it had notice of the accidents on that section of its line prior to 1977. Plaintiff, however, refused the stipulation. The CTA also presented evidence that there were no accidents on the section between July 1976, when it installed the “jaws,” and October 1977, when Lee was electrocuted. Charles Heilman, plaintiff’s expert witness, testified that the segment of track in question is the only one in the United States or Canada where an electrically charged grade-level third rail is unguarded, uncovered or unfenced. At the completion of testimony, the parties tendered instructions to the court. Plaintiff’s instruction, Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 120.03 (2d ed. 1971) (IPI Civil 2d No. 120.03), was based on the theory that at the time of the accident, the CTA was engaged in the activity of conducting electricity. The CTA objected to the submission of this instruction, tendering in its stead IPI Civil 2d No. 120.02, reflecting the CTA’s position that the electrified third rail was a condition, not an activity, on the land. Finding, however, that the CTA was engaged in the activity of conducting electricity, the court rejected the CTA’s instruction, and instructed the jury in accordance with IPI Civil 2d No. 120.03. The court specifically instructed the jury that “the C.T.A. owes the trespasser no duty unless his presence on the tracks should have been reasonably anticipated, then the C.T.A. owes him the duty not to willfully or wantonly cause him injury. The C.T.A. was under a duty not to [injure] Sam [sic] Yeul Lee, however, if the C.T.A. knows or to facts known to it should reasonably anticipate the presence of Sam Yeoul [sic] Lee in the place of danger, it is then under the duty to use ordinary care not to injury [sic] Sam Yeoul [sic] Lee.” Following deliberations, the jury found that the CTA had breached its duty of care and was thus negligent. In response to a special interrogatory, the jury also found that the CTA’s conduct was not willful or wanton. The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff which was proportionately reduced to reflect decedent’s own negligence. On appeal, the appellate court held that the trial court improperly gave the jury IPI Civil 2d No. 120.03, which states a landowner’s duty of ordinary care to an anticipated trespasser when that trespasser is injured by an activity on the land. Rather, according to the appellate court, the trial court should have instructed the jury according to IPI Civil 2d No. 120.02, which states the duty of the landowner to refrain from willful and wanton conduct towards a trespasser who is injured by a condition on the land. Because the jury had specifically found that the CTA’s conduct was not willful or wanton, the appellate court reversed without remanding for a new trial. DISCUSSION Negligence Traditionally, the liability of a landowner in Illinois has been delineated in terms of the duty owed to persons present on the land. Whether a duty exists is a question of law for the court to determine. (Gouge v. Central Illinois Public Service Co. (1991), 144 Ill. 2d 535, 542.) Courts have found the duty of a landowner to vary according to whether the entrant on the landowner’s property was classified as an invitee, a licensee or a trespasser, with the greatest care due to the invitee and the least to the licensee or trespasser. However, in 1984, the Premises Liability Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 80, par. 301 et seq.) abolished the common law distinction between invitees and licensees. Section 2 of the Act states that “[t]he duty owed to such entrants is that of reasonable care under the circumstances regarding the state of the premises or acts done or omitted on them.” Because the Act is not retroactive, and because plaintiff does not dispute that Lee was a trespasser at the time of his death, we consider the Act only insofar as it reaffirms the views of the legislature concerning trespassers. Section 3 of the Act states unequivocally that “[n]othing herein affects the law as regards any category of trespasser.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 80, par. 303. Generally, the rule in Illinois is that a landowner owes a trespasser only the duty to refrain from willfully or wantonly injuring him. (Marcovitz v. Hergenrether (1922), 302 Ill. 162, 167; Votava v. Material Service Corp. (1979), 74 Ill. App. 3d 208, 212.) However, as is the case with most rules, certain exceptions to that rule have evolved. This court has long recognized that a landowner must use ordinary care to avoid injury to the trespasser who has been discovered in a place of danger on the premises. (Briney v. Illinois Central R.R. Co. (1948), 401 Ill. 181, 186; Neice v. Chicago & Alton R.R. Co. (1912), 254 Ill. 595, 603; Illinois Central R.R. Co. v. Eicher (1903), 202 Ill. 556, 560.) Courts have also found that the landowner owes a duty of ordinary care to those who are frequent trespassers in a limited area where the landowner knows or should know of their constant intrusion. (Bernier v. Illinois Central R.R. Co. (1921), 296 Ill. 464, 471; Restatement (Second) of Torts §334 (1965).) Finally, an exception has been recognized where small children foreseeably intrude on the premises and are incapable of appreciating the risk involved. In such cases, the landowner must exercise due care to remedy the dangerous condition or otherwise protect the children from injury resulting from it. (Kahn v. James Burton Co. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 614, 625.) None of these exceptions, however, apply to the case before us. In this appeal, plaintiff advances six separate approaches, any one of which, she maintains, supports the imposition of a duty on the CIA. We rely, for disposition of this matter, upon only one of plaintiffs theories. Thus, we need not recite or analyze each of the several theories advanced. We note in passing, however, that one approach advanced by plaintiff is the abolition of the traditional distinctions between statuses of persons on the land with the same duty of care imposed for trespassers and non-trespassers alike. Plaintiff’s argument in support of abolishment of the classifications is both extensive and compelling. However, the legislature’s recent iteration on the licensee/invitee classification and its determination to leave intact the common law rule concerning trespassers (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 80, par. 301 et seq.) persuades us that society yet finds some benefit in retaining the trespasser classification. Thus, we continue to decline abolition of the classifications. See Pashinian v. Hartinoff (1980), 81 Ill. 2d 377, 380-81. We find compelling, however, plaintiff’s invitation to adopt section 337 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts as an additional exception to the trespasser rule. Relying on section 337, plaintiff urges this court to hold that, if a landowner knows of or reasonably anticipates the presence of a trespasser in a place of danger, the landowner should be held to a duty of ordinary care to protect and/ or warn the trespasser. The CTA maintains that even if section 337 applied, plaintiff could not prevail because there was “no duty, no breach of duty, and no proximate causation.” Section 337 of the Restatement, entitled “Artificial Conditions Highly Dangerous to Known Trespassers,” provides: “A possessor of land who maintains on the land an artificial condition which involves a risk of death or serious bodily harm to persons coming in contact with it, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to trespassers by his failure to exercise reasonable care to warn them of the condition if (a) the possessor knows or has reason to know of their presence in dangerous proximity to the condition, and (b) the condition is of such a nature that he has reason to believe that the trespasser will not discover it or realize the risk involved.” Restatement (Second) of Torts §337, at 195 (1965). In order to establish a duty under section 337, the trespasser must first show that the landowner knew or had reason to know of the trespasser’s presence. The phrase “reason to know” is defined in section 12 of the Restatement to mean that the possessor of land has information from which a person of reasonable intelligence, or of the superior intelligence of the actor, would infer that the fact in question exists, or would govern his conduct upon the assumption that it does exist. Restatement (Second) of Torts §12, at 19 (1965). In satisfaction of the knowledge requirement, plaintiff relies on the CTA’s stipulation that it could “reasonably anticipate” persons contacting the grade-level third rail. The CTA denies that it so stipulated, contending, instead, that it stipulated only to notice of the prior incidents. We believe that the record belies any claim by the CTA that it did not stipulate to reasonable anticipation. During plaintiff’s examination of Thomas Boyle, the head of the CTA’s safety department, the following colloquy occurred: “MR. MALONEY [Plaintiff’s Attorney]: Sir, would it be fair for me to say that CTA could reasonably anticipate people were contacting the third rail as it was at grade level and being killed or seriously injured before 1977? MR. BOYCHUCK [Defense Attorney]: We object. We have never denied that the CTA was aware of this — this was gone over before the jury and on a number of occasions now. And I believe that it is just being — improper at this point. MR. MALONEY: May we have a stipulation now then, too, that the answer to my question is ‘yes’? THE COURT: I’ll let the- MR. BOYCHUCK: Your Honor, I offered a stipulation before as to the notice of each of those incidents. MR. MALONEY: I’m sorry. I mean the way my question is phrased. Would you stipulate to the answer to that is ‘yes’? MR. BOYCHUCK: Yes. THE COURT: Proceed. MR. MALONEY: And you had that reasonable anticipation as of October 22, ’77 and before that, is that fair? WITNESS: The anticipation, sir, that somebody— MR. MALONEY: What Mr. Boychuck just stipulated to, you had that knowledge as of October ’77, didn’t you? WITNESS: Yes, sir. I believe that is one of the reasons— MR. MALONEY: Is the answer ‘yes’? WITNESS: —that the barriers were put in, yes.” On three subsequent occasions during examination of various witnesses, Maloney, in phrasing his interrogatories, stated that the CTA had stipulated that it could reasonably anticipate persons coming into contact with the third rail at grade level prior to October of 1977. Maloney repeated the stipulation during his closing argument to the jury. At no time did defense counsel object as to the correctness of Maloney’s characterization of the stipulation. The evidence which the jury heard was that the CTA stipulated to reasonable anticipation. Regardless of its intent, the CTA cannot now contend that its stipulation was, instead, to notice. Moreover, plaintiff presented evidence at trial of 10 prior accidents which occurred between 1948 and 1975 on the 3.2-mile segment of track where the CTA’s third rail ran at grade level. Even had there been no stipulation to reasonable anticipation, a finding of reasonable anticipation could properly be supported by evidence of the CTA’s knowledge of the prior accidents. The CTA maintains, however, that comment a to section 337 renders that provision inapplicable in this case because, as the comment makes clear, section 337 requires “foreseeability in fact.” Comment a to section 337 states that “[t]he rule *** relates only to the conditions under which a possessor of land is subject to liability to a trespasser whom he knows to be about to come in contact with a highly dangerous artificial condition maintained by him upon the land.” (Emphasis added.) (Restatement (Second) of Torts §337, Comment a, at 195 (1965).) Our research has yielded only a few cases which have considered the applicability of section 337. In Johnson v. Rinker Materials, Inc. (Fla. App. 1988), 520 So. 2d 684, Payne v. M. Greenberg Construction (1981), 130 Ariz. 338, 636 P.2d 116, and Martin v. Jones (1953), 122 Utah 597, 253 P.2d 359, the courts strictly interpreted the phrase “about to” in comment a and thereby found section 337 inapplicable. However, the Arizona Supreme Court, in Webster v. Culbertson (1988), 158 Ariz. 159, 761 P.2d 1063, recently applied section 337 and implicitly rejected comment a as a constraint on the applicability of the provision. In Webster, the defendant bought a parcel of property and erected a barbed wire fence to keep out trespassers who were crossing her property. The fence crossed over a “wash” that the defendant knew was used for recreational purposes. An equestrian trail crossed the wash less than 14 yards from where the wash entered the defendant’s property. The fence was not plainly visible, and the defendant had not posted warnings of its existence. Evidence in the record indicated that footprints, hoofprints and tire tracks were plainly visible in the wash. The plaintiff, Webster, was injured when he rode his horse into the barbed wire fence. The defendant asserted that she had no reason to know of the plaintiff’s proximity to the fence and, therefore, should not be held liable for the plaintiff’s injuries. The Arizona Supreme Court rejected the defendant’s argument that she had no reason to know of the plaintiff’s presence. In essence, the court placed a duty to warn on a person who maintains a dangerous artificial condition when the person is aware of the possibility that others will come into dangerous proximity of the condition. We agree with the Arizona court’s application of section 337 of the Restatement. In the case before us, the third rail is located a mere 6V2 feet from the public sidewalk, which is adjacent to a busy city street. The CTA knew that pedestrians used the sidewalk to cross the tracks, and certainly that pedestrians gained access thereby to those tracks. Thus, the CTA was aware that such persons could possibly come into dangerous proximity with the third rail. Therefore, we find that the CTA had “reason to know” of the presence of pedestrians upon its tracks. Restatement (Second) of Torts §337(a) (1967). In applying section 337, we must also determine whether the third rail was of such a nature that the CTA had reason to believe that a trespasser would not discover it. At the time of the decedent’s injuries, the warnings at the Ravenswood crossing indicated only that there was danger and that there was electric current. There was nothing which indicated either the existence or the location of the third rail, or that the electric current was carried in a rail. There were no markings on the third rail itself. Significantly, George Millonas, the CTA’s director of plant maintenance, testified that the CTA trained its employees to recognize and to work around the rail. These facts amply support a finding that CTA had reason to believe that a trespasser would not discover the third rail. We find that the requirements of section 337 have been satisfied. Thus, we hold that the CTA owed plaintiff’s decedent a duty of ordinary care to properly warn of the third rail. We recognize that our holding today represents a slight departure from the traditional rule regarding the duty owed to trespassers. However, “[i]n the choice of competing considerations of societal policy, the need for protection against the reasonably foreseeable risk of death or severe personal injury outweighs the freedom of action that would otherwise characterize the relation of the possessor of land to a trespasser.” (Imre v. Riegel Paper Corp. (1957), 24 N.J. 438, 448-49, 132 A.2d 505, 510.) Our determination of the existence of a duty here, we believe, is properly reflective of the prevailing social policies. Moreover, the legal concept of duty is not sacrosanct in itself. (Renslow v. Mennonite Hospital (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 348, 356.) Though the existence of a legal duty is ordinarily considered in terms of foreseeability of injury, the question of whether a legal duty exists is contingent upon a variety of factors. (Kirk v. Michael Reese Hospital & Medical Center (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 507, 526.) Considerations such as the likelihood of injury, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against the injury, and the consequences of placing that burden upon the defendant must be taken into account. (Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co. (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 430, 438; Illinois Housing Development Authority v. Sjostrom & Sons, Inc. (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 247, 261-62.) Thus, duty is no more than an expression of the sum total of those considerations of policy which lead the law to say that the particular plaintiff is entitled to protection. Nelson v. Commonwealth Edison Co. (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 655, 662. Here, the close proximity of the third rail to the sidewalk significantly increased the likelihood of injury to pedestrians who used the sidewalk. At trial, the CTA presented evidence that alternate means of guarding the right-of-way against pedestrian entry could be problematic to install and maintain. That notwithstanding, we believe that the risk of serious injury or death to a pedestrian as a result of contact with a third rail located at grade level, in close proximity to a sidewalk, outweighs any burdens associated with more formidable safeguards or, at the least, adequate warning. The CTA maintains, however, that even if section 337 may be relied upon to impose a duty to warn, there was no breach of that duty, and further, there was no proximate cause. The CTA points out that there were “no fewer than five warning signs on the east side of Kedzie” at the time of the incident. The CTA maintains that “[ljegally, those signs were adequate, but that their adequacy is irrelevant because plaintiffs decedent’s alcohol level rendered him incapable of reading or understanding any sign.” Initially, we note that the CTA is not relieved of its duty because of the decedent’s diminished capacity. Notwithstanding the decedent’s condition or level of mental functioning at the time he sustained injury, the CTA owed a duty to adequately warn of the dangers of the third rail. The decedent’s intoxication was properly a consideration only with respect to his contributory negligence. Questions concerning breach of a duty and proximate cause are factual matters for the jury to decide. (Ward v. K mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 132, 156; French v. City of Springfield (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 74, 79; Ney v. Yellow Cab Co. (1954), 2 Ill. 2d 74, 84.) A jury’s determination will not be set aside unless, clearly, it is not supported by the evidence. The jury returned a general verdict in which it found, inter alia, that the CTA “failed to adequately warn of electricity in its third rail.” Of the five warning signs posted at the crossing, not one warning indicated the presence of the third rail. Additionally, as we have previously stated, the third rail was not marked, nor was there any indication that the electric current, of which the posted signs warned, was carried in any of the grade-level rails. Regardless of the CTA’s belief that the signs were legally adequate, the jury apparently believed otherwise. The CTA makes much of the fact that, in addition to the posted warning signs, it had installed “jaws” adjacent to the sidewalk, which would alert someone attempting to traverse the “jaws” that he was in a prohibited area. Though the “jaws” may, in fact, serve that purpose, they nevertheless did not warn of the third rail’s existence or dangerousness. The evidence adequately supports the jury’s finding that the CTA breached its duty to adequately warn of electricity in its third rail. The term “proximate cause” describes two distinct requirements: cause in fact and legal cause, which is a policy decision that limits how far a defendant’s legal responsibility should be extended for conduct that, in fact, caused the harm. (McCoy v. McCoy (1992), 227 Ill. App. 3d 244, 248; see also M. Polelle & B. Ottley, Illinois Tort Law 413-18 (1985).) The CTA. summarily concludes, without reference to either of the two requirements, that proximate cause was not proved. We deem it appropriate to consider both requirements. Cause in fact can only be established when there is a reasonable certainty that a defendant’s acts caused the injury or damage. Under the substantial factor test, the defendant’s conduct is a factual cause of the plaintiff’s injury if the conduct was a material element and a substantial factor in bringing about the injury. (McCoy, 227 Ill. App. 3d at 248; W. Keeton, Prosser & Keeton on Torts §41, at 267 (5th ed. 1984).) Where reasonable minds could differ, whether the defendant’s conduct was of such a substantial factor in bringing about the plaintiff’s injury is for the jury to decide. (W. Keeton, Prosser & Keeton on Torts §41, at 267 (5th ed. 1984).) It is axiomatic that liability cannot be premised merely upon surmise or conjecture as to the cause of the injury. Here, the CTA failed to adequately warn that its third rail transmitted 600 volts of electric current. In addition to that fact, plaintiff’s decedent was intoxicated to a degree which placed him at the “stupor” level of intoxication. Yet we cannot conclude that plaintiff's decedent’s injuries would have occurred without the CTA’s failure to adequately warn of the electric current in the rail. Significantly, plaintiff’s decedent apparently had the presence of mind to seek the privacy and shelter of the surrounding buildings at the crossing before relieving himself. We do not find the jury’s finding on cause in fact so palpably erroneous as to warrant a different result. Legal cause “is essentially a question of foreseeability: a negligent act is a proximate cause of an injury if the injury is of a type which a reasonable man would see as a likely result of his conduct.” (See Masotti v. Console (1990), 195 Ill. App. 3d 838, 845.) Thus, an injury will be found not to be within the scope of the defendant’s duty if it appears “highly extraordinary” that the breach of the duty should have caused the particular injury. Restatement (Second) of Torts §435(2), at 449 (1965). The mere fact that the CTA placed several warning signs at the crossing supports a finding that it was foreseeable that serious injury or death would result from a failure to warn of the danger.- Thus, it was likewise foreseeable that injury would result if the warnings were inadequate. Accordingly, we find no error in the jury’s finding of legal causation. In sum, given the close proximity of the grade-level third rail to the pedestrian sidewalk, the failure of the CTA to warn of the presence, location and danger of the third rail, along with the fact that plaintiff’s decedent would not likely discover the danger, the CTA owed plaintiff’s decedent a duty to adequately warn of the danger. The CTA breached its duty by failing to warn of the presence and location of the third rail, and that the electric current warned of was transmitted via that rail. Finally, the CTA’s failure to adequately warn of the electric current in the third rail was a proximate cause of plaintiff’s decedent’s injuries. Thus, the jury instruction, though premised on the theory that the CTA was engaged in an activity, correctly instructed the jury that the CTA owed plaintiff’s decedent a reasonable duty of care. Alleged Trial Errors The CTA challenges the jury’s verdict in several other respects. As its major contention, the CTA argues that improper and insufficient evidence and prejudicial error compelled the entry of judgment notwithstanding the verdict or the granting of a new trial. Under the standard announced in Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510, a directed verdict or judgment notwithstanding the verdict should be granted only where all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors the movant that no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand. For the reasons which follow, we find that the Pedrick standard has not been met. The CTA posits three arguments in support of its claim of improper and insufficient evidence. The CTA first argues that the trial court improperly permitted plaintiff to present evidence of prior incidents to establish that the third rail was unreasonably dangerous. The CTA maintains that notwithstanding plaintiff’s attorney’s protestations to the contrary, evidence of prior third rail incidents was used at trial as evidence that the condition of the third rail was unreasonably dangerous. The CTA asserts that such evidence was admissible for that purpose only upon a showing of substantial similarity. Because plaintiff did not lay a foundation showing that the prior incidents were substantially similar, it was error for this evidence to be presented to prove that the rail was unreasonably dangerous. The CTA’s claimed error is not supported by the record. Although it may have been plaintiff’s hope that the evidence of prior incidents would be considered by the jury for the purpose of showing the dangerousness of the rail, the record reveals that the trial court did not permit its use for that purpose. During the course of trial, defense counsel tendered to the court a limiting instruction regarding the use of the evidence of the prior incidents. The court subsequently instructed the jury that the evidence of reports received by the CTA involving individuals coming into contact with the third rail at grade crossings was for the limited purpose of showing notice to the CTA that the accidents occurred and that the evidence was not to be considered for any other purpose. Further, in closing argument, defense counsel argued to the jury that the trial court would read a limiting instruction to it to consider the evidence of prior incidents on the issue of notice. Finally, the trial court instructed the jury that whatever evidence was received for a limited purpose should not be considered for any other purpose. Our determination that the evidence of the prior incidents was not admitted to show that the third rail was unreasonably dangerous obviates the need for us to consider the CTA’s substantial-similarity argument. The CTA’s second challenge to the jury verdict is that the trial court erred in denying the CTA’s motions in limine to bar testimony of plaintiff’s expert. The CTA maintains that plaintiff relied upon Heilman’s testimony to establish that the Ravenswood crossing was unreasonably dangerous. According to the CTA, Heilman’s testimony did not establish that the crossing was unreasonably dangerous because Heilman had no degree in engineering; had “no experience in the day-to-day operations of a major metropolitan transit system”; reached his opinions based upon information supplied to him by plaintiff’s attorney; and was unable to testify how the CTA could implement his suggestion to install cover boards. An expert witness is “a person who, because of education, training or experience, possesses knowledge of a specialized nature beyond that of the average person on a factual matter material to a claim or defense in pending litigation.” (134 Ill. 2d R. 220(a)(1).) If an expert possesses specialized knowledge that will assist the trier of fact, he may testify concerning that knowledge. See M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence §702, at 493 (5th ed. 1990). The proponent of the testimony bears the burden of establishing the qualifications of a person to testify as an expert witness on a particular subject. (People v. Park (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 203, 209.) Formal academic training or specific degrees are not required to qualify a person as an expert; practical experience in a field may serve just as well to qualify him. (Schaffner v. Chicago & North Western Transportation Co. (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 1, 37.) Whether a witness is qualified to testify as an expert rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. Schaffner, 129 Ill. 2d at 36; Hardware State Bank v. Cotner (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 240, 250. Charles Heilman, who was called as plaintiff’s safety expert, testified that he is a safety engineer and safety consultant. He attended Northeastern University in Massachusetts where he studied pre-engineering for a period of two years. He is a member of the American Society of Safety Engineers, and is a certified safety professional by the Board of Certified Safety Professionals and a registered professional engineer in the State of California. In the past, he has provided consulting services to utility companies concerning transmission and distribution lines and the protection of their employees and the general public from the hazards of those lines. Heilman further testified that he has performed safety analyses of conditions on several railroads, including rapid transit systems. He is familiar with customs, practices and standards in rapid transit systems and third rails. Heilman testified regarding the safety of the Ravenswood grade crossing third rail. In view of his knowledge, experience and skill in the area of safety and the transmission of electric power, we find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s decision to permit him to testify as an expert on the unsafe condition of the grade crossing third rail. Further, the CTA’s assertions, viz., Heilman based his opinions upon information supplied by plaintiff’s attorney, and Heilman was unable to testify how the CTA. could implement the suggestion to install a cover board, do not defeat Heilman’s competency to testify in the area of safety. Moreover, we know of no rule which dictates the source of information upon which an expert must base his opinion. It would seem to us that the more relevant inquiry is the reliability of the information upon which the expert relies. Third, the CTA argues that plaintiff failed to establish that a catenary or gates were preferable to trespass barriers or that the installation of cover boards or additional warnings would have prevented plaintiff’s decedent’s death. The CTA maintains that the jury’s finding that the CTA breached its duty of care by choosing to install trespass barriers instead of a catenary, gates or cover boards or that the lack of either or additional warnings caused plaintiff’s decedent’s death was unsupported by competent evidence and against the manifest weight of the evidence. The elements necessary for proof in a negligence action are duty, breach, injury and causation. (Merlo v. Public Service Co. (1942), 381 Ill. 300, 312.) By its contention, the CTA seeks to increase the burden of proof requirements beyond those of an ordinary negligence case. A plaintiff, in order to prevail on a claim of negligence, is not required to prove, in addition to the elements of ordinary negligence, what conduct would have prevented injury. In further support of its claim of incompetent evidence, the CTA again refers to Heilman’s testimony. As we have already determined that Heilman was competent to testify on the issue of safety, we decline further discussion on this issue. Further, our earlier discussion on the issues of duty, breach and proximate cause adequately disposes of the CIA’s assertion that the verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Additional discussion would only be superfluous. In support of its claim -of prejudicial error, the CTA urges three additional arguments. First, the CTA argues that the trial court erred in permitting plaintiff’s use of prior incidents to establish notice after the CTA offered to stipulate. The CTA maintains that once it offered to stipulate, notice was no longer an issue in the case. Further, the CTA urges that the evidence of prior incidents was cumulative and tended to confuse the jury. Thus, the CTA argues that it was error for the trial court to permit evidence on the issue of notice. As a preliminary matter, we note that the admission of evidence, even cumulative evidence, is largely a matter committed to the sound discretion of the trial court. (Lewis v. Cotton Belt Route—St. Louis Southwestern Ry. Co. (1991), 217 Ill. App. 3d 94, 108; Simmons v. City of Chicago (1983), 118 Ill. App. 3d 676, 685; Long v. Bennett (1977), 55 Ill. App. 3d 50, 53.) The court’s determination on admissibility is based upon a balance of the probative value and the prejudicial effect of the proffered evidence. Absent a clear showing that the trial court has abused its discretion in admitting certain evidence, its determination will remain undisturbed. Skelton v. Chicago Transit Authority (1991), 214 Ill. App. 3d 554, 577; Hopkinson v. Chicago Transit Authority (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 825, 844. A stipulation, or a judicial admission, is an agreement between the parties or their attorneys with respect to business before the court. (American Pharmaseal v. T E C Systems (1987), 162 Ill. App. 3d 351, 355; Scott v. Dreis & Krump Manufacturing Co. (1975), 26 Ill. App. 3d 971, 989; 34 Ill. L. & Prac. Stipulations §1, at 166 (1958).) It has the effect of withdrawing a fact from issue and dispensing wholly with the need for proof of that fact. (See 34 Ill. L. & Prac. Stipulations §8, at 178-79 (1958); McCormick, Evidence §254, at 142 (4th ed. 1992).) There is, however, no absolute rule on the subject. The fact that an opponent has offered to stipulate or is not disputing a proposition for which evidence is being offered must, of course, be a consideration in the trial court’s evaluation of the probative value of the proffered evidence. However, the fact that the proposition is not being disputed is not determinative. The proponent of the evidence is entitled to have the court also consider the fair and legitimate weight that introduction of the evidence would have upon the trier of fact. (See M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence §403.1, at 170 (5th ed. 1990).) After all, “a colorless admission by the opponent may sometimes have the effect of depriving the party of the legitimate moral force of his evidence ***.” (Emphasis omitted.) (9 J. Wigmore, Evidence §2591, at 824 (Chadbourn rev. ed. 1981).) A wealth of criminal law decisions demonstrates that an offer to stipulate to certain facts does not foreclose the presentation of such evidence. See, e.g., People v. Henderson (1990), 142 Ill. 2d 258, 319; People v. Hudson (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 177, 196-97; People v. Scheck (1934), 356 Ill. 56, 60-62; see also Veer v. Hagemann (1929), 334 Ill. 23, 27 (stating it is competent for witnesses to testify as to mental condition of testator, and fact that his sanity is conceded as to certain date does not bar testimony of witnesses on that matter). Having determined that the CTA’s offer to stipulate did not bar presentation of the evidence, we must yet determine whether its admission was an abuse of discretion. Plaintiff presented evidence of notice in the form of testimony from David Silverzweig, an attorney who represented a plaintiff in an earlier negligence suit involving the CTA (Mullen v. Chicago Transit Authority (1961), 33 Ill. App. 2d 103). Silverzweig’s testimony was very limited. He testified that in 1948 he represented a plaintiff who sustained an injury when he came into contact with the third rail of a CTA track and that the CTA had notice of those facts. Following Silverzweig’s testimony, plaintiff read into evidence the CTA’s answers to two sets of interrogatories from two earlier cases in which the CTA was a party. In the answers, the CTA acknowledged injuries to persons coming into contact with a third rail at grade level. The first set of interrogatories acknowledged six incidents which had occurred between August 1968 and May 1973. The second set of interrogatories acknowledged four additional incidents which had occurred between July 1974 and June 1975. Additionally, plaintiff read to the jury an allegation from the complaint in this case which stated that prior to October 1977, the CTA knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, that numerous persons had suffered injuries as a result of coming into contact with the third rail; particularly knew of the incidents set forth in the answers to interrogatories from the prior cases; and that the CTA admitted knowledge of the incidents set out in the answers. Finally, plaintiff presented testimony from Thomas Boyle, the head of the safety department for the CTA, concerning the date and place and nature of each incident from 1968 to 1973. Boyle, additionally, affirmed that there had been three additional incidents in 1974. In responding to the CTA’s objection to Boyle’s testimony, the trial court stated that plaintiff had a right to have the testimony concerning the incidents “go in” by the person at the CTA who was responsible for safety. The court stated that it allowed the testimony, even though cumulative, because Boyle was the head of safety. We agree that the evidence was cumulative. The trial court, however, made a reasoned decision to admit the notice evidence in these various forms. Significantly, the evidence was presented in such a manner as to give no more than the date, place and nature of the injury. Thus, the jury could not have been confused. We note that all effective evidence is prejudicial in the sense that it damages the party against whom it is offered. However, we are not persuaded that the evidence of prior incidents was unfairly prejudicial to the CTA. Therefore, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing its admission. Finally, we note that the CTA’s reliance on Bullard v. Barnes (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 505, is misplaced. In Bullard, the plaintiff suffered fatal injuries as a result of being involved in an accident. The defendant admitted liability. Thus, the only issue for the jury was damages. That notwithstanding, the plaintiff presented detailed evidence concerning the cause of the plaintiff’s injuries and the defendant’s conduct following the accident. (See Bullard v. Barnes (1983), 112 Ill. App. 3d 384, 392-93.) The appellate court held that this evidence was prejudicial and inflammatory, and required that the judgment be reversed. (Bullard, 112 Ill. App. 3d at 393-94.) This court affirmed. Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d 505. Here, unlike in Bullard, the CTA denies liability. Thus, notwithstanding the CTA’s admission, plaintiff was entitled to prove every element of her claim, and the evidence, which was probative on the issue of notice, was properly admitted. We do not find that the prior-incidents evidence, which was lacking in specifics, was either inflammatory or unduly prejudicial. The CTA’s second argument on the issue of prejudice is that the trial court erred in denying the CTA’s motion for a mistrial following plaintiff’s three emotional outbursts. We disagree. The CTA describes that during a third emotional outburst, plaintiff sobbed uncontrollably and the court declared a recess and excused the jury. Plaintiff admits to only one emotional outburst during trial, allegedly occurring when she was in the courtroom ánd the jurors were in the jury room behind closed doors. We are unable to determine from the record the extent of plaintiff’s dramatic conduct. However, the record does reveal that during the course of plaintiff’s testimony, the court recessed and excused the jury on three separate occasions. After the third recess, the trial court, concerned about jury sympathy, stated that the witness “had difficulty in responding to a question.” During the third recess, plaintiff’s counsel stated that he had spoken with plaintiff concerning the need for her to maintain her composure. There were no further incidents. As far back as the decision in Chicago & Erie R.R. Co. v. Meech (1896), 163 Ill. 305, 317-18, this court held that unless the “dramatic occurrence” is intentional or is the result of an improper motive, “[t]he fact that a plaintiff *** suddenly swoons or faints, or gives vent to hysterical exclamations, or breaks down with hysteria, does not call for the granting of a new trial.” Here, the trial court was keenly aware of the potential effect of plaintiffs conduct on the jury. After the third dramatic occurrence, the trial court noted that the jury’s decision was to be made without sympathy or prejudice. In denying the CTA’s motion for a mistrial, the trial court stated that it did not find plaintiff’s conduct to have been so prejudicial as to require the granting of a new trial. We do not believe, and the CTA makes no assertion, that plaintiff’s conduct was either intentional or the result of any improper motivation. Significantly, during the recess which followed the third incident, plaintiff’s counsel advised the court that he had admonished plaintiff concerning the importance of remaining composed and no subsequent incidents occurred. The trial court was in the best position to assess the plaintiff’s conduct and to determine its effect upon the jury. We, therefore, defer to its findings. It does not appear to us that the trial court was clearly wrong in finding no prejudice. Accordingly, we find no abuse of discretion in the denial of the CTA’s motion for mistrial. We note that Stephans v. Chicago Transit Authority (1960), 28 Ill. App. 2d 229, a case upon which the CTA relies, is factually distinguishable. In Stephans, the trial court’s grant of a new trial was not the result solely of plaintiff’s and his wife’s outbursts, but rather resulted from a combination of errors, including unsatisfactory testimony on the plaintiff’s injuries. Cf. Meech, 163 Ill. 305 (no new trial where “during examination of the witness Ella Louise Hoyt the plaintiff became hysterical, broke out crying and uttered a cry of distress, and was carried out of the court room; that immediately at the time of the occurrence his wife exclaimed, ‘You’re killing my husband,’ and that the witness began to cry and was temporarily excused from the stand”); see also Mondelli v. Checker Taxi Co. (1990), 197 Ill. App. 3d 258 (fact that plaintiffs wept twice during their counsel’s opening statement and once at trial did not entitle defendants to new trial where weeping was brief, and after second occurrence, plaintiff’s counsel offered to and did remove clients from courtroom during remainder of opening statement). Third, the CTA argues that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting plaintiff to amend her complaint to change her theory of the case immediately before closing argument. The CTA urges that it was “genuinely surprised by the new theory” and was prejudiced by the amendment. Here, prior to closing argument, plaintiff moved the court to amend her complaint. The trial court permitted the amendment over the CTA’s objection. The amendment alleged that the CTA used and transmitted electricity without safeguards. In Illinois, courts are encouraged to freely and liberally allow the amendment of pleadings. (See Bank of Northern Illinois v. Nugent (1991), 223 Ill. App. 3d 1, 13; Senese v. Climatemp, Inc. (1991), 222 Ill. App. 3d 302, 320.) Notwithstanding that liberal policy, a party’s right to amend is not absolute and unlimited. (Whildin v. Kovacs (1980), 82 Ill. App. 3d 1015, 1017.) The decision whether to grant leave to amend a pleading rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. (Old Salem Chautauqua Association v. Illinois District Council of the Assembly of God (1958), 13 Ill. 2d 258, 266.) Absent an abuse of that discretion, its decision will not be disturbed on review. (See McCastle v. Sheinkop (1987), 121 Ill. 2d 188, 194.) Among the factors to be considered in determining whether or not to permit an amendment to the pleadings are whether the amendment would cure a defect in the pleadings; whether the other party would be prejudiced or surprised by the proposed amendment; timeliness of the proposed amendment; and whether there were previous opportunities to amend the pleadings. Loyola Academy v. S & S Roof Maintenance (1992), 146 Ill. 2d 263, 273, citing Kupianen v. Graham (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 373, 377. Prior to considering the factors which we have set out above, we note our disagreement with the CTA’s assertion that the amendment changed the theory of the case. There is no allegation that plaintiff’s amendment was for the purpose of curing a defect in the original pleading. Thus, this factor is not relevant to our analysis. Additionally, because amendments may be allowed at any time before the entry of a final judgment (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615(a)), the timeliness of plaintiff’s amendment is not at issue. Concerning the prejudice factor, we note the following. Throughout the course of trial, evidence was presented that the third rail carried 600 volts of electricity. Also, George Millonas, the director of plant maintenance for the CTA, testified in his evidence deposition that the CTA controlled the electrical force by dispersing it through the third rail and that the CTA could turn the electricity on or off. Ronald Swindell, director of power signals and communications for the CTA, testified that his job was to see that power is transmitted to the rapid transit system in a safe manner and to make certain that electrical current was capable of being delivered. Additionally, Thomas Wolgemuth, another CTA employee, testified that the CTA purchased its power from Commonwealth Edison and transformed it to 600 volts DC in its substations. Also, plaintiff presented evidence on the issue of the adequacy of warnings as well as the absence of certain types of barriers at the grade level crossing. The CTA, in rebuttal, presented evidence to prove the adequacy of the warning and barriers at the crossing. Ordinarily, once a trial has begun, an amendment should not be permitted to set up matters of which the pleader had full knowledge at the time of interposing the original pleading and no excuse is presented for not putting its substance in the original pleading. (Blazina v. Blazina (1976), 42 Ill. App. 3d 159, 165.) This is particularly true where the amendment is prejudicial or would alter the nature and quality of the proof required to defend. (Blazina, 42 Ill. App. 3d at 165.) However, where prejudice is not likely to result, the trial court may permit amendment. The CTA does not suggest, and we do not find, that plaintiff’s amended complaint required the CTA to present evidence other than that which it had already presented in order to defend against the added allegation. Because plaintiff’s amendment did not alter the nature and quality of the proof required for the CTA to defend, we fail to see how the CTA was thereby prejudiced. In fact, it appears that the amendment did no more than conform the pleadings to the evidence adduced at trial. Finally, we believe that plaintiff had other opportunities, prior to the close of the CTA’s case to amend the pleadings. Evidence concerning the distribution of electricity had been adduced by plaintiff in her case in chief. That notwithstanding, because the CTA was not prejudiced by the amendment, we are unable to conclude, based upon this factor alone, that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting the amendment. In sum, we find that the jury verdict is properly and adequately supported by competent evidence. Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s denial of the CTA’s motion for directed verdict or for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Damages Award Finally, the CTA contends that the jury’s apportionment of fault and award of damages were the product of prejudice and unsupported by the evidence. The CTA maintains that the combination of plaintiff’s emotional outbursts, the use of the prior-incidents evidence, and plaintiff’s “carefully crafted” reasonable anticipation stipulation led to the jury’s 50-50 apportionment of liability and its $3 million verdict. The CTA argues that the verdict was excessive and compels a new trial, or, at the very least, remittitur. As we have stated, the jury awarded damages in the amount of $3 million. The award to plaintiff was reduced by 50% for decedent’s own negligence. The amount of a damage award is peculiarly an issue of fact for the jury to determine. (Lau v. West Towns Bus Co. (1959), 16 Ill. 2d 442, 452.) A jury’s award in a wrongful death action should not be overturned unless it is obviously outside the limits of fair and reasonable compensation (see Drews v. Gobel Freight Lines, Inc. (1991), 144 Ill. 2d 84, 97) or unless it is obviously the result of passion or prejudice (Phelps v. Chicago Transit Authority (1991), 224 Ill. App. 3d 229, 234; Shaheed v. Chicago Transit Authority (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 352, 359). Further, a jury’s award will not be subject to remittitur where it falls within the flexible range of conclusions which can reasonably be supported by the facts. (Chambers v. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center (1987), 155 Ill. App. 3d 458, 468; Guerrero v. City of Chicago (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 348, 352.) Where the jury is properly instructed and has a reasonable basis for its award, a reviewing court will not disturb its verdict. The CTA makes no assertion that the jury was improperly instructed on the issue of damages, and our review reveals no impropriety. Further, we have determined that the admission of the prior-incidents evidence was proper and that plaintiffs dramatic conduct was not prejudicial. Thus, we reject the CTA’s assertion that these factors resulted in an excessive verdict. The jury heard evidence that the remaining life expectancy of a man decedent’s age (46) was 27.9 years. Calib Peterson, decedent’s employer, testified that at the time of death, decedent’s gross salary was $144 weekly, plus fringe benefits, valued at $100 monthly. Peterson further testified that the age of retirement was 70 years and that decedent would receive an annual 10% increase in earnings each year. Further, Peterson testified that, at the time of trial, the fringe benefits were valued at $350 per month. In closing argument, plaintiff argued that the amount of lost wages and benefits for a period from 1976 up until the time of trial (1987) amounted to about $407,000. Plaintiff represented to the court that this figure did not include an inflation factor, no 10% salary increases, were computed beyond 1987, and the fringe benefit estimate was calculated on the lower figure of $100, as opposed to the higher $350 rate about which Peterson testified. Accepting plaintiff’s calculations on lost wages alone, we do not find that the jury award in this case was excessive. It is presumed that the wrongful death of a decedent results in substantial pecuniary loss to lineal heirs. (Long v. Bennett (1977), 55 Ill. App. 3d 50, 52.) In arriving at a fair and reasonable award, the jury could properly have considered the lost wages and benefits along with the loss of society and companionship to decedent’s wife and two sons. Moreover, even if we were to consider a different verdict than the jury, we would not be free to reweigh the evidence. (Allendorf v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co. (1956), 8 Ill. 2d 164, 171.) The CTA has failed to demonstrate any impropriety in the jury’s award of damages. Finally, we note that the CTA’s reliance on Panepinto v. Morrison Hotel, Inc. (1966), 71 Ill. App. 2d 319, is unavailing. In Panepinto, the reviewing court was called upon to determine the propriety of the trial court’s grant of a new trial. On appeal, the court stated that when “the verdict could well have been influenced by incompetent evidence erroneously admitted, or by erroneous instructions; or is clearly unwarranted by the competent damages evidence; or indicates passion or prejudice; reasonable discretion imposes a duty upon the trial judge to grant a new trial.” (Panepinto, 71 Ill. App. 2d at 336.) The improprieties which occurred in Panepinto simply are not present in this case. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed. JUSTICE BILANDIC took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9737683 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:12.263264+00 ===

JUSTICE MORAN, dissenting: The issue is whether the CTA owed a duty of ordinary care to the decedent Lee, who was a trespasser on its right-of-way. The majority adopts section 337 of the Restatement to impose that duty on the CTA. Because the knowledge requirement of section 337 has not been satisfied under the facts of this case, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s decision. The rule in Illinois has long been that a landowner owes a trespasser only the duty to refrain from willfully or wantonly injuring him. (Marcovitz v. Hergenrether (1922), 302 Ill. 162, 167.) A limited number of exceptions to the rule have been recognized over the years. Thus, if trespassers are discovered in a place of danger (Briney v. Illinois Central R.R. Co. (1948), 401 Ill. 181, 186) or if the landowner knows that trespassers have frequently intruded in a limited area (Bernier v. Illinois Central R.R. Co. (1921), 296 Ill. 464, 471), the landowner must exercise due care towards them. Similarly, if small children foreseeably intrude on the landowner’s property and are unable to appreciate the risk involved, the landowner must take due care to protect them from being injured due to a dangerous condition on the premises. Kahn v. James Burton Co. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 614, 625. With today’s decision, the majority has carved out yet another exception to the trespasser rule. In this case, the majority purports to follow section 337 of the Restatement, entitled “Artificial Conditions Highly Dangerous to Known Trespassers.” Section 337 provides: “A possessor of land who maintains on the land an artificial condition which involves a risk of death or serious bodily harm to persons coming in contact with it, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to trespassers by his failing to exercise reasonable care to warn them of the condition if (a) the possessor knows or has reason to know of their presence in dangerous proximity to the condition, and (b) the condition is of such a nature that he has reason to believe that the trespasser will not discover it or realize the risk involved.” (Emphasis added.) Restatement (Second) of Torts §337, at 195 (1965). The majority recognizes that, in order to establish a duty of ordinary care under section 337, the trespasser must first show that the landowner knew or had reason to know of the trespasser’s presence. Comment a to section 337 states that the rule “relates only to the conditions under which a possessor of land is subject to liability to a trespasser whom he knows to be about to come in contact with a highly dangerous artificial condition maintained by him upon the land.” (Emphasis added.) (Restatement (Second) of Torts §337, Comment a, at 195 (1965).) Thus, section 337, as explained by comment a, requires foreseeability in fact. If section 337 were correctly applied to the facts of this case, the CTA would clearly not be liable. The majority, however, refuses to accept comment a’s limitation of section 337 to instances where the landowner knows that the trespasser is about to come into contact with a dangerous condition on his premises. In this, it relies upon the reasoning of the only jurisdiction which has previously adopted section 337 without accepting the interpretation of comment a. (See Webster v. Culbertson (1988), 158 Ariz. 159, 761 P.2d 1063.) In my opinion, the Arizona case is inapplicable to the facts of the case at bar. In Webster, the defendant had erected a barbed wire fence to keep trespassers from entering her property. The fence crossed over a wash in which footprints, tire tracks and hoofprints were plainly visible. The wash was visible from defendant’s house, and she visited the area approximately once a week. Evidence indicated that, at the time of the accident, the wash was used by pedestrians, children, motorcyclists, four-wheel drive vehicles, dunebuggies and equestrians for recreational purposes. Defendant’s fence was virtually invisible, and she had posted no signs to alert trespassers to its existence. The plaintiff was injured when he rode his horse into the fence. Adopting section 337, the Arizona Supreme Court rejected defendant’s argument that she had no knowledge or reason to know of the plaintiff’s presence, and reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in her favor. The majority states that the Arizona court thus imposed a duty to warn on a person who maintains a dangerous artificial condition when the person is aware of the “possibility” that others will come into dangerous proximity of the condition. (152 Ill. 2d at 451.) However, the Webster court instead stated that section 337 is applicable when the defendant has “reason to know” of the presence of trespassers. Webster, 158 Ariz. at 163, 761 P.2d at 1067. Moreover, the facts of the present case are markedly different from those in Webster, where there was ample recent evidence of the presence of many trespassers. Here, the CTA stipulated that it had notice of 10 prior accidents in the 3.2-mile right-of-way where its third rail runs at grade level. Thus, it could reasonably anticipate the intrusion of trespassers. However, the CTA had no actual knowledge or reason to know that trespassers had recently been within its right-of-way at the Kedzie/ Ravenswood crossing. Not only had there been no accidents along the entire 3.2-mile stretch of street-level third rail within the previous 15 months, but, more to the point, there was no physical evidence that intruders had recently entered the particular area where the accident occurred in 1977. Although a youth had fallen onto the third rail from a fence he was scaling at that location in 1974, there was no recorded incident of a pedestrian ever previously contacting the third rail after leaving the sidewalk at the Kedzie/Ravenswood crossing. I do not believe that the CTA’s knowledge of accidents taking place more than 15 months earlier and at other locations along the line is enough to satisfy comment a’s requirement that a landowner have reason to know that a trespasser is about to come into contact with the third rail. Further, even if comment a were not to apply, the facts of this case fail to satisfy section 337’s requirement that the CTA knew or had reason to know of the presence of trespassers at the Kedzie/Ravenswood crossing. In a conclusory manner, the majority points to policy reasons — the likelihood of injury, the magnitude of guarding against the injury, and the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant — for its imposition of a duty of ordinary care on the CTA. However, the majority does not weigh the cost to the CTA — and the public — of putting into place and maintaining other safeguards. The CTA contends that measures such as swinging gates and catenary wires would impose a heavy financial burden, and that such measures have not proved effective in protecting the public. Consequently, the CTA placed signs warning "Danger,” "Keep Out” and “Electric Current” within several feet of the third rail at the Kedzie/ Ravenswood crossing. It also installed pointed boards on the ground to alert trespassers to the fact that they were walking where they ought not to be. That the CTA might have taken more extensive precautions to warn the public of danger goes to the question of whether it breached its duty of ordinary care, not to whether it had such a duty in the first place. See, e.g., Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co. (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 430, 441. Because the presence of trespassers at the Kedzie-Ravenswood crossing was not foreseeable in fact, I do not believe that the CTA had a duty of ordinary care towards trespassers at that location. The jury found that the CTA’s conduct was not willful and wanton. Consequently, in my view the CTA was not liable for the injury to Lee. I believe that the majority’s decision to the contrary will go far towards making the CTA and any other landowner who can possibly anticipate the presence of trespassers in a dangerous area an absolute insurer of public safety.

=== CASE 9737684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:12.266881+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, also dissenting: This case demonstrates once again the casino-like atmosphere of our tort system. A drunken 46-year-old Korean immigrant whose blood alcohol was 0.341, or three times the legal limit for intoxication under the motor vehicle code, walked off the sidewalk and up the Chicago Transit Authority railroad tracks where he was electrocuted by the so-called third rail which supplies power to the electric trains. At his point of entry, the decedent walked past three warning signs, “DANGER,” “KEEP OUT” and “ELECTRIC CURRENT.” These signs were printed in English which the decedent could not read. With a 0.341 concentration of blood alcohol, however, it is questionable whether it would have mattered if the signs had been printed in Korean or even in pictures. The decedent was virtually blind drunk. In addition to the signing, sharp triangular shaped boards had been installed between the sidewalk and the third rail to make it extremely difficult and awkward for a person to walk up the tracks. Nonetheless, the decedent walked up the tracks approximately 6V2 feet to the point where the third rail began. There, attempting to urinate, he was electrocuted. At the time of his death, his yearly gross income including all fringe benefits was approximately $8,700. He had a remaining life expectancy of approximately 28 years. He left surviving a widow and two sons. The jury returned a verdict of $3 million reduced by 50% for the decedent’s own negligence. The net verdict was thus $1.5 million. As with any tort case, there are two primary elements, namely, liability and damages. As to liability, at the time of this accident, Illinois was operating under the pure form of comparative negligence. That is to say, if a defendant were at fault to any extent, the plaintiff could recover that percent of his damages. In other words, a plaintiff who was 90% negligent on his own behalf could still recover 10% of his damages from a partially culpable defendant. Due to a statutory enactment, however, since November 25, 1986, an injured plaintiff may now recover damages only so long as the percentage of his fault does not exceed 50% of the total. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1116. Considering the operative facts, it is clear to this writer that the jury finding of 50% fault on the part of the Chicago Transit Authority is grossly erroneous and warrants reversal on that element alone. It is fair to say that some negligence may be attributable to the CTA since various safety devices could or might have been installed that would have made entry to the track area more difficult. A 10% degree of negligence or thereabouts would be in the range of reasonableness. A finding of a 50% degree of negligence is, as I have indicated, grossly erroneous. Such a finding could only be the result of sympathy, passion, prejudice or ignorance. Regarding the second element, namely, damages, the jury verdict once again overshot the mark. It fixed the plaintiffs damages at $3 million reduced by 50% for its finding of decedent’s own negligence. The net verdict was thus $1.5 million. The oft-quoted aphorism that figures don’t lie but liars can figure is certainly true. The decedent’s estate and survivors were not damaged to the extent of $3 million. It is quite a simple proposition to puff up a damage verdict to offset its reduction by the comparative negligence percentage. Thus, as in this case, a jury wanting to give a decedent $1.5 million but choosing to find him 50% at fault could very simply just double the damage figure. Whether the jury’s calculations in the instant case were the result of intellectual dishonesty and, hence, corrupt or whether they were simply the result of honest mistakes or poor judgment is a matter of conjecture only and not the controlling issue. That the jury was wrong, however, seems clear. As to the loss to decedent’s estate, simple multiplication of 28 years of life expectancy times his annual earnings would equal approximately $250,000. If one were to add another $250,000 for loss of society to his family and another $250,000 for the one-third to be paid to the attorney, the total verdict would be in the range of $750,000. Reducing this figure under pure comparative negligence by a 90% fault figure attributable to decedent, a net verdict of $75,000 is produced. It seems apparent in this case that the bulk of the jury verdict could only be allocated to that concept we call “loss of society.” This is so since it could not possibly be justified on a loss of income basis. What is loss of society worth? In Illinois, we have chosen to give the jury carte blanche authority to fix this figure. The law falsely pretends that the concept “loss of society” has a quantifiable cash value when it clearly does not. Certainly, no one can deny the reality of the feeling of deprivation upon the loss of a loved one. Loss of society is a real loss which causes real suffering. But such a loss cannot be quantified with a dollar sign. As was observed in 1986 by the West Virginia Supreme Court, “if the measure of damages were the value of a human life then, arguably, no jury verdict could be excessive. The death of a family member *** involves inconsolable grief for which no amount of money can compensate. Counsel’s suggestion that the [family] would not have traded [their child’s] life for $10,000,000 is entirely accurate — but they would also not have traded [their child’s] life for $100,000,000 or even $1,000,000,000.” Roberts v. Stevens Clinic Hospital, Inc. (W. Va. 1986), 345 S.E.2d 791, 800. By refusing to recognize any limits on such damage awards, litigants, with the assistance of their attorneys, are turning the court system into a giant gambling casino. Pain, suffering, or the loss of a loved one may produce incalculable wealth if only the person causing the injury is wealthy enough or carries enough insurance. What we are witnessing here is a vast predatory movement of citizen against citizen, the magnitude of which is beyond calculation. All of this predation is taking place under the form of legal, political and governmental procedures. Though selected individuals are being made rich, most notably the plaintiffs’ personal injury lawyers, society as a whole is crippling itself. No corporation is large enough, no individual is rich enough, no amount of insurance coverage is high enough to prevent a defendant’s financial destruction in a negligence law suit under existing standards. It is long past time for the courts to recognize that damages such as pain and suffering and loss of society do not have a quantifiable dollar value. If society is to allow compensation for such injuries, then society has a duty to limit recovery to some rule of reasonableness. While the courts could order remittitur in an appropriate case such as the case we decide today, they have shown no willingness to do so. The only recourse for the public is through action on the part of the legislature with the setting of statutory limits. Action is needed now and is long overdue. For the reasons given, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 3920347 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 09:47:30.825345+00 ===

This suit was instituted by the county attorney of Reeves county, Tex., in the name of the state of Texas to enforce the collection of delinquent taxes due on certain described lands, and this appeal is prosecuted from a judgment by default for the amount of state and county taxes, interest and penalties alleged to be due against M. Meierhoffer and Elzada McDaniels, a widow, and Leo McDaniels, a minor.
The transcript does not show any appearance by defendants, nor does it contain the citation and return, as required by statute. Without the citation and return we cannot determine whether there is such issuance, service, and return of process as is necessary to support a judgment by default, and it is not sufficient that the judgment contains the recital that defendants were duly served with citation. Palomas Land  Cattle Co. v. Good, 184 S.W. 805.
For which reason the cause must be reversed and remanded, and it is so ordered.
WALTHALL, J., did not sit, being absent on committee of judges assisting the Supreme Court.

=== CASE 9737687 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:13.251851+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: On August 26, 1988, Gorina Frye, as special administrator of the estate of Stephen Frye, deceased, filed a two-count complaint against defendants Dr. John Barrow, M.D., Medicare-Glaser Corporation (Medicare-Glaser) and Evelyn Nightengale. In count I, plaintiff alleged that Dr. Barrow failed to warn plaintiff’s decedent of the dangerous effects of taking the drug Fiorinal while drinking alcohol. In count II, plaintiff sued Medicare-Glaser, the pharmacy that filled the prescription, and Evelyn Nightengale, the registered pharmacist and employee of Medicare-Glaser, on a theory of negligent undertaking. Specifically, plaintiff alleged that although Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale had no initial duty to warn of the dangerous side effects of the drug Fiorinal, they undertook to warn and did so negligently. The circuit court granted Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale’s motion for summary judgment as to count II. The appellate court reversed, holding that the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale. (219 Ill. App. 3d 931.) We granted Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). Only count II of plaintiff’s complaint is before this court for review. Amicus curiae briefs were filed by the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association (“A Pharmacist should be under a duty to properly warn under special circumstances such as when she voluntarily assumes the duty to warn”), the Illinois Pharmacists Association (“Impose upon the pharmacy profession the same duty as that owed by other professionals practicing their professions”) and the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (“A pharmacist has an affirmative duty to warn a patient of potential drug interactions and possible side effects of drugs”). On Friday, August 28, 1986, Dr. Barrow performed arthroscopic surgery on Stephen Frye’s knee at Franklin Hospital in Benton, Illinois. Following surgery, Dr. Barrow prescribed the drug Fiorinal for Stephen Frye. Later that afternoon, after Frye had been released from the hospital, his mother had the prescription filled at the Medicare-Glaser pharmacy by Evelyn Nightengale, the pharmacist on duty. Nightengale filled the prescription with the correct drug and with the appropriate number of capsules. Further, on the prescription container, Nightengale affixed two labels: one, a label with a picture of a “drowsy eye” and the words “May Cause Drowsiness”; and, two, a federally required label stating “CAUTION: Federal law prohibits the transfer of this drug to persons other than the patient to whom it was prescribed.” The written prescription from Dr. Barrow for Fiorinal did not instruct or suggest that any warning label be placed on the prescription container. On September 3, 1986, Stephen Frye was found dead in his trailer, and his date of death was estimated to be the evening of September 1. Evelyn Nightengale was deposed by plaintiffs counsel on July 7, 1989, and provided the following relevant information. When a prescription is filled at Medicare-Glaser, patient information and the specific prescription is typed into a computer. The computer generates a label, identifying the prescribing physician, the patient, and the dosage as indicated by the physician’s prescription. In addition, a computer software program generates a separate document that suggests warning labels that might be placed on the container. In this case, the computer suggested three warning labels: “drowsiness *** alcohol and *** impairing the ability to drive.” Nightengale testified that the warning pertaining to the use of alcohol and Fiorinal said “something to the effect that alcohol may intensify the effect of this drug.” Nightengale also stated that the pharmacist filling a prescription has the discretion of whether to place a specific label on a container. Here, Nightengale stated that she did not place a label warning about the effects of alcohol when combined with Fiorinal because “it offended so many people that I would think that they might drink.” Nightengale testified that she had been “chewed out” in the past for placing such labels on containers. As mentioned briefly above, two amici curiae, namely, the Illinois Pharmacists Association (Pharmacists Association) and the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (National Association), argue that this court should place an affirmative duty on pharmacists to counsel consumers on the dangerous side effects of prescription drugs. Specifically, the Pharmacists Association and the National Association contend that the “learned intermediary doctrine,” which basically states that drug manufacturers must warn physicians of a drug’s dangerous side effects and that the prescribing physicians have a duty to convey the warnings to their patients (see Kirk v. Michael Reese Hospital & Medical Center (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 507; Leesley v. West (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 135; Eldridge v. Eli Lilly & Co. (1985), 138 Ill. App. 3d 124), should not stand in the way of a pharmacist’s affirmative duty to warn consumers of a drug’s dangerous side effects. This question will not, however, ‘be considered here, as the parties have never raised the issue. (See Archer Daniels Midland Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 107, 117.) Plaintiff has conceded in her complaint and throughout the appeals process that pharmacists do not have an affirmative duty to counsel customers on the dangerous side effects of prescription drugs. Rather, plaintiff bases her complaint on the negligent undertaking theory of liability, and that is, therefore, the focus of this opinion. Plaintiff argues that although Medicare-Glaser and Nightengale did not have a duty to warn Stephen Frye of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal, they undertook to warn of the dangerous side effects, and in so doing were negligent. Specifically, plaintiff alleges that defendants failed to adequately warn of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal and “placed a warning label showing a ‘drowsy eye’ *** when the proper warning label should have warned that anyone taking [Fiorinal] should avoid the use of alcohol, because alcohol would intensify the effect of [Fiorinal].” This matter is before us on defendants’ motion for summary judgment. The purpose of summary judgment is not to try an issue of fact but to determine if one exists. A motion for summary judgment should be granted when the pleadings, depositions and affidavits reveal that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1005(c).) Moreover, for purposes of summary judgment, we must take the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, and thus we assume that Stephen Frye died from the combined use of alcohol and Fiorinal as plaintiff alleges. The appellate court stated that pursuant to the “learned intermediary doctrine,” Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale were under no initial duty to warn Frye of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal. (219 Ill. App. 3d at 934-35 (citing Kirk v. Michael Reese Hospital & Medical Center (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 507, Leesley v. West (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 135, and Eldridge v. Eli Lilly & Co. (1985), 138 Ill. App. 3d 124).) Moreover, the appellate court correctly noted that plaintiff has framed her claim under the voluntary undertaking theory of liability. However, the appellate court stopped short in its analysis by failing to address whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the defendants performed their undertaking negligently. The appellate court merely held that “[defendants can, therefore, be liable for injuries or death to the consumer if they undertook to warn the consumer of the dangerous side effects of a prescription drug and did so negligently.” 219 Ill. App. 3d at 936. After reviewing the pleadings and depositions on file, we do not believe that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Medicare-Glaser and Evelyn Nightengale performed their voluntary undertaking negligently. Pursuant to the voluntary undertaking theory of liability, one who gratuitously or for consideration renders services to another is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to the other by one’s failure to exercise due care or “ ‘such competence and skill as [one] possesses.’ ” (Cross v. Wells Fargo Alarm Services (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 313, 317, quoting Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp. (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 69.) In Nelson, this court stated: “It is axiomatic that every person owes to all others a duty to exercise ordinary care to guard against injury which naturally flows as a reasonably probable and foreseeable consequence of his act, and that such duty does not depend upon contract, privity of interest or the proximity of relationship, but extends to remote and unknown persons.” Nelson, 31 Ill. 2d at 86. In addition to the above, of particular relevance is section 323 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, which states: “One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if (a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm, or (b) the harm is suffered because of the other’s reliance upon the undertaking.” Restatement (Second) of Torts §323 (1965). Under the voluntary undertaking theory of liability, the duty of care to be imposed upon a defendant is limited to the extent of its undertaking. (See Pippin v. Chicago Housing Authority (1979), 78 Ill. 2d 204, 210 (“The [Chicago Housing] Authority’s duty was limited by the extent of the undertaking, viz, to use reasonable care in engaging Interstate [Service Corporation] to provide the guard services. The Authority can therefore be liable at most for the negligent hiring of Interstate”).) In this case, plaintiff believes that the extent of the defendants’ undertaking was to warn Frye of all potential dangers involved in taking Fiorinal. We believe that, in so arguing, plaintiff has taken an overly broad interpretation of the defendants’ undertaking. The extent of the defendants’ undertaking was the placing of the “drowsy eye” label on Frye’s prescription container which warned that Fiorinal may cause drowsiness. Our narrow construction of defendants’1 voluntary undertaking is supported by public policy. First, if we were to hold that by choosing to place the “drowsy eye” label on Frye’s prescription container defendants were assuming the duty to warn Frye of all of Fiorinal’s side effects, we believe that pharmacists would refrain from placing any warning labels on containers. Thus, consumers would be deprived of any warnings which might be beneficial. Moreover, requiring Nightengale to warn Frye of all potential side effects of Fiorinal because she chose to warn him of the drug’s propensity to cause drowsiness would be difficult from a practical standpoint. The dangerous propensities of Fiorinal include more than the three standard warnings Medicare-Glaser’s computer software program suggested to Nightengale. These additional warnings include: hypersensitivity to aspirin, caffeine or barbiturates; patients with porphyria; drug dependence; the effects of use with other central nervous system depressants; adverse effects during pregnancy; excess dosage; dizziness and lightheadedness; and gastrointestinal disturbances such as nausea, vomiting and flatulence. The “drowsy eye” label placed on Frye’s container was correct — one of Fiorinal’s side effects is that it does cause drowsiness. Assuming, as the appellate court did, that Nightengale gave a completely inaccurate warning, and the consumer followed the incorrect instructions resulting in injury, defendants would be liable for performing their voluntary undertaking negligently. However, that is not the case here. Plaintiff does not deny that the warning actually given was accurate. Rather, plaintiff argues that the “drowsy eye” label was not adequate to warn of the “real” dangers, i.e., drinking alcohol while taking Fiorinal, and that the “drowsy eye” label could mislead someone into thinking that the worst side effect of Fiorinal was drowsiness. We disagree. As explained above, Medicare-Glaser by and through its agent Nightengale undertook to warn Frye that Fiorinal may cause drowsiness. That was the extent of their undertaking, which they were obligated to perform with reasonable care. Plaintiff’s contention that the “drowsy eye” label was inadequate to warn of the danger of drinking alcohol and taking Fiorinal begs the question. Defendants did not intend that the “drowsy eye” label act as a warning of the danger of combining alcohol and Fiorinal. Further, we think that it is unreasonable to argue that by placing only the “drowsy eye” label on the prescription container, a pharmacist might mislead a consumer into believing that drowsiness is the only side effect of Fiorinal. In our opinion, consumers should principally look to their prescribing physician to convey the appropriate warnings regarding drugs, and it is the prescribing physician’s duty to convey these warnings to patients. (See Kirk, 117 Ill. 2d at 524 (“The extent of warnings to patients concerning prescription drugs, as we have previously noted, is within the discretion of the physician”).) Further, in terms of this case, there is no evidence that Frye’s death was due to his reliance on the defendants’ decision to place the “drowsy eye” label on the prescription container. See Restatement (Second) of Torts §323(b) (1965). For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the trial court was correct in granting summary judgment. The judgment of the appellate court is reversed, and the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9737688 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:13.256551+00 ===

JUSTICE BILANDIC, dissenting: I concur in the majority’s determination that the prescribing physician has the primary duty to warn of the side effects of prescription drugs. As the majority correctly points out, count I of the plaintiff’s complaint against the doctor is not before this court. I also agree with the majority that the question of whether pharmacists have an affirmative duty to warn customers of the side effects of prescription drugs is not before us in this case. The issue is whether the defendants negligently performed their voluntary undertaking and thereby caused Frye to suffer harm that was reasonably probable and foreseeable. I must respectfully dissent because the majority improperly restricts the scope of the voluntary undertaking theory of liability. In Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp. (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 69, 86, this court stated: “It is axiomatic that every person owes to all others a duty to exercise ordinary care to guard against injury which naturally flows as a reasonably probable and foreseeable consequence of his act, and that such duty does not depend upon contract, privity of interest or the proximity of relationship, but extends to remote and unknown persons.” The duty to exercise ordinary care is a broad duty. In regard to the liability which may be incurred due to a breach of this duty, the Restatement (Second) of Torts states: “One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if (a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm, or (b) the harm is suffered because of the other’s reliance upon the undertaking.” Restatement (Second) of Torts §323 (1965). Under this theory of liability, one who voluntarily undertakes a course of action may not perform the act negligently. One who is negligent in his or her undertaking will be held liable for foreseeable consequences of the act if another suffers harm because, inter alia, he or she relied upon the other’s undertaking. The majority is correct in noting that, under this theory of liability, the defendant’s duty of care is limited to the extent of his or her undertaking. However, by asserting that the extent of the defendants’ undertaking in this case was merely “the placing of the ‘drowsy eye’ label on Frye’s prescription container which warned that Fiorinal may cause drowsiness” (153 Ill. 2d at 33), the majority has improperly restricted the duty of the instant defendants by improperly restricting the scope of their particular undertaking. This court has previously rejected such a narrow construction of a defendant’s voluntary undertaking. (See Cross v. Wells Fargo Alarm Services (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 313.) In Cross, the Chicago Housing Authority (CHA) hired Wells Fargo Alarm Services, Inc., a security service, to provide guard services in one of its housing projects during the hours of 9 a.m. to 1 a.m. The-plaintiff in Cross was severely beaten in the building at 1:15 a.m. after the guards had left the premises. In his complaint against the CHA, the plaintiff alleged that the effect of the CHA’s voluntary undertaking to provide part-time security service was to substantially increase the incidence of crime in the project after 1 a.m., thereby increasing the personal danger to the tenants and guests therein. In Cross, the CHA cited Pippin v. Chicago Housing Authority (1979), 78 Ill. 2d 204, and argued that the extent of its undertaking was to hire the security service and, therefore, it could only be liable if it was negligent in hiring the Wells Fargo service. This court rejected the CHA’s argument, stating: “But Pippin is not to be so narrowly read. Pippin held that the CHA’s voluntary undertaking to hire a protection agency required it to use reasonable care in hiring. The setting here is different, but the ground asserted for liability of the CHA is the same. A duty voluntarily assumed must be performed with due care or ‘such competence and skill as [one] possesses.’ [Citation.] The CHA undertook to provide part-time guard service at the project. In providing that service it was obligated to use reasonable care not to create increased dangers to persons lawfully on its property.” (Cross, 82 Ill. 2d at 317.) The Cross court found that the plaintiff stated a cause of action against the CHA. Cross, 82 Ill. 2d at 317-18. In Cross, this court made it clear that the extent of the CHA’s voluntary undertaking was not merely hiring the security agency. Rather, the Cross court determined that the extent of the CHA’s undertaking was to provide part-time security service. Under Cross, the majority in the case sub judice errs in determining that the extent of the defendants’ undertaking was merely to warn Frye of drowsiness. The majority’s construction of the defendants’ undertaking is much too narrow and significantly undermines the voluntary undertaking theory of liability. The Cross court found that the extent of the CHA’s undertaking was to provide part-time guard service and not merely the hiring of the service. Therefore, in the instant case, I would conclude that the extent of the defendants’ undertaking was to warn Frye of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal, not merely to warn Frye of drowsiness. In the case at bar, the full extent of the defendants’ undertaking is clear from the record. The pharmacist gave testimony that she had other computer-generated warning labels as well as the “drowsy eye” label but she selectively chose not to include other labels on Frye’s prescription container. Although the majority refers to Cross, it does not correctly apply the reasoning of that case. The majority reasons, in the case at bar, that the duty of the pharmacist ended with the placing of the drowsiness label on the medicine because she applied that label correctly. It overlooks the fact that the pharmacist also knew that drinking alcohol, while taking the medicine, could be fatal. The majority concludes that by not placing the alcohol label on the medicine, the pharmacist did not assume the risk of any harm that may visit a patient who indulges. This reasoning is in direct conflict with the opinion of this court in Cross. The CHA provided private security guards until 1 a.m. This is analogous to the pharmacist placing the “drowsy eye” label on the medicine. When the security guards left at 1 a.m., the housing complex was more dangerous. The plaintiff in that case sustained injuries at 1:15 a.m., when the area was not protected. This court in Cross held the CHA to a different standard than the majority holds the defendants in this case. By doing so, the majority has reversed Cross sub silencio. In my judgment, the placing of the “drowsy eye” label may have warned Frye of a relatively minor consequence of the medication. Failure to place a warning about the use of alcoholic beverages while taking the medication has far greater consequences. Yet, the pharmacist testified that she was aware of the consequences but did not place the alcohol label because it offended some people. According to the pleading, mixing of alcohol with Fiorinal was fatal to Frye. Having undertaken to warn Frye of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal, the defendants were obligated to do so in a reasonable manner. By placing only the “drowsy eye” label on Frye’s prescription container, a reasonable person could be misled into thinking that drowsiness is the only or the most severe side effect of Fiorinal. Summary judgment in this case is improper because material issues of fact exist with respect to whether the defendants’ undertaking increased the risk of harm to Frye (see Restatement (Second) of Torts §323(a) (1965)) or whether Frye died because he relied upon the defendants’ undertaking to warn of the dangerous side effects of the drug (see Restatement (Second) of Torts §323(b) (1965)). Because material questions of fact exist with respect to whether the defendants negligently performed their undertaking to warn Frye of the dangerous side effects of Fiorinal, the grant of summary judgment in favor of the defendants should be reversed and the cause should be remanded for resolution of these fact questions by the trier of fact. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent. JUSTICE FREEMAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2211661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.913464+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 89 (1960)
KENTNER TRUCK LINE, INC. (a Corporation), Respondent,
v.
MAIER BREWING COMPANY (a Corporation), Appellant.
Civ. No. 18810.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 25, 1960.
G. Vernon Brumbaugh for Appellant.
Robert E. Phelan and Vernon W. Humber for Respondent.
SHOEMAKER, J.
Plaintiff Kentner Truck Line, Inc., a radial highway common carrier, in a complaint of three counts, sued defendant Maier Brewing Company for undercharges growing out of transportation services furnished between the years 1952-1954 inclusive. Each count carried a demand for somewhat less than the jurisdictional amount of the superior court but the total fulfilled this requirement. A demurrer was filed to each count. It was overruled as to count one but was sustained as to counts two and three on the ground that said counts were barred by the statute of limitations. Following trial by court, judgment was entered for plaintiff on the first count in the sum of $2,531.36 which included $73.73 in federal taxes, from which judgment defendant appeals.
The facts are not in dispute. During the years 1953 and 1954 defendant kept one million or more pounds of rice on *91 hand at the premises of its supplier, C. E. Grosjean Rice Milling Company, in San Francisco. Defendant's president testified that in January of 1953 a representative of plaintiff quoted a price of about 36 or 37 cents per 100 pounds for the bulk shipping by truck of said rice from San Francisco to defendant's place of business in Los Angeles. He stated, "The rate was based on 80,000 pounds rail."
Plaintiff introduced into evidence one copy of a bill of lading and two copies of a freight bill for each of 49 shipments, these documents bearing various dates from March 5, 1953, to May 10, 1954 (Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 1). The bills of lading are signed by a representative of defendant and defendant was billed for each of these shipments at the agreed rate of 37 cents and paid said bills in accordance with their terms.
Plaintiff's case was presented on the theory that the billing at the above-mentioned rate was erroneous, inasmuch as that rate is lower than the minimum tariff prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission for such shipments. Plaintiff showed that the rate actually charged was a rail rate applicable to the product here involved only when shipments thereof are in quantities of at least 60,000 pounds. No single shipment in the instant case weighed more than 43,000 pounds (Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 1).
Plaintiff also introduced into evidence the tariff regulations promulgated by the Public Utilities Commission (Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 2) and prayed judgment for the minimum charges specified therein which it alleged to be yet unpaid, plus the taxes aforementioned. The court's findings are in substantial harmony with the plaintiff's contentions.
There is no question but that a contract for a rate lower than that prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission is nugatory and a recovery for such undercharge may be had (Hischemoeller v. National Ice etc. Storage Co. (1956), 46 Cal.2d 318 [294 P.2d 433]). However, defendant contends that the superior court was without jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter and, in this connection, argues that although the complaint originally involved claims totaling $3,017.10, this amount was reduced to $2,661.77 (the prayer of count one) by virtue of the action of the trial court in sustaining the demurrer to the second and third counts of said complaint and that this amount is clearly within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. This contention seems plausible but the law of California is to the contrary. [1] The rule is that a complaint which seeks a total recovery of an amount *92 in excess of the superior court's jurisdictional minimum states a cause of action within that court's jurisdiction even though it may appear from the face of the complaint that some of the recovery sought may be defeated by application of the statute of limitations (Brooks v. Brooks (1941), 48 Cal.App.2d 347, 349 [119 P.2d 970]).
[2] While it is true that the effective demand of the complaint must be made in good faith (13 Cal.Jur.2d 574), there is no indication that such is not the situation here. [3] The statute of limitations is a defense which must be properly raised else it is waived. If a plaintiff trims his demand and initially files his action in an inferior court he prematurely concedes the conclusiveness of a defense which a defendant might neglect to plead or be unable to prove (1 Witkin, California Procedure, 292). Appellant cites Demartini v. Marini (1920), 45 Cal.App. 418 [187 P. 985], as authority to the contrary, but in that case the plaintiff did not state a cause of action in the first count of her complaint and under the facts alleged could not. The remaining counts did not involve a total sum within the jurisdictional limits of the superior court and a demurrer on that ground was properly sustained without leave to amend.
[4] Defendant next contends that because it neither signed nor received either the bills of lading pertaining to the subject shipments or copies thereof, it is not a party thereto and hence cannot be bound by their terms. This contention is answered by section 2126i of the Civil Code which provides that "Except as otherwise provided in this article where a consignor receives a bill and makes no objections to its terms or conditions at the time he receives it, neither the consignor nor any person who accepts delivery of the goods ... shall be allowed to deny that he is bound by such terms and conditions, so far as they are not contrary to law or public policy." The bills of lading in the instant case provide that "The owner or consignee shall pay the freight and average, if any, and all lawful charges accruing on said property ..." ( 7). [5] Furthermore, although the shipper is presumably the consignor and his promise to pay the charges may ordinarily be inferred, this inference may be rebutted and it may be shown by the bill of lading or otherwise that he was not acting in his own behalf, that this fact was known to the carrier, and that the parties intended that the consignee should assume such obligation (New York Central R.R. v. F. H. Buck Co. (1935), 2 Cal.2d 384 [41 P.2d 547]). The undisputed evidence *93 of the parties' negotiations prior to the first of said shipments, and of defendant's ownership of the rice which constituted the subject matter thereof, is clearly sufficient to show the existence of the knowledge and intent necessary to establish the latter's liability.
[6] Defendant also urges that it was plaintiff's duty to comply with the terms of Item 85-A of Highway Carriers' Tariff Number 2 and that had it done so the rate which was actually charged and paid would have been applicable. That section provides in part that multiple pickups by a carrier shall constitute a single composite shipment for purposes of rate computation if (1) the entire shipment is delivered at one time, (2) a single shipping document for the entire shipment delivered is issued prior to or at the time of the first pickup and (3) the entire shipment is picked up within a period of two consecutive days (Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 2, p. 16-A).
Defendant refers to no authority which recognizes the existence of a duty on the part of a carrier to so manage the affairs of a consignor as to specify the size of his shipments. Our own research has produced none and in our opinion no such duty exists.
[7] Finally defendant contends that because it was not a party to the bills of lading, plaintiff's action is not upon any contract, obligation or liability founded upon an instrument in writing and that said claim is therefore barred by the statute of limitations. This position has been decided adversely to defendant. In Pioneer Fruit Co. v. Southern Pacific Co. (1920), 47 Cal.App. 44 [190 P. 50], it was held that a bill of lading constituted not only a receipt as to the amount and type of goods shipped but also a contract to which the four-year limitations period applies. Additionally defendant signed a freight bill upon its receipt of each shipment. Each such bill contains a clause which states "The acceptance of this shipment constitutes an obligation to pay collect charges if so billed." The trial court concluded that the four-year statute of limitations applies to plaintiff's claim whether it is based upon the bills of lading or upon the freight bills. Such conclusion was correct.
The judgment is affirmed.
Kaufman, P. J., and Draper, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737689 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:18.861582+00 ===

KAUFMAN, P. J.
This is an appeal by plaintiff, Mark B. Fambrini, by his guardian ad litem, Louis Fambrini, from a judgment by the Honorable Norman A. Gregg, Judge of the Superior Court of the County of Contra Costa against his negligence suit for personal injuries.
*238The sole issue on appeal is the propriety of the court’s refusal to give the appellant’s offered instruction on last clear chance. The form of the instruction is not in issue, but rather the applicability of the doctrine under the facts of the case.
About 5 :20 p. m. on August 5, 1957, a clear day, the respondent was proceeding up Hadden Road in Walnut Creek, when she observed the plaintiff, Mark Fambrini, coasting toward her down the hill on his bicycle at a rapid rate of speed. She recognized the bicycle rider as Mark, a minor 7 years of age, and knew him to be an erratic bicyclist. The respondent was the only eyewitness to the accident, with the exception of Mark who did not recollect the events very clearly. She was going at a rate of from 15 to 20 miles per hour when she first observed him; at that time, the vehicles were about 90 feet apart. He was looking off to his right as he proceeded downhill, and never directed his attention towards the approaching car. The respondent immediately applied the brakes upon observing the appellant, and brought the ear to a full stop within about 10 feet. In her pretrial deposition, the respondent stated the only thing she did was apply the brakes, while at trial, she said she veered to the right. The child hit the left side of the front of the car which by that time was fully stopped, was thrown off his bike, and suffered a fractured leg, and other injuries. At the point of impact, the ear was from 2% to 3% feet left of the center of the road; the child was approximately in the center of the road. At the trial, respondent stated that only a few seconds elapsed between the time she saw the child and her full stop; in her pretrial deposition, she stated it was hard to tell, but she thought it was about a half a minute which she understood to be 30 seconds.
Hadden Road is a two block cul-de-sac in a residential neighborhood in which over 50 children live. It is common for children to ride their bikes on the street. Both appellant and respondent live on the street, the latter having resided there for six years and driven back and forth to work daily for five years, and is familiar with the area. The road has a fairly steep grade on which coasting bikes can attain a good rate of speed. There are no sidewalks, there is no marked center line, and the road has a paved width of 18 feet at the point of impact. Respondent stated there was room for cars to pass her vehicle on the left, and that they did so while she was awaiting the police.
The appellants’ offered instructions were correct as to form. They gave the elements of the doctrine of last clear *239chance as set out in Brandelius v. City & County of San Francisco, 47 Cal.2d 729 at page 743 [306 P.2d 432] :
“The doctrine of last clear chance may be invoked if, and only if, the trier of facts finds from the evidence: (1) that the plaintiff was in a position of danger and, by his own negligence, became unable to escape from such position by the use of ordinary care, either because it became physically impossible for him to escape or because he was totally unaware of the danger; (2) that defendant knew that plaintiff was in a position of danger and further knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that plaintiff was unable to escape therefrom; and (3) that thereafter defendant had the last clear chance to avoid the accident by the exercise of ordinary care but failed to exercise such last clear chance, and the accident occurred as a proximate result of such failure.”
The appellants correctly point out that the appellate court in considering the propriety of the instruction must view the evidence most favorable to the contention that the doctrine is applicable, since the plaintiffs are entitled to an instruction thereon if the evidence so viewed could establish the elements of the doctrine. (Selinsky v. Olsen, 38 Cal.2d 102 [237 P.2d 654]; Bonebrake v. McCormick, 35 Cal.2d 16 [215 P.2d 728].)
The appellants also argue that where a trial court refuses to give instructions on the doctrine, the same situation is presented as when a nonsuit, directed verdict, or motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict is granted, relying on a concurrence by Justice Carter, an advocate of expanding last clear chance, and consistent dissenter where the doctrine was not invoked, in Daniels v. City & County of San Francisco, 40 Cal.2d 614 [255 P.2d 785]. The test urged is to see if there is any substantial evidence on which the trier of fact could reach a contrary decision, based upon the concurrence and Hilyar v. Union Ice Co., 45 Cal.2d 30 [286 P.2d 21], which involved an appeal from a nonsuit, but not the doctrine of last clear chance.  Actually, the rule is that there must be substantial evidence present to justify the question of last clear chance going to a jury, and the existence of the substantial evidence justifying the application of the doctrine is a question of law to be determined by the judge. (Doran v. City & County of San Francisco, 44 Cal.2d 477 [283 P.2d 1] ; Nippold v. Romero, 145 Cal.App.2d 235 [302 P.2d 367].)
It should also be noted that since the doctrine relieves an injured party of the results of his own contributory *240negligence and permits recovery despite such negligence, it applies only in the exceptional case where there is substantial evidence to support a favorable finding on each of the required elements enumerated earlier; if any of these elements is absent the doctrine does not apply and the case is governed by the ordinary rules of contributory negligence. (Doran v. City & County of San Francisco, supra; Johnson v. Sacramento Northern Ry., 54 Cal.App.2d 528 [129 P.2d 503]; Fleharty v. Boltzen, 137 Cal.App.2d 187 [290 P.2d 311].)
The appellants contend that because of the time element the respondent had a last clear chance and did not exercise the ordinary care required in such a situation because she failed to blow her horn, or swerve.  The appellants argue that viewing the evidence most favorable to appellants requires accepting respondent’s statement on deposition that she had 30 seconds from the time she viewed the child until the time she stopped. Appellants correctly urge that this extrajudicial statement is excepted hearsay as an admission. (Bonebrake v. McCormick, supra), and may be used as evidence as well as to impeach. Although the rule stated earlier requires the court to give all favorable import to evidence supporting the applicability of the doctrine, it must be remembered that the evidence must be substantial.  For evidence to be substantial, it must be at least ponderable. (Estate of Teed, 112 Cal.App.2d 638 [247 P.2d 54].)  First, the accompanying remark must be considered, that is, that she said it was hard to tell how much time elapsed when she made her estimate. Secondly, the circumstances of the accident must be taken into account. The vehicles were only 90 feet apart when Mark was first seen. The bike was going at a good rate of speed which is obvious from the damage done when it hit the car which was motionless on impact. The car had been going between 15 and 20 miles per hour when respondent first saw the child. It is inconceivable that it could have taken them 30 seconds to meet; a realistic view of the situation indicates only several seconds could have elapsed as respondent stated at trial. The rule requiring the evidence to be viewed in favor of the doctrine does not require reality to be ignored, since there is the substantiality requirement. Therefore, the happenings must be considered as having transpired within several seconds, which was no doubt the case. Having this in mind, the appellants’ contention as to time to react must be viewed. *241Several cases are cited for the proposition that it is a jury question as to whether the space of time allowed for avoiding the accident. (Selinsky v. Olsen, supra; Durkee v. Atchison, T. & S. F. Ry. Co., 159 Cal.App.2d 615 [324 P.2d 91].) The distinction between these cases and the present is readily apparent. Both involved defendants who failed to take any action for some of the time available to them, and had they done so the accidents might have been avoided. In the present case, the evidence is undisputed to the effect that respondent acted immediately, and succeeded in stopping her car before it was hit by appellant.  It is clear the doctrine of last clear chance never meant a splitting of seconds when emergencies arise. (Rodabaugh v. Tekus, 39 Cal.2d 290 [246 P.2d 663]; Hickambottom v. Cooper Transportation Co., 163 Cal.App.2d 489 [329 P.2d 609].) The real objection of the appellants here is not the failure of the respondent to act in the time available but rather the failure to successfully act to avoid the collision.
The appellants also cite some cases arguing from such that failure to blow her horn in the time available was a failure to exercise appropriate care during a last clear chance. (Peterson v. Burkhalter, 38 Cal.2d 107 [237 P.2d 977]; Girdner v. Union Oil Co., 216 Cal. 197 [13 P.2d 915]; Center v. Yellow Cab Co., 216 Cal. 205 [13 P.2d 918].) None of these eases stated that the fact that the party failed to blow the horn by itself indicated a failure to take advantage of a last clear chance, but considered that along with a failure to brake down or swerve after first seeing the plaintiff in peril. Here, the respondent acted immediately and stopped her vehicle.
Appellants make a similar argument to the effect that not swerving is a failure to take advantage of the last clear chance based on Jones v. Gilland, 137 Cal.App.2d 486 [290 P.2d 329] ; Lebkicher v. Crosby, 123 Cal.App.2d 631 [267 P.2d 361].  Again, appellants are correct in pointing out that an admission is an exception to the hearsay rule, and carries evidentiary import (Bonebrake v. McCormick, supra). Appellants indicate that in her deposition respondent stated the only thing she did was stop, and argue this not only indicates her statement that she swerved made at trial was untruthful but indicates she did not swerve. Assuming such was the case, it must be noted that the parties in the swerving cases all failed to bring their vehicles to a halt, which is an important distinction, but even more crucial is the fact that they hit victims who at the time were standing still and hence, *242swerving would have avoided the accident, while such is mere speculation here.
The appellants contend that the application of last clear chance is influenced by the character of the neighborhood, relying on Hensley v. Sellers, 160 Cal.App.2d 117 [324 P.2d 954], The case did set out the character of the neighborhood in its statement of facts, but did not indicate exactly what role that played in the decision. In an analogous argument, the appellants allege that the respondent did not exercise the requisite standard of care, citing Hilyar v. Union Ice Co., supra, for the proposition that where children are known to play in the area the requisite degree of care depends upon this circumstance.  The citation is true, but the case did not involve the question of last clear chance but rather was speaking of negligence, while here, we are concerned with a doctrine which pre-supposes negligence on the defendant’s part. (Berton v. Cochran, 81 Cal.App.2d 776 [185 P.2d 349].)  It is possible the characteristics of the neighborhood have some bearing on the care required if there is a last clear chance to avoid an accident, although its real import is on the original negligence of the defendant. However, for this factor to have any weight on this consideration, it must first be demonstrated that there was a last clear chance to avoid the accident. While discussing the standard of care, the appellants point to Paulos v. Market Street Ry. Co., 136 Cal.App. 163 [28 P.2d 24] for the proposition that one may not rely upon his own dullness once he sees another in a position of peril when the doctrine of last clear chance is attempted to be invoked. This statement was made in connection with an argument by a defendant that although one might see a person in a position of peril, he might not realize such is the case and the court should look at the individual’s capacity to grasp the situation. Needless to say, when placed back into context, it hardly seems accurate to say the respondent reacted with " dullness " when she immediately brought her vehicle to a stop on seeing the child. This purported issue inspires the appellants to literary heights, contending that the standard of care required of respondent under the circumstances was “the jungle alertness of a Bengal tiger in his native habitat or the lightning reflexes of a mongoose engaged in deadly combat with a hooded cobra.” In bringing forth this carnival of the animals, appellants have lost sight of the fact that in setting a standard of care one seeks to find the conduct appropriate for a reasonable man, and what they silently would require of the *243respondent is animal-like qualities so that she would be enabled to brake her car, swerve it, and honk the horn in a matter of seconds. Suffice it to say, before one considers the care required in a last clear chance situation, the last clear chance must be found to be present.
While engaged in literary pursuits, the appellants attempt to immortalize respondent by waxing poetic on a theme found in The Charge of the Light Brigade. They try to analogize respondent’s course up Hadden Road to the charge at Balaclava. However, the blunder here is as obvious as that made in the Crimea, even if not as costly; it is apparent that if any comparison is appropriate, the blind and unquestioning charge here was made by the bicyclist. At any rate, it is not too much less in point on the crucial issue here of existence of a last clear chance than some of the more legalistic arguments advanced by appellants.
One line of argument pursued by respondent to support the refusal to instruct on the last clear chance doctrine is the theory that the mere fact that respondent observed appellant some distance away does not in itself invoke the doctrine, since a party is not necessarily in a position of danger throughout his approach, and it is not until such time as he cannot extricate himself that the doctrine applies. (Rodabaugh v. Tekus, supra; Clarida v. Aguirre, 156 Cal.App.2d 112 [319 P.2d 20] ; Ferner v. Casalegno, 141 Cal.App.2d 467 [297 P.2d 91] ; Wilson v. Knudsen Creamery Co., 137 Cal.App.2d 552 [290 P.2d 677] ; Fleharty v. Boltzen, supra; Dalley v. Williams, 73 Cal.App.2d 427 [166 P.2d 595]; Johnson v. Sacramento Northern Ry. Co., supra; McHugh v. Market St. Ry. Co., 29 Cal.App.2d 737 [85 P.2d 467] ; Choquette v. Key System Transit Co., 118 Cal.App. 643 [5 P.2d 921].) The defect in this contention is that giving all the evidence a most favorable effect towards the contention that the doctrine applies compels consideration of the fact that in addition to observing Mark coasting when she turned uphill, respondent stated she knew he was an erratic bicyclist, and also saw that he was not watching her. This would seem to put her on notice of his peril at that point.
The question on which the applicability of the doctrine turns remains; that is, was there a last clear chance to avoid the accident from the time respondent first observed the child some 90 feet away? In answering this question several principles must be kept in mind.  First, the chance to avoid the collision must have been clear: last clear chance does not mean *244possible chance, or bare chance, but clear chance. (Berton v. Cochran, supra; Dalley v. Williams, supra; Poncino v. ReidMurclock & Co., 136 Cal.App. 223 [28 P.2d 932].)  Secondly, under the most favorable realistic view of the evidence only a few seconds elapsed between respondent seeing the child and impact.  The doctrine of last clear chance does not apply to splitting of seconds; when the emergency arises suddenly and there are only a few seconds to avoid collision, and there is no substantial evidence that the defendant had time to avoid the collision, the doctrine of last clear chance does not apply. (Hickambottom v. Cooper Transportation Co., supra; Hall v. Atchison T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 152 Cal.App.2d 80 [312 P.2d 739] ; Wilson v. Knudsen Creamery Co., supra; Mehling v. Zigman, 116 Cal.App.2d 729 [254 P.2d 141] ; Berton v. Cochran, supra; Poncino v. Reid-Murdock & Co., supra. )  There is no substantial evidence here that respondent had time to avoid the collision. The evidence rather indicates that confronted with the emergency respondent immediately applied her brakes bringing the car to a complete stop in seconds, at which point the bicycle crashed into it. The respondent took a reasonable course in the emergency and the appellants actually have based their case on the theory that in fact respondent was not able to avoid collision, rather than being able to establish that she did have a last clear chance to avoid the accident.
Judgment affirmed.
' Draper, J., concurred in the judgment.

=== CASE 9737690 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:18.866832+00 ===

GOOD, J. pro tem.*
I dissent.
The majority opinion appears to be predicated upon only a limited portion of respondent’s testimony and ignores or rejects admissions and other evidence, direct and inferential, that fixes the distance between véhicles at 160 to 180 feet rather than 90 feet and that contradicts her testimony of an immediate stop within 10 feet upon observing the plaintiff’s position of peril. The rejected evidence as to distance lies in respondent’s testimony that she first observed the boy and knew he was in danger as she went into the curve from Black-wood and that he was then at the McCleary driveway. Later she said he was just coming off the upper level portion of Hadden, which would be a considerably greater distance. The McCleary driveway was 75 to 80 feet above the point of impact *245which in turn was 39 feet above a tangent projected by the traffic officer from the opposite side of the Blackwood curve. A tangent from the near side would add another 40 feet to Hadden. The descriptions of the course of the two roads and the photographic exhibits show that Blackwood and Hadden form a continuous curve and that forward visibility would be constant from any point on the first half of the curve. This distance of uninterrupted visibility for a driver entering Hadden was paced by Mr. Fambrini at 180 feet. These factors in evidence, corroborated by the photographs, would well support a jury finding that instead of 90 feet respondent had between 160 to 180 feet of observation of plaintiff upon first discovering his position of peril.
Further her testimony as to an immediate stop within 10 feet (with the boy continuing to coast some 80 feet into her stopped automobile) is contradicted by her admissions to the traffic officer at the scene that she was just “barely moving” or had stopped or “almost” stopped at the time of impact. If the jury found the distance to be either 160 feet or more on her testimony or 180 feet on the Fambrini testimony and further found that she was almost stopped it could have drawn the rather compelling inference that respondent did not come to an immediate stop upon first observing the inattentive cyclist but continued ahead for 90 to 100 feet straddling the center of the road by two or three feet (her stopped position) and then made the last instant kind of panic stop that, as she said, stalled her motor. The traffic officer also testified that the bicycle hit respondent’s car at its left head-lamp, thus placing the boy 1% feet on his own side of the road. Because of this and the fact that 8 feet of black-top plus a shoulder of unspecified width was clear and unoccupied at her right it cannot be said as a matter of law that a swerve of even 2 or 3 feet to respondent’s side of the road was not available to her and, in the exercise of due care, was not required in order to avoid impact. I do not consider it “mere speculation” to assume that if vehicles have even three or four feet of space between them they do not ordinarily collide.
The majority seems to concede that there was substantial evidence of the first two elements of the Brandelius formula but relies on the testimony of the 90-foot distance and immediate stop to hold that there was no substantial evidence to-support the third element. The ignored evidentiary factors above mentioned were at least of sufficient substance to require a jury determination of whether or not the facts required by *246the third element, including time and space, were present at the time and place of the accident in question. Confessing to no great sympathy for erratic young cyclists it is nevertheless the law that they are just as deserving of the right to a jury determination of the facts as any plaintiff in any recorded ease wherein the last clear chance doctrine has provided an exception to the consequences of the law of contributory negligence. I would therefore reverse the judgment.
Appellants’ petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied September 20, 1960. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737691 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:23.22782+00 ===

JUSTICE LUND delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the circuit court of McLean County, defendant Donald J. Whalen was convicted of two counts of first degree murder, in violation of section 9—1(a)(1) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 9—1(a)(1)), and sentenced to a term of 60 years’ imprisonment. On appeal, defendant contends it was reversible error to (1) exclude his expert witness because of late disclosure; (2) admit evidence of his purchase and use of cocaine; and (3) exclude evidence tending to show that another committed the crime. We disagree and affirm. On the morning of April 6, 1991, the body of William Whalen was discovered at the Twenty Grand Tap in Bloomington, Illinois. Police arrested his son, defendant Donald Whalen, and charged him with two counts of first degree murder. The decedent had been struck 39 times with blunt instruments and stabbed over 30 times with several sharp instruments. In its initial discovery response, the State disclosed evidence of an alleged match between a bloody latent palm print found on a broken pool cue and inked palm prints of defendant. Defendant filed his discovery response on September 30, 1991, and provided notice of an intended alibi defense. No mention was made of an intent to seek an expert witness. Defendant then filed a supplementary discovery response on October 21, 1991, that listed 24 additional witnesses, but made no mention of seeking an expert witness. On November 4, 1991, eight days before trial, defense counsel filed another supplemental discovery response disclosing his intent to call an expert witness, Dr. Zeldes. Zeldes’ resume was attached to the discovery response, but there was no indication of the nature or content of his proposed testimony. The State telephoned Zeldes the same day and learned that he was not certain what he would be asked to testify about, although he did indicate that one area of his expertise is in fingerprint analysis. The next day, November 5, 1991, a hearing was held on the State’s motion to strike the supplemental discovery and bar the testimony of Zeldes. The State argued that as recently as October 28, 1991, defense counsel advised them that the only evidence he had was his alibi evidence and character witnesses. No mention was made of finding an expert witness in fingerprint analysis. The State’s trial strategy focused on its expert testimony versus defendant’s alibi. This last-minute revelation of expert testimony supporting defendant’s position represented a major change in the trial strategy which the State claimed would require more than a single week for adequate preparation. The State argued that the situation was further aggravated by the fact that it was given no information regarding Zeldes’ findings. Defense counsel contends the delay in hiring Dr. Zeldes was caused by lack of funds. The funds allegedly became available approximately 10 days before the November 5, 1991, hearing. The prints were faxed to Zeldes approximately seven days prior to the hearing, and defense counsel was unable to speak to Zeldes personally because defense counsel was involved with a family matter regarding surgery on his father. The State questions the credibility of defense counsel’s argument on lack of funds. It questions why defendant never filed a motion for the appointment of an expert alleging an inability to pay. Defense counsel offered to set up a phone conference between Zeldes and the assistant State’s Attorney on the following day. The trial court found this solution to be insufficient, claiming defense counsel had had plenty of time to get the job done. The trial court granted the State’s motion to bar the expert’s testimony. On November 6, 1991, defense counsel filed a motion to reconsider the court’s ruling barring Dr. Zeldes’ testimony. Attached to the motion was a letter from defense counsel’s private investigator, who had spoken with Zeldes on the telephone and summarized the proposed testimony. At a hearing held the following day, defense counsel stated that he was prepared to have Zeldes issue a report and have it faxed to the court immediately He argued that there was no undue delay on the part of the defense from the point in time when the witness first became available to him and when he formed the intent to call him as a witness. Defense counsel argued that Zeldes’ testimony would cast doubt upon the only physical evidence linking defendant to the crime and to exclude this testimony would deprive him of a fair trial. The State argued that it was now three days since the name of the expert had been disclosed and it still did not have any type of report indicating the basis for the expert’s determination. Before a decision could be made to reconsider, the State argued that defendant should produce Dr. Zeldes, in person, along with whatever he used to make his comparison. The trial court noted that defense counsel had not brought to the court’s attention any problems concerning disclosure of expert witnesses, and that a firm trial date had been set for over 60 days. Before issuing its ruling on the motion to reconsider, the court engaged in the following dialogue with defense counsel: “[THE COURT:] I can only think of one possible mitigation in this matter and that is if you want a continuance is the only possible situation we can run into. [Defense counsel]: Could — If we did move for a continuance would we still be able to try it this calendar? THE COURT: No way it can be tried this calendar with a continuance. [Defense counsel]: When would the next available trial— THE COURT: January. [Defense counsel]: May I have a moment to discuss it with my client? [Defendant]: Don’t need a moment. [Defense counsel]: My client indicates, Your Honor, that he does not desire a continuance. THE COURT: Well, that’s entirely up to you. I would afford a continuance potentially you see— [Defense counsel]: I understand. THE COURT: Seems to me that’s the only way we can cure the problem we have, and even that imposes considerable difficulty on the State because they have at least an out-of-state witness that’s been subpoenaed. They have a witness out of the penitentiary, don’t you, that’s been [‘Jwritted out[’j? [Prosecution]: Yes. THE COURT: And we have, you know, we’ve set aside the time for this. [Defense counsel]: Could we have — Could we have one more minute? * * * [Defense counsel]: My client wishes to proceed to trial on the 12th, Your Honor.” Motion to reconsider was denied, and the action proceeded to trial on November 12,1991.  The correct sanction to be applied for violation of a discovery rule is left to the trial court’s discretion, and the judgment of the trial judge is given great weight. (People v. Morgan (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 111, 135, 492 N.E.2d 1303, 1312.) This rule is balanced against the principle that few rights are more fundamental than that of an accused to present witnesses in his own defense. (Taylor v. Illinois (1988), 484 U.S. 400, 98 L. Ed. 2d 798, 108 S. Ct. 646.) The exclusion of evidence is a drastic measure, applicable to flagrant violations where the uncooperative party demonstrates a " ‘deliberate contumacious or unwarranted disregard’ ” of the court’s authority. People v. Rayford (1976), 43 Ill. App. 3d 283, 286, 356 N.E.2d 1274, 1277, quoting Schwartz v. Moats (1971), 3 Ill. App. 3d 596, 599, 277 N.E.2d 529, 531. Even so, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that preclusion of evidence is never a permissible sanction for a discovery violation: “[I]t is neither necessary nor appropriate for us to attempt to draft a comprehensive set of standards to guide the exercise of discretion in every possible case. It is elementary, of course, that a trial court may not ignore the fundamental character of the defendant’s right to offer the testimony of witnesses in his favor. But the mere invocation of that right cannot automatically and invariably outweigh countervailing public interests.” Taylor, 484 U.S. at 414, 98 L. Ed. 2d at 814, 108 S. Ct. at 656.  The principal reason for notice rules is prevention of surprise to the opposing party, not punishment of the proponent of the evidence for mere technical errors or omissions. Other factors considered before a witness preclusion sanction is employed to enforce discovery rules are effectiveness of less severe sanctions, materiality of the testimony to the outcome of the case, prejudice to the other party caused by the testimony, and evidence of bad faith in the violation of the discovery rules. United States ex rel. Enoch v. Hartigan (1985), 768 F.2d 161. Defendant contends that the preclusion of relevant defense testimony is too harsh a sanction where there is no evidence that defense counsel willfully violated discovery rules in order to obtain a tactical advantage. The State counters that there is more than sufficient evidence of willful behavior designed to obtain a tactical advantage. Furthermore, the State argues that eight days would be insufficient time to investigate Zeldes’ background, potential bias, and qualifications while simultaneously reworking its entire trial strategy. We need not address these arguments, since we find that defendant’s refusal of an offer to continue the trial to a later date effectively waived this issue for purposes of review. The Supreme Court in Taylor acknowledged that a sanction less drastic than evidence preclusion is always available. “Prejudice to the prosecution could be minimized by granting a continuance or a mistrial to provide time for further investigation ***.” (Taylor, 484 U.S. at 413, 98 L. Ed. 2d at 813, 108 S. Ct. at 655.) The trial court offered a continuance of approximately two months and, after consulting with defendant, the offer was refused. Defendant cannot be permitted to complain of an alleged error which was invited by his behavior and preserved through his rejection of the only reasonable solution. See People v. Moore (1988), 178 Ill. App. 3d 531, 533 N.E.2d 463.  Defendant argues the court gave no assurance that the expert would be allowed to testify, even if the continuance was requested. Furthermore, he argues that the court gave no assurance that the continuance would be granted if it was requested. Appellate counsel is ignoring the clear interpretation of the evidence as shown by the transcript quoted above. No other reasonable interpretation can be given to this discussion but that defendant was offered the use of Dr. Zeldes’ testimony in exchange for a continuance. The fact that the continuance would delay the trial until January did not prevent waiver. Defendant’s claim that the trial court might have refused to grant the continuance, after suggesting that counsel should request one, is unconvincing. Alternatively, defendant argues that he was never admonished that his decision to proceed to trial on the scheduled date effectively waived his right to present a witness in his defense. Consistent with waivers in other sixth amendment contexts, defendant contends that the court is required to determine whether defendant knowingly, intentionally, and voluntarily relinquished his constitutional right to compulsory process and to present witnesses in his defense. In support, defendant cites Faretta v. California (1975), 422 U.S. 806, 45 L. Ed. 2d 562, 95 S. Ct. 2525, and Patterson v. Illinois (1988), 487 U.S. 285, 101 L. Ed. 2d 261, 108 S. Ct. 2389. Both cases involve waiver of the sixth amendment right to counsel. We find no support in these cases for defendant’s argument. Next, defendant claims the court committed reversible error in allowing the State to present testimony that defendant purchased cocaine in Chicago shortly after the death of his father. At trial, William Craig Elliott testified that defendant was involved in a $3,000 purchase of cocaine on April 9 and 10, 1991, three days after his father’s death. The State maintains that evidence of the cocaine purchase tended to establish a motive for the murder. Defendant claims there was insufficient evidence to establish the cocaine purchase as motive and that proof of defendant’s need for money could have been established without reference to the actual cocaine purchase. Accordingly, the evidence is claimed to have been grossly prejudicial and should have been excluded. The State theorized that defendant had a poor relationship with his father and killed him, in part, to support his cocaine habit. The State presented evidence that defendant had a $100-per-day cocaine habit. One month prior to the murder, defendant became involved in a fight with his father at the tavern. His father had also kicked him out of the family residence. A police investigator testified that defendant told him that he owed his father $350 and was trying to avoid seeing him. This conflicts with defendant’s testimony that he worked at his father’s tavern the night before his murder and was also scheduled to work the following day. Evidence also established that defendant was an unemployed laborer who tended bar on a part-time basis. He had no checking or savings account. On the morning of the day before the murder, defendant borrowed $50 from his mother. When police arrived at the scene of the crime, the door to the safe was open with no money inside. Evidence was heard that as much as $900 could have been taken in during the previous day’s business. Two hundred and forty dollars in small bills were left in the cash register. No evidence established the actual amount in the safe on that day. Over defense counsel’s objection, William Elliott testified that on April 9, 1991, defendant told him he had approximately $5,000 and wanted to go to Chicago to buy cocaine. Defendant allegedly purchased four ounces of cocaine for $3,000 and then returned to Bloomington with Elliott. The jury was properly instructed to consider evidence of the cocaine purchase solely in terms of the issues of intent and motive. Defendant denied these allegations, claiming that he had never met Elliott, and never possessed $5,000 in cash nor purchased any cocaine with Elliott. The State then produced evidence that a few weeks later defendant sold his family’s lawn mower for $500. The lawn mower was later reported stolen by his brother and mother. Defendant also sold his car. Between the time of his father’s death and the time he was arrested, defendant cashed checks from his mother totalling nearly $5,000. Defendant claims there is no direct link between his alleged purchase of cocaine shortly after his father’s death and his alleged motive for murdering him a week earlier. Defendant testified that he never had a drug problem until after his father died. A few weeks after his father’s death, he admitted himself into a drug rehabilitation center. Defendant points out three inconsistencies in the murder-for-drug-money theory: (1) no one knew how much, if any, money was in the safe; (2) there was no explanation for the $240 left in the cash register; and (3) no evidence that he knew how to open the safe. Defendant sees the alleged purchase of cocaine as separate and distinct from the charge of murder. Furthermore, defendant claims that evidence of his possession of a large sum of cash could have been accomplished without mentioning that the money was used to purchase cocaine. The State’s theory of defendant’s motive is comprised of two elements. First, he needed money to satisfy his cocaine habit. Since he had worked part-time in the family-owned tavern before, he would know that a large sum of money would be on hand at the close of business late Friday night. Second, the State sought to establish that defendant had a much closer relationship with his mother and would be able to get money from her to satisfy his cocaine habit much more easily if his father was out of the way. The significance of the evidence showing that he received large amounts of money from his mother and sold several items after the homicide is unclear, the State argues, without the drug sale and drug use providing the necessary attitude of desperation required to kill his own father.  Evidence of other crimes is admissible if it is relevant for any purpose other than to show the defendant’s propensity to commit a criminal offense. (People v. McKibbins (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 176, 182, 449 N.E.2d 821, 824.) Generally, while any evidence which tends to show that an accused had a motive for committing murder is relevant, to be competent, it must, at least to a slight degree, tend to establish the existence of the motive relied on. (People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22, 56, 473 N.E.2d 840, 857.) “The admissibility of evidence at trial is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court, and that court’s decision may not be overturned on appeal absent a clear abuse of discretion. [Citations.] Such an abuse of discretion will be found only where the trial court’s decision is ‘ “arbitrary, fanciful or unreasonable” ’ or ‘ “where no reasonable man would take the view adopted by the trial court.” ’ ” (People v. Illgen (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 353, 364, 583 N.E.2d 515, 519, quoting People v. M.D. (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 73, 90, 461 N.E.2d 367, 375, quoting Peek v. United States (9th Cir. 1963), 321 F.2d 934, 942.) Evidence of a defendant’s uncharged misconduct undermines the presumption of innocence. (People v. Hendricks (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 31, 52, 560 N.E.2d 611, 620.) But motive, although not an element of murder, may be a material factor in establishing guilt, particularly when the only evidence is circumstantial. In some circumstances “it is possible for the State to offer evidence tending to establish a defendant’s motivation even though it involves the potential of disclosing a defendant’s prior immoral or improper conduct.” (Hendricks, 137 Ill. 2d at 53, 560 N.E.2d at 621.) We find no abuse of discretion in the admission of William Elliott’s testimony. Next, defendant claims the court committed reversible error in excluding the testimony of Robert McElvaney and Detective Richard Davis which tended to show that another person committed the offense with which defendant was charged and of which he was convicted. Following the State’s objection, defendant was allowed to make an offer of proof to determine whether the jury would be allowed to hear the testimony of McElvaney and Davis. The following facts were elicited. The night before Bill Whalen’s murder, Robert McElvaney was at the Twenty Grand Tap drinking Pabst Blue Ribbon beer. As a result of a confrontation between McElvaney and two other customers, the decedent asked McElvaney to leave the tavern. McElvaney was a friend of the victim, and he left without argument. No evidence was presented that any force was used to eject him from the tavern. This was not the first time he had been asked to leave and, when asked if he was upset with the decedent, he replied that he was not. Before leaving, he told Bill Whalen that he would see him again the next day. Upon learning of McElvaney’s ejection from the tavern the night before, two detectives went to McElvaney’s residence at 7 a.m. on the day of the murder. McElvaney was fully dressed, except for being barefoot, and the detectives found this unusual based on their prior contacts with him. After telling McElvaney there had been a disturbance at the Twenty Grand Tap, McElvaney stated that, “I wouldn’t hurt Bill Whalen. Bill Whalen is my buddy. What did I do?” Defendant stresses the fact that at the time the statement was made, no news reports had been released concerning Whalen’s murder. Also noted is the fact that a number of empty beer cans were found at the crime scene, and one of them was a Pabst Blue Ribbon can. The trial court barred the evidence on grounds that there was no evidence of animosity between McElvaney and the deceased. Defendant contends that his constitutional right to present witnesses in his defense has been violated.  A defendant may prove any fact or circumstance tending to show that the crime was committed by a person other than himself, but that right is not without limitations. (People v. Nitti (1924), 312 Ill. 73, 90, 143 N.E. 448, 454; People v. Enis (1990), 139 Ill. 2d 264, 281, 564 N.E.2d 1155, 1161.) A trial court may reject offered evidence on grounds of irrelevancy if it has little probative value due to its remoteness, uncertainty, or if it is speculative in nature. (Enis, 139 Ill. 2d at 281, 564 N.E.2d at 1161; People v. Howard (1991), 147 Ill. 2d 103, 143, 588 N.E.2d 1044, 1060.) The trial judge has a wide scope of discretion in ruling on issues of relevancy and materiality and its ruling should not be reversed absent a clear showing of abuse of that discretion. Enis, 139 Ill. 2d at 281, 564 N.E.2d at 1161; People v. King (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 49, 55, 377 N.E.2d 856, 860. The State argues persuasively that McElvaney’s testimony would provide nothing more than a possible motive for committing the murder. People v. Columbo (1983), 118 Ill. App. 3d 882, 455 N.E.2d 733, is cited for the principle that evidence of possible motive, without more, is insufficient to require admission of the evidence. In Columbo, defendant subpoenaed two business acquaintances of the victim in an effort to show that they harbored animosity toward him and, therefore, had motive to murder him. Both witnesses were questioned outside the presence of the jury, and both indicated that, if called to testify, they would invoke their privileges under the fifth amendment. Defense counsel requested the court’s permission to ask the questions before a jury anyway, but the court refused. On appeal, the trial court’s refusal to allow testimony regarding the witnesses’ relationships with the decedent was upheld. The evidence was found to be purely speculative and lacking the requisite specificity required by law so as to ensure that extraneous and irrelevant matters are excluded from the jury. In support, the Columbo decision cited People v. Dukett (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 432, 308 N.E.2d 590, where the trial court refused to allow testimony of a witness who had threatened the murder victim. The witness, James Basford, testified outside the presence of the jury that several months prior to the murder he had fired a blank cartridge in the direction of the victim, burning his jacket. Three months before the murder, he told the victim that he should have his “block knocked off.” (Dukett, 56 Ill. 2d at 448, 308 N.E.2d at 599.) When someone asked him whether he committed the murder, he told the person that he did not know if he did or not. This was later explained as a smart remark. The chief of police also testified outside the presence of the jury that Basford had inquired about developments in the case on three or four occasions, asking whether he had been cleared of suspicion. The supreme court found the evidence was properly excluded, as it merely showed that Basford disliked the victim and was concerned that he would be accused of the crime. As such, evidence of this possible motive, without more, was held to be entirely speculative. In Howard, defendant was denied the opportunity to question the sole eyewitness to a murder on the question of whether she was involved in a romantic relationship with the victim. According to statements of counsel at the hearing on the State’s motion in limine, both the witness and the victim were married at the time of the murder. Defense counsel represented that the police had initially investigated the case as a family-related homicide and had questioned the witness’ husband and given him a lie detector test. Defendant asserted that evidence that the witness was romantically involved with the victim suggested that the witness’ husband, or the victim’s wife, had motive to commit the murder. Additionally, the love affair provided motive for the witness to misidentify the actual offender. The supreme court found no error in the trial court’s exclusion of evidence on the subject of her marriage and the nature of her relationship with the decedent. Evidence of a possible motive, without evidence linking either spouse to the murder, was held to be groundless and based upon speculation.  In the present case, the only evidence linking McElvaney to the crime scene is the fact that one of a number of empty beer cans found at the scene was the same brand that McElvaney drinks. No evidence was presented that McElvaney had ever touched this can, nor is there any evidence of animosity between McElvaney and the deceased. To the contrary, all evidence points to a conclusion that their relationship was amicable. Finally, we are left with McElvaney’s outburst to detectives that he would not hurt Bill Whalen, at a time when he had no reason to know of any injury to the deceased. This evidence is far too uncertain to form the basis for finding that the trial judge abused his discretion in excluding McElvaney’s testimony. Affirmed. GREEN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737692 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:23.232921+00 ===

JUSTICE KNECHT, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I agree with the majority opinion it was not an abuse of discretion to admit evidence of defendant’s purchase and use of cocaine. This evidence arguably supported the State’s murder-for-drug-money theory, and the trial judge appropriately exercised his discretion. Defendant should have the same latitude in presenting evidence to support his theory of the case. Evidence that someone other than the defendant may have committed the offense is relevant and admissible when a close connection is demonstrated between the third person and the commission of the offense. (People v. Maberry (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 250, 263, 549 N.E.2d 974, 982; King, 61 Ill. App. 3d at 52, 377 N.E.2d at 859.) It is properly excluded if it is remote or speculative. (Howard, 147 Ill. 2d at 143, 588 N.E.2d at 1060; People v. Ward (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 443, 455, 463 N.E.2d 696, 702.) Defendant should have been permitted to introduce evidence which allegedly linked a third person to the victim’s murder. His offer of proof shows a patron of the Twenty Grand Tap was ejected from the tavern just hours before the murder. The victim asked this patron to leave because of a confrontation between the patron and two other customers. While the patron did not argue and did not appear upset, he was ejected. On the early morning of April 6, just a few hours after the crime was discovered and before any information had been released to the media, two police detectives sought out the patron at his home. When advised there had been trouble at the tavern, the patron responded, “I wouldn’t hurt Bill Whalen. Bill Whalen is my buddy. What did I do?” Police sought out the patron precisely because he had had a drunken encounter with another customer and had been ejected from the tavern. They found him fully dressed and awake. The detectives thought this was unusual because of what they knew about his habits. The patron then responded in a manner which suggested he knew Bill Whalen had been harmed. This evidence tended to show someone other than defendant committed the murder. None of the cases cited by the majority address the issue presented here. The offer of proof goes beyond establishing a possible motive for someone else to murder Bill Whalen. The majority infers the patron was not affronted by the ejection because he had been ejected before, and there was an amicable relationship between the patron and the victim. This analysis ignores the fact the patron had been at the scene of the crime just hours before the murder, was ejected from the tavern by the victim, was a regular customer who would know the closing routine, and responded to a police visit by denying he would ever hurt Bill Whalen at a time when only the authorities, and the guilty party or a witness, would know Bill Whalen had been murdered. This interpretation of the evidence, which defendant is entitled to suggest, is not extraneous or irrelevant. I am confident the State could have presented evidence to undercut this theory on rebuttal, just as the evidence already presented during its case in chief would likely have overcome this theory. The point is, defendant ought to be given the chance to advance the theory, and he was denied that chance. The importance of this error is enhanced by the exclusion of defendant’s expert witness because of late disclosure. The trial judge carefully considered this issue and even suggested a continuance as a practical solution. The majority relies on the refusal of a continuance as a waiver of the issue. The record suggests defendant was offered the use of Dr. Zelde's testimony in exchange for a continuance, but the issue is not whether we understand the court’s suggestion, but whether defendant understood the offer and its consequences. The compulsory process clause of the sixth amendment of the United States Constitution ensures a criminal defendant “ ‘the right to the government’s assistance in compelling the attendance of favorable witnesses at trial and the right to put before a jury evidence that might influence the determination of guilt.’ ” (Taylor, 484 U.S. at 408, 98 L. Ed. 2d at 810, 108 S. Ct. at 652, quoting Pennsylvania v. Ritchie (1987), 480 U.S. 39, 56, 94 L. Ed. 2d 40, 56, 107 S. Ct. 989, 1000.) The majority rejects defendant’s argument that just as waiver of a sixth amendment right to counsel must be made knowingly, intentionally, and voluntarily, waiver of his right to compulsory process and to present witnesses in his defense must be made knowingly, intentionally, and voluntarily. The right of a defendant to present evidence “stands on no lesser footing than the other Sixth Amendment rights.” (Washington v. Texas (1967), 388 U.S. 14, 18, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1019, 1023, 87 S. Ct. 1920, 1923.) A constitutional protection can be waived only if it is made knowingly and intelligently. People v. Lester (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 1056, 1058, 519 N.E.2d 1127, 1129; People v. Jackson (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 750, 758, 433 N.E.2d 1385, 1391. The record does not show defendant understood he was being asked to weigh the right to a prompt trial with the right to present a witness on his behalf. For an issue this important the trial court could and should have explicitly stated to both defendant and his attorney that defendant’s expert would be permitted to testify only if the case were continued; and if the defendant did not agree to a continuance, then the court would not permit his expert to testify. The preclusion of defendant’s expert would have been proper had the court clearly presented the alternatives to defendant and he then elected to proceed to trial and reject a continuance. The alternatives were not clearly presented and this record does not show waiver. If there was no waiver, then defendant’s arguments on the preclusion of his expert witness should be addressed. The less severe sanction of a continuance was available but was not properly explained to defendant. The likely testimony of the expert would have challenged the reliability of the bloody palm print comparison and was thus material to the outcome of the case. Since the State intended to establish defendant’s presence at the scene by the palm print, a defense expert’s challenge to the reliability of its palm print comparison would not necessitate reworking its entire trial strategy. The trial judge granted the State’s motion to bar the expert’s testimony, but nothing in the record suggests the trial court found that defense counsel wilfully violated the rules of discovery to gain an advantage. Considering these factors, as relied on by the majority citation to Enoch, I believe the preclusion of the defense expert witness was too drastic in these circumstances. I would reverse and remand for a new trial and accordingly dissent on this issue.

=== CASE 9737693 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:24.040068+00 ===

Zahra, J.
Defendant appeals as of right from an order denying his petition for a change of custody and granting plaintiff’s petition for a change of domicile. We affirm.
Plaintiff and defendant were divorced in January 1994. The judgment of divorce granted the parties joint legal custody of their two-year-old daughter with physical custody awarded to plaintiff. Following the divorce, plaintiff allowed defendant liberal visitation beyond that ordered by the trial court and often asked the paternal grandmother to baby-sit the child in lieu of a hired baby-sitter. On July 28, 1997, the trial court entered a stipulated order signed by both parties changing custody to joint physical and legal custody. The order also provided that plaintiff would keep the child in the Owosso School District until she *20reached the age of majority and, if plaintiff moved away from Owosso, defendant would be given physical custody of the child.
In April 1998, plaintiff married a man who lives and works in California. In July 1998, plaintiff petitioned the trial court for change of domicile from Michigan to California and requested an assessment of child support. Defendant in turn filed a petition for change of custody and asked the trial court to enforce the July 28, 1997, stipulated order. Plaintiff then petitioned for change of custody and asked the trial court to set aside the stipulated order. At the conclusion of a four-day evidentiary hearing, the trial court set aside the stipulated order, denied defendant’s petition for change of custody, and granted plaintiff’s petition for change of domicile.
We apply three standards of review in custody cases. The great weight of the evidence standard applies to all findings of fact. A trial court’s findings regarding the existence of an established custodial environment and regarding each custody factor should be affirmed unless the evidence clearly preponderates in the opposite direction. Fletcher v Fletcher, 229 Mich App 19, 24; 581 NW2d 11 (1998), citing Fletcher v Fletcher, 447 Mich 871, 877-878; 526 NW2d 889 (1994). An abuse of discretion standard applies to the trial court’s discretionary rulings such as custody decisions. Id. Questions of law are reviewed for clear legal error. Fletcher, supra, 229 Mich App 24, citing MCL 722.28; MSA 25.312(8), and Fletcher, supra, 447 Mich 881. A trial court commits clear legal error when it incorrectly chooses, interprets, or applies the law. Fletcher, supra, 229 Mich App 24, citing Fletcher, supra, 447 Mich 881.
*21Defendant first argues that the trial court erred in setting aside the July 28, 1997, stipulated order. We disagree. Stipulated orders that are accepted by the trial corut are generally construed under the same rules of construction as contracts. See Limbach v Oakland Co Bd of Co Rd Comm’rs, 226 Mich App 389, 394; 573 NW2d 336 (1997); Eaton Co Bd of Co Rd Comm’rs v Schultz, 205 Mich App 371, 379-380; 521 NW2d 847 (1994). Like contracts, stipulated orders are agreements reached by and between the parties. Id. at 378-379. However, contract principles do not govern child custody matters. The Legislature imposed on trial courts, through the Child Custody Act, MCL 722.21 et seq.; MSA 25.312(1) et seq., the duty to review proposed changes in child custody to determine whether the changes would be in the best interests of the child. MCL 722.27(l)(c> MSA 25.312(7)(l)(c). While trial courts try to encourage parents to work together to come to an agreement regarding custody matters, the circuit court retains jurisdiction over the child until the child reaches the age of majority. The trial court cannot blindly accept the stipulation of the parents, but must independently determine what is in the best interests of the child. Lombardo v Lombardo, 202 Mich App 151, 160; 507 NW2d 788 (1993), citing West v West, 241 Mich 679, 683-684; 217 NW 924 (1928), and Ebel v Brown, 70 Mich App 705, 709; 246 NW2d 379 (1976).
In Napora v Napora, 159 Mich App 241; 406 NW2d 197 (1986), as in this case, the parties agreed to a change of custody that was later disputed by the custodial parent. The Napora Court held that the trial court erred in believing that it was required to uphold the stipulation of the parties:
*22Despite any agreement which the parties may reach in regard to the custody of their child, where a custodial environment is found to exist physical custody should not be changed absent clear and convincing evidence that the change is in the best interests of the child. [Id. at 246-247 (citation omitted)].
See also In re Ford Estate, 206 Mich App 705, 708; 522 NW2d 729 (1994), holding, in part, a stipulation between the parties was not binding because “the parties to a civil matter cannot by their mere agreement supersede procedures , and conditions set forth in statutes or court rules.” (citation omitted).
In the present case, the trial court entered the stipulated order to change custody without making any independent determination regarding the best interests of the child pursuant to the Child Custody Act. We conclude that the trial court erred in failing to make such a determination.1 As such, the trial court *24was obligated to set aside the July 28, 1997, stipulated order and make its own determination whether a change of custody would be in the child’s best interests pursuant to the Child Custody Act. Therefore, we hold the trial court properly set aside the stipulated order of July 28, 1997.
Defendant next argues that the trial court ignored the great weight of the evidence in failing to grant custody to him. We disagree.2 A custody award may be modified on a showing of proper cause or change of circumstances that establishes that the modification is in the child’s best interest. MCL 722.27(l)(c); MSA 25.312(7)(l)(c); Dehring v Dehring, 220 Mich *25App 163, 166; 559 NW2d 59 (19.96).3 However, when a modification of custody would change the established custodial environment of a child, the moving party must show by clear and convincing evidence that it is in the child’s best interest. Rummelt v Anderson, 196 Mich App 491, 494; 493 NW2d 434 (1992). A custodial environment is established if
over an appreciable tíme the child naturally looks to the custodian in that environment for guidance, discipline, the necessities of life, and parental comfort. The age of the child, the physical environment, and the inclination of the custodian and the child as to permanency of the relationship shall also be considered. [MCL 722.27(l)(c); MSA 25.312(7) (1) (c). ]
The trial court acknowledged that defendant and his family played important roles in the child’s life, but that, nevertheless, the custodial environment was with plaintiff as opposed to defendant. The trial court noted that this is not a case of plaintiff versus defendant and his mother, Sharon Jordan. In fact, the trial court opined that both plaintiff and defendant would fall short if they had to compete with Sharon Jordan for custody of the child. However, the trial court looked at the factors as they pertained to plaintiff and defendant, not including the extended family.
The evidence revealed that, during defendant’s parenting time, the child spent the majority of her time at Sharon Jordan’s house. Even on the weekends when defendant was not working, defendant would spend the day with the child, but the child usually slept at Sharon Jordan’s house rather than at defend*26ant’s house. In fact, defendant testified that the child stayed overnight with him less than five times a year. Defendant rarely spent time alone with the child without the presence of his mother and other relatives. The report of the independent psychologist, Dr. Heather Zak, indicated that the child had probably bonded more closely with the paternal grandmother and aunt than she had with defendant.
The trial court determined that the child had been with plaintiff since birth except for parenting time spent with defendant. The trial court further found that the child looked to plaintiff, as between the parents, for guidance and the other factors listed in MCL 722.27(l)(c); MSA 25.312(7)(l)(c). On the basis of these facts, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s determination that a custodial environment was established with plaintiff was against the great weight of the evidence.
Once it was determined that a custodial environment was established with plaintiff, it was incumbent on defendant to show by clear and convincing evidence that a change in custody was in the child’s best interests. Rummelt, supra at 494.
The trial court must examine the factors listed in MCL 722.23; MSA 25.312(3) to determine the best interests of the child. The trial court found that the parties were equal with regard to all the factors listed in MCL 722.23; MSA 25.312(3), except factors c, d, and e, which the trial court found to weigh in favor of plaintiff.
MCL 722.23(c); MSA 25.312(3)(c) examines each party’s capacity to provide food, clothing, and medical treatment. There was evidence that plaintiff voluntarily refused child support when defendant was out of *27work because of a broken leg. After defendant returned to work, plaintiff still did not request child support. The evidence showed that plaintiff was the primary caregiver and she provided food, clothing, and toys to the child on a daily basis. While there was evidence that defendant and his family gave the child gifts of clothing, this clothing usually stayed at their house and the child did not take the items when she left.
Defendant alleges that plaintiff failed to provide proper medical care for the child twice in the past. The trial court did not make a specific finding regarding either parent’s ability to provide medical care; however, in both instances cited by defendant, the facts show that the child received the necessary medical care. On the first occasion, the child was taken to the hospital by defendant’s mother while she was watching the child, but plaintiff did not go to the hospital to check on the child until the next day. On another occasion, plaintiff had taken the child to the hospital, but the hospital was unable to reach plaintiff regarding follow-up care because plaintiff’s phone was disconnected and registered letters were allegedly not claimed by plaintiff. Although plaintiff’s actions in both instances may not have been ideal, that does not prove that plaintiff is incapable of providing adequate medical care for the child. Therefore, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s findings were against the great weight of the evidence with regard to factor c.
MCL 722.23(d); MSA 25.312(3)(d) considers the length of time the child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment, and the desirability of maintaining continuity. The trial court acknowledged that plaintiff *28had moved quite often. Nevertheless, the trial court concluded that the child’s home was with plaintiff wherever that may be and that parents could not be punished for having to move. As mentioned above, an established custodial environment existed with plaintiff in which she provided for the child’s daily needs. While defendant presented testimony that, on at least one occasion, the child was observed in unsanitary living conditions, the trial court made no mention of this incident in its findings of fact. The trial court may have concluded that the testimony was not credible or that the testimony related to an isolated incident. Questions of credibility are best left to the trier of fact. Blase v Appicelli, 195 Mich App 174, 179; 489 NW2d 129 (1992). The evidence as a whole demonstrated that the child was a normal, active, well-adjusted six year old and the trial court had no reason to believe that the child would not continue to thrive under plaintiff’s care. Considering the evidence as a whole, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s findings were against the great weight of the evidence with regard to factor d.
MCL 722.23(e); MSA 25.312(3)(e) evaluates the permanence, as a family unit, of the existing or proposed custodial home. The trial court found that with regard to this factor, both plaintiff and defendant had much to offer. However, the trial court favored plaintiff because of the fact that, to date, she had provided an adequate custodial home for the child. The trial court also considered the fact that plaintiff’s new marriage added stability to plaintiff’s life. Therefore, the trial court’s findings were not against the great weight of the evidence with regard to factor e.
*29For these reasons, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s findings under the Child Custody Act were against the great weight of the evidence. Consequently, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying defendant’s petition for change of custody.
Defendant finally argues that the trial court abused its discretion in granting plaintiff’s petition for change of domicile because the trial court rejected the testimony of Dr. Zak, the independent psychologist who evaluated the parties and recommended that plaintiff not be allowed to leave the state with the child. We disagree.
A trial court’s decision to allow a parent to remove a child from the state is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Overall v Overall, 203 Mich App 450, 458-459; 512 NW2d 851 (1994). An abuse of discretion is found only in extreme cases in which the result is so palpably and grossly violative of fact and logic that it evidences a perversity of will or the exercise of passion or bias. Dacon v Transue, 441 Mich 315, 329; 490 NW2d 369 (1992).
This Court, in Overall, reiterated the standard for determining whether a change of domicile should be granted. Overall, supra at 458-459. Four factors must be considered:
“(1) whether the prospective move has the capacity to improve the quality of life for both the custodial parent and the child; (2) whether the move is inspired by the custodial parent’s desire to defeat or frustrate visitation by the noncustodial parent and whether the custodial parent is likely to comply with the substitute visitation orders where he or she is no longer subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state; (3) the extent to which the noncustodial parent, in resisting the move, is motivated by the desire to secure a financial advantage in respect of a continuing support obli*30gation; and (4) the degree to which the court is satisfied that there will be a realistic opportunity for visitation in lieu of the weekly pattern which can provide an adequate basis for preserving and fostering the parental relationship with the noncustodial parent if removal is allowed.” [Id., quoting Anderson v Anderson, 170 Mich App 305, 309; 427 NW2d 627 (1988).]
With regard to the first factor, the trial court found that plaintiffs marriage and move to California had the potential for improving both the child’s and plaintiff’s quality of life. The trial court noted that plaintiff’s husband earned a very respectable living and, judging from his appearance, demeanor, and testimony, he would likely continue to be a success. The trial court also considered plaintiffs desire to study the real estate business as a potential improvement to their quality of life. Plaintiff had testified that a career in real estate would allow her to work part-time, so she could fit her schedule around the child’s school schedule. The trial court stressed that it was not obligated to determine whether, in fact, the quality of life would improve, but instead was required to consider whether it had the potential to improve.
Additionally, we note that the trial court did not reject outright the recommendation of Dr. Zak. Rather, the trial court found that Dr. Zak confused the standard for change of custody with the standard for change of domicile. Dr. Zak opined that it would be in the child’s best interests to deny the change of domicile, but she did not conclude that it was in the best interests of the child to change custody to defendant. In fact, Dr. Zak’s recommendation was to have plaintiff’s husband move to Michigan so that the child could remain in the Owosso community and be raised *31by all the people that love and support her.4 Although defendant’s family, particularly his mother, play an important role in this child’s life, the role of the extended family cannot be the determining factor in denying a change of domicile. Instead, the trial court must consider whether the move has the capacity to improve the quality of life for both the custodial parent and the child and whether there will be a realistic opportunity to preserve and foster the parental relationship with the noncustodial parent.
The trial court found that the move did have the capacity to improve the quality of life for plaintiff and the child and that extensive summer and holiday visitation would preserve and foster the parental relationship with defendant. The trial court further found, on the basis of plaintiff’s allowance of liberal visitation in the past, that there was no evidence to suggest that the move was inspired by plaintiff’s desire to defeat defendant’s visitation rights or that she would not comply with the trial court’s order for visitation. Nor did the trial court find that defendant’s resistance to the move was motivated by a desire to secure a financial advantage.
On the basis of the evidence presented, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s decision to grant a change of domicile was an abuse of discretion.
Affirmed.
J. W. Fitzgerald, J., concurred.
The dissent would hold that “[w]hen the parties are in agreement regarding a modification of the custodial arrangement . . . the court has the authority, but is not bound, to accept the parties’ stipulation without first specifically reexamining the best interest factors.” Post at 33-34. The dissent relies on Dick v Dick, 210 Mich App 576, 584-585; 534 NW2d 185 (1995), and Koron v Melendy, 207 Mich App 188, 191; 523 NW2d 870 (1994), in support of its conclusion. However, the decisions in those cases were based on stipulations involving the original judgments of divorce, not a modification of custody. To apply the reasoning from Dick and Koron to the case at bar would be contrary to the plain language of MCL 722.27(l)(c); MSA 25.312(7)(l)(c), which provides, in pertinent part:
The court shall not modify or amend its previous judgments or orders or issue a new order so as to change the established custodial environment of a child unless there is presented clear and convincing evidence that it is in the best interest of the child. [Emphasis added.]
The dissent focuses on the word “dispute” in § 7 of the Child Custody Act to suggest that the quoted provision applies only where the parties seek specific judicial intervention from the court. We opine that such a narrow reading of § 7 is unwarranted in light of well-settled principles of *23statutory interpretation. Statutory language should be construed reasonably, keeping in mind the purpose of the act. Barr v Mt Brighton Inc, 215 Mich App 512, 516; 546 NW2d 273 (1996). The first criterion in determining intent is the specific language of the statute. In re MCI Telecommunications Complaint, 460 Mich 396, 411; 596 NW2d 164 (1999). Every word within a statute should be presumed to have some meaning, and a construction that would render any part of a statute surplusage or nugatory should be avoided. Hoste v Shanty Creek Management, Inc, 459 Mich 561, 574; 592 NW2d 360 (1999). Unless defined in the statute, every word or phrase of a statute should be accorded its plain and ordinary meaning, taking into account the context in which the words are used. MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1); Western Michigan Univ Bd of Control v Michigan, 455 Mich 531, 539; 565 NW2d 828 (1997).
The Child Custody Act is equitable in nature and, thus, should be liberally construed. MCL 722.26(1); MSA 25.312(6)(1); Frame v Nehls, 452 Mich 171, 176; 550 NW2d 739 (1996). Subsection 7(1) of the act reads in pertinent part:
If a child custody dispute has been submitted to the circuit court as an original action under this act or has arisen incidentally from another action in the circuit court or an order or judgment of the circuit court, for the best interests of the child the court may do 1 or more of the following:
The act does not define “child custody dispute.” Therefore, it is proper to consult dictionary definitions to determine its meaning. Popma v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 446 Mich 460, 470; 521 NW2d 831 (1994); Ryant v Cleveland Twp, 239 Mich App 430; 608 NW2d 101 (2000). Dictionary definitions of the term “dispute” include
1. to engage in argument or debate. 2. to argue vehemently; quarrel. ... 3. to argue or debate about. 4. to argue against; call in question. 5. to quarrel or fight about; contest. 6. to strive against; oppose . . . 7. a debate, controversy, or difference of opinion. 8. a quarrel. [Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997).]
Blacks Law Dictionary (7th ed) defines the term as: “A conflict or controversy, esp. one that has given rise to a particular lawsuit.” Given those definitions and the act’s purpose of promoting the best interests and welfare of children, Frame, supra at 176, we read the language in § 7 in the greater context of the Child Custody Act to mean any case arising from divorce or otherwise where child custody is at issue. Thus, a child custody dispute, as that term is used in § 7 of the Child Custody Act, is any matter that relates to the custody of a child from the time the issue of custody arises until the child reaches the age of majority. This interpretation is supported by the fact that, from the time a court takes jurisdiction over a child custody dispute, all matters relating to the child’s welfare and upbringing, such as child support, parenting time, and changes of custody *24are implemented by order of the court. These orders would be unwarranted under the dissent’s interpretation of § 7. Thus, we believe that we have reasonably construed the text of § 7 and applied it accordingly. See Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1997), p 23.
It is also noteworthy that the dissent’s assertion that “[a]s with judicial acceptance of an original custody arrangement, implicit in a court’s acceptance of a modification agreement is an acknowledgment that the agreement is in the child’s best interest”, post at 35, n 2, is particularly inapplicable to the present case. The lower court record suggests the trial court did not consider, either implicitly or explicitly, if the stipulation was in the child’s best interest before entering its order. The fact that the stipulation was signed on behalf of the trial judge as well as the trial court’s discussion during the evidentiary hearing regarding the stipulation’s effect of precluding the court, “potentially forever,” from considering whether it was in the best interest of the child, suggest the stipulation was blindly accepted without any consideration of its effect on the child.
The trial court correctly determined that blind acceptance of the parties’ July 28, 1997, stipulated order changing physical custody, i.e., changing the established custodial environment, was improper absent clear and convincing evidence that it is in the best interest of the child.
Defendant preliminarily argues that the trial court erred in failing to allow the child’s doctor to testify regarding whether plaintiff provided adequate medical treatment for her daughter. However, defendant waived this issue by failing to cite authority to support this argument. Insufficiently briefed issues are deemed waived on appeal. Dresden v Detroit Macomb Hosp Corp, 218 Mich App 292, 300; 553 NW2d 387 (1996). Therefore, we will not address this issue.
Defendant contends that a change in circumstances exists in this case as a result of plaintiffs desire to move the child to California.
Dr. Zak would have plaintiffs new husband give up a lucrative career and move to Michigan to be with plaintiff. However, plaintiff’s husband testified during the hearing that he would not be able to find a comparable job with the same potential for growth in Michigan.

=== CASE 9737694 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:24.046529+00 ===

*32Holbrook, Jr., P.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. This case centers on the parties’ minor child, Jayce Lyn Jordan, bom March 31, 1993.
The majority concludes that because the court originally erred in entering the July 28, 1997, order without first making an independent determination regarding the best interests of the child, it therefore did not err in subsequently setting aside that order. Ante, p 22-24. I disagree. In support of this conclusion, the majority cites my authored opinion in Lombardo v Lombardo, 202 Mich App 151; 507 NW2d 788 (1993). As its author, I believe that the majority has misread that opinion.
In Lombardo, the parents had come to an impasse concerning the proper educational setting for their minor son. The lower court determined that because the defendant father had sole physical custody of the boy, he alone had the authority to decide into what educational program the boy would be enrolled. Id. at 153. We disagreed, concluding that a “court should not relinquish its authority to determine the best interests of the child to the primary physical custodian.” Id. at 160. The case did not involve a stipulated order transferring custody of the boy, nor was there an issue about any stipulation reached between the parties that would limit the court’s ability to determine the best interests of the child. Further, Lombardo specifically “concluded] that a trial court must determine the best interests of the child in resolving disputes concerning ‘important decisions affecting the welfare of the child’ that arise between joint custodial parents.” Lombardo, supra at 160, quoting MCL 722.26a(7)(b); MSA 26.312(6a)(7)(b) (emphasis added).
*33The majority also relies on the majority opinion in Napora v Napora, 159 Mich App 241; 406 NW2d 197 (1986). To the extent that Napora indicates that where an established custodial environment exists, divorced parents cannot agree to change their custody arrangement without first having the court determine if such a change is within the best interests of the child, I must disagree with its analysis. Section 7 of the Child Custody Act1 states in pertinent part:
(1) If a child custody dispute has been submitted to the circuit court as an original action under this act or has arisen incidentally from another action in the circuit court or an order or judgment of the circuit court, for the best interests of the child the court may do 1 or more of the following:
* * *
(c) Modify or amend its previous judgments or orders for proper cause shown or because of change of circumstances until the child reaches 18 years of age and, subject to section 4a, until the child reaches 19 years and 6 months of age. The court shall not modify or amend its previous judgments or orders or issue a new order so as to change the established custodial environment of a child unless there is presented clear and convincing evidence that it is in the best interest of the child. [Emphasis added.]
I believe, as did the dissenting judge in Napora, that the plain language of § 7 indicates that the revisiting of the best interest analysis is required only where a “child custody dispute” has arisen. See People v Nimeth, 236 Mich App 616, 620; 601 NW2d 393 (1999). When the parties are in agreement regarding a modification of the custodial arrangement, I believe the *34court has the authority, but is not bound, to accept the parties’ stipulation without first specifically reexamining the best interest factors. See Dick v Dick, 210 Mich App 576, 584-585; 534 NW2d 185 (1995).2
*35In the case at hand, plaintiff and defendant had reached an agreement regarding custody, the substance of which is embodied in the July 28, 1997 order.3 As another panel of this Court observed in Koron v Melendy, 207 Mich App 188, 191-192; 523 NW2d 870 (1994):
While it is true that a trial court is not bound by the parties’ stipulations or agreements regarding child custody, Napora v Napora, 159 Mich App 241, 245; 406 NW2d 197 (1986), the court is not precluded from accepting the parties’ agreement and including it in the orders of the court. Implicit in the trial court’s acceptance of the parties’ custody and visitation arrangement is the court’s determination that the arrangement struck by the parties is in the child’s best interest.
... Accordingly, we hold that in cases where the parties are in agreement regarding custody and visitation and present the court with such an agreement, the trial court need not expressly articulate each of the best interest factors.
While the Koron case involved the entry of an original custody agreement and not a modification, I believe the reasons articulated by the Koron Court also support the acceptance of the stipulation in the *36case at hand. Id. at 191-193. Indeed, the Koron Court cited as support for its reasoning the Napora dissent. Id. at 192.4 I also do not find support in the record that the stipulation was obtained by fraud, mistake, or unconscionable advantage.
Therefore, I believe the court erred in not enforcing the provision in the July 28 order modifying the custody arrangement. I do not, however, believe the court erred in disregarding the provision regarding a change in custody if plaintiff were to “change residence from the Owosso School District . . . .” This provision did have the effect of usurping the court’s authority to consider the best interests of Jayce when the court was presented with the current custody dispute. See Lombardo, supra at 160.
Accordingly, because the trial court did not begin its analysis of the change of domicile and change of custody petitions with the understanding that the parties had joint legal and physical custody of Jayce, I would remand for reconsideration in light of this custodial arrangement.
As for the issue of the change in domicile, I believe that the court did abuse its discretion in granting plaintiff’s petition. Overall v Overall, 203 Mich App 450, 458-459; 512 NW2d 851 (1994). As the majority observes, the paternal grandmother’s involvement in taking care of Jayce during defendant’s parenting time *37was substantial. Ante, p 25-26. However, the majority fails to note that the record also indicates that the grandmother had considerable involvement with Jayce during plaintiff’s parenting time. The evidence is that plaintiff would often rely on her ex-mother-in-law to care for Jayce, often without advance notice. The strength of Jayce’s relationship with her grandmother is typified by an incident that occurred in Dr. Zak’s office. Dr. Zak testified that, at one point, Jayce picked up a toy telephone, dialed the grandmother’s telephone number, and then began to pretend that she was talking to her grandmother. When asked whether she knew any other telephone numbers, including her parents’, Jayce responded that she did not. As Dr. Zak noted in response to a question posed by the court, the paternal grandmother’s home “has been [Jayce’s] home consistently for her life. I don’t think dad’s house has been her home, nor do I think mother’s house” has been her home.5
The majority correctly notes that under the first prong of the D’Onofrio test,6 the role of the Jordan “family cannot be the determining factor in denying a change of domicile.” Ante, at 31. However, it is a factor in determining “whether the prospective move has the capacity to improve the quality of life” of Jayce. Anderson v Anderson, 170 Mich App 305, 309; 427 NW2d 627 (1988). See also Scott v Scott, 124 Mich App 448, 452; 335 NW2d 68 (1983) (“The D’Onofrio test . . . focuses on the best interest of the custodial parent and child.”).
*38After reviewing the record, I conclude that the purported potential advantages of the move to California for Jayce do not outweigh the existing advantages of remaining in Michigan. It is true that the economic condition of plaintiff’s new husband would significantly alter Jayce’s fife style. I do not believe, however, that this justifies taking Jayce away from both the nurturing and stable atmosphere offered by the Jordan family and the school system in which she has thrived. As for plaintiff’s desire to pursue a career in real estate, I am not convinced by the evidence of the plausibility of this opportunity. Plaintiff’s testimony regarding her desire to pursue such a career indicates that it was more of a daydream than an actual goal.7
I am not unsympathetic to plaintiff’s position. She is married to a man who lives in California, and she *39understandably wants to move so that they can live together. However, plaintiff’s situation did not just drop out of the sky and fall onto her shoulders. It was her decision to marry without either first applying to the court for a change in Jayce’s domicile or securing defendant’s agreement to the move. See Zwernemann v Kenny, 236 NJ Super 37, 48; 563 A2d 1158 (1988). Indeed, plaintiff’s own testimony indicates that this course of action was a calculated risk on her part.
Accordingly, I would reverse the grant of the petition for change in domicile. I would also reverse the denial of defendant’s petition for a change in custody and remand for a reexamination of that issue in light of the existence of a joint physical and legal custodial relationship.
MCL 722.27; MSA 25.312(7).
As the United States Supreme Court observed in United States v Turkette, 452 US 576, 580; 101 S Ct 2524; 69 L Ed 2d 246 (1981): “Of course, there is no errorless test for identifying or recognizing ‘plain’ or ‘unambiguous’ language.” It is not all that unusual — indeed, it is quite common — for members of a court to disagree on “plain meaning” of the words in a given statute. Lasky, Perplexing problems with plain meaning, 27 Hofstra L R 891, 910 (1999) (and cases cited therein); Taylor, Structural textualism, 75 BU L R 321, 356 (1995) (and cases cited therein). This is another example of such a disagreement.
The majority notes that my conclusion that a court has the authority, but is not bound, to accept a parental stipulation regarding modification of a custodial arrangement is at odds with the plain meaning of § 7. Ante, n 1, pp 22-23. In support of this assertion, the majority quotes from subsection 7(l)(c). Id. It is a fundamental tenent of statutory construction that every word and every clause of a statute must be read in the context of the entire statute so as to produce an harmonious whole. Weems v Chrysler Corp, 448 Mich 679, 699-700; 533 NW2d 287 (1995); Gumma v D & T Constr Co, 235 Mich App 210, 218; 597 NW2d 207 (1999). Section 7 is divided into six subsections. Each of these six subsections is tied together by § 7’s introductory clause, which I have already quoted. As this clause indicates, the six judicial responses authorized in subsections 7(l)(a)-(f) arise in the context of a “child custody dispute” that has been submitted to the circuit court. Accordingly, the mandatory limitations placed on the circuit court in subsection 7(1) (c) apply only in the context of a custody dispute. Certainly, if the Legislature had wanted to so circumscribe the circuit court’s authority to modify a custody arrangement in the absence of parental agreement, it would not have included subsection 7(l)(c) in this list. It is not for the courts to determine that an honorable and broader social purpose could be served if the statute had been designed differently. Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1997), p 23. Rather, it is the role of the judiciary to reasonably construe the text of a statute and apply it accordingly. Id.
Additionally, I believe that recognition of a court’s authority to accept a modification offered by a child’s parents furthers the laudable goals of minimizing the state’s role in decisions involving family life and promoting cooperation between divorced parents in matters involving their children.
Let me also make clear that I do not believe a court should blindly accept a parental agreement modifying custodial arrangements. I would not bind the court’s hands in such a fashion. In the same vein, I do not believe § 7 binds the court’s hands with respect to a parental agreement to change a custodial arrangement in the absence of a dispute between *35the parents. As with judicial acceptance of an original custody arrangement, implicit in a court’s acceptance of a modification agreement is an acknowledgment that the agreement is in the child’s best interest.
While I agree with the reasoning set forth by the dissenting judge in Napora, I do not agree with his result. The facts of that case indicate that a dispute did indeed arise between the parties before the stipulation was incorporated in an order of the court. Thus, while a stipulation existed regarding a change in custody, the court was not bound to follow it, and indeed was required by § 7 to review the issue of the best interests of the child, because of the existence of that dispute. Again, this is not the situation in the case at hand, where the dispute arose after the July 28, 1997, order was entered.
I note that the Koron Court remarked that cases cited by the defendant in support of the argument that a trial court is always required to place findings on the record regarding the statutory best interest factors were distinguishable because they involved “modification of the terms of a custody arrangement. . . .” Koron, supra at 192.1 also note that in the cases cited there was a dispute between the parties regarding the potential modification. Hoffman v Hoffman, 119 Mich App 79, 81; 326 NW2d 136 (1982); Dowd v Dowd, 97 Mich App 276, 278; 293 NW2d 797 (1980).
This conclusion is supported by testimony by Jayce’s first grade teacher that Jayce could not identify where she lived.
D’Onofrio v D’Onofrio, 144 NJ Super 200; 365 A2d 27 (1976).
I believe the following trial excerpt is illustrative:
Court: And as far as your proposed employment in the event you move to California, you want to get into real estate?
Plaintiff: Yes.
Court: And is that something you’ve tried here?
Plaintiff: No.
Court: You’ve not gone to school here?
Plaintiff. No.
Court: You’ve not gone after any certification or licensure to become a realtor?
Plaintiff: No.
Court: So you don’t know if you could fare better in Michigan or California selling real estate?
Plaintiff. If I could what?
Court: Fare better in Michigan than in California if you were to sell real estate?
Plaintiff: I guess I don’t understand what you’re saying.
Court: Do you know if you could earn more money selling real estate in Michigan than in California?
Plaintiff: I would assume I would earn more in California just because the market is more expensive.

=== CASE 9737695 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:28.146098+00 ===

SHARPNACK, Chief Judge.
Aloysius and Marilyn Molargik (“Molar-giks”) appeal from a judgment of $7,600.94 entered for West Enterprises, Inc. d/b/a Steve West Motors (“West”) on West’s nuisance claim against the Molargiks. We affirm.
The Molargiks raise two issues, which we restate as:
1. Did the Molargiks waive their contention that they were protected under I.C. § 34-l-52-4(f) by failing to affirmatively plead that statutory section as a defense?
2. Was the trial court’s finding that dirt from the Molargiks’ property caused 50% of West’s damages clearly erroneous?
West sells and services new and used vehicles at its dealership, which is located across a highway from the Molargiks’ property. When the Molargiks bought their property in 1965 it was marshy and filled with peat moss. Since that time, the Mo-largiks have been reclaiming their property by a process known as “sur charging,” which involves the removal of muck or peat and its replacement with fill material. As ■part of their sur charging activities, the Molargiks excavated the muck from their property and then back-filled the excavated area with fine, brown dirt which was hauled onto the premises by dump trucks. The Molargiks stored the fine, brown dirt on their property until it could be back-filled into the excavated areas. The dirt periodically blew onto West’s property and settled on and in cars kept on the lot. Similar dirt also came from other sources near West’s property. West incurred substantial expense in additional cleaning of cars due to the presence of the dirt.
West filed a complaint against the Molar-giks wherein it alleged that the blowing dirt from the Molargiks’ property constituted a nuisance and sought both damages and injunctive relief. The Molargiks filed an answer in which they denied the majority of the allegations in West’s complaint. They did not specifically plead any defenses. In their opening statement at trial, the Molargiks referred to Ind. Code § 34-1-52-4 which protects prior existing industrial operations from being termed nuisances. However, when the Molargiks attempted to introduce evidence in support of their defense under I.C. § 34-1-52-4, West raised a continuing objection on grounds that the Molargiks had not raised such a defense in their answer as required by Trial Rule 8(C). The trial court noted that objection and took evidence relating to that defense under advisement.
The trial court issued a judgment for West which was accompanied by findings *1199of fact and conclusions of law. The court concluded that the Molargiks’ reliance upon I.C. § 34-1-52-4 was an affirmative defense, and that regardless of whether they had to plead that defense, the Molargiks use of their property did not amount to an industrial operation within the contemplation of that section. The court further found that the Molargiks’ use of their property constituted a nuisance but that, “[b]ased upon the evidence of the extent of the blowing dirt created by the Defendants and the dirt from other sources ... the Defendants are responsible in damages for 50% of the total damages incurred by the Plaintiff.” (Record, p. 32)
In its Appellee’s brief, West contends that the Molargiks never raised the issue of whether the cause of West’s damages was an “industrial operation” within the meaning of I.C. § 34-l-52-4(e) and therefore protected by I.C. § 34-l-52-4(f) from being deemed a nuisance. According to West, I.C. § 34-l-52-4(f) is an affirmative defense, and as such must be pleaded under Trial Rule 8(C). The Molargiks did not respond to West’s claim of waiver.
Trial Rule 8(C) states that responsive pleadings shall set forth affirmatively all affirmative defenses and matters constituting an avoidance. Failure to do so results in waiver. City of Hammond v. Northern Ind. Public Service Co. (1987), Ind.App., 506 N.E.2d 49, 51, trans. denied. Because I.C. § 34-1-52-4(f) is not one of the defenses specifically listed in T.R. 8(C), we must decide whether it constitutes an affirmative defense.
“The determination of whether a defense is affirmative depends upon whether it controverts an element of the plaintiff’s prima facie case or raises matter outside the scope of the prima facie case.” FMC Corp. v. Brown (1988), Ind.App., 526 N.E.2d 719, 728, opinion adopted by FMC Corp. v. Brown (1990), Ind., 551 N.E.2d 444. An affirmative defense is a defense “upon which the proponent bears the burden of proof and which, in effect, admits the essential allegations of the complaint, but asserts additional matter barring relief.” Id. (quoting Rice v. Grant County Board of Commissioners (1984), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 213) (emphasis in original).
Ind.Code § 34-1-52-1 defines a nuisance as follows:
“Whatever is injurious to health, or indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance, and the subject of an action.”
Anyone whose property has been injuriously affected or whose personal enjoyment has been lessened may bring a nuisance action, I.C. § 34-1-52-2, and they may seek both injunctive relief and damages. I.C. § 34-1-52-3. Ind.Code § 34-1-52-4(f) provides:
“No agricultural or industrial operation or any of its appurtenances shall be or become a nuisance, private or public, by any changed conditions in the vicinity of the locality after the agricultural or industrial operation, as the case may be, has been in operation continuously on the locality for more than one (1) year, provided:
(1) there is no significant change in the hours of operation;
(2) there is no significant change in the type of operation; and
(3) the operation would not have been a nuisance at the time the agricultural or industrial operation, as the case may be, began on that locality.”
We hold that I.C. § 34-1-52-4(f) constitutes an affirmative defense. The most logical reading of the statute as a whole is that sections 1 and 2 set out the elements of a plaintiff’s prima facie case, and that section 4 imposes a specific bar to relief dependant upon facts outside the plaintiff’s prima facie case. Such a reading is supported by the fact that, while the first three sections of chapter 52 all were originally enacted in 1881, section 4 was not enacted until 1981. Furthermore, the defendant in a nuisance action is clearly in a better position to present the facts upon which a defense under I.C. § 34-1-52-4(f) *1200may be based and therefore should bear the burden of proof on that issue.
While we recognize that T.R. 15(B)1 promotes the liberal allowance of the amendment of pleadings, the Molargiks have not pointed either to any request on their part for the pleadings to be amended or to any action by the trial court amending the pleadings.2 This case is governed by the second part of T.R. 15(B), as West properly objected to the introduction of evidence going to the affirmative defense and thus did not consent to the trial of that issue. In such a case, T.R. 15(B) clearly contemplates both a motion to amend by the proponent of the objectionable evidence and some indication by the trial court that the pleadings will be amended and the issue inserted into the proceedings. This is made clear by contrasting the following language in the latter part of 15(B), “If evidence is objected to at the trial on the ground that it is not within the issues made by the pleadings, the court may allow the pleadings to be amended ...” with the first portion of 15(B), “When issues not raised by the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised by the parties.” (emphasis added in both sections).
Although the trial court possibly could have taken the Molargiks’ indication in their opening statement that they intended to rely upon I.C. § 34-l-52-4(f) coupled with their attempt to introduce evidence on the defense as a request to amend the pleadings and granted it3, the court did not do so. Because the Molargiks did not previously request that they be allowed to amend the pleadings and do not now contest the trial court’s failure to amend them, we hold that the pleadings were never amended and that the Molargiks have waived any defense under I.C. § 34-1-52-4(f) for failure to plead it.
The Molargiks next contend that the trial court erred in finding that they caused 50% of West’s dirt-related damages. The thrust of the Molargiks’ argument is that, although there may be sufficient evidence to support a finding that some of the dirt that blew onto West’s property came from their property, there is no evidence to support a determination as to what particular percentage of the total dirt came from their property. We disagree.
The trial court made special findings in this case. When we review a trial court’s judgment based upon findings of fact and conclusions of law, we will reverse only if the findings and conclusions drawn therefrom are clearly erroneous. A judgment is clearly erroneous when it is unsupported by the findings and conclusions. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous if the record fails to disclose any facts in *1201evidence or any reasonable inferences from the evidence in support of the findings. Donavan v. Ivy Knoll Apts. Partnership (1989), Ind.App., 537 N.E.2d 47, 50. We will not reweigh the evidence and we will affirm the trial court unless the evidence, when viewed in a light most favorable to the judgment, points uncontrovertibly to an opposite conclusion. Id. at 50-51.
Although none of the witnesses testified as to specific percentages of dirt coming from the Molargiks or other nearby properties, there was testimony that virtually all of the dirt in question came from the Molargiks as well as testimony that dirt blew onto West’s property from several other sources besides the Molargiks property. The trial court was entitled to determine the percentage based upon numerous evidentiary factors, including: the proximity of the Molargiks’ property to West’s compared to the other potential sources of dirt, the relative dryness of the dirt on the Molargiks’ property compared to the dirt on other properties, and the fact that the dirt was kept in piles on the Molargiks’ property. Based upon these and other factors, we cannot say that the evidence points uncontrovertibly to the conclusion that the Molargiks caused less than 50% of West’s damages.
For the reasons contained in this opinion, we affirm.
AFFIRMED.
BARTEAU, J., concur.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with separate opinion.
.Trial Rule 15(B) provides:
"When issues not raised by the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings. Such amendment of the pleadings as may be necessary to cause them to conform to the evidence and to raise these issues may be made upon motion of any party at any time, even after judgment, but failure so to amend does not affect the result of the trial of these issues. If the evidence is objected to at the trial on the ground that it is not within the issues made by the pleadings, the court may allow the pleadings to be amended and shall do so freely when the presentation of the merits of the action will be subserved thereby and the objecting party fails to satisfy the court that the admission of such evidence would prejudice him in maintaining his action or defense upon the merits. The court may grant a continuance to enable the objecting party to meet such evidence.”
. We will not search the record for grounds for reversal where the appellant does not respond to an appellee’s waiver argument. Dep't of Financial Institutions v. Wayne Bank (1978), 178 Ind.App. 265, 276, 381 N.E.2d 1100, 1106, reh’g denied, Dep’t of Financial Institutions v. Wayne Bank (1979), 178 Ind.App. 265, 385 N.E.2d 482.
. See 2625 Building Corp. v. Deutsch (1979), 179 Ind.App. 425, 434, 385 N.E.2d 1189, 1194. In Deutsch, the court held that the plaintiffs indication in his opening argument that he would rely upon two separate theories of recovery, coupled with his statement at the close of evidence that he would only rely on the latter theory, qualified as a request that his complaint be amended to include that theory. The Deutsch court did not indicate which part of T.R. 15(B) it relied upon in affirming the judgment.

=== CASE 9737696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:28.150837+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I do not agree with the majority that the failure to specifically plead I.C. 34-1-52-4(f) as an affirmative defense constitutes a waiver of the right of defendant to introduce evidence that its business dirt-fill operation did not constitute a nuisance. As the majority correctly notes, such “defense” is not one which is specifically enumerated in Rule 8(C). The mere fact that plaintiff’s proof, absent evidence to the contrary, might be determined to be a nuisance is not determinative of the issue as to whether the statute creates an affirmative defense.
In my estimation, if the operation in question is demonstrated to be an “industrial operation” it cannot constitute a nuisance. Accordingly, evidence of an “industrial operation” is admissible, not as an affirmative defense, but rather as within the permissible framework of an answer which denies that the operation is a nuisance. See Rice v. Grant County Board of Commissioners (1984) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 213, trans. denied. In this regard, the evidence of industrial operation would not constitute an exception to the statute concerning nuisance; rather, it serves to show that the plaintiff’s allegations of nuisance are not true.
Even if the matter be considered an affirmative defense in the limited sense that defendant bears the burden of bringing forth sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the operation is not a nuisance, such does not mean that failure to specifically plead it constitutes waiver.
The trial court took its ruling upon the affirmative defense-waiver objection under advisement, but no ruling appears of record. The court, however, stated that defendant’s use of its property did not amount to an industrial operation. In this sense, therefore, the trial court apparently gave some conditional consideration to that evidence. It is unclear, however, whether the trial court considered and rejected that portion of I.C. 34-l-52-4(c) which includes “storage or disposition of a product or material” as an industrial operation.
Be that as it may, the judgment should be reversed for quite a different reason. The trial court determined that defendant was responsible for 50% of the dirt and dust which caused plaintiff’s damages. This conclusion is wholly speculative and should not be sustained on appeal. Although there was evidence from which the trier of fact could conclude that defendant’s operation contributed somewhat to plaintiff’s problem, the extent and degree of that contribution cannot be determined.
*1202Although no particular degree of mathematical certainty is required, an award of damages may not rest upon conjecture, speculation or guesswork. Ashland Pipeline Co. v. Indiana Bell Telephone Company, Inc. (1987) 1st Dist. Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 483, trans. denied. The case before us is unlike Richter v. Klink Trucking, Inc. (1992) 4th Dist. Ind.App., 599 N.E.2d 223, trans. denied, in which plaintiff was held entitled to a trial to establish damages when defendant was shown to have been responsible for over 95% of the dirt hauling which in turn caused the debris condition. Even if plaintiff here is entitled to some recovery from defendant, I would limit such recovery to nominal damages, at most.
I would reverse and remand for a new trial.

=== CASE 2211700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:10.407931+00 ===

414 Mass. 146 (1993)
605 N.E.2d 852
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
JOSEPH E. LaVELLE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
December 7, 1992.
January 12, 1993.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & LYNCH, JJ.
John H. LaChance for the defendant.
Howard A. Wise, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
*147 NOLAN, J.
A Superior Court jury found the defendant, Joseph E. LaVelle, guilty on two indictments charging distribution of a counterfeit controlled substance. G.L.c. 94C, § 32G (1990 ed.). Prior to trial the judge denied the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictments on the ground that the integrity of the grand jury proceeding had been impaired. At trial the judge granted the Commonwealth's motion in limine to exclude evidence pertaining to the Commonwealth's sole eyewitness. Claiming prejudicial error, the defendant made a timely appeal to the Appeals Court, which affirmed his convictions. Commonwealth v. LaVelle, 33 Mass. App. Ct. 36 (1992). We granted further appellate review. After reviewing the record, we conclude that any errors made at trial did not prejudice the defendant's case, and, therefore, we affirm the convictions, though we would not have ruled as the trial judge ruled.
LaVelle was but one of many targets in a Framingham police "sting" operation codenamed "Last Call." The operation was designed to stop rampant drug sales among patrons of certain bars and other establishments in Framingham. The police enlisted the aid of confidential informants who would enter these bars, approach individuals whom the police suspected of drug dealing, and attempt to purchase cocaine. In this case, two Framingham police detectives and an informant, John Robinson, planned to buy cocaine from LaVelle at a nightclub along Route 9. Because LaVelle denies ever meeting Robinson at the nightclub, Robinson's report is the only account of the drug transaction.
Robinson testified that he approached LaVelle at the nightclub in mid-October, 1986, and asked if he could buy drugs from him. LaVelle responded affirmatively, and Robinson reported this information to the two Framingham detectives. Then on October 21, 1986, the detectives asked Robinson to attempt to buy cocaine from LaVelle at the nightclub. The detectives strip searched Robinson, gave him $100 for the drug purchase, and then followed him to the nightclub. When Robinson entered the nightclub, the detectives remained in their automobile. They neither confirmed LaVelle's *148 presence in the nightclub nor checked to see if his car was in the parking lot. After several minutes, Robinson came from the nightclub and handed to the detectives what they presumed to be cocaine. There is conflicting evidence as to whether a field test was performed at that time. However, a subsequent laboratory test revealed that the substance was not cocaine.
Robinson testified that while he was in the nightclub he asked LaVelle if "he had anything for me." LaVelle wanted to see the money first, so Robinson showed him the one hundred dollar bill and then asked for a gram of cocaine. LaVelle proceeded to usher Robinson over to a hallway where he then took a small packet out of a cigarette box. LaVelle admitted that the amount was only three-fourths of a gram, so he reduced the price. Robinson took the packet.
Three days later, after the laboratory report showed that the substance obtained from LaVelle was not cocaine, the detectives sent Robinson back to the nightclub, following the same procedures, to see if he could replace the counterfeit cocaine with the real thing. According to Robinson, LaVelle gave him a gram of cocaine to replace the "garbage" he had given him the first time. Laboratory tests confirmed that this second gram also did not contain cocaine. LaVelle was subsequently arrested and charged with two counts of distributing a counterfeit controlled substance. Robinson testified that prior to LaVelle's arrest LaVelle drove into Robinson's driveway and allegedly said, "You shouldn't be doing what you're doing  it's wrong. You've got to be careful of your family." Robinson interpreted this as a threat.
In June, 1987, before the trial began, Robinson made false allegations of assault to the police. From the affidavits of the police officers, Robinson, who was then living in Holliston, claimed that he had been assaulted by three men in his backyard but later admitted to a Framingham detective with whom he had been working on operation Last Call that he had fabricated the entire story. Robinson claimed the incident was a reaction to the pressures of his work as a police informant. He feared for his family's safety and felt he *149 needed greater police protection. This incident was disclosed neither to the grand jury nor to the trial jury.
1. Grand jury proceedings. The defendant makes three objections to the grand jury proceedings: (1) the case presented to the grand jury was based almost exclusively on hearsay; (2) the Commonwealth failed to provide the grand jury with information regarding the informant's criminal record; and (3) the Commonwealth failed to inform the grand jury of their right to know the identity and background of the informant. The trial judge denied the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictments; we affirm that decision.
"Our review of the propriety of any indictment is limited to determining whether the grand jury received sufficient evidence to find probable cause for arrest ... and whether the integrity of the grand jury proceedings was impaired" (citation omitted). Commonwealth v. McGahee, 393 Mass. 743, 746-747 (1985). In regard to the defendant's first objection, we have held that "it is not enough to justify dismissal of an indictment that the jurors received hearsay or hearsay exclusively, and this is so even when better testimony was available for presentation to the grand jury." Commonwealth v. St. Pierre, 377 Mass. 650, 655 (1979) (police officer with no personal involvement in the case allowed to present hearsay evidence to a grand jury). See also Mass. R. Crim. P. 4(c), 378 Mass. 849 (1979).[1] On the other hand, we have said repeatedly that "sound policy dictates a preference for the use of direct testimony before grand juries." St. Pierre, supra at 656, citing Commonwealth v. Lincoln, 368 Mass. 281, 285 n. 2 (1975). Therefore, we have indicated that in certain "extraordinary circumstances" a grand jury's dependence upon hearsay might impair the integrity of the proceeding. St. Pierre, supra at 655, 656. Commonwealth v. O'Dell, 392 Mass. 445, 450-451 (1984). If, for example, the prosecutor *150 intentionally or knowingly deceived the grand jury, then the defendant could rightly claim that the integrity of the grand jury was impaired. St. Pierre, supra at 655. Commonwealth v. Mayfield, 398 Mass. 615, 621 (1986). In addition, if the hearsay testimony fails to reach the level of probable cause needed to support the arrest, then the indictment might be vulnerable. St. Pierre, supra at 656. In any case, the defendant bears a heavy burden to show impairment of the grand jury proceeding. Commonwealth v. Shea, 401 Mass. 731, 734 (1988).
After reviewing the record, we conclude that there is no evidence that the prosecution knowingly deceived or misled the grand jury, nor did the evidence presented fail to reach the appropriate level of probable cause. In addition to the hearsay regarding Robinson's statements to the police, the grand jury also heard the nonhearsay testimony of a detective who assisted Robinson in the sting operation. Moreover, the prosecutor was justified in not disclosing Robinson's identity to the grand jury because of his precarious role as a police informant. Lastly, the defendant's claim that reliance on hearsay rather than direct testimony deprived the defendant of "valuable discovery and possible impeaching evidence" is without merit. The informant's identity was revealed to the defendant nearly one year before the trial, providing more than enough time for discovery and preparation of an adequate defense.
Regarding the second objection, we note that "[p]rosecutors are not required in every instance to reveal all exculpatory evidence to a grand jury," Commonwealth v. McGahee, 393 Mass. 743, 746 (1985), citing O'Dell, supra at 447, but they must disclose evidence that would "greatly undermine the credibility of evidence likely to affect the grand jury's decision to indict." McGahee, citing Commonwealth v. Connor, 392 Mass. 838, 854 (1984). We believe that informing the grand jury of Robinson's convictions for larceny and breaking and entering, occurring over six years before the investigation began, would not have greatly undermined the *151 credibility of the evidence against La Velle and would not have significantly affected the decision to indict.[2]
The defendant's third objection is likewise without merit. There is no right to discover an informant's identity or background through grand jury proceedings distinct from the principles outlined above.
2. Evidence of prior bad acts and the Bohannon exception. The well-established rule in Massachusetts is that "[s]pecific acts of prior misconduct of the witness ... not material to the case in which he testifies cannot be shown by the testimony of impeaching witnesses or other extrinsic evidence to affect [the witness's] credibility." P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 149 (5th ed. 1981). Commonwealth v. Schaffner, 146 Mass. 512, 515 (1888).[3] Into this weathered edifice we have chiseled a narrow exception, recognizing that in special circumstances the interest of justice forbids strict application of the rule. Commonwealth v. Bohannon, 376 Mass. 90, 94 (1978), S.C., 385 Mass. 733 (1982), citing Miller v. Curtis, 158 Mass. 127, 131 (1893) (rule against introducing witness's prior bad acts is not inflexible). We have applied this exception in only one case, Commonwealth v. Bohannon, where we allowed evidence of prior false accusations of rape to impeach a witness's credibility. Specifically, the special circumstances included: "the witness was the victim in the case on trial, her consent was the central issue, she was the only Commonwealth witness on that issue, her testimony was inconsistent and confused, and there was a basis in independent third-party records for concluding that the prior accusations of the same type of crime had been made and were false." Commonwealth v. Sperrazza, 379 Mass. 166, 169 *152 (1979), citing Bohannon, supra at 95.[4] La Velle now asks us to expand the Bohannon exception to cover the facts of his case. His arguments, however, are not persuasive.
Generally, "[t]he admissibility of ... evidence of prior bad acts lies in large measure in the discretion of the trial judge." Commonwealth v. McGeoghean, 412 Mass. 839, 841 (1992). In Sperrazza, we held that a trial judge did not abuse his discretion to limit cross-examination on a collateral matter when he excluded evidence that the Commonwealth's sole eyewitness to the defendant's presence at a murder scene had falsely reported that she had been kidnapped. Sperrazza, supra at 169. As in Sperrazza, we find no abuse of discretion in the present case. Like Bohannon, there was only one eyewitness and the defendant had independent third-party evidence that the eyewitness had made prior false allegations to the police. However, unlike Bohannon, the witness Robinson was not the victim in the trial, the witness's testimony was not inconsistent and confused, the false report did not concern a crime similar to the one at trial, nor was there a pattern of false allegations of the same crime. Given this factual predicate, we hold that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in determining that Robinson's prior false claims were collateral or cumulative and that the Bohannon exception does not apply.[5]
*153 3. Evidence of bias. The defendant also asserts that the evidence concerning Robinson's false assault report should have been admissible to show bias. Certainly, in contrast to prior bad acts, evidence of bias is almost never a collateral matter. Liacos, supra at 145. Indeed, cross-examination to show bias or prejudice is a matter of right that may assume constitutional dimensions if the witness has testified to material facts. Commonwealth v. Michel, 367 Mass. 454, 459 (1975).
In this case, the defendant argues that the incident reveals (1) a close relationship between Robinson and the detectives, (2) Robinson's need to seek police protection from physical harm, and (3) Robinson's need to avoid prosecution for making false statements to police officers.[6] The defendant correctly states that a criminal defendant has the right to cross-examine a government witness to reveal a motive which might prompt the witness to testify falsely on behalf of the government. See Commonwealth v. Dougan, 377 Mass. 303 (1979). Cf. G.L.c. 233, § 20I (conviction cannot be based solely on testimony of immunized witness). Determining whether the evidence demonstrates bias, however, falls within the discretion of the trial judge. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. D'Agostino, 344 Mass. 276, 280, cert. denied, 371 U.S. 852 (1962). We have upheld a trial judge's determination that proffered evidence does not show bias when the witness's statements to the police made before "he became susceptible to official pressure" do not differ significantly from his testimony at trial. Compare Commonwealth v. Haywood, 377 Mass. 755, 762-763 (1979) (arrest record showing charges pending against witness was properly excluded as collateral when statements made before the witness's arrest did not differ *154 from witness's testimony at trial), with Commonwealth v. Connor, 392 Mass. 838, 841 (1984) (defendant has right to question witness about pending criminal charges when witness's prior statements were inconsistent with testimony at trial), and Commonwealth v. Martinez, 384 Mass. 377, 380-381 (1981) (trial judge erred by refusing to allow cross-examination on witness's pending appeals of criminal convictions when witness first testified as to observing defendant two or three times and then testified on rebuttal as to seeing him fifteen or sixteen times). In Haywood, we upheld a trial judge's determination that an arrest record was collateral to the issue of bias because if the record were admitted, then the Commonwealth would be entitled to introduce the witness's prior consistent statements and hence there would be no evidence that pending charges affected the witness's testimony. Haywood, supra at 762-763. Similarly, in La Velle's case there is no evidence that Robinson ever changed his account of the drug deal with La Velle, and therefore, there is no evidence of bias to justify overturning the trial judge's decision to exclude the incident as collateral.[7]
This case is analogous to Commonwealth v. Donahue, 369 Mass. 943, 951, cert. denied, 429 U.S. 833 (1976), in which we held that because there was extensive inquiry into the witness's bias and credibility in general, it was within the judge's discretion to exclude a specific inquiry. We have stated that "[t]he right [to cross-examine to show bias or prejudice] is not necessarily infringed by curbing inquiry if the matter sought to be elicited has been sufficiently aired." Commonwealth v. Hicks, 377 Mass. 1, 8 (1979). In this *155 case, the defense counsel was allowed to explore on cross-examination several issues bearing on the witness's bias and credibility including payment for undercover work, use of aliases, a false report of the death of his son, prior undercover work for operation Last Call, and three prior felony convictions. Based on the breadth and depth of this cross-examination over areas which impugned the witness's credibility and raised the possibility of bias, we conclude that if any errors as to the admissibility of evidence were made at trial, the defendant suffered no prejudice.[8]
4. Hearsay evidence. Lastly, the defendant claims that the trial judge committed reversible error by admitting hearsay evidence of Robinson's past relationship with the police for the purpose of bolstering his credibility and reliability. He points to a detective's testimony concerning Robinson's initial contacts with police, his knowledge of drug trafficking activity, his motives for aiding the police, his participation in operation Last Call, and his statements concerning La Velle. While the testimony of the detective as to statements made by Robinson is clearly hearsay, "[t]he hearsay rule forbids only the testimonial use of reported statements. It does not preclude the use of such statements for other valid purposes such as ... the state of police knowledge which impelled the approach to the defendant." Commonwealth v. Miller, 361 Mass. 644, 659 (1972). See Commonwealth v. Bradshaw, 385 Mass. 244, 269-270 (1982) (prosecutor entitled to present full picture of events surrounding the incident). After *156 reviewing the detective's testimony, we affirm the trial judge's determination that, to the extent the testimony included hearsay statements, the information was relevant to the state of police knowledge which led them to use Robinson as an informant and to seek out LaVelle as a possible drug trafficker.
For these reasons, we conclude that there were no prejudicial errors, and, therefore, we affirm the convictions.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Rule 4(c) of Mass. R. Crim. P. reads: "An indictment shall not be dismissed on the grounds that the evidence presented before the grand jury consisted in whole or in part of the record from the defendant's probable cause hearing or that other hearsay evidence was presented before the grand jury."
[2]  It is instructive to note that a twelve person jury found La Velle guilty beyond a reasonable doubt even after listening to evidence that the only eyewitness had a prior criminal record, had falsely reported his son's death, and had been a paid police informant. It would be rational to assume, therefore, that a failure to disclose the same evidence to a grand jury seeking only probable cause would have had a negligible effect on their decision to indict.
[3]  We recognize that Massachusetts law regarding prior bad acts differs in some respects from the Federal rules. Compare Fed. R. Evid. 608.
[4]  Essentially, this exception acts as a "crying wolf" defense. The defendant is entitled to cross-examine an alleged victim about a pattern of false accusations or "crying wolf" when, as in Bohannon, there is independent evidence of such a pattern, the false allegations all pertain to the type of crime which is the subject of the trial, and the evidence would significantly touch a central issue of the trial. Absent such a pattern, the exception does not apply. See Commonwealth v. Hicks, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 487, 490 (1987) (one false allegation of assault by boyfriend does not suggest a pattern of false accusations of sexual misconduct); Commonwealth v. Blair 21 Mass. App. Ct. 625, 629 n. 8 (1986) (single, unsupported accusation of rape does not suggest a pattern).
[5]  As discussed below, the evidence concerning the false assault report would probably not have had a significant impact on the jury given the scope of cross-examination by the defense on other matters. Hence, the trial judge did not deny La Velle his right to present a full defense. Bohannon, supra at 94, and cases cited. Moreover, there can be no reversible error in excluding collateral matters when the exclusion could not have resulted in prejudice to the defendant. Commonwealth v. Binkiewicz, 342 Mass. 740, 755-756 (1961).
[6]  General Laws c. 269, § 13A (1990 ed.), reads: "Whoever intentionally or knowingly makes or causes to be made a false report of a crime to police officers shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred nor more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in a jail or house of correction for not more than one year, or both."
[7]  There is no evidence in the trial record which even suggests that the Commonwealth made any overtures or promises to La Velle in return for his testimony. In fact, defense counsel was allowed to inquire into this area extensively on cross-examination. Moreover, during the nearly fifteen months between the incident and the trial the police failed even to file charges against Robinson. In such circumstances, even the most timorous witness would hardly feel pressured into testifying falsely. We note that if there were evidence of a quid pro quo agreement, then the defendant would have the right to introduce such evidence. See Haywood, supra at 759 n. 4, citing Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 154-155 (1972).
[8]  The defendant claims further that Robinson opened the door to cross-examination regarding the false assault report by testifying that he was honest and truthful with police in matters relating to his investigations. We note first that the admission was not made by the witness on direct examination but rather the words were spoken by defense counsel who evoked an affirmative response from Robinson during cross-examination. Thus, the issue was raised by the defense. Second, the trial judge had determined at voir dire that the prior incident was irrelevant to the investigation of La Velle. La Velle has no right to inquire into irrelevant subject matter regardless of whether the witness raised it. The legal relevancy of evidence is left to the discretion of the trial judge, Commonwealth v. Sherry, 386 Mass. 682, 693 (1982), and, given absence of any prejudice to the defendant, we hold that there was no abuse of that discretion.

=== CASE 9737697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:29.310222+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
This case concerns the defensive use of collateral estoppel in uninsured motorist litigation. Harvey and Carolyn White (Plaintiffs-Appellants below) seek transfer after the Court of Appeals affirmed the summary judgment granted against them and in favor of Allstate Insurance Company (Defendant-Appellee below) (“Allstate”). White v. Allstate Ins. Co. (1992), Ind.App., 591 N.E.2d 586. The dispositive issue is whether the Whites are collaterally estopped from relitigating the issue of a hit-and-run automobile. We hold that defensive use of collateral estoppel was proper and that the Whites are precluded from relitigating the issue of a hit-and-run automobile.
The facts relative to this appeal follow. On December 4, 1988, Harvey White, while driving an automobile owned by his employer, was involved in an automobile acci*142dent in which he suffered personal injury. The Whites claimed that a hit-and-run automobile had collided with the automobile Harvey White was driving. His employer had automobile insurance coverage through Cigna Property & Casualty Companies (“Cigna”). At the same time, the Whites had personal automobile insurance with Allstate. Cigna and Allstate each provided coverage for hit-and-run accidents pursuant to uninsured motorist coverage contained in the policies. Under each policy, the uninsured motorist coverage required actual physical contact between the hit-and-run automobile and the insured automobile.
On May 11, 1990, the Whites filed a complaint against Cigna in state court. The case was transferred to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana upon Cigna’s motion, based on diversity of citizenship and the amount in controversy exceeding $50,000.
Following a bench trial of the action against Cigna, the District Court in March 1991 found in favor of Cigna and determined that there was no hit-and-run automobile. The court, in announcing the verdict, made findings of fact and conclusions of law and thoroughly discussed the evidence presented to the court.
Meanwhile, the Whites notified Allstate on May 23, 1990, that their damages exceeded the $60,000 coverage maximum of Cigna. At this time, the Whites advised Allstate that they were making a conditional claim under Allstate’s uninsured motorist coverage for an additional $40,000. The Whites, in a subsequent letter, notified Allstate that they would seek the full uninsured coverage amount of $100,000 under the Allstate policy because the injuries sustained “are in excess of $160,000.” Additionally, this letter informed Allstate that the District Court had set the Cigna action for trial on March 4,1991, and ordered that any party to be added to the Cigna action must be added by September 4, 1990.
The Whites did not add Allstate as a party to the action against Cigna, nor did Allstate intervene. Because the Whites were not satisfied with Allstate’s response, they filed a separate action against Allstate in state court on September 12, 1990, and, as in the action against Cigna, alleged that a hit-and-run vehicle struck the White vehicle on December 4, 1988.
In July 1991, Allstate moved for summary judgment arguing that the Whites were precluded from relitigating the issue of the existence of a hit-and-run automobile. The trial court granted Allstate’s motion.
In view of Sullivan v. American Casualty Co. (1992), Ind., 605 N.E.2d 134, we now grant transfer. In Sullivan, we rejected the requirement of mutuality of es-toppel and identity of parties as prerequisites to the defensive use of collateral es-toppel. 605 N.E.2d at 137. We held that in determining whether the defensive use of collateral estoppel is appropriate, a court is to consider whether the party against whom the prior judgment is pled had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the issue and whether it would be otherwise unfair under the circumstances to permit the use of collateral estoppel. 605 N.E.2d at 138. Applying this holding in Sullivan, we concluded that the insurance company could properly use collateral estoppel to prevent Sullivan from relitigating a negligence issue. Id. Sullivan originally brought a negligence suit against the driver of an automobile involved in an accident in which Sullivan, while driving his employer’s vehicle, sustained personal injury. In that action, a jury returned a verdict in favor of the defendant, which was affirmed on appeal. Sullivan then filed an action against his insurance company and his employer’s insurance company under the uninsured motorist coverage. In determining that the insurance companies properly asserted collateral estoppel on the issue of negligence and that summary judgment was appropriate, we found that the issue in both cases was identical, that Sullivan had a full and fair opportunity to prosecute the original negligence claim, and that Sullivan should not be given a second opportunity to prove his negligence claim. Sullivan, 605 N.E.2d 139.
*143Here, the Whites chose to proceed against Cigna first. The Whites sued Cigna under the uninsured motorist coverage alleging that a hit-and-run automobile had struck the Whites’ vehicle. The verdict in favor of Cigna necessarily means that the Whites failed to prove one or more of the required elements. Consequently, Cigna was not liable to White under the uninsured motorist coverage of the insurance policy. The issue decided in the action against Cigna, whether a hit-and-run automobile struck the Whites’ vehicle on December 4, 1988, is identical to the one presented in the Whites suit against Allstate. Equally clear is the fact that the Whites were given a full and fair opportunity to prosecute the claim against Cigna. The judgment in the Cigna action was a final judgment on the merits against the Whites. We find no reason why the Whites should be allowed to have another opportunity to prove the existence of a hit-and-run automobile.
The Whites assert that collateral estop-pel is inappropriate because the safeguards stated in Blonder-Tongue Labs, Inc. v. Univ. of Ill. Foundation (1971), 402 U.S. 313, 91 S.Ct. 1434, 28 L.Ed.2d 788, have not been satisfied. Specifically, the Whites argue that they did not have a choice of forum, that the incentive to litigate against Cigna was not as great as to litigate against Allstate, and that a sense of justice and equity is not served by applying collateral estoppel.
First, the Whites assert that they did not have a choice of forum because Cigna had the case removed to federal court. Although the case was removed to federal court, state law was applied to the facts. The Whites have failed to show that they were harmed.
The Whites argue that the incentive to litigate against Cigna was less because they knew that they could recover under Allstate’s policy if they recovered little or nothing under the Cigna policy. It is difficult to conceive of a situation where an attorney would not attempt to gain a favorable outcome in a litigation which could benefit his client. If the attorney were not going to use his best effort to attain a favorable result upon the belief that greater relief may be obtained from another, then the attorney should consider whether the first action is a frivolous claim. Furthermore, a favorable result in the first litigation may have assisted the attorney in the second action and may have promoted a settlement.
Finally, White asserts that the combination of non-choice of original forum, less incentive to sue Cigna, and Allstate’s failure to intervene lead to the conclusion that justice and equity require that collateral estoppel is improper. The Whites argue that Allstate had knowledge of the action with Cigna, chose to do nothing, and should not be able to benefit from its inaction. Just as Allstate could have intervened, the Whites could have added Allstate as another defendant in the original action. Each side chose a strategy which they believed would bring them the most favorable result. As each side selected their strategy, they took the chance that later their strategy would not bring the desired result. The Whites chose to sue Allstate and Cigna separately. In the action against Cigna, the Whites were given a full and fair opportunity to litigate the liability issue. The Whites had their day in court and may not relitigate the same issue against a new defendant. In short, preventing the Whites from relitigating the issue of liability is a just and equitable solution.
This case was resolved in the trial court by summary judgment. Summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and evidence sanctioned by Indiana Trial Rule 56(C) show “there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and ... the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” T.R. 56(C). Once the movant shows entitlement to summary judgment, the non-moving party “must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.” T.R. 56(E).
Recently, we stated the standard for reviewing the propriety of summary judgment on appeal. We said that summary judgment, like all trial court judgments, is clothed with the presumption of *144validity. Dept. of Rev. v. Caylor-Nickel Clinic (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 1311, 1313. The reviewing court faces the same issues that were before the trial court and follows the same process. Id. The party appealing from the grant of summary judgment has the burden of persuading the appellate tribunal that the grant of summary judgment was erroneous. Id. The trial court’s determination is “carefully scrutinized to assure that the non-prevailing party is not improperly prevented from having his day in court.” Id.
Here, a bench trial resulted in a judgment against the Whites and in favor of Cigna on the Whites’ claim for insurance coverage. That judgment established that Cigna was not liable to the Whites because the court found that there was no hit-and-run automobile and, therefore, the Whites were not entitled to recover damages from Cigna. On their claim against Allstate, the Whites have presented no evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact precluding summary judgment. Accordingly, summary judgment was properly entered in favor of Allstate.
We now grant transfer, vacate the decision of the Court of Appeals, and affirm the entry of summary judgment in favor of Allstate.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents, with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9737698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:29.314296+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
I would not permit the defendant-appel-lee insurance company to employ an estop-pel against the plaintiffs-appellants in this case for several reasons:
1. The plaintiffs did not choose to have their claims against CIGNA litigated in federal court, but were forced out of their chosen state court in Elkhart County by CIGNA.
2. The plaintiffs’ claims against Allstate are based upon separate and distinct contracts for which separate consideration was provided.
3.The common law and state law pronouncing duty of Indiana courts will be diminished if we do not maintain mutuality of estoppel where the first court to speak on an issue is a federal court.
In addition to the above, I would not order summary judgment for Allstate affirmed were I to agree with the reasoning of the majority opinion, but would instead remand to permit plaintiffs an opportunity to show that the defense of collateral es-toppel should not be applied in their case. While Allstate’s motion for summary judgment laid an estoppel claim, the law in Indiana at the time did not support that estoppel claim. Plaintiffs properly relied upon such law in making a defense to the motion for summary judgment and were not pressed to investigate and support rational procedural or factual reasons for rejecting the motion for summary judgment.

=== CASE 9737699 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:30.89659+00 ===

CONOVER, Judge.
Defendant-Appellant Lucille Mayberry appeals her conviction for forgery, a class C felony. IND.CODE 35-43-5-2.
We affirm.
Mayberry presents two issues for our review:
1. whether the trial court erred in admitting evidence of approximately twenty forged checks made out to her; and
2. whether her sentence is manifestly unreasonable.
Thelma Myers, age 85, and Lucille May-berry, age 66, live in the same apartment complex in Haubstadt, Indiana. Mayberry helped Myers with household chores such as bringing in the mail, giving her baths, and other chores. In September, 1992, Mayberry cashed a $50 check drawn on Myers’ account at a store. When the check went through Myers’ bank, an employee, who was familiar with Myers, noticed the account was overdrawn and the signature on the check was different from the signature on the bank card. She alerted the police.
When the police interviewed Mayberry, she stated Myers had written the check in question and asked her to cash it just as she had done several times previously. She contended after she cashed it, she had given the money to Myers. While at her apartment, the police found in the bathtub a deposit envelope addressed to Myers’ bank with a sticky note reading “overdrawn $108.71.” She admitted she hid the *246envelope there so she would not appear to be guilty.
The State charged Mayberry with forgery. After a lengthy discussion at trial, the court permitted the State to introduce twenty-two allegedly forged checks drawn on Myers’ account to show a common scheme or plan. Mayberry objected. The State presented to the jury testimony to show: 1) twenty-one of these checks were made out to Mayberry for amounts from $25 to $250; 2) the signatures on the checks were not that of Myers; 3) Myers denied writing the checks; 4) none of the checks written to Mayberry had been recorded in the check register; 5) Myers’ check register showed a balance of approximately $12,000 when in fact she was overdrawn on the account; and 6) Mayberry had cashed the checks. The jury found Mayberry guilty as charged. The court sentenced her to seven years. She appeals.
Mayberry first contends the trial court erred in admitting, over objection, evidence of the additional forged checks. She argues the court erred in ruling the uncharged misconduct proved a common scheme or plan. Further, she claims it was unfair to charge her with one count of forgery and then require her to defend against twenty-two other allegations of forgery.
Evidence of crimes extrinsic to the crime for which the defendant is on trial is generally inadmissible. Gibbs v. State (1989), Ind., 538 N.E.2d 937, 939. However, there are certain exceptions to this general rule such as evidence which promotes an inference about the defendant’s intent, motive, purpose, identity, or common scheme or plan. Williams v. State (1986), Ind., 489 N.E.2d 53, 55. The trial court has broad discretion in ruling upon the relevance of such evidence. Clarkson v. State (1985), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 501, 506. Evidence of uncharged misconduct may be admissible if it promotes a legitimate inference about some issue in the cause, notwithstanding its incidental revelations of bad character or criminal propensity. Bedgood v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 869, 872-873. However, because the admission of prior crimes can taint the fairness of the trial, the exception must be cautiously applied. Clark v. State (1989), Ind., 536 N.E.2d 493, 494.
Admission of evidence for extrinsic offenses which is used to show a common plan or scheme has been permitted for two purposes: 1) to show a preconceived plan that includes the charged crime, and 2) to prove intent, motive, purpose or identity by showing the defendant committed other crimes with identical modus operandi. Lannan v. State (1992), Ind., 600 N.E.2d 1334; Gibbs, 538 N.E.2d at 939.
To prove a preconceived plan, the extrinsic offenses are admissible only if the charged crime and the extrinsic crimes are so related in character, time, and place of commission as to establish some plan which embraced both the prior criminal activity and the charged crime. Malone v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 1339, 1345. The uncharged crimes must be tangibly connected to the one for which the defendant is on trial. Johnson v. State (1989), Ind. App., 544 N.E.2d 164, 170, trans. denied.
In forgery cases, evidence of other checks drawn shortly before or shortly after the charged crime and cashed in the same locale has been admitted to prove a preconceived plan or scheme. Vanway v. State (1989), Ind., 541 N.E.2d 523, 527; Boney v. State (1986), Ind.App., 498 N.E.2d 67, 69; Cooper v. State (1923), 193 Ind. 144, 139 N.E. 184, 185.
In the instant case, the evidence of the other forged checks could only be properly admitted if it tended to prove a disputed fact in issue. See Street v. State (1991), Ind.App., 567 N.E.2d 1180, 1185. The State charged Mayberry with one count of forgery for the $50 check. Thus, the State was required to prove Mayberry’s intent to defraud Myers. IC 35-43-5-2; Eifler v. State (1991), Ind.App., 570 N.E.2d 70, 77, trans. denied. Mayberry denied she intended to defraud Myers. She told the police she worked for Myers. She claimed Myers had written her the check and had received the money. Myers stated Mayberry never worked for her and denied she had *247written the check to Myers. Her testimony, however, was rambling and confused, raising the inference the elderly victim’s memory was faulty. As evidence of a common plan or scheme on the part of Mayber-ry to defraud Myers, the State offered the twenty-two forged checks drawn on Myers’ account. Twenty-one of the checks were made payable to Mayberry. They were all dated approximately two weeks apart and none were recorded in Myers’ checkbook register, as noted. The other checks are tangibly related in character, time, and place of commission to the crime charged and demonstrate a pattern which supports a reasonable inference Mayberry had a preconceived plan to defraud Myers of her savings. The probative value of this evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect. Therefore, the trial court did not err in admitting the other checks into evidence.
Mayberry contends her seven year sentence was manifestly unreasonable because the mitigating factors outweigh the aggravating factors. The determination of a sentence rests with the discretion of the trial court. Duvall v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 34, 36. An appellate court will not alter a sentence authorized by statute unless the sentence is manifestly unreasonable in light of the offender and the offense. Durbin v. State (1989), Ind.App., 547 N.E.2d 1096, 1100. A sentence is not manifestly unreasonable unless no reasonable person could consider the sentence appropriate. Reichard v. State (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 163, 167.
The trial court set out a statement of the mitigating and aggravating factors in this case. IC 35-38-1-3. In aggravation, the court found the age of victim (85 years old), the lack of remorse of the defendant, defendant’s varying accounts of events, the pattern of conduct by which defendant took several thousand dollars of the victim’s savings, and the harassing phone calls made to the victim. In mitigation, the court considered the defendant’s age, health problems, and absence of prior convictions.
The presumptive sentence for a class C felony is four years, with not more than four years added for aggravating circumstances. IC 35-50-2-6. The trial court enhanced the presumptive sentence by three years, which is within statutory limits. To enhance a sentence, the trial court need only to state one aggravating factor. Duvall, 540 N.E.2d at 36. A trial court properly may consider evidence of prior criminal conduct which has not been reduced to conviction and evidence of prior uncharged crimes. Hensley v. State (1991), Ind.App., 573 N.E.2d 913, 917, trans. denied. While Mayberry may feel the mitigating factors entitle her to a shorter sentence, we do not find the sentence manifestly unreasonable in light of the legitimate aggravating factors. The trial court court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Mayberry.
Affirmed.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
MILLER, J., concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9737700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:30.901008+00 ===

MILLER, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
When a trial court sentences a sixty-six (66) year-old, widowed, great-grandmother, who is a first time offender to almost the maximum prison sentence allowed by statute (eight years is the maximum) for the conviction of a non-violent crime, the sentence warrants close scrutiny.1 I wish to *248point out that in addition to there being no evidence or logic to support several of the aggravating factors cited by the trial court, there is at least another side to this story— one which reveals a very important mitigating factor which the trial court ignored, that is, the fact that Lucille provided valuable services for Thelma of which Thelma was in dire need. Given the nature of the offense, the offender, and the victim, I would find Lucille’s seven-year (7) sentence for forging a $50.00 check to be manifestly unreasonable.
It is important to note that, in addition to the above, Lucille worked as a visiting nurse. It was well established in the trial testimony, a published deposition, and Lucille’s Pre-Sentence Investigation Report, that Lucille performed many necessary and valuable services for Thelma. For a year, Lucille checked in on Thelma almost daily when bringing Thelma her mail. Lucille would also bathe Thelma, clean her apartment, pick up groceries occasionally, and perform errands. In light of the services Lucille performed for Thelma, the evidence used in Lucille’s trial takes on a new hue. Of the twenty (20) checks admitted into evidence for the purpose of demonstrating a common scheme or plan to defraud Thelma, nineteen (19) checks were payable to the order of Lucille and one in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) was payable to Meny’s, a local grocery store. The nineteen checks payable to Lucille spanned a time period of one year and totalled $2,750.00. This divides into about $52.00 a week — a reasonable amount of compensation for the services Lucille performed.2
Even working as a visiting nurse did not keep Lucille from being a member of an unfortunate growing class of older working poor. The record indicates that Lucille qualifies for some type of low cost housing ($33.00 a month). Added to this is the fact that Lucille has high blood pressure, and may not be in good health. Lucille’s seven year sentence should be revised based on the nature of “the offender” alone. Sadly, there is more to the story.
Thelma was elderly and feeble of body and mind. She had great difficulty walking into the courtroom — even with the aid of a walker. She was unable to climb one step in order to get into the witness chair, and as a result testified from a chair in front of the jury. Clearly, Thelma was incapable of taking care of herself and required the assistance of another. There is no indication that Thelma had any relatives who could care for her.
*249As the complaining witness, Thelma’s testimony left much to be desired. Thelma testified that she did not employ Lucille, but that Lucille would bring her her mail, bathe her, and clean her home. R. 386, 87, 94. She described Lucille as a good worker. R. 388. Thelma stated that she didn’t know if Lucille charged her for the work she performed. R. 387, 743. Thelma also did not want to bring charges against Lucille who was, in the words of the trial judge, the person that “left her bereft of her life saving.” R. 68. Thelma also demonstrated a tendency to fade from reality. When asked a simple informational question requiring only a one-word response, Thelma drifted back in time and related a tale from her younger days. R. 67-71. Thelma, in her deposition, also fantasized about a cult of Satan worshipers, who she believed were meeting regularly in her apartment complex and plotting evil deeds. R. 91-97.
As for the nature of the offense — the amount of the check that Lucille was convicted of forging ($50.00) is relatively small. However, the costs, in terms of human tragedy and sorrow, are immense.
Yet the trial court was seemingly unaware of the nuances of the case before it. Furthermore, there is no evidence to support several of the aggravating factors cited by the trial court. The trial court sentenced Lucille as follows:
[T]he aggravating circumstances which would justify an increase in the standard or base penalty are as follows: The victim in this case, Mrs. [sic] Myers, was eighty-six (86) years of age. She is feeble. The court observed her when she came to testify on the two occasions where she was called by the State of Indiana: that she came approximately the sixty (60) feet from the door to the outer area hallway to the witness area moving one step at a time behind a walker. She was unable to climb the one step into the witness chair, and as a result, testified in front of the jury from a chair with her walker in front of her. The defendant has shown a complete lack of remorse in regard to this matter. The defendant has told more than one story in regard to this matter. The pattern of conduct evidenced by the defendant was to take the woman’s money.3 The evidence establishes beyond doubt that she took several thousands of dollars from this woman as a pattern of outright theft. She makes note on Page 6 of the Pre-Sentence Report, “Now Miss Myers did receive some telephone calls from some friends of mine. I didn’t know that they threatened her. I did not hear this. They made them from my home. Now, I didn’t know about this until one or two of them told me that they had called her and was having a little fun with her. I told them that I didn’t think that was funny and I said I hoped that they didn’t threaten her. They said, no they didn’t threatened her. I had no part in that.” To ask this court to accept that is to stagger the imagination of the Court.
R. 884-885.
First, I am unable to understand how the trial judge could discern that Lucille demonstrated a complete lack of remorse. At the sentencing hearing, Lucille stated “I’m very sorry for what all has happened and everything and I just ... that’s about all I can say.” R. 881. In Lucille’s Pre-Sen-tence Investigation Report, she maintained that she was not guilty — that Thelma wrote the checks to pay for the services that she performed. R. 173. Lucille stated that although she was upset about her predicament, she felt sorry for Thelma and harbored no animosity towards her. R. 174. Given Lucille’s statements, I find no support for the trial court’s finding that Lucille demonstrated a lack of remorse.
What Lucille did was to maintain that she was innocent of the crime. This means that she believed that she was “free from guilt or sin,” or “free from legal guilt or fault.” Webster’s New International Dictionary 1921 (3d ed. 1976). Remorse, on the other hand, is defined as “a gnawing distress arising from a sense of guilt for past wrongs.” Id. at 1166. If Lucille believed she was innocent, by the common *250definition, she was incapable of feeling remorse. Yet, she was subjected to an increased penalty for maintaining her innocence. As noted by Judge Robertson in addressing the argument that a trial court had imposed a harsher sentence because the defendant chose to exercise his right to plead not guilty and request a trial:
[I]t is well settled that to punish a person for exercising a constitutional right is “a due process violation of the most basic sort.” Bordenkircher v. Hayes (1978), 434 U.S. 357 [98 S.Ct. 663, 54 L.Ed.2d 604]. Moreover, it is constitutionally impermissible for a trial court to impose a more severe sentence because the defendant has chosen to stand trial rather than plead guilty, (citations omitted). It is also clear that under the appropriate circumstances, a defendant may receive a more severe sentence following his trial than he would have received had he pleaded guilty because the trial may reveal more adverse information about him than was previously known. However, a court may not impose a sentence that conflicts with a defendant’s exercise of his constitutional right to a jury trial, (citations omitted).
Walker v. State (1983), Ind.App., 454 N.E.2d 425, 429.4 When one exercises her right to a trial, she is pleading not guilty to the crime charged. At trial, the defendant is clothed with the constitutionally protected right to maintain that she is innocent. Here, we are presented with a logical extension of the constitutional right to maintain innocence at trial — the right to maintain innocence after trial. Nowhere is it written that a defendant, upon a conviction, must cry “uncle” and confess to the crime. There is a big difference — as far as lack of remorse is concerned — between stating that [you] did not commit the offense, and admitting that [you] did commit the offense and the victim got what he deserved.
The trial court stated that Lucille left Thelma “bereft of her life savings.” R. 886. As for Thelma’s financial condition and banking transactions during this period, I make the following comments. First of all, the prosecutor had access to all of Thelma’s bank records (Thelma authorized the bank to release her records to the authorities). At trial, none of Thelma’s bank statements were offered into evidence. Consequently, we do not know how much Thelma had in the bank or what transactions occurred in the year in question— except for the $2750 mentioned earlier which Lucille claimed Thelma agreed to pay her for her services. Secondly, the bank official did not testify that Thelma had $12,000 in her account or had any particular amount in her account at any particular time. The $12,000 amount mentioned by the majority appears to be a figment of Thelma’s imagination. The bank officer testified that despite Thelma’s account being overdrawn, Thelma had written in her check register, as her current balance, approximately $12,000. Thus, one cannot speculate that Lucille took huge sums from Thelma — there is no evidence to support it.
The trial court also stated that Lucille demonstrated a pattern of outright theft of Thelma’s money. The prosecutor, who had access to Thelma’s account only established that Lucille received about $2,750 — which Lucille claims to be payment for services rendered to Thelma. The State, in introducing the twenty (20) checks, was trying to create a pattern. If there were other checks confirming their theory, the State would have tendered them.
In addition, the trial court found as aggravating factors the victim’s age, and Lucille’s alleged knowledge of friends threatening the victim. Lucille does not have the power to control the actions of her friends, *251and in fact denied having anything to do with the threats. There was no evidence that Lucille had knowledge of the threats, nor had Thelma testified that she had been threatened in regard to this case. While the victim, Thelma, was over the age of sixty-five (65), so is Lucille.
Article 1, § 18, of our Indiana Constitution states that “[t]he penal code shall be founded on principles of reformation, and not of vindictive justice.” We must ask ourselves what is the point of sentencing a sixty-six (66) year-old first offender to seven years in prison for forging a $50.00 check. I am confounded as to why the trial court — in laboring to dig up aggravating factors — did not consider the necessary and valuable services Lucille performed as an important and significant mitigating factor. I acknowledge there is no evidence in the record as to the value of Lucille’s daily care for Thelma. But I would venture to say that Lucille gave as much or more than she received. I would also add the obvious— that Thelma enjoyed peace of mind knowing that if she were ever to become ill or incapacitated, Lucille would learn of it during her daily visit.
Under the totality of the circumstances— Lucille is a sixty-six (66) year-old, widowed, poor, great-grandmother, who is a first-time offender, convicted of a non-violent crime, and who provided necessary and monetarily valuable services for an elderly woman who was not capable of taking care of herself — I would remand the cause and order the trial court to impose a two-year sentence — the four-year presumptive sentence minus two years for being a first offender — suspend all two years and place Lucille on probation.
. Ind. Appellate Rule 17 allows our court to revise a sentence that is "manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.” A sentence is manifestly unreasonable, and hence eligible for revision if “no reasonable person could find the sentence appropriate to the particular offense and offender for which such sentence was imposed.” Id. (emphasis added). Despite this strict standard, our divided supreme court has had occasion to revise a defendant’s sentence. Harrington v. State (1992), Ind., 584 N.E.2d 558, (J. Givan dissenting); Wilson v. State (1992), Ind., 583 N.E.2d 742, (J. Givan dissenting). Wilson demonstrates that even if a trial judge, three court of appeals judges, and one supreme court justice would uphold a defendant’s sentence, four supreme court justices can find the sen*248tence to be manifestly unreasonable. In reality, the standard boils down to the fact that if a majority of the reviewing court deems a defendant’s sentence to be manifestly unreasonable, it is unreasonable, irrespective of the disposition below. I merely point this out to illustrate that the "no reasonable person test” of the manifestly unreasonable standard is not applied literally. Instead, the standard set by the supreme court allows the majority of a reviewing court to examine the circumstances of a given case and determine if the sentence is unduly harsh given the background of the offender and the offense.
. It is interesting to note how our civil law would have dealt with the flip side of this situation. If Thelma received Lucille’s services but did not compensate her, Lucille could seek recovery from Thelma under the theory of quantum meruit. A party seeking to recover under a theory of quasi contract or quantum meruit must demonstrate that a benefit was rendered to the other party at the express or implied request of such other party under circumstances in which equity should demand compensation in order to prevent unjust enrichment. Kody Engineering v. Fox Insurance Agency (1973), 158 Ind.App. 498, 303 N.E.2d 307. “Where one accepts valuable services from another, the law implies a promise to pay for them. To warrant a finding of an implied contract the elements of intention to pay and the expectation of payment must be found to exist.” Silverthorne v. King (1979), 179 Ind.App. 310, 385 N.E.2d 473, 476. "An inference may be drawn from the relationship and the situation of the parties, the nature and character of the services rendered, and any other facts and circumstances shedding light on the question at issue.” Id.
When services are performed by a family member, who lives in the same household as the recipient, there is a presumption that the services were gratuitously performed. Witt v. Witt (1938), 105 Ind.App. 415, 12 N.E.2d 1013, 1015. There is no presumption that services performed by a non-family member are gratuitous. In fact, ”[w]here the services are performed by one not a member of the recipient's family, an agreement to pay may be implied from the mutual relations, the situations, the conduct of the parties, and from the nature and character of the services rendered. Johnson v. Gaugh's Estate (1955), 125 Ind.App. 510, 124 N.E.2d 704, 708.
. Lucille demonstrated a pattern of conduct designed to provide services and care for Thelma.
. Because of the internal inconsistency between maintaining innocence and demonstrating a lack of remorse, our supreme court should reexamine their position that maintenance of innocence can be considered an aggravator in sentence enhancement. In light of Bordenkircher, supra, maintenance of innocence is not to be held against the defendant. In the meantime, I read Owens v. State (1989), Ind., 544 N.E.2d 1375, for the proposition that "a lack of remorse by a person who maintains his innocence must be regarded as a modest aggravator,” Id. at 1379 (emphasis added), to mean that at the very most, a sentence may only be slightly enhanced due to the defendant’s lack of remorse while maintaining innocence.

=== CASE 9737701 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:30.905482+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in result.
I fully agree that, as stated in Judge Miller’s dissent, the trial judge was in error in considering “lack of remorse” as an aggravating factor. Furthermore, I agree with much of the remainder of the dissenting opinion.
Mayberry’s crime is not justifiable as a self-help effort to collect compensation for services rendered. The trier of fact reasonably concluded that Mayberry did in fact intend to steal from Myers and did not negotiate the fifty dollar check in order to obtain legitimate compensation.
Nevertheless, the trial court might well have considered the totality of the circumstances to be somewhat in mitigation of the crime or crimes committed. The State in prosecuting appeared to do so. The prosecution might well have chosen to charge and seek conviction for multiple counts of forgery. However, despite twenty-two separate instances, the State elected to seek conviction upon only one forgery count. This prosecutorial election indicates a non-vindictive approach to Mayberry’s pattern of conduct.
The sentence itself, for the single count, may well be harsh under the circumstances. I agree that many, if not most, sentencing authorities would have imposed a less harsh sentence. However, even though our Supreme Court might well do so in light of its past decisions, I am unable to say with absolute conviction that this sentence is so manifestly unreasonable as to require modification. For this reason I concur in the affirmance of the conviction and the sentence.

=== CASE 9737702 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:37.144987+00 ===

KINGSLEY, J.
Defendant was charged with a violation of section 11500.5 of the Health and Safety Code (possession of heroin for sale) ; two prior felony convictions, both for burglary, were alleged. After a motion under section 995 of the Penal Code had been made and denied, defendant pled not guilty and denied the priors. Trial by jury was duly waived and the case was submitted on the transcript of the preliminary examination, supplemented by additional testimony on the part of the People and by a stipulation (hereinafter discussed) that defendant be deemed to have testified in a certain manner. The court found defendant guilty of the offense charged and ordered a probation report. Thereafter, pursuant to what was then section 6451 of the Penal Code,1 the criminal proceeding was suspended and proceedings under the Narcotic Rehabilitation Law were instituted and defendant was committed to the Narcotic Rehabilitation Center. Thereafter he was returned to court by the authorities of that institution, purportedly acting under the provisions of section 6453 of the Penal Code,2 on two grounds: (1) that defendant was on parole for one of the burglary offenses; and (2) that his past history indicated that he was a serious security problem and that his attitudes in narcotic treatment programs conducted in the prison and parole systems had shown him to be uncooperative. The criminal proceedings were resumed, and the trial court, having before it not only the formal order of the Director of Corrections returning defendant to it but a copy of the evaluation report on which that order was based, made a formal finding as follows: “The Defendant having been returned by the California Rehabilitation Center as not a fit subject for their program, the Court makes a finding that this was not an abuse of discretion on the part of that Institution in view of the evidence before the court. ’ ’
The court then found the two priors to be true as alleged, probation was denied3 and a state prison sentence was *140imposed, to run concurrent with “any other sentence he may he serving.” Defendant has appealed.4
On this appeal, defendant urges the following contentions: (1) that evidence introduced against him was obtained by the use of a search warrant invalid on its face; (2) that the stipulation as to testimony by defendant, above referred to, was improper because it amounted to a plea of guilty made without the consent or approval of defendant; (3) that defendant has been subjected to double jeopardy by reason of the present sentence entered after the earlier commitment to the Rehabilitation Center; (4) that submission of the case on the preliminary transcript amounted to a denial of due process of law; and (5) that there are inconsistencies in the evidence not satisfactorily explained.
I
The last three of these contentions can be disposed of briefly.
The alleged inconsistencies consist of the fact that, while it was undisputed that both defendant and his companion were properly warned of their constitutional rights to remain silent and to consult counsel, there was divergent testimony as to which officer gave the warnings. Such inconsistencies go only to the weight of the evidence, are for the trial court, and its determination, implicit in its ultimate decision, is binding here.
In support of the fourth contention, counsel relies on the opinion of a federal district court in Gray v. Wilson (N.D. Cal. 1964) 230 F.Supp. 860. But, subsequent to the filing of appellant’s brief, that decision was expressly overruled by the court of appeals (Wilson v. Gray (9th Cir. 1965) 345 F.2d 282 and certiorari was denied (382 U.S. 919 [86 S.Ct. 288, 15 L.Ed.2d 234]). We conclude that the constitutional validity of a submission in whole or in part on the transcript of a preliminary examination is now settled.
The contention that the nonpunitive commitment for treatment under the Narcotic Rehabilitation Act violates the prohibition against double jeopardy where a defendant is thereafter discharged from that program and sentenced to prison has been rejected, for reasons which we need not repeat here. *141(People v. Reynoso (1966) 64 Cal.2d 432 [50 Cal.Rptr. 468, 412 P.2d 812].)
II
At the trial, defendant’s principal effort was an attack on the admissibility of evidence against him which had been procured under circumstances hereinafter considered. The trial court rejected the contentions of invalidity of a search warrant and connected issues of unlawful search and seizure. Defense counsel then tendered a stipulation, which was accepted, concerning testimony by defendant. The record shows the following in that connection: “Mb. Arthur: Your Honor, at this time the defendant would offer the following stipulation, that if the defendant were called to testify and did testif3'-, that he, one, would deny that any contraband at the apartment at which he was living at that time was going to be used for sale, other than a slight amount or amounts for his own use; Secondly, the defendant has offered to stipulate that he was a user of narcotics at that time, and was using the amount that he told Officer Leeds, as related to this Court by Officer Leeds; Thirdly, that he was occupying that particular apartment with another person, a female, and that to his knowledge she was also a user of narcotics at that time. Mr. Boon: I am willing to stipulate to the substance of what counsel has said, your Honor. I feel that the way he has worded his offered stipulation has the same defect that it had yesterday. He said, ‘if the defendant was called, he would testify so. ’
“The Court : Maybe he added this other ‘and did testify ’ in the stipulation, did you not,— Mr. Arthur : Yes. The Court : You are offering to stipulate that the defendant has been called, sworn, and so testified; is that your stipulation? Mr. Arthur: Yes, it is, your Honor. Mr. Boon: I will join in the stipulation. The Court : And that, if I understood the stipulation correctly, that not any of the contraband was going to be used for sale other than a slight amount for his own use ? ’ ’
Defendant’s counsel in this court relies on People v. Rogers (1961) 56 Cal.2d 301 [14 Cal.Rptr. 660, 363 P.2d 892], and urges that this stipulation amounted to a plea of guilty entered by counsel and not by defendant personally. But in Rogers, the stipulation was that the trial court was not to consider either a finding of first degree murder or a finding of not guilty, but was to restrict its deliberation to a choice between murder in the second degree and manslaughter. Clearly, that stipulation amounted to a plea of guilty to one of *142the two lesser degrees of homicide and, as such, required the clear personal concurrence of the defendant. But here the stipulation went no further than to admit, on behalf of defendant, certain facts. Whether or not those facts, taken together with other evidence, would support a finding of the offense charged, or of some lesser offense, or of no offense at all, remained a matter for argument and for the exercise of judicial determination.
As the Attorney General points out in the then status of the case, there was before the court evidence which overwhelmingly supported a finding of possession of heroin by defendant for the purpose of sale. The trial counsel could not, if the facts set out in the stipulation were true (and that is not denied), allow his client to take the stand and deny the testimony from the People’s witnesses which incriminated him. The attorney then was faced with three choices: (a) to rest without further testimony—a tactic which could have had no result other than a conviction of the offense charged; (b) to place his client on the stand, have him tell his version, necessarily admitting—either on direct or on cross-examination— the facts here stipulated to—a tactic which, if defendant were unprepossessing or otherwise not a “good” witness, might well prejudice him; or (c) to keep his client off the stand, candidly admit as little as was consistent with truth, and hope for some favorable reaction from the court. These are always difficult considerations of trial strategy and tactics5 and the determination thereof by counsel is part of his professional obligation. We cannot, and do not attempt to second guess him here. (People v. Brooks (1966) 64 Cal.2d 130, 140 [48 Cal.Rptr. 879, 410 P.2d 383] ; and cf. People v. Dickerson (1966) 242 Cal.App.2d 73 [51 Cal.Bptr. 113].)
Ill
For some time, the police had been investigating the activities of defendant and of a woman named Tellez whom they suspected of involvement in the sale of narcotics. On November 23, 1964, Officer Leeds set forth the results of that investigation in an affidavit for a search warrant which he presented to a magistrate of Los Angeles County, and on the basis of which a search warrant issued. We set forth hereinafter the contents of that affidavit. Among the information secured by the police was the fact that defendant was on parole, that he had vio*143lated his parole, and that a warrant for his arrest as a parole violator was outstanding. Armed with the data obtained by the police investigation, and with the search warrant, Officer Leeds, accompanied by three other officers, went to the address set forth in the warrant (which was the residence of Mrs. Tellez), entered and arrested defendant for parole violation. They advised defendant as to his constitutional rights to remain silent and to be advised by counsel. They then searched the premises and discovered a substantial quantity of heroin, cans of milk sugar and of dextrose, and other materials of a type commonly used to “cut” and package heroin for sale. Subsequent analysis of the heroin disclosed that some of it was 20 percent pure and the rest 25 percent—strengths far beyond that of heroin ordinarily used by an addict and approaching (if not exceeding) a lethal strength. After part of the incriminating evidence had been found, Mrs. Tellez was also arrested, and similarly warned of her constitutional rights. When first interrogated, defendant denied all knowledge of the articles found but, as the search disclosed additional evidence, defendant told the officers that all of the heroin was his and made other incriminating statements.6
Since defendant’s statements, although not obtained in vio*144lation of the Escobedo-Dorado rule, were obviously the result of the search and its products, it is not denied that their admission stands or falls with the validity of the search itself.7
The Attorney General argues that the search was valid without reference to the search warrant, on the theory that it was a mere incident to defendant’s lawful arrest as a parole violator, and that defendant did not adequately present the •present contentions concerning the warrant at the trial. We think the latter point is without merit8 and, since we find the warrant to have been valid, we need not here decide whether or not a search of the type herein made can be regarded as 11 incident ” to an arrest on a charge unrelated to the narcotic traffic, nor how far a parolee may object to a search of premises on which he is found.9
We have recently considered, at length, the grounds on which an attack may be made at the trial on the validity of a search warrant, and the constitutionally imposed standards by which such a warrant and the affidavit supporting it must be judged. (People v. Aguilar (1965) 240 Cal.App.2d 502 [49 Cal.Rptr. 584].) As we there said (at p. 507) :  “The determination to issue, or not to issue, a search warrant is primarily for the magistrate to whom application is made, and a court is authorized to set the warrant aside only if, as a matter of law, the affidavit or deposition bn which it is based shows, on its face, that the probable cause required by the Constitution and by section 1525 of the Penal Code is lacking. [Citations.]”  And, as we discussed in Aguilar, to be sufficient, the affidavit, if it relies only on information from an unidentified informer, must set forth (a) facts from which the magistrate may, himself, determine that the informant was credible, and (b) facts from which it appears that the informer had spoken of his own knowledge and was not merely- transmitting hearsay. Unless the affidavit meets *145these tests, it is sufficient only if the data from an informant is shown to have been adequately corroborated by credible data independently secured. We proceed to test the affidavit herein involved by these rules.
The pertinent portions of the affidavit are set forth in an appendix to this opinion. In addition to setting forth data as to investigations made by the police of defendant, Mrs. Cruz and her husband, and to investigation verifying an informant’s statements that Mrs. Cruz resided at the address involved, that she owned the automobile attributed to her, and that defendant had been found driving that vehicle, the affidavit alleged: “Affiant received information from a confidential reliable informant who has furnished information in the past that has resulted in the arrest of 7 persons, 6 for 11500 H&S, and one for violation of parole. These cases are still waiting adjudication in Los Angeles courts. Informant has never given information which proved to be incorrect. On 11-13-64 Informant stated to affiant that a person known as Richard Cruz was living and dealing narcotics from 2770 W. 8th St. That he was living at this location with a person known as Christine Tellez and her son age approx 14 years. That Mrs. Tellez’ husband had been arrested at this location approximately one year ago for possession of approximately 4 ounces of heroin. Informant further stated that a telephone call would be made to 382-9435 and he would then talk to Mr. Cruz and order what narcotics was [sic] wanted and Mrs. [sic] Cruz would then set a time and place for a meeting. The meet would be made usually near 6th & Hoover. Any amount of heroin could be ordered and delivered during this transaction. ’ ’
It is urged that the affidavit was insufficient because (a) the credibility of the unidentified informant was not shown by a mere allegation that he had given information in seven eases, none of which were alleged to have resulted in convictions, (b) the affidavit does not show that the informant spoke of his own knowledge, and (e) the affidavit shows no adequate corroboration of the informant, in that all independently secured data was either consistent with innocence or too remote in time to support a conclusion of present narcotic activity.
We need not consider the matter of independent corroboration since we conclude that the affidavit’s allegations relating to the informer were themselves sufficient to support the warrant.
It is true that the affidavit does not show that the informer *146had, in the past, heen instrumental in procuring narcotic convictions. But while such an allegation is quite commonly relied on to show credibility, it is not the only way in which credibility may be made to appear.  We keep in mind that the magistrate was the person to be convinced that the informant was credible and that his determination binds us so long as any reasonable man could have so found. We cannot say that an informant whose data has proved sufficient to induce trained officers to make seven arrests, and who—it is positively alleged—“has never given information which proved to be incorrect ’ ’ could not be deemed, by a reasonable magistrate, to be “credible.” The magistrate’s interest is in whether or not the informant is a truthful person; it is not unreasonable to give credence to an informant who has told the truth on seven similar previous occasions, whether or not policemen and prosecutors were efficient enough to turn his data to successful use.
We conclude, also, that the affidavit sufficiently alleged personal knowledge on the part of the informer. We are enjoined to read such affidavits “in a common sense and realistic fashion.” (United States v. Ventresca (1965) 380 U.S. 102, 108 [85 S.Ct. 741, 746, 13 L.Ed.2d 684, 689].) Bead in this fashion, we think the magistrate was warranted in concluding that the allegations as to past purchases10 indicate personal participation by the informant of recent date.
The affidavit being sufficient, the warrant was valid, the obtained by its use was admissible, and that evidence sustains the conviction.
The judgment is affirmed.
Files, P. J., and Jefferson, J., concurred.
A petition for rehearing was denied on August 29, 1966, and the following opinion was then rendered:
Now section 3051, Welfare and Institutions Code.
Mbw section 3053, Welfare and Institutions Code.
Defendant expressly waived a supplementary and current probation report.
At defendant’s request, we augmented the record on appeal by examination of the original superior court file, which contains a record of the proceedings above summarized and the affidavit and search warrant hereinafter discussed. •
Consult the discussion of these problems in California Criminal Law Practice (Continuing Education of the Bar Practice Handbook No. 23, 1964), pp. 565-568, §§ 13.28 and 13.29.
"A. Yes. Mr. Cruz was shown the bindle and the condom found in the right dresser drawer in the bedroom.
"He stated at this time, ‘All the narcotics that you found is mine. The money that you found is also mine. I have saved it. ’
‘ ‘ He stated that he had been living here with Christina Tellez for approximately eight months, and that he had been running from his parole officer, and was in violation of parole. That is about the conversation. ’ ’
* ** *
"A. Yes. He stated that all the narcotics that we found in the house was his; that he had paid $300 an ounce for it; that he was using approximately a quarter a day, quarter-ounce a day; that he wasn’t peddling very much, just enough to keep up his habit; that he had been running from his parole officer and had been living with Christine Telles at this location, 2770 West 8th Street, for approximately eight months; that he had done a little work off and on, and that the money that was found in the house belonged to him; that he had purchased an ounce and had cut it up into all of the narcotics that we found in the house.
‘ ‘ Oh, and that he didn’t feel that any of the narcotics there was very good.
"Q. Did he tell you it was about an ounce and a half that he had there?
"A. I believe he stated that there was approximately an ounce and a half in a milk sugar can that was found in the—in a kitchen cabinet.
‘ Q. When he told you that he paid $300 an ounce for it, did he tell you how often it could be cut when he it?
"A. Well, he said he had bought an ounce and had cut it into all that we had there. This is all that he said, and he said that it was not very good. This is all he said pertaining to that, which would have been three out of one.’ ’
Similarly, as we have pointed out above, the stipulation at the trial as to defendant’s testimony was impelled by the admission of the evidence obtained by the search; unless the search was valid the People may not rely on the stipulation to support the conviction.
At the opening of the trial, defense counsel set forth, as one of his two defenses, that he proposed to attack the search warrant as being insufficient on its face. A motion to strike the evidence was duly made and argued at length; we do not see how more could be required.
As to the latter point, consult: People v. Gastelum (1965) 237 Cal.App.2d 205 [46 Cal.Rptr. 743]; People v. Giles (1965) 233 Cal.App.2d 643 [43 Cal.Rptr. 758]; People v. Hernandez (1964) 229 Cal.App.2d 143 [40 Cal.Rptr. 100],
‘Informant further stated that a telephone call would be made to 382-9435 and Tie would then talk to Mr. Cruz and order what narcotics was [sic] wanted and Mrs. [sic] Cruz would then set a time and place for a meeting. The meet would be made usually near 6th & Hoover. Any amount of heroin could be ordered and delivered during this transaction. Informant stated Cruz would drive a 1959 Olds, 2dr brn, at times to make delivery. ’ ’ Clearly it was not unreasonable to have read ‘ ‘ would ’ ’ as referring to past, and not to anticipated future, events.

=== CASE 9737703 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:37.149483+00 ===

THE COURT.
In a petition for rehearing, counsel argues that, since both of the trial counsel, and the trial court, were unaware of the subsequent holding (in People v. Butler
*147(1966) 64 Cal.2d 842 [52 Cal.Rptr. 4, 415 P.2d 819]) that an attack on a search warrant might be made at the trial not only as to the legal sufficiency of the affidavit but by way of traverse of the facts therein stated, “ It is impossible to say what testimony could have been turned up had both counsel been proceeding under the rule of the Butler ease.” However, an examination of the record discloses that, in spite of objection by the prosecuting attorney, the trial court allowed extensive cross-examination of the officer-affiant; we do not see what further traverse could have been made even if the parties had anticipated Butler.
The petition for rehearing is denied.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 4, 1966.
Appendix
“Pacts in support of issuance of search warrant: Tour affiant has been a police officer for 13 years and has been assigned to Narcotic Division for 7 years. Affiant has made hundreds of arrests for possession, possession for sale, sale and use of narcotics. Affiant has testified in court as an expert in the field of narcotics as to possession, use and the paraphernalia used in both instances. Affiant received information from a confidential reliable informant who has furnished information in the past that has resulted in the arrest of 7 persons, 6 for 11500 H&S, and one for violation of parole. These cases are still waiting adjudication in Los Angeles courts. Informant has never given information which proved to be incorrect. On 11-13-64 Informant stated to affiant that a person known as Richard Cruz was living and dealing narcotics from 2770 W. 8th St. That he was living at this location with a person known as Christine Tellez and her son age approx 14 years. That Mrs. Tellez’ husband had been arrested at this location approximately one year ago for possession of approximately 4 ounces of heroin. Informant further stated that a telephone call would be made to 382-9435 and he would then talk to Mr. Cruz and order what narcotics was [sic] wanted and Mrs. [sic] Cruz would then set a time and place for .a meeting. The meet would be made usually near 6th & Hoover. Any amount of heroin could be ordered and delivered during this transaction. Informant stated Cruz would drive a 1959 Olds, 2dr brn, at times to make delivery. Also the informant stated Cruz was probably wanted for violation of parole. Affiant checked phone number 382-9435 and found it registered to Christine Tellez at *148the above address, 2770 W. 8th. A cheek of the mail box at this location found it to have the name Mrs. Tellez and family on the outside of the box. Affiant checked license number LYE 754 and registration showed registered owner as Christine Tellez at 2770 W. 8th St. Affiant and partner, Officer Maga were the officers who participated in the arrest of the husband of Christine Tellez, Espiranzo Tellez, on 1-23-64 when Tellez was arrested for violation of parole and possession of heroin for sale. Affiant and officers found approximately 100 grams (4 ounces) at 2770 W. 8th St., the location of arrest). At this time Christine Tellez and her son Peter were residents at this address. Officers observed the above vehicle LYE 754, 1959 Olds, 2dr brn leave above location with one male mex. driving. Vehicle was stopped and driver identified as Richard Permia Cruz and the vehicle as beloning to Christine Tellez. This information was relayed to affiant by Sergeants Evans and Olson whose information the affiant has found in the past to be reliable. R&I was checked at Los Angeles Police Dept, and affiant found Richard Permia Cruz AKA Richard Medina Cruz, LA #148633-C to have an arrest record for violation of State Narcotic Act as a juvenile, violation of State Narcotic Act in 1952 found in danger of leading immoral life, LA. County Juvenile Court February 1953. Sent to Youth Authority. Arrested for burglary 11-8-56, sentenced to 5 years probation, 6 months county jail. Arrested 6-18-57 suspicion burglary, 10-15-57, State Prison. 10-29-57 convicted of burglary from L.A. County 6 months to 15 years, parole 4-29-59. 4-17-61 CTA & 10851 VC, 360 days County Jail, count 1 dismissed. 11-19-62 violation of parole, returned to parole 4-20-64 tent, discharge date 3-1-70. R&I further showed that there was at present a want for violation of parole by Reg. Admin. L.A. reference B.S. Griggs (66 SAC. SC 5) Also Officers checked the record of Christine Tellez and found her to be convicted of suspicion of narcotic act 11721 H&S, 90 days, suspicion of narcotics 12-9-57. 2-4-58 committed CIW, 6 months to 10 years. Paroled 5-5-60, tent, discharge 2-17-63.”

=== CASE 9737704 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:37.44343+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
We granted leave in this felony murder case to determine whether the prosecution presented sufficient evidence of common-law arson, the felony underlying the convictions, MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548. A jury convicted defendant of two counts of felony murder, MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, and one count of arson of a dwelling house, MCL 750.72; MSA 28.267. Defendant was thereafter sentenced to concurrent terms of life imprisonment on the felony murder counts, while the arson conviction was vacated. The Court of Appeals, in a split opinion, reversed on the ground of insufficient evidence and remanded with instructions to enter a conviction of involuntary man*395slaughter. We hold that the evidence of arson was legally sufficient and reinstate defendant’s convictions of felony murder.
This case also affords us the opportunity to clarify the state of mind required to prove common-law arson. The Court of Appeals erred in assuming that common-law arson is a specific intent crime. Common-law arson is a general intent crime that merely requires the prosecutor to prove malice. It occurs in circumstances where a defendant intentionally or wantonly bums property without justification or excuse.
I. UNDERLYING FACTS
On January 15, 1995, the ten-unit Lansing apartment building where defendant lived exploded and burned. The force of the explosion fragmented the building. The three center units were completely leveled and the roof was blown off. A sixty-seven-year-old woman and a ten-year-old boy who lived in the center section in apartments adjoining defendant’s were killed. Ironically, although defendant was present in his apartment where the explosion originated, he sustained only bums and minor injuries. He walked away from the explosion and spoke coherently with investigators shortly thereafter.
The prosecution theorized that defendant attempted suicide by releasing gas into his apartment, resulting in the explosion and fire. Defendant essentially contended that the explosion and fire were accidental. The defense suggested various possible accidental sources of the gas, including the furnace and water heater. Further, the defense argued that if defendant *396deliberately released the gas, he may have been trying to asphyxiate himself or to gain attention rather than cause an explosion. By their verdicts, the jury accepted the prosecution’s theory.
The evidence showed that defendant had attempted suicide three times in 1992. On January 8, just one week before the fire, defendant told his minister and later told a police officer that he wanted to “end it all” by putting a “bullet in his head.” The officer took defendant to a psychiatric hospital where he remained until the day before the explosion.
Defendant obtained a temporary pass to leave the psychiatric hospital on January 14. He asked his former girlfriend, Kathryne Russell, to transport him home from the hospital, but she wanted defendant to stay in the hospital. During their conversation, defendant threatened suicide and said that nobody would catch him this time. Despite defendant’s suicidal threat, Russell did not comply with defendant’s wishes. Defendant returned to his apartment by cab.
On the day of the crime, someone released gas into defendant’s apartment by deliberately tampering with the gas pipe at its union with the water heater and loosening the pipes. Gas built up in defendant’s apartment; it thereafter ignited, causing the explosion and fire. None of the other apartments experienced any gas buildup. The experts opined that the cause of the explosion was the combustion of an almost perfect mix of methane gas and air that “literally made a bomb of apartment number 5
The prosecution’s experts systematically excluded accidental sources of the blast. They found no electrical malfunction because the building’s gas regulator was in good condition and the gas lines had not rup*397tured. Given the exclusion of various accidental sources of gas and the evidence that the pipes had been loosened, the experts concluded that some human agency untied the gas train to allow an uninterrupted flow of gas into defendant’s apartment.
The experts could not, however, explain how the gas had been ignited. They discounted possible sources of ignition, such as the presence of static electricity or the arc generated by a light switch, as unlikely in a residential setting.
The prosecution’s experts also opined that the pattern of blast debris and the fact that the explosion flowed in an omnidirectional movement from the center established that the explosion originated in defendant’s apartment. Further, defendant’s lack of blast-related injuries strongly suggested that he was present at the epicenter of the explosion. Prosecution experts testified that following an explosion, a propagation wave becomes stronger as it leaves the point of ignition. Thus, a person located at the source of ignition has a greater chance of survival than someone who is located further away.
Other evidence revealed that defendant left a note on the apartment door warning Ms. Russell not to turn on any type of switch. Defendant also admitted to the police that he knew about gas appliances because he had worked in an appliance store. Finally, defendant falsely told police that he had unplugged appliances and tightened the gas union in the water heater/fumace area and shut down the gas line when he smelled gas, contrary to the physical evidence that the gas pipes had been loosened. The prosecution relied on this evidence to establish that defendant was the individual who tampered with the gas pipes.
*398II. COURT OF APPEALS ANALYSIS
In reversing, the Court of Appeals majority found “[w]hat is missing is sufficient evidence to establish that the ignition of the gas was the result of an intentional act on defendant’s part.” Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued October 9, 1998 (Docket No. 196655), slip op, p 5. The majority noted that the prosecution experts could not determine the exact source of ignition. The majority assumed that defendant had deliberately filled his apartment with gas, but held that the evidence did not establish that defendant specifically intended to ignite the gas. An equally possible explanation was that defendant merely intended to asphyxiate himself. Accordingly, the panel majority found the proof insufficient.
In dissent, Judge Griffin accused the majority of usurping the jury’s role as trier of fact. He noted that the prosecution’s experts characterized defendant’s theories of accident as improbable. Judge Griffin observed that the prosecutor was not required to negate every reasonable theory consistent with innocence. In his view, a reasonable juror could conclude that one who purposefully fills his apartment with natural gas intends an explosion to occur. He adopted the trial court’s reasoning: one who loosens gas pipes and releases a quantity of gas intends the natural results thereof, i.e., an explosion or fire. Although static electricity possibly could have been the source of the ignition, the evidence supported the reasonable inference that defendant had purposefully created conditions from which an explosion and fire was a natural and probable consequence. Thus, the jury’s verdicts were not irrational.
*399Judge Griffin cited the following evidence:
(1) [Defendant deliberately filled his apartment with natural gas by loosening the gas pipe at its union, (2) the fire and explosion were caused by the ignition of the gas buildup, (3) defendant, as a former employee of an appliance store, was knowledgeable of the functioning of gas appliances, (4) defendant had a history of suicide attempts and expressed his intent to kill himself less than a week before the explosion, vowing that “nobody would catch him this time,” (5) defendant’s lack of “blast-related injuries” indicated that defendant was located at or near the origin of the ignition, (6) accidental ignition from static electricity (in a nonindustrial setting) or from an arc caused by a light switch or an appliance was very unlikely, and (7) defendant’s note on his front door warning his girlfriend revealed defendant’s knowledge of the danger and potential for the explosion that ultimately occurred (negating defendant’s claim of accident or mistake). [Slip op, p 3.]
We granted the prosecution’s application for leave to appeal. 459 Mich 1002 (1999).
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
The test for determining the sufficiency of evidence in a criminal case is whether the evidence, viewed in a light most favorable to the people, would warrant a reasonable juror in finding guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Hampton, 407 Mich 354; 285 NW2d 284 (1979); Jackson v Virginia, 443 US 307; 99 S Ct 2781; 61 L Ed 2d 560 (1979). People v Wolfe, 440 Mich 508, 515; 489 NW2d 748 (1992), articulated the governing standard for reviewing sufficiency claims:
[Wjhen determining whether sufficient evidence has been presented to sustain a conviction, a court must view the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution and determine whether any rational trier of fact could have *400found that the essential elements of the crime were proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
The standard of review is deferential: a reviewing court is required to draw all reasonable inferences and make credibility choices in support of the jury verdict. The scope of review is the same whether the evidence is direct or circumstantial. “ ‘Circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from that evidence can constitute satisfactory proof of the elements of a crime.’ ” People v Carines, 460 Mich 750, 757; 597 NW2d 130 (1999).
We once again caution reviewing courts that the prosecutor need not negate every reasonable theory consistent with innocence. People v Konrad, 449 Mich 263, 273, n 6; 536 NW2d 517 (1995). Instead, the prosecution is bound to prove the elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. It is not obligated to disprove every reasonable theory consistent with innocence to discharge its responsibility; it need only convince the jury “in the face of whatever contradictory evidence the defendant may provide.” Id.
IV. SUFFICIENCY ANALYSIS
Because this offense occurred in January 1995, before the April 1, 1996, effective date of the amendments in 1996 PA 20, § 1, now codified as MCL 750.316(2)(a); MSA 28.548(2)(a), we must analyze the sufficiency of proof of common-law arson underlying the felony murder charge, rather than statutory arson. In People v Reeves, 448 Mich 1, 3-4; 528 NW2d 160 (1995), we held that “the word ‘arson’ in the felony murder statute refers to the common-law crime of arson, that is, the malicious and voluntary or wilful *401burning of a dwelling house of another.” This Court reviewed the history of the felony murder statute and concluded that the Legislature intended to retain the common-law definition of arson in the felony murder statute. In apparent response to Reeves, the Legislature amended the felony murder statute to provide that statutory, not common-law, arson is the relevant offense in felony murder cases. See 1996 PA 20, now codified as MCL 750.316(2)(a); MSA 28.548(2)(a).
People v Carines, supra, pp 758-759, recited the elements of felony murder:
“The elements of felony murder are: (1) the killing of a human being, (2) with the intent to kill, to do great bodily harm, or to create a very high risk of death or great bodily harm with knowledge that death or great bodily harm was the probable result [i.e., malice], (3) while committing, attempting to commit, or assisting in the commission of any of the felonies specifically enumerated in [the statute, including (arson)].” [Citation and internal quotations omitted.]
“The facts and circumstances of the killing may give rise to an inference of malice. A jury may infer malice from evidence that the defendant intentionally set in motion a force likely to cause death or great bodily harm.” Id., p 759 (citations omitted).
The prosecution presented sufficient evidence of the elements of felony murder. Uncontested evidence established that two human beings died in the explosion, thereby satisfying the first element. Regarding the second element, the jury could infer that defendant acted with malice when he intentionally set in motion a force likely to cause death or great bodily harm. As discussed below, the circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom indicated *402that defendant intentionally released and ignited gas in his apartment building. Defendant thereby created a very high risk of death or great bodily harm, and the jury could infer from defendant’s actions that he knew that death or such harm was the likely result.
The third element of felony murder is satisfied because defendant committed the crime of arson. People v Reeves, supra, pp 3-4, defined common-law arson as “the malicious and voluntary or wilful burning of a dwelling house of another.”
We note preliminarily that the trial court, without objection, instructed the jury in accord with CJI2d 31.2(4), which states that the defendant must have “intended to set a fire, knowing that this would cause injury or damage to another person or to property.” We hold that the evidence was sufficient to establish the elevated level of intent required by the standard instruction.1
In arson cases, the trier of fact usually draws inferences from circumstantial evidence:
[TJhere is rarely direct evidence of the actual lighting of a fire by an arsonist; rather, the evidence of arson is usually circumstantial. Such evidence is often of a negative character; that is, the criminal agency is shown by the absence of circumstances, conditions, and surroundings indicating that *403the fire resulted from an accidental cause. [Fox v State, 179 Ind App 267, 277; 384 NE2d 1159 (1979).[2]
It is beyond dispute that the “dwelling house of another” was burned. Thus, the only remaining question is whether defendant maliciously and voluntarily or wilfully caused the burning.
The evidence supported a reasonable inference that defendant intentionally caused the explosion and resulting fire. Defendant had threatened to kill himself the previous day and the previous week. A rational jury could infer that defendant deliberately released gas into his apartment by loosening the union of the gas pipe. Further, defendant was present at the point of ignition because he suffered no blast-related injuries.
The circumstantial evidence that defendant was located at the source of the ignition is particularly persuasive. The expert testimony concerning the properties of propagation waves supported a rational *404jury determination that defendant ignited the gas. The Court of Appeals majority completely overlooked this evidence.
The evidence also supports the reasonable inference that defendant ignited the gas in an effort to kill himself quickly. When threatening to kill himself, defendant told Russell that no one would catch him this time. A rational juror could infer that defendant intended to take his life quickly to avoid being stopped. Igniting the gas obviously provided a quicker method of demise than asphyxiation. As a former appliance store employee, defendant certainly knew the dangers of a gas explosion. Indeed, defendant specifically cautioned Russell not to turn on any switches.
A reviewing court must consider the evidentiary facts not in isolation, but in conjunction with one another, in a light most favorable to the prosecution. Taken together in this light, the evidence supports a reasonable inference that defendant intentionally released the gas in his apartment and ignited it.
V. INTENT REQUIREMENT FOR COMMON-LAW ARSON
We now turn to the mental state required for common-law arson.3 Under the common law, the act of purposefully creating conditions that cause a dwelling to bum satisfies the elements of arson. The Court of *405Appeals majority posited that common-law arson requires proof of an intentional act of ignition on the implicit assumption that common-law arson is a specific intent crime. The Court of Appeals may have relied for that mistaken view on CJI2d 31.2(4). That instruction states that arson requires proof that the defendant “intended to set a fire, knowing that this would cause injury or damage to another person or to property.” A footnote to the instruction also refers to arson as a specific intent crime, without distinguishing various statutory offenses with specific intent components from common-law arson.
CJI2d 31.2 does not accurately reflect Michigan law regarding common-law arson. No Michigan case has ever held that common-law arson is a specific intent crime. Accordingly, the cases cited in the commentary to CJI2d 31.2 in support of the specific intent instruction are inapposite for purposes of analyzing common-law arson. For example, in People v McCarty, 303 Mich 629; 6 NW2d 919 (1942), the defendant was convicted of the statutory offense of wilfully burning insured personal property with the intent to injure and defraud the insurer, 1931 PA 328, § 75, now codified at MCL 750.75; MSA 28.270. Obviously, the statutory language at issue in McCarty included a specific intent requirement. But McCarty never held that common-law arson is a specific intent crime.
“[T]he distinction between specific intent and general intent crimes is that the former involve a particular criminal intent beyond the act done, while the latter involve merely the intent to do the physical act.” People v Beaudin, 417 Mich 570, 573-574; 339 NW2d *406461 (1983).4 Because virtually every reported Michigan case involves a statutory arson offense, see Reeves, supra, our cases do not discuss common-law arson.
Const 1963, art 3, § 7 states: “The common law and the statute laws now in force, not repugnant to this constitution, shall remain in force until they expire by their own limitations, or are changed, amended or repealed.” Thus, to the exdent that it is consistent with our state and federal constitutions and statutes, the common law has been adopted into our jurisprudence. In re Lamphere, 61 Mich 105, 108; 27 NW 882 (1886); Lorman v Benson, 8 Mich 18 (1860); Stout v Keyes, 2 Doug 184 (Mich, 1845).
Common-law arson is a general intent crime. “[T]he enduring common law definition of the mental element of” arson is that the burning be done “maliciously and voluntarily.” Poulos, The metamorphosis of the law of arson, 51 Mo L R 295, 319 (1986). A malicious burning occurs when the defendant “either intentionally or wantonly bums property without justification or excuse.” Id., p 403. Wanton arson “required an intentional act which created a very high risk of burning a dwelling house, which risk was known by the actor and disregarded when the actor performed the risk taking act.” Id., p 408. “[T]he word ‘willfully’ adds nothing to the common law concept of malice . . . .” Id., p 404.
*407The common law defines arson as the performance of any act resulting in the burning of a dwelling house that was done with malice. Perkins, Criminal Law (2d ed), ch 3, § 2, pp 216-219. Common-law malice requires either: 1) an actual intent to commit the actus reus, or 2) an intent to act with a heedless disregard that the prohibited harm is a plain and strong likelihood. Id., ch 7, § 4, pp 766-768, and n 25.
Arson, in the common-law sense, usually results from a deliberate intent to bum the dwelling of another and without doubt this intent was at one time assumed to be an ingredient of the crime, which explains the use of the word “voluntary” or “wilful,” as mentioned above, in many of the definitions. Either word, however, lost all meaning in this definition when it became established that by fiction an intent to bum might be recognized in law when it did not exist in fact. Thus Lord Coke, writing in the early 1600’s said that the “law doth sometime imply, that the house was burnt maliciously and voluntarily,” giving as an illustration the instance of a fire spreading and causing damage beyond that actually intended. It is not common-law arson for a dweller to bum his own dwelling, and this has given rise to the outstanding example of unintentional arson; for if such a fire obviously creates an unreasonable fire hazard for other nearby dwellings, and any of these is actually burned, common-law arson has been committed even if the wrongdoer did not actually intend the consequence and may have hoped it would not happen. An intentional act creating an obvious fire hazard to the dwelling of another, done without justification, excuse or mitigation, might well be characterized as “wilful” (a word of many meanings), and would certainly be malicious, but as the law has developed it is a mistake to assume that the phrase “wilful and malicious,” when found in the definition of common-law arson, adds some distinct requirement not included in the word “malicious” alone. [Id., ch 3, § 2, pp 217-218.]
*4084 Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 222 (1769), states that common-law arson requires a malicious burning. Blackstone stated:
As to what shall be said a burning, so as to amount to arson: a bare intent, or attempt to do it, by actually setting fire to a house, unless it absolutely bums, does not fall within the description of incendit et combuffit; which were words necessary, in the days of law-latin, to all indictments of this sort. But the burning and consuming of any part is sufficient; though the fire be afterwards extinguished. Also it must be a malicious burning; otherwise it is only a trespass: and therefore no negligence or mischance amounts to it. [Id.]
See also United States v Acevedo-Velez, 17 MJ 1, 2-3 (1983).
We have previously discussed the definition of malice in the context of murder. The “malice” required to prove murder requires either: 1) an intent to kill, 2) an intent to cause great bodily harm, or 3) wanton and wilful disregard that the natural tendency of the defendant’s behavior is to cause death or great bodily harm. People v Aaron, 409 Mich 672, 714; 299 NW2d 304 (1980). The same level of criminal culpability exists regardless whether a defendant wantonly and wilfully disregards the consequences of his actions or intends to cause the prohibited harm.
Like murder, common-law arson is a crime against the person and manifests a contempt for human life. 3 Torcia, Wharton’s Criminal Law (15th ed), § 334, pp 325-326, and n 5, citing State v McGowan, 20 Conn 245 (1850). We thus treat arson no differently than murder for purposes of defining malice. Accordingly, the required mental state for arson is either: 1) an intent to bum the dwelling house of another, or 2) *409doing an act in circumstances where a plain and strong likelihood of such a burning exists. Perkins, supra, ch 3, § 2, pp 219-220.5
Proof of common-law arson does not require a specific intent to cause injury to a particular person or damage to particular property. To establish that a defendant acted wilfully or maliciously and voluntarily, the prosecution must prove one of the following: 1) that the defendant intended to do the physical act constituting the actus reus of arson, i.e., starting a fire or doing an act that results in the starting of a fire (intentional arson); or 2) that the defendant intentionally committed an act that created a very high risk of burning a dwelling-house, and that, while committing the act, the defendant knew of the risk and disregarded it (wanton arson).
The first type of malice should not be confused with a specific intent requirement. The discussion in People v Langworthy, 416 Mich 630; 331 NW2d 171 (1982), of malice in the murder context provides a useful analogy. While the intent to kill and the intent to cause great bodily harm “sound suspiciously akin to the traditional language of specific intent,” Lang-*410worthy, p 651, neither intent is a necessary element of second-degree murder. “[A] wanton and willful disregard of the likelihood that the natural tendency of a person’s behavior is to cause death or great bodily harm may also satisfy thé malice requirement.” Id., pp 650-651.
Similarly, while an “intent to start a fire” may sound like the language of specific intent, this intent is simply one possible means of proving malice in an arson case. Such an intent is not a necessary element of arson. The wilful and wanton commission of an act that creates a very high risk of burning a dwelling house is an alternative method of proving malice.
VI. CONCLUSION
The prosecution presented sufficient evidence of common-law arson underlying the murders in this case. This evidence established the elevated level of intent required by CJI2d 31.2(4). Nonetheless, common-law arson is a general intent crime. Accordingly, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstate defendant’s convictions of felony murder.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Corrigan, J.
We do not suggest that the trial court’s instructions are dispositive when reviewing sufficiency of the evidence claims. Normally, an appellate court identifies the elements of the crime and assesses whether the evidence presented at trial, taken in the light most favorable to the prosecutor, satisfied those elements. In this case, however, the prosecution satisfied the heightened intent requirement of CJI2d 31.2(4). As discussed below, the jury instruction wrongly created an elevated intent requirement to prove common-law arson that is not found in the common law. We take the opportunity in the next section of this opinion to clarify the mental state needed to prove common-law arson.
2 See also People v Horowitz, 37 Mich App 151, 154; 194 NW2d 375 (1971), in which our Court of Appeals stated:
It is the nature of the offense of arson that it is usually committed surreptitiously. Rare is the occasion when eyewitnesses will be available. By necessity, proofs will normally be circumstantial.
In Horowitz, the Court of Appeals rejected the defendant’s claim that the jury had piled inference upon inference:
“The rule is not that an inference, no matter how reasonable, is to be rejected if it, in turn, depends upon another reasonable inference; rather the question is merely whether the total evidence, including reasonable inferences, when put together is sufficient to warrant a jury to conclude that defendant is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. If enough pieces of a jigsaw puzzle fit together the subject may be identified even though some pieces are lacking.” [Id., p 155, quoting Birring v United States, 328 F2d 512, 515 (CA 1, 1964).]
We acknowledge that this question is not squarely before us, given our conclusion that the evidence was sufficient under the heightened intent requirement of CJI2d 31.2(4). We nonetheless address the intent requirement of common-law arson because we have no other method of suggesting corrections to misstatements in the standard instruction.
Many courts and commentators have criticized the general intent/specific intent distinction as confusing and unworkable. See People v Langworthy, 416 Mich 630, 639-640, 653; 331 NW2d 171 (1982), and authorities cited therein. Nonetheless, this Court in Langworthy declined to abolish or modify the longstanding dichotomy. Id., pp 641, 653. We likewise refuse to abandon a concept that is so deeply rooted in our state’s criminal jurisprudence.
Foreign authorities also persuade us that common-law arson is a general intent crime that requires proof of either an intentional or a wanton act. See, e.g., State v Scott, 118 Ariz 383, 385; 576 P2d 1383 (Ariz App, 1978); United States v Acevedo-Velez, supra; DeBettencourt v State, 48 Md App 522, 525; 428 A2d 479 (1981); Linehan v State, 442 So 2d 244 (Fla App, 1983); State v Nelson, 17 Wash App 66, 69; 561 P2d 1093 (1977) (“At common law, specific intent to bum a particular thing or to injure a particular person was unnecessary, it being sufficient to show that there was a general malice or intent to bum some structure”); Mai v People, 224 Ill 414; 79 NE 633 (1906); State v Doyon, 416 A2d 130, 135 (RI, 1980) (“We adhere, therefore, to the common-law mandate that the mental state for the crime of arson requires only that the defendant intended to do the proscribed act, that it was done unlawfully, and that it was not done inadvertently”); People v Tanner, 95 Cal App 3d 948; 157 Cal Rptr 465 (1979).

=== CASE 9737705 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:37.449106+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
I concur with the majority’s determination that the defendant’s felony-murder convictions should be reinstated. Further, I agree with the majority that arson is a general intent crime rather than a specific intent crime, and that CJI2d 31.2(4) is misleading. I write separately, however, because I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that there was *411sufficient evidence to prove that the defendant intended to ignite the fumes in his apartment.
When faced with a sufficiency of the evidence challenge, an appellate court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, and determine whether a rational trier of fact could have found that the essential elements of the crime were proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Jaffray, 445 Mich 287, 296; 519 NW2d 108 (1994). In felony-murder cases, courts consider both whether murder has been committed and whether an underlying, enumerated felony has been committed. See, generally, People v Aaron, 409 Mich 672; 299 NW2d 304 (1980). I agree with the majority that, in order to convict a defendant of felony murder, it must be shown that (1) he killed a human being, (2) that he acted with the intent to kill, the intent to inflict great bodily harm, or with a wanton and wilful disregard of the likelihood that the natural tendency of his behavior is to cause death or great bodily harm, and (3) that the killing occurred while the defendant was committing, attempting to commit,. or assisting with the commission of an underlying felony. Ante at 401-402.
The first element in a felony-murder charge is a “ ‘killing of a human being.’ ” Id. at 401. Here, it is undisputed that two human beings were killed. The second element of a felony-murder charge is whether the defendant possessed the requisite mens rea for murder. I would hold that the defendant possessed the requisite mens rea because, by filling his apartment with gas fumes, he created a very high risk of death or great bodily harm with the knowledge that death or great bodily harm was the result.
*412The defendant argues that, even if it can be shown that he allowed gas fumes to fill his apartment, he was attempting only to commit suicide. As such, he did not possess the requisite intent for the crime of murder. I disagree. The defendant’s experiences working in an appliance store provided him with knowledge about the dangerous properties of gas fumes. Further, the defendant left a note on the door advising his former girlfriend not to turn on any switches. Arguably, the defendant’s note illustrates an attempt to prevent an explosion. However, even under such an assumption, the note also illustrates the defendant’s knowledge that there was a high risk of a dangerous explosion that could cause death or great bodily harm. When taken in a light most favorable to the prosecution, the evidence supports a rational finding by the trier of fact that the defendant possessed the mens rea necessary for murder. Therefore, it becomes necessary to examine whether the defendant committed a statutorily enumerated underlying felony.
The underlying felony in the present case is arson. I agree with the majority that this Court must examine the common-law definition of arson in order to resolve the sufficiency challenge. Thus, we are bound to determine whether the defendant wilfully or maliciously and voluntarily burned the dwelling house of another. People v Reeves, 448 Mich 1, 3-4; 528 NW2d 160 (1995). I further agree with the majority that the mens rea necessary for arson can be established either by proving (1) that the defendant intended to commit the actus reus, or (2) by proving that the defendant intentionally committed an act that created a very high risk of burning a dwelling house. Ante at 409. Michigan law defines malice as “an intent to *413cause the very harm that results or some harm of the same general nature, or an act done in wanton or wilful disregard of the plain and strong likelihood that some such harm will result.” People v Hansen, 368 Mich 344, 350; 118 NW2d 422 (1962). Unlike the majority, however, I would not conclude that the defendant intentionally ignited the fumes in his apartment. Rather, I would hold that the defendant intended to fill his apartment with gas fumes, and that the act of releasing the fumes created a very high risk of harm of burning a dwelling house.
When reviewing the sufficiency challenge in the present case, the Court of Appeals was unpersuaded that the defendant intentionally ignited the gas fumes in his apartment. Instead, the Court opined that, while a jury could have rationally concluded that the defendant purposefully filled his apartment with the gas, the jury could not have rationally concluded that the defendant intended to ignite the fumes. The Court then reversed the defendant’s conviction, holding that the defendant did not possess the specific intent required for the arson underlying the felony-murder charge. Conversely, the majority opines that the Court of Appeals erred by treating arson as a specific intent crime rather than a general intent crime, and by concluding that there was insufficient evidence of intentional ignition. Ante at 395, 398.
I agree with the majority that there was a flaw in the Court of Appeals determination that a specific intent to bum was required. However, I decline to join the majority because our determination that common-law arson is a general intent crime makes it unnecessary to resolve the dispute over whether the defendant intentionally ignited the fumes in his apart*414ment. I agree with the Court of Appeals that, viewed in a light most favorable to the prosecution, the expert testimony established: “(1) that defendant purposefully filled his apartment with natural gas; (2) that the explosion and fire were caused by the ignition of the gas build-up; and (3) that the explosion originated in defendant’s apartment.” Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued October 9, 1998 (Docket No. 196655). When the Court of Appeals conclusions are examined in a general intent framework, the defendant’s convictions must be reinstated. I would conclude that the defendant acted in wanton or wilful disregard of the plain and strong likelihood that the burning of another’s dwelling house was likely to result from his decision to fill his apartment with gas fumes. Because the defendant acted “maliciously and voluntarily,” and because the evidence demonstrates that the defendant committed the underlying arson even if he did not act intentionally, I find it unnecessary to speculate about whether the fumes were intentionally ignited.
Kelly, J., concurred with Cavanagh, J.

=== CASE 9737706 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:38.259676+00 ===

NEAL, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
James T. Campbell appeals the granting of summary judgment against him in his action against Eli Lilly & Company (Lilly), in which he sought damages and reinstatement based upon his discharge by Lilly.1
We affirm.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
The facts most favorable to Campbell, as the non-moving party, reveal the following. Campbell was employed by Lilly, a pharmaceutical manufacturer, as an antibiotic operator in 1953. He became a technical associate in the research section in 1967, which position he maintained until the employment relationship terminated in 1978. *1057From April, 1973, through the remainder of his employment, Campbell worked, at different times, as a technical associate for three separate research teams conducting research on various drugs. Campbell had no written contract of employment with Lilly, and there was no agreement as to a definite term of employment.
On December 2, 1977, Campbell’s attorney, Carl Peters, met with Lilly’s staff counsel. Peters related in substance that Campbell had knowledge of various acts of misconduct on the part of the superiors under whom he was assigned during the 1973-1978 period. Campbell further questioned the safety of some of the drugs and made other accusations. At the close of the meeting it was determined that Lilly would investigate Campbell’s allegations. Campbell was placed on a paid leave of absence pending completion of the investigation.
The investigation was completed by Jan-, uary 9, 1978, on which date a meeting of Campbell, Peters, and Lilly officials was held. At this meeting, Campbell reiterated his allegations of misconduct and contended that his research work saved Lilly some $500,000,000 in future claims against the company. Lilly reported the findings of its investigation and concluded that Campbell’s accusations were totally false. Campbell was placed on an unpaid leave of absence.
Campbell was subsequently informed that there was no job for him at Lilly and on March 21, 1978, he advised Lilly that he had quit. Campbell was fully paid for the work he had done and received all company benefits that had accrued to him, including pension.
ISSUES
Campbell presents six issues for review essentially as follows:
I. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by allowing Lilly 122 days in which to file a responsive pleading;
II. Whether the trial court erred in limiting discovery;
III. Whether the trial court was imper-missibly biased and prejudiced;
IV. Whether the cumulative effect of the alleged errors asserted in Issues I — III denied Campbell his rights to fair proceedings;
V. Whether a cognizable claim is stated by a former at will employee who claims he was discharged in retaliation for having reported to company officials serious allegations of misconduct on the part of his superiors.
VI. Whether the trial court erred in allegedly determining an issue of material fact regarding the existence of a covenant of employment.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
The principles we apply in reviewing a summary judgment are familiar. Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 56(C) states in part that:
“The judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, answer to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits and testimony, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.”
Our task on review, therefore, is to determine whether there is any genuine issue of material fact and whether the law was correctly applied. Smith v. P. & B. Corporation, (1979) Ind.App., 386 N.E.2d 1232. In so determining the existence of a genuine issue of material fact, we accept as true all facts set forth by the party opposing the motion and resolve all doubts against the party who moved for summary judgment. Johnson v. Motors Dispatch, Inc., (1977) Ind.App., 360 N.E.2d 224; St. Joseph Bank & Trust Company of South Bend v. The Wackenhut Corporation, (1976) Ind.App., 352 N.E.2d 842.
Issue I. Granting enlargement of time
Campbell contends the trial court abused its discretion by allowing Lilly some 122 days to file its responsive pleading to his complaint. Campbell claims that the effect of the enlargements allowed Lilly *1058was to “unduly delay the cause and frustrate the appellant’s reasonable efforts to secure a just determination of his action.”
Lilly contends that it received automatic enlargement of time in which to respond under Local Rule 5(H) of the Marion Circuit and Superior Courts. Prior to the expiration of the enlarged period, Campbell filed an amended complaint adding a new cause of action. Lilly then filed a motion for enlargement of time in response to the filing of the amended complaint. Lilly sought one further enlargement to accommodate the filing and signing of Campbell’s deposition.
Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 6 provides the trial court with discretion to permit enlargements of time for pleadings. Only an abuse of that discretion will allow this court to reverse the decision in Campbell’s favor. Snyder v. Tell City Clinic, (1979) Ind.App., 391 N.E.2d 623. The record shows that a good portion of the delay was occasioned by Campbell’s filing the amended complaint and his reluctance to sign his own deposition. Further delay was attributed to the reporter who transcribed the deposition. Campbell has failed to demonstrate any prejudice whatever. There was no abuse of discretion.
Issue II. Discovery
Campbell argues that the trial court abused its discretion in limiting discovery. In particular, Campbell complains that the trial court failed to compel Lilly to answer certain interrogatories. Additionally, Campbell asserts that the trial court failed to enter a ruling on Lilly’s motion to limit discovery. Campbell urges that the trial court’s action prevented him from pursuing his case in an “orderly, full fashion,” and that the trial court, in ruling on Lilly’s motion for summary judgment before discovery had been completed, acted contrary to the policy underlying summary judgment.
In ruling on issues of discovery, the trial court exercises its judicial discretion; this court will interfere only if the trial court has abused its discretion. Geib v. Estate of Geib, (1979) Ind.App., 395 N.E.2d 336.
In the case at bar, Lilly successfully sought to limit discovery, temporarily, to matters relevant to the issues raised by its motion for summary judgment.
At a pretrial conference, the trial court directed the parties to limit discovery, temporarily, to matters relevant to the disposition of Lilly’s motion for summary judgment. This consisted of restricting Campbell’s discovery to the deposition of the two Lilly employees, Dr. Tuttle and Mr. Taylor, who were identified by Campbell as having knowledge of issues relevant to the motion. Indeed, Campbell failed to depose these witnesses prior to the hearing on the summary judgment motion, and declined to take advantage of the court’s reasonable offer to delay hearing on the motion until Campbell took those depositions. Campbell does not set forth in his brief with any specificity whatever the nature of the ihterrogatories he sought to be answered by Lilly. Lilly characterizes these interrogatories as lengthy and convoluted and relating matters not relevant to the summary judgment motion.
We find no abuse of discretion. Lilly directs us to the case of Newton v. Yates, (1976) Ind.App., 353 N.E.2d 485, wherein this court affirmed the delaying of discovery relating to punitive damages, pending determination of other issues, stating:
“The ‘principle of judicial parsimony’ allows a court to delay or suspend discovery on one issue if the outcome of another issue, to be tried first, will be dispositive of the entire case.” (Citations omitted.)
353 N.E.2d at 491.
This principle was followed, and prudently so, in the case at bar.
Issue III. Trial court bias
In this issue, Campbell claims that he was denied his due process right to a fair proceeding and that the trial judge demonstrated bias, prejudice, and hostility to Campbell. In his brief, he points to several examples of alleged bias on the part of the trial court consisting of statements made by *1059the trial judge at the summary judgment hearing.
We have carefully examined the specific references cited by Campbell. Regarding the court’s expressions of alleged antipathy toward the Food and Drug Administration, and the federal bureaucracy in general, we see nothing indicating an unfair predisposition on the part of the judge to Campbell’s case. Campbell claims the trial judge erroneously rejected relevant evidence at the hearing. Campbell made no objection; indeed, his counsel stated that he understood the trial court’s reasoning. Campbell points to the judge’s remark in reference to the personnel manual that, “I am not about to read Lilly’s gingerbread book. It doesn’t apply to this particular case.” While this characterization of the manual is interesting, nevertheless the determination of its inapplicability to the case is correct. See discussion of Issue VI, infra. Campbell notes that the judge characterized Counts I, II, and III of the complaint as “hogwash.” We disagree that this expression tends to show prejudice. It is a familiar and colloquial manner of saying that the judge found those counts of the complaint as being without merit, and ultimately ruled accordingly.
Finally, Campbell alludes to other remarks contended to reflect bias, prejudice and hostility. We feel that expressions of personal opinion are better left unsaid, but note that this, was a hearing on a pretrial motion and, of course, no jury was present or had even been assembled. In the context of the proceedings, the remarks consisted of the judge’s musings about issues irrelevant to the trial. It is axiomatic that for alleged prejudice and hostility to be reversible, some harm must be shown. Inasmuch as we affirm the trial court’s application of the law to this case, and since no factual dispute needed to be resolved by the court that could possibly have been tainted by prejudice, we fail to see any harm demonstrated.
Issue IV. Cumulative error
Campbell contends that the cumulative effect of the alleged irregularities in Issues I — III denied him a fair or meaningful hearing on his complaint. Since we found no error to have been shown in those issues it follows, a fortiori, that no error is shown here.
Issue V. Retaliatory discharge
This is the heart of the appeal. Campbell claims the trial court erred in determining that in complaining to Lilly officials about its products and personnel, he was not exercising a right conferred upon him by a statute or protected by statute. The trial court found that his claim of retaliatory discharge does not state a valid claim which qualifies as an exception to the employment at will doctrine recognized by the Supreme Court of Indiana. The court further found that there is no recognized public policy restricting the right of an employer to discharge an at will employee who charges the employer with practices allegedly contrary to the federal drug regulatory scheme and the regulations issued thereunder. Absent the existence of a statutorily conferred right, and Campbell’s alleged exercise of that right, the court concluded, Campbell, in alleging that Lilly’s termination of his employment violated general public policy, failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted.
Campbell’s position may be summarized in the following way: The principal responsibility is imposed upon the manufacturer to develop the data upon which the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) reviews, analyzes, classifies and finally determines the suitability for sale of a particular drug. The sale of drugs which have not attained approval by the FDA may be a basis for criminal prosecution. The scheme requires the full cooperation of the manufacturer in reporting all relevant data, particularly that which may identify adverse reactions occasioned by the administration of the drug. Given that the responsibility is placed upon the manufacturer to so report, it follows that the responsibility is ultimately borne by the employees of the manufacturer. If an employee reports misconduct of his superiors which al*1060legedly impairs the integrity of that data, important public policy would be frustrated if the employee is discharged in retaliation for so reporting, presuming the deterrent effect such discharge would have upon other employees in carrying out their responsibilities.
Resolution of this issue requires an examination of the traditional at will employment doctrine and an exception to that doctrine recently recognized in Indiana. It was early stated:
“The rule seems to be well settled, by the great weight of authority, that where, by the terms of a contract, whether it be written or verbal, where the contract is one for employment, and by its terms, the tenure of service cannot be determined, such contract is one at will, and may be terminated at any time, at the election of either party.”
Speeder Cycle Company v. Teeter, (1897) 18 Ind.App. 474, 477, 48 N.E. 595.
The rule has been confirmed in Indiana over the years. See Martin v. Platt, (1979) Ind.App., 386 N.E.2d 1026; Shaw v. S. S. Kresge Company, (1975) 167 Ind.App. 1, 328 N.E.2d 775; Montgomery Ward & Co. v. Guignet, (1942) 112 Ind.App. 661, 45 N.E.2d 337; Accord Davis v. Davis, (1926) 197 Ind. 386, 151 N.E. 134. See also Pearson v. Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company, (7th Cir.1964) 332 F.2d 439, cert. denied 379 U.S. 914, 85 S.Ct. 262, 13 L.Ed.2d 185 (applying Indiana law).
The employment at will doctrine has generally been followed, subject to contractual arid statutory limitations, throughout the jurisdictions. 9 S. Williston, Contracts § 1017 (3d ed. 1967); Restatement (Second) of Agency § 442 (1958); 56 C.J.S. Master and Servant § 31; 53 Am.Jur.2d Master and Servant § 43; Annotation: Employee’s Arbitrary Dismissal as Breach of Employment Contract Terminable at Will, 62 A.L.R.3d 271. “Although the employment at will rule has been almost uniformly criticised ... it has been widely followed.” Fortune v. National Cash Register Company, (1977) 373 Mass. 96, 364 N.E.2d 1251, 1255. Indeed, there is no paucity of commentary critical of the rule. See, e. g., Blades, Employment at Will vs. Individual Freedom: on Limiting the Abusive Exercise of Employer Power, 67 Colum.L.Rev. 1404 (1967).
Our Supreme Court most recently considered the employment at will doctrine in Frampton v. Central Indiana Gas Company, (1973) 260 Ind. 249, 297 N.E.2d 425. The issue in that case was whether a cognizable claim was stated by a former at will employee who alleged she was discharged in retaliation for having submitted a workmen’s compensation claim against her former employer. The court held that a cause of action would lie, thereby recognizing an exception to the traditional at will employment rule.
In reaching its decision, the court examined the Indiana workmen’s compensation legislation and found that it was designed to effectuate public policy by bestowing upon an employee the right to receive compensation for certain employment-related injuries, and imposing upon the employer the concomitant duty to compensate, through insurance, the injured employee. The public policy underlying the scheme was to shift the economic burden for employment-related injuries from the employee to the employer. The court recognized that, as a practical matter, injured employees might be reluctant to file deserving claims if such action would jeopardize their continued employment, and noted that the statute 2 states:
“ ‘No contract or agreement, written or implied, no rule, regulation or other device shall, in any manner, operate to relieve any employer in whole or in part of any obligation created by this act.’ (our emphasis)”
260 Ind. at 252, 297 N.E.2d at 428. The court found the threat of discharge to be a “device” under the statute, and hence in clear contravention of public policy.
In conclusion, the court stated:
*1061“We agree with the Court of Appeals that, under ordinary circumstances, an employee at will may be discharged without cause. However, when an employee is discharged solely for exercising a statutorily conferred right an exception to the general rule must be recognized.”
260 Ind. at 253, 297 N.E.2d at 429.
The case of Martin, supra, is particularly apposite here. In that case, two former at will employees alleged they were discharged in retaliation for having reported to a company official that their immediate superior had solicited and received illegal “kickbacks” from company suppliers. The Third District of this court refused to recognize a cause of action where the alleged reason for the discharge is contrary to general public policy, stating: “Normally, of course, the determination of what constitutes public policy, or which of competing public policies should be given precedence, is a function of the legislature.” 386 N.E.2d at 1028.
Campbell further contends that he was under a duty to communicate to his superiors the allegedly hazardous nature of certain of Lilly’s products. We recognize, as did the court in Martin, that several courts have recognized a cause of action for a former at will employee who alleged his discharge was in retaliation for his having fulfilled a statutorily imposed duty. See e. g. Nees v. Hocks, (1975) 272 Or. 210, 536 P.2d 512 (statutory obligation to perform jury service); Petermann v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters, (1959) 174 Cal. App.2d 184, 344 P.2d 25 (refusal to commit perjury).
We conclude from Frampton that in order to fall within a recognized exception to the employment at will rule, a plaintiff must demonstrate that he was discharged in retaliation for either having exercised a statutorily conferred personal right or having fulfilled a statutorily imposed duty in order to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. We have examined closely the materials submitted by the parties, and the authorities cited therein, and fail to discern that Campbell has stated such a claim under any resolution of the facts. He has nowhere demonstrated a statutory source for the alleged right he claims to have exercised, nor has he demonstrated a statutory source for the duty he claims to have fulfilled. We do not recognize the general public policy exception urged by Campbell to the venerable at will employment doctrine we reconfirm today.
The rationale for our result was stated in Percival v. General Motors Corporation, (8th Cir. 1976) 539 F.2d 1126. There, a complaint was dismissed which alleged an employee was discharged,
“... as a result of a conspiracy among his fellow executives to force him out of his'employment because of his age and because he had legitimately complained about certain allegedly deceptive practices of General Motors, had refused to give the government false information although urged to do [so] by colleagues ’and superiors, and had, on the contrary, undertaken to correct certain alleged misrepresentations made to the government by the defendant?’
539 F.2d at 1128. The federal court refused to predict that Michigan law would recognize the new theory that a discharge is actionable.if it is motivated by the fact that the employee did something that public policy encourages or that he refused to do something that public policy forbids. This being, essentially, the position taken by Campbell, we think the following comment by the Percival court is appropriate:
“It may be conceded to plaintiff that there are strong public policy arguments that can be made in support of the theory which he invokes; there are also strong policy arguments that can be made against it. It should be kept in mind that as far as an employment relationship is concerned, an employer as well as an employee has rights; and it should also be kept in mind that a large corporate employer such as General Motors, except to the extent limited by statute or contractual obligations, must be accorded *1062wide latitude in determining whom it will employ and retain in employment. ..
539 F.2d at 1130.
There was no error in the trial court’s judgment.
Issue VI. Question of fact
In his final issue, Campbell claims that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for Lilly, contending that a genuine issue exists as to his allegation that Lilly:
“... violated a covenant of the conditions of appellant’s employment that it would not terminate that employment for reporting, attempting to report or discuss negligent acts and practices of the appel-lee when such acts could and would have presented a substantial risk of danger to the health and safety of the public, such covenant being founded upon considerations of public policy and the manifest representations of the appellee.”
Campbell claims that the trial court improperly determined the non-existence of the covenant, an alleged question of fact. In his brief, Campbell grounds the presence of this alleged covenant upon three footings.
Campbell states the proposition that the alleged covenant is founded upon public policy but has cited no authority in contract law supporting that assertion. We have considered, and rejected, Campbell’s theory that a general public policy exception to the at will employment rule exists to support his cause of action for retaliatory discharge sounding in tort, and we find no similar public policy to support his contention that such implies a covenant in his employment agreement.
Campbell claims he was denied procedural due process. Although he has waived consideration of this contention by raising it for the first time on appeal (A.P. 8.3(A)(7)) we nonetheless note that the argument is without merit. He has not demonstrated the existence of a property interest protected by state law under statute, ordinance, or contract, as is required. McQueeney v. Glenn, (1980) Ind.App., 400 N.E.2d 806.
Finally, Campbell claims that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for Lilly, because the provisions of the personnel manual which were submitted to the court created a genuine issue of material fact as to the existence of the alleged covenant.
In Shaw, supra, the plaintiff, an at will employee, contended that an employee’s handbook issued by his employer, Kresge, set out the conditions of employment which both parties agreed to follow, and as such constituted a part of the contract of employment. The plaintiff alleged that his discharge was not effected in accordance with the disciplinary procedure outlined in the handbook, and as such constituted a breach of his employment contract. Kresge’s motion for summary judgment was sustained. The following statement by Judge Hoffman is appropriate to the case-at bar:
“Even assuming, arguendo, that the handbook relied upon by appellant constituted a part of the contract, in the absence of a promise on the part of the employer that the employment should continue for a period of time that is either definite or capable of determination, the employment relationship is terminable at the will of the employer. See: Pearson v. Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. (7th Cir. 1974), 332 F.2d 439. There being no binding promise on the part of the employee that he would continue in the employment, it must also be regarded as terminable at his discretion as well. For want of mutuality of obligation or consideration, such a contract would be unenforcible [sic] in respect of that which remains executory. See: 1A Corbin, Contracts, § 152 (1963). See also: 1 Corbin, Contracts, § 96 (1963); 3A Corbin, Contracts, § 683 (1960).”
167 Ind.App. at 7, 328 N.E.2d at 781.
Thus, the covenant alleged to have existed by Campbell would be unenforceable even if found to exist. Campbell’s attempt to distinguish Shaw on its *1063facts is unavailing. Here, the trial court in essence determined that the question of the covenant’s existence was not a material issue of fact. An issue of fact is material for purposes of a motion for summary judgment if it bears on the ultimate resolution of relevant issues. Stuteville v. Downing, (1979) Ind.App., 391 N.E.2d 629. Relevant here, assuming the truth of Campbell’s allegation that the.covenant exists, as we must, is the issue of its enforceability. The trial court did not err in determining that the covenant was unenforceable as a matter of law.
The trial court did not err in granting Lilly’s motion for summary judgment in this cause.
Affirmed.
YOUNG, P. J. (participating by designation), concurs.
RATLIFF, J., concurs in part, dissents in part, and concurs in result with opinion.
. We note at the outset that Campbell, in preparing his appeal, ignored the clear mandate of Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(4) by failing to include in his statement of the case a brief indication of the nature of the case and a verbatim statement of the judgment. Campbell additionally failed to include a summary of argument, as required by A.R. 8.3(A)(6). Although this is careless appellate practice, the inadequacies are not so substantial as to require summary affirmance of the trial court’s judgment, and we shall consider this appeal on the merits.
. Ind. Code 22-3-2-15.

=== CASE 9737707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:38.266902+00 ===

RATLIFF, Judge,
concurring in part, dissenting in part, and concurring in result.
Of the six issues presented in this appeal, I concur in the majority’s resolution of Issues I, II, III, IV, and VI. I find myself in disagreement with the majority opinion on Issue V, that of retaliatory discharge, the issue which the majority says is the heart of the appeal. For reasons hereinafter stated, I believe the “public policy exception” to the common law employment at will doctrine is available, in a proper ease, to protect the employee who finds himself the victim of retaliatory discharge for activities which have been referred to in some cases and by some writers as “whistle blowing.” The exception would grant a right of action for damages to the responsible whistle blower so discharged.
It is true Indiana has followed the traditional common law rule that an employment for an indefinite term not protected either by statute or collective bargaining agreement is terminable at the will of either employer or employee. Martin v. Platt, (1979) Ind.App., 386 N.E.2d 1026; Shaw v. S. S. Kresge Co., (1975) 167 Ind.App. 1, 328 N.E.2d 775, trans. den. Indeed, such is the rule not only in Indiana but also is the general rule. Pierce v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., (1980) 84 N.J. 58, 417 A.2d 505; Tameny v. Atlantic Richfield Co., (1980) 164 Cal.Rptr. 839, 610 P.2d 1330; Harless v. First Nat. Bank in Fairmont, (W.Va.1978) 246 S.E.2d 270; Percival v. General Motors Corp., (8th Cir. 1976) 539 F.2d 1126.
Application of the common law majority rule permits the discharge of an at will employee at any time, with or without reason, and even when done maliciously. Recognition of the harsh results oft-times produced by rigid adherence to the traditional common law employment at will doctrine has given birth to an emerging doctrine generally designated as the “public policy exception” to the rule. Courts and writers have noted that the common law rule has its roots in nineteenth century legal formalism and laissez-faire labor policies which are not always valid in modern society. Pierce v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., supra; Note: Protecting at Will Employees Against Wrongful Discharge: The Duty to Terminate Only in Good Faith, 93 Harv.L. Rev. 1816, 1824-28 (1980); Comment: Protecting the Private Sector at Will Employee Who “Blows the Whistle”: A Cause of Action Based Upon Determinants of Public Policy, 1977 Wis.L.Rev. 777, 782-83 (1977). Thus, courts have begun to place limitations upon the free and unfettered common law right of an employer to terminate at will an employee where that termination runs counter to some compelling public policy. As stated by the Supreme Court of West Virginia in Harless, supra:
“However, the general rule does not dispose of the issue in this case. There is a growing trend that recognizes that an employer may subject himself to liability if he fires an employee who is employed at will if the employee can show the firing was motivated by an intention to contravene some substantial public policy.”
246 S.E.2d at 273.
The New Jersey Supreme Court in Pierce, supra, said:
*1064“Commentators have questioned the compatibility of the traditional at will doctrine with the realities of modern economics and employment practices. [Citations omitted] .. . [M]any states have recognized the need to protect employees who are not parties to a collective bargaining agreement or other contract from abusive practices by the employer.
“Recently those states have recognized a common law cause of action for employees at will who were discharged for reasons that were in some way ‘wrongful’. ... Nearly all jurisdictions link the success of the wrongfully] discharged employee’s action to proof that the discharge violated public policy.” (Our insertion.)
417 A.2d at 509.
In Tameny, supra, the California Supreme Court stated:
“Over the past several decades, however, judicial authorities in California and throughout the United States have established the rule that under both common law and the statute [Labor Code 2922] an employee does not enjoy an absolute or totally unfettered right to discharge even an- at-will employee. In a series of cases arising out of a variety of factual settings in which a discharge clearly violated an express statutory objective or undermined a firmly established principle of public policy, courts have recognized that an employer’s traditional broad authority to discharge an at-will employee ‘may be limited by statute ... or by considerations of public policy.’ [Citations omitted.]” (Our insertion.)
610 P.2d at 1332-33.
The “public policy exception” has been created in recent years by a few courts to afford some means of protection to an at will employee whose discharge seriously undermines some compelling public policy.1 The method of protection has been to grant a cause of action for damages to the wronged employee.2
The Indiana Supreme Court has recognized the “public policy exception” in the landmark case of Frampton v. Central Indiana Gas Co., (1973) 260 Ind. 249, 297 N.E.2d 425. In that case, Frampton, an at will employee, contended she was discharged in retaliation because she exercised her statutory right to pursue a workmen’s compensation claim against her employer. The employer defended on the basis of the traditional common law employment at will doctrine asserting its absolute right to discharge Frampton even in, retaliation, although not admitting such questionable conduct. Justice Hunter, speaking for our Supreme Court, wrote:
“In summary, we hold that an employee who alleges he or she was retaliatorily discharged for filing a claim pursuant to the Indiana Workmen’s Compensation Act . . . has stated a claim upon which relief can be granted. We further hold that such a discharge would constitute an intentional, wrongful act on the part of the employer for which the injured employee is entitled to be fully compensated in damages. Of course, the issue of retaliation should be a question for the trier of fact.” 260 Ind. at 253, 297 N.E.2d at 429.
In Frampton, the court agreed that under ordinary circumstances, an employee at will may be discharged without cause. “However, when an employee is discharged solely for exercising a statutorily conferred right an exception to the general rule must be recognized.” 260 Ind. at 253, 297 N.E.2d at 429.
The Michigan Supreme Court has likewise recognized an exception to the common law rule granting a right of action against the employer to an at will employee discharged in retaliation for filing a workmen’s compensation claim. Sventko v. Kroger Co., (1976) 69 Mich.App. 644, 245 N.W.2d 151. A similar holding is found in Kelsay v. Motorola, Inc., (1978) 74 Ill.2d 172, 23 Ill.Dec. 559, 384 N.E.2d 353.
*1065Courts in other jurisdictions have extended the “public policy exception” to situations other than those in which an employee at will was terminated in retaliation for exercising a statutorily guaranteed personal right of the employee. Thus, in Petermann v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters, (1959) 174 Cal.App.2d 184, 344 P.2d 25, an employee discharged for refusal to give false testimony to a legislative committee was granted a right of action against his employer. The Petermann court reasoned that a directive to commit perjury, a criminal offense, contravened public policy; therefore, discharging the employee for his refusal to commit perjury was “obnoxious to the interests of the state and contrary to public policy and sound morality.” 344 P.2d at 27. Reuther v. Fowler & Williams, Inc., (1978) 255 Pa.Super. 28, 386 A.2d 119, recognized the existence of a cause of action for damages when an employee is discharged for having served jury duty. Nees v. Hocks, (1975) 272 Or. 210, 536 P.2d 512, is another ease involving retaliatory dismissal for jury service. Monge v. Beebe Rubber Co., (1974) 114 N.H. 130, 316 A.2d 549, applied the “public policy exception” to a claim by a female employee of retaliatory dismissal for refusal to go out with her foreman. Tameny v. Atlantic Richfield Co., supra, held that an employee who allegedly was fired because of his refusal to participate in an illegal gasoline price fixing scheme could maintain a tort action for damages against his former employer. Harless v. First Nat. Bank in Fairmont, supra, upheld a bank employee’s right to maintain an action for damages based upon alleged discharge in retaliation for bringing to the attention of his superiors alleged violations of consumer credit legislation and seeking to promote compliance with such laws.
These cases, and others, demonstrate three categories into which “public policy exception” cases fall: (1) where “a particular statute exists which gives a right to the discharged employee but not a corresponding personal remedy”; (2) where “a statute defines a public policy which the employer has breached, but .. . fails to express either a right or a remedy for the discharged employee”; and (3) where there is no statutory public policy, but a judicially declared public policy exists. 1977 Wis.L.Rev. 777, 787-88. In this third situation, the court is faced with the task of defining the policy and fashioning the remedy. Id. at 788.
The case before us in this appeal appears to be within the second category, that is, a statutorily defined public policy, not for the special benefit of the employee, but for the benefit of the general public. Congress has enacted the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) and created the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to regulate the drug industry in the United States. The FDA in turn has promulgated specific regulations to carry out the act. The purpose of such legislation and regulations is to ensure that all drugs and medications made available to the general public are reasonably safe. Here, Campbell contends his discharge was retaliatory because he reported to his superiors what he believed to be serious violations of the federally mandated regulatory scheme pertaining to drugs. Campbell asserts the declared public policy of the United States Congress pertaining to the drug industry required him to report such violations, and that Lilly’s action in discharging him, although his employment was at will, contravenes that clear public policy. Thus, Campbell reasons he is squarely within the “public policy exception.” He further describes himself as a “whistle-blower” and argues that public policy and the general welfare demand the extension of some measure of protection to the so-called whistle-blower who, responding to his public duty arising out of that public policy, reports violations only to find himself out of a job. It is this precise predicament which is the subject of the Comment in 1977 Wis.L.Rev. 777. This Comment urges extension of the “public policy exception” to the responsible whistle-blower.3 Indeed, the Harless case spe*1066cifically deals with the case of the whistle-' blower. In Harless the court stated that the West Virginia Consumer Credit and Protection Act represented a comprehensive effort by the legislature to protect consumers and persons obtaining credit. The Court went on to say:
“We have no hesitation in stating that the Legislature intended to establish a clear and unequivocal public policy that consumers of credit covered by the Act were to be given protection. Such manifest public policy should not be frustrated by a holding that an employee of a lending institution covered by the Act, who seeks to ensure that compliance is being made with the Act, can be discharged without being furnished a cause of action for such discharge.” 246 S.W.2d at 276.
In Pierce v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., supra, the New Jersey Supreme Court held that an employee has a cause of action for wrongful discharge when the discharge is contrary to a clear mandate of public policy. Pierce further states that the wrongfully discharged employee may maintain a cause of action in contract or tort or both.4 The New Jersey court, however, found that Dr. Pierce was not discharged for reasons viola-tive of public policy, but rather because of her own personal opinions which differed from those of her employer.
In Martin v. Platt, supra, the Third District of this court rejected the contention that the “public policy exception” applied to employees allegedly discharged for reporting to a superior that their immediate superior was soliciting and receiving “kickbacks.” The opinion in Martin restricted application of the Frampton rule to cases where the employee was discharged in retaliation for having exercised a statutorily conferred personal right (e. g., a workmen’s compensation claim). The Martin court also alluded to cases, such as Nees and Petermann, where the employee was discharged for complying with a statutory duty, and presumably such reference was with approval. Martin, however, declined to declare unlawful the discharge of an employee at will where the reason for the discharge is contrary to general public policy, saying that the adoption of a “public policy exception” rule in such cases should be left to the legislature. In this assessment, I disagree. Courts have the capability to carve out exceptions to common law rules where strict adherence to such rule creates harsh and unjust results. The New Jersey Supreme Court said in Pierce at 417 A.2d 511:
“This Court has long recognized the capacity of the common law to develop and adapt to current needs. [Citations omitted.] The interests of employees, employers, and the public lead to the conclusion that the common law of New Jersey should limit the right of an employer to fire an employee at will.” (Our insertion.)
The writer of the Note on 93 Harv.L.Rev. 1816, at 1838 says:
“Courts possess the legitimate heritage of common law innovation that develops new principles to accommodate changing values, and are therefore an appropriate forum for the creation of job security rights. Because courts have considerable experience with similar employment relations problems, they possess sufficient expertise to resolve wrongful discharge disputes. Thus, courts need not await legislative initiative to effect doctrinal change in the employment at will area. Courts themselves created the at will rule; it is therefore entirely appropriate that they now take the lead in modifying it.'. . . ” (Footnotes omitted.)
I do not seek to establish by the judicial process a rule permitting only “good faith” discharges of at will employees as is advocated in the 93 Harv.L.Rev. 1816 Note. *1067Nor do I accept the rationale that there is an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing limiting the right of termination existing in the employment at will relationship as found by the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in Fortune v. National Cash Register Co., (1977) 373 Mass. 96, 364 N.E.2d 1251. Rather, I would not so strictly limit the Frampton rule as did the Third District in Martin v. Platt, supra. Instead, I would extend the protection of the “public policy exception” to grant a right of action for damages to any employee at will whose wrongful and retaliatory discharge contravenes clearly established public policy. Further, I would grant such protection in all cases where the firing was obnoxious to such clearly declared or established public policy including all three categories previously mentioned. In my view, if the discharged employee could establish that he was dismissed in retaliation for the exercise of any right or duty granted or required by such strong public policy, he should recover damages.
Extension of the “public policy exception” to protect the so-called “responsible whistle-blower” is especially appropriate. A conscientious employee, albeit an employee at will, who, motivated by a sincere desire to further a clear and compelling public policy, either statutorily or judicially declared, calls to the attention of his employer or appropriate authorities facts revealing actual violations of such policy for the purpose of carrying out that clear public policy should not be subjected to retaliatory discharge without being provided with a remedy. The appropriate remedy, in my view, as supported by the cases and commentary cited herein, is a tort action for damages.5 Giving such a right of action for damages would serve as a deterrent to retaliatory discharge and would promote the very same strong and compelling public policy which the retaliatory discharge would violate. At the same time, in the case of the “whistle-blower,” limiting the right of action to the “responsible whistle-blower” serves to protect the employer from frivolous action based upon groundless claims motivated by harassment for personal gain or publicity. However, the need to extend such protection to the “responsible whistle-blower” is real. Neither crystal ball nor prophetic power is required in order to discern that if such a whistle-blower may be retaliatorily discharged without recourse, the intimidating effect upon other employees will ensure that the first whistle-blower will also be the last.
Therefore, it seems particularly appropriate in a case involving a matter of such great concern to,the general public as the development, manufacture, and distribution of drugs to extend the protection of the “public policy exception” to the at will employee wrongfully discharged contrary to the clear mandate of public policy. The fact that Congress has enacted comprehensive legislation regulating the drug industry and that extensive regulations in furtherance of the legislative regulatory scheme have been promulgated establishes the clear and compelling public policy relating to the industry. Consequently, if Campbell presented sufficient facts to raise a genuine issue of fact on the question of whether or not he acted responsibly in calling to the attention of his superiors actual violations of the drug laws, summary judgment should not have been entered against him. In such case, Campbell should have been permitted to proceed to trial, and if he could sustain his burden of proof that his discharge was retaliatory and in contravention of the clear mandate of public policy, he should prevail in an action for damages. The question thus becomes whether Campbell in fact presented a genuine issue of fact concerning his alleged wrongful discharge.
Summary judgment is an appropriate vehicle for disposing of cases expeditiously where legal issues exist and there are no genuine issues of material fact. Podgorny v. Great Central Ins. Co., (1974) 160 Ind.*1068App. 244, 311 N.E.2d 640. “The movant carries the burden of establishing the absence of a factual controversy and the evi-dentiary matters will be construed in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party.” Lee v. Weston, (1980) Ind.App., 402 N.E.2d 23, 24. However, while the burden is upon the party moving for summary judgment to establish that there is no genuine issue of material fact, and all doubts are resolved in favor of the non-moving party, nevertheless, the opposing party must set forth specific facts showing the existence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. Henderlong Lumber Co. v. Zinn, (1980) Ind.App., 406 N.E.2d 310; Lee v. Weston, supra; Walters v. Kellam & Foley, (1977) 172 Ind.App. 205, 360 N.E.2d 199, trans. den. Indiana Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 56(E) provides in part:
“When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials in his pleading, but his response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial... . ”
Here, Lilly filed a motion for summary judgment supported by an affidavit stating facts establishing that Campbell was an employee at will. The affidavit further stated that charges had been made by Campbell which Lilly investigated and found to be groundless. Campbell’s deposition was also submitted as part of the summary judgment hearing. At the hearing, the court permitted additional testimony. Campbell testified at the hearing. The essence of Campbell’s testimony was that the allegations of his complaint were true. This, in my opinion, is nothing more than standing on the mere allegations of his pleading, which, under T.R. 56 and Henderlong Lumber, supra; Lee, supra; and Walters, supra, is insufficient. Further, a review of Campbell’s deposition reveals no specific facts sufficient to give rise to any genuine issue of material fact that Campbell was discharged in retaliation for reporting any violations of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or FDA regulations, or that other Lilly employees engaged in any activity condemned by clear and compelling public policy. Campbell pointed to no specific facts showing any concealment of any testing or data that the drugs to which he refers were hazardous, or to any falsification of any records, or failure to report any test results. In fact, his testimony shows that his tests revealing possible lethal effects of one of the drugs was reported to the FDA and that the drug has never been placed on the market. Also, Campbell’s deposition clearly established as a primary interest of his a desire to be rewarded for allegedly saving Lilly vast sums of money which they would have been compelled to pay in judgments had not his test results revealed the potential hazard of a certain drug.6 Clearly, Campbell has not met the requirements of T.R. 56(E) or of the pronouncements of this court in the Henderlong Lumber, supra; Lee, supra; and Walters, supra; cases. He has not shown the existence of any genuine issue of fact which would bring him within the protection of the “public policy exception” to the employment at will doctrine as that exception should be extended to the “responsible whistle-blower.”
Therefore, although I dissent from the majority view restricting the “public policy exception” to the narrow confines of Frampton as interpreted by Martin v. Platt, supra, I am compelled to concur in the result reached by the majority. My concurrence, however, is based upon the opinion that Campbell did not show the existence of a genuine issue for trial, thus summary judgment was properly entered against him.
. See Comment: 1977 Wis.L.Rev. 777 at 786-99 for an excellent treatment of the development of the “public policy exception” and defining the parameters of the exception.
. Note: 93 Harv.L.Rev. 1816 at 1822. The “public policy exception” is discussed at 1822-24 of this note.
. See 1977 Wis.L.Rev. at 778, fn. 10 relative to differentiation between a “responsible” whistle-blower and an “irresponsible” one. An “irresponsible” whistle-blower is one who seeks *1066to embarrass his employer by groundless accusations for his own personal motives.
. In Tameny, the California Supreme Court held such action to be in tort. Harless also says the action is in tort. The language from Frampton, previously quoted in this opinion seems to sound in tort. The Note in 93 Harv.L. Rev. 1816 at 1843 suggests the tort theory to be preferable.
. Campbell’s demand for reinstatement would not be within the remedy so provided. The action for damages would be the only remedy.
. Campbell contended Lilly had saved five hundred million dollars it would have had to pay in settlement of death claims but for his discoveries. He suggested many times that he was due a substantial reward, two hundred million dollars being suggested in his complaint.

=== CASE 2211734 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:10.927551+00 ===

244 Cal.App.2d 565 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
RICHARD PEREZ MORAGA, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 11439.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Aug. 31, 1966.
Gilbert F. Nelson, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Edward P. O'Brien, Jackson L. Smith and Robert Shuken, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *567
KINGSLEY, J.
In an indictment, defendant and a codefendant were charged in two counts with violation of section 11531 of the Health and Safety Code. Defendant was arraigned in superior court; a motion to set aside the indictment under section 995 of the Penal Code was made, continued, and later withdrawn. Defendant pled not guilty to both counts. After a trial by jury, a verdict of guilty as to count I was returned; a not guilty verdict was returned on count II. The court denied probation and ordered that defendant be committed to the Youth Authority. Defendant appeals.
[1a] Undercover narcotics agent, Edward Noriega, in the presence of Freddy Bustillo, a paid informer, had a conversation with defendant while standing in front of a barber shop. The officer asked defendant if he had any marijuana. Defendant replied that he did not, but that he knew where he could obtain it. Defendant got into the state vehicle and directed Noriega to drive to the Colonia to locate a person named Connie who always had marijuana on him. Noriega testified that the defendant stated that he would start dealing in marijuana when he finished the barber's exam, and that he had a connection who could obtain marijuana. The officer also stated that defendant had a conversation with Bustillo about "going in with him" on the money so he could obtain one-half pound of marijuana. Defendant directed them to a house on Fir Street and Bustillo went to the door and returned with Wright. Defendant asked if he had any "cans" and Wright said he had only nine "joints" (marijuana cigarettes). Wright agreed to sell Noriega three marijuana cigarettes. Noriega marked them for identification. Defendant bought two cigarettes from Wright and gave one to Bustillo, which was marked for identification.
A police detective covering agent Noriega said he saw Noriega and the defendant drive to the Wright residence. William Arnold, a chemist employed by the State Narcotic Bureau, testified that the three cigarettes turned in for evidence by Noriega contained marijuana.
Defendant testified that, when asked by Noriega if he had marijuana or knew where he could get some, he replied that he did not know. Defendant claimed that it was Bustillo who suggested that they go to the house on Fir Street to find marijuana, and that it was Bustillo who brought Wright out to the car. Defendant joined in an argument about price and the officer bought three cigarettes and Bustillo bought one. *568
Defendant asserts that:
1. The defendant was entrapped.
2. The evidence is insufficient to support the verdict.
3. The instruction to the jury to bring in a verdict was prejudicial error.
I
[2] Defendant's claim of entrapment must fail. If the criminal intent originates in the mind of the accused and the offense is completed, the fact that an opportunity was furnished or that the accused was aided in the commission of the crime is no defense. [3] The claim of entrapment must also fail where the officer uses no more persuasion than is necessary for an ordinary sale, and the accused is ready and willing to make the sale. [4] And, when an accused has a preexisting criminal intent, the fact that, when solicited by a decoy, he committed a crime raises no inference of unlawful entrapment. (People v. Herrera (1959) 171 Cal.App.2d 551 [340 P.2d 690].) In the case at bench the trial court could readily infer from Officer Noriega's testimony that the intent to deal in narcotics existed in the mind of the accused, and that the accused was merely aided in the commission of the crime. [5] An appellate court will not draw an inference contrary to that drawn by the trial court if there is sufficient substantial evidence to support the lower court (People v. Herrera, supra), and Officer Noriega's testimony (discussed in the facts above) provided such substantial evidence.
II
[1b] Defendant's argument that the evidence is insufficient to support the verdict seems to be based on the fact that defendant did not handle the marijuana and did not handle the money, and therefore his behavior was not sufficiently tied in with the commission of the crime. The case of People v. McKinley (1962) 201 Cal.App.2d 256 [19 Cal.Rptr. 898], presented a fact situation that is similar to the facts of the case at bench. In that case, Officer Johnson, working as an undercover narcotics agent, met the defendant in a donut shop. He told the defendant that he was looking for "stuff" (narcotics) and the defendant replied that he knew where he could get some. At another time the defendant directed the officer to drive to a place where the defendant introduced the officer to his codefendant. The codefendant said he had two joints and handed two marijuana cigarettes to the officer. The court held in the McKinley case that the evidence disclosed at the very least that defendant aided and abetted his codefendant in furnishing *569 a marijuana cigarette and therefore he was properly charged and convicted as a principal. In the case at bench, the court accepted Officer Noriega's version of what occurred; and, in accordance with that version, the evidence against defendant Moraga was as strong as the evidence against the defendant in the McKinley case. There is no merit to defendant's claim that the evidence is insufficient to support the verdict.
III
[6] Defendant objects to the following instruction as prejudicial: "The final test of the quality of your service will lie in the verdict which you return to the court, not in the opinions any of you may hold as you retire. Have in mind that you will make a definite contribution to efficient judicial administration if you arrive at a just and proper verdict in this case."
Defendant suggests that such an instruction coerced the jury into reaching a verdict even if they were unable to agree on a verdict.
The language objected to, and which we have quoted above, cannot, however, be read alone. It is a part of a longer instruction (CALJIC No. 4), which was given in this case and which is regularly given to the jury at the close of criminal trials. It is entitled "How Jurors Should Approach Their Task," and, in its full text, reads as follows: "The attitude and conduct of jurors at the outset of their deliberations are a matter of considerable importance. It is rarely productive of good for a juror, upon entering the jury room, to make an emphatic expression of his opinion on the case or to announce a determination to stand for a particular verdict. When one does that at the outset, his sense of pride may be aroused, and he may hesitate to recede from an announced position if shown that it is fallacious. Remember that you are not partisans or advocates, but rather judges. The final test of the quality of your service will lie in the verdict which you return to the court, not in the opinions any of you may hold as you retire. Have in mind that you will make a definite contribution to efficient judicial administration if you arrive at a just and proper verdict in this case. To that end, the court reminds you that in your deliberations in the jury room there can be no triumph excepting the ascertainment and declaration of the truth."
This instruction was immediately preceded by the giving of CALJIC No. 3, entitled "Individual Opinion Required," and *570 which reads as follows: "The People and the defendant both are entitled to the individual opinion of each juror. It is the duty of each of you, after considering all the evidence in the case, to determine, if possible, the question of the guilt or innocence of the defendant. When you have reached a conclusion in that respect, you should not change it merely because one or more or all of your fellow jurors may have come to a different conclusion, or merely to bring about a unanimous verdict. However, each juror should freely and fairly discuss with his fellow jurors the evidence and the deductions to be drawn therefrom. If, after doing so, any juror should be satisfied that a conclusion first reached by him was wrong, he unhesitatingly should abandon that original opinion and render his verdict according to his final decision."
When these two instructions are read together they clearly rebut any idea that the jury was told that their duty was to arrive at a verdict of some sort.
The situation here is far different from that which exists where, after a jury has deliberated for some time, they are recalled and the court seeks to induce a verdict. It was in the latter context that the supplemental instruction,  [fn. 1] discussed and condemned in People v. Baumgartner (1958) 166 Cal.App.2d 103 [332 P.2d 366], was given. And even where the challenged instruction is given after deliberations have proceeded for some time, it will not necessarily be regarded as coercive if it merely urges on a jury the importance of giving reasonable consideration to the views of others. (People v. Walker (1952) 112 Cal.App.2d 462 [246 P.2d 1009].)
Defendant particularly relies on the case of People v. Watson (1913) 165 Cal. 645, 654 [133 P. 298]. The instructions in that case were: " 'To vote time after time in accordance with the first vote cast, and not try to arrive at a verdict is to deliberately set aside the oath you took on being accepted as jurors, to wit: That you would return a verdict in accordance with the testimony delivered in the case. This, each one of you can do and do no violence to your conscience as fair-minded, conscientious and intelligent jurymen.' "
The instruction in the Watson case is clearly distinguishable *571 from the instruction in the case at bench. In the Watson case, the court pointed out (at p. 654), "the jurors were told, in effect, that they were oathbound to reach some sort of a verdict--that to vote time after time in accordance with the first ballot cast was something most reprehensible--indeed that failure to try to reach a verdict would render the offending jurors guilty of a flagrant violation of their oaths." A fair reading of the instruction in the instant case indicates no such insistence by the judge that the jury bring in a verdict. Furthermore, the emphasis in the instruction at bar is on the importance of bringing in a "just and proper verdict," (italics added) and not in merely bringing "in a verdict."
It has been held that an instruction which stated, in part, that the jury should "fully and freely interchange views with each other" it being "for the interests of the state and the benefit of the defendant, that a verdict should be returned" was proper and not coercive. (People v. Selby (1926) 198 Cal. 426, 439 [245 P. 426].) The instruction herein questioned, particularly when coupled with its companion instruction above quoted, was certainly less open to objection than the one approved in Selby.
The judgment is affirmed.
Files, P. J., and Jefferson, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "And, on the one hand, if much the larger number of your panel are for a conviction, a dissenting juror should consider whether a doubt in his or her own mind is a reasonable one, which makes no impression upon the minds of so many men or women, equally honest, equally intelligent with himself or herself, and who have heard the same evidence with the same attention with an equal desire to arrive at the truth and under the sanction of the same oath." (People v. Baumgartner (1958) 166 Cal.App.2d 103, 106 [332 P.2d 366].)

=== CASE 9737708 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:40.691588+00 ===

Jansen, P.J.
In these consolidated appeals, we are asked to determine if the preemption provision of the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994 (faaaa), 49 USC 41713, preempts claims of race and gender discrimination brought under the state Civil Rights Act, MCL 37.2101 et seq.-, MSA 3.548(101) et seq. In Docket No. 209699, plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court’s order granting summary disposition in favor of defendants on the basis of preemption. We reverse. In Docket No. 209991, defendants appeal by leave granted from the trial court’s order denying their motion for summary disposition. We affirm.
Plaintiffs, all African-American males, worked for defendant United Parcel Service (ups) as delivery drivers. Contrary to company practice and procedure, the drivers allegedly took an unauthorized meal break while on duty, for which each driver claimed well over two hours of time for the period they were not actually working. Defendant Paul Maconchi, an employee of UPS, allegedly defamed plaintiffs by stating they had falsified their time records. In December 1996, plaintiffs’ employment was terminated for dishonesty.
In July 1997, plaintiffs brought suit against defendants. The complaints alleged racial and gender discrimination in violation of the state Civil Rights Act, *174and common-law defamation. Plaintiffs alleged in their complaints that white employees were not disciplined or terminated from employment for the same conduct. In each case, defendants moved for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(4), alleging lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, on the ground that plaintiffs’ claims were preempted by the faaaa.
We review de novo a trial court’s ruling regarding a motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(4). James v Commercial Carriers, Inc, 230 Mich App 533, 536; 583 NW2d 913 (1998). Because a preemption determination involves legal questions of statutory interpretation, we likewise review these issues de novo. Saginaw Co v John Sexton Corp of Michigan, 232 Mich App 202, 214; 591 NW2d 52 (1998).
Whether a federal statute preempts state law is a question of congressional intent. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc v Norris, 512 US 246, 252; 114 S Ct 2239; 129 L Ed2d 203 (1994); Ryan v Brunswick Corp, 454 Mich 20, 27; 557 NW2d 541 (1997). Congressional intent is to be gleaned from the text, structure, and purpose of the statute as a whole, including the manner in which Congress intended the statute and its surrounding regulatory scheme to affect business, consumers, and the law. Id., p 28. The plain meaning of a statute must be given effect unless there is reason to believe that Congress intended a more restrictive reading. Id. “Federal provisions that invalidate state law must be narrowly tailored to support a presumption against preemption of state law.” Id., p 27. State police powers should not be superseded unless that is the clear and unequivocal intent of Congress, especially where *175state regulation of matters relating to health and safety are concerned. Id.
Additionally, preemption of state law may be either express or implied. If express, the intent of Congress to preempt state law must be clearly stated in the statute’s language or impliedly contained in the statute’s structure and purpose. Id., p 28. Implied preemption may exist in the form of conflict or field preemption. Conflict preemption preempts state law that is in direct conflict with federal law or with the purposes and objectives of Congress. Id. Field preemption preempts state law where federal law so thoroughly occupies a legislative field that it is reasonable to infer that Congress did not intend for states to supplement it. Id. A common-law tort claim is a state law action that can be preempted by federal law. Id., pp 33-34.
Before 1978, interstate airline travel was heavily regulated by the federal government. Federal Aviation Act of 1958, PL 85-726 (codified at 49 USC 1301 et seq., but now repealed). In 1978, Congress decided that open competition among airlines, especially in the area of rates and services, would benefit consumers and the economy. See 49 USC 1302 (recodified as 49 USC 40101). Thus, in 1978, Congress enacted the Airline Deregulation Act (ADA), 49 USC 41713(b)(1), formerly codified at 49 USC 1305, “[t]o ensure that the States would not undo federal deregulation with regulation of their own . . . .” Morales v Trans World Airlines, Inc, 504 US 374, 378; 112 S Ct 2031; 119 L Ed 2d 157 (1992).
In 1994, Congress amended the ada and added subsection 41713(b)(4)(A),1 which states as follows:
*176General rule. — Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a State, political subdivision of a State, or political authority of 2 or more States may not enact or enforce a law, regulation, or other provision having the force and effect of law related to a price, route, or service of an air carrier or carrier affiliated with a direct air carrier through common controlling ownership when such carrier is transporting property by aircraft or by motor vehicle (whether or not such property has had or will have a prior or subsequent air movement).
This subsection’s language and purpose are essentially the same as the general preemption clause of the ADA, 49 USC 41713(b)(1),2 but applies to all cargo air transportation carriers. Thus, cases interpreting the general preemption clause of the ADA may be applied by this Court in conducting our analysis under subsection 41713(b)(4)(A). LaRosa v United Parcel Service, Inc, 23 F Supp 2d 136 (D Mass, 1998).
The United States Supreme Court has considered ADA preemption in two cases. In Morales, supra, the United States Supreme Court considered whether subsection 41713(b)(1) preempted state attorneys general from enforcing state consumer protection laws regarding airline fares advertising. The United States Supreme Court held that the plain meaning of the term “relating to” in the preemption provision indicated a congressional intent to broaden the scope *177of preemption. Morales, supra, p 384. In other words, state statutes or actions having some “ ‘connection with or reference to’ ” airline rates, routes, or services are preempted under the ada. Id., quoting Shaw v Delta Air Lines, Inc, 463 US 85, 97; 103 S Ct 2890; 77 L Ed 2d 490 (1983). The United States Supreme Court concluded that “the obligations imposed by the [advertising] guidelines would have a significant impact upon the airlines’ ability to market their product, and hence a significant impact upon the fares they charge.” Morales, supra, p 390. Thus, the fares advertising guidelines were preempted. Id. However, the United States Supreme Court cautioned against preempting claims where the state statute’s effect on an airline’s rates, routes, or services was “ ‘tenuous, remote, or peripheral....’” Id., p 390, quoting Shaw, supra, p 100, n 21.
The United States Supreme Court later addressed the ada’s preemption provision in American Airlines, Inc v Wolens, 513 US 219; 115 S Ct 817; 130 L Ed 2d 715 (1995). In Wolens, participants in American Airlines’ frequent flyer program challenged modifications to the program that devalued credits already earned by program participants. Id., pp 224-225. The frequent flyer participants argued that the modifications violated the Illinois Consumer Fraud Act and also constituted a breach of contract. Interpreting the Morales decision, the Supreme Court concluded that American Airlines’ frequent flyer program related to “rates, routes, or services.” Id., p 226. However, the Supreme Court emphasized that a state must also “enact or enforce” a law affecting rates, routes, or services before such law is preempted by the ADA. Id. The Supreme Court distinguished the consumer fraud *178claim from the breach of contract claim and held that the consumer fraud claim involved the enactment or enforcement of state law and, therefore, was preempted. The state’s enforcement of private contractual rights did not involve the enactment or enforcement of state law and, consequently, the Supreme Court held that the breach of contract claim was not preempted by the ADA. Id., p 228.
Accordingly, for a claim to be preempted by the ADA, the following must be shown: (1) the claim must derive from the enactment or enforcement of state law, and (2) the claim must relate to airline rates, routes, or services, either by expressly referring to them or by having a significant economic effect on them. Travel All Over the World, Inc v Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 73 F3d 1423, 1432 (CA 7, 1996). There is no dispute that plaintiffs’ claims derive from the enactment or enforcement of state law. Thus, the question before this Court is whether the state Civil Rights Act’s prohibition against racial and gender discrimination in employment “relates to” rates, routes, or services of an air carrier.
This Court addressed the issue of preemption by the ADA of claims brought under the state Civil Rights Act in Gilman v Northwest Airlines, Inc, 230 Mich App 293; 583 NW2d 536 (1998). In Gilman, the plaintiff was an account executive in Northwest Airlines’ sales office and was terminated from her job, allegedly for poor performance. The plaintiff filed a three-count complaint, alleging claims of wrongful discharge, age discrimination, and gender discrimination under the state Civil Rights Act. After examining the legislative intent behind the ADA, this Court concluded that
*179there is nothing in the language of the statute to suggest that Congress intended, nor does the case law suggest, that the preemption provision should be interpreted in such a broad and extensive maimer as to completely shelter airlines from a state action by an employee who has allegedly been discriminated against by the airline in no connection whatsoever to the services it provides. [Id., p 297.]
This Court in Gilman distinguished the prior decision of Fitzpatrick v Simmons Airlines, Inc, 218 Mich App 689; 555 NW2d 479 (1996), and the Colorado Court of Appeals decision in Belgard v United Airlines, 857 P2d 467 (Colo App, 1992), by noting a particular distinction between “the effect physical abilities or characteristics have on an airline’s services and the effect one’s age or sex has on the industry.” Gilman, supra, p 300. This Court ruled that a person’s age or gender are, “for the most part, wholly unrelated to an individual’s ability to carry out duties and serve the airline industry.” Id. This Court was “unable to discern how an individual’s age or sex has any reasonable connection or relation to airline services or how a state law abridging unlawful discrimination on those bases will restrict an airline’s authority to select employees.” Id. This Court in Gilman concluded that “while the ADA has been interpreted to have a broad preemptive sweep over state Civil Rights Act claims, there must, nonetheless, be an apparent connection or relation to the airline’s routes, prices, or services, in order for the preemptive provision of the ADA to be applicable.” Id., p 303.
Regardless of this Court’s decision in Gilman, defendants argue that the earlier holding in Fitzpat*180rick is controlling.3 In Fitzpatrick, this Court affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s weight discrimination claim under the Civil Rights Act on the basis of preemption under the ADA. The plaintiff was a baggage handler whose employment was terminated for failure to meet the defendant airline’s mandatory height and weight rule.
This Court in Fitzpatrick cited Morales for the proposition that “the words ‘relating to’ as used in the ADA expressed a broad preemptive purpose.” Fitzpatrick, supra, p 691. This Court in Fitzpatrick relied on the Colorado Court of Appeals decision in Belgard in support of its finding of preemption. In Belgard, airline employees who had been denied jobs as pilots as a result of having undergone corrective eye surgery sued the airline, claiming that the airline violated a Colorado statute that prohibited discrimination based on a perceived physical handicap. Relying on the ADA’s dual purposes of “ ‘maintenance of safety as the highest priority’ ” and “ ‘maximum reliance on competitive market forces,’ ” the court in Belgard determined that state regulation of hiring decisions made on the basis of a job applicant’s “physical characteristics” was preempted as having a “connection with” the airline’s services. Belgard, supra, pp 470-471. On the basis of the foregoing, this Court in Fitzpatrick, supra, concluded, “ ‘[A]ny law or regulation that restricts an airline’s selection of employees, based upon their physical characteristics, must necessarily have a connection with and reference to, and there*181fore must be one “relating to,” the services to be rendered by the airline.’ ” [Fitzpatrick, supra, p 692, quoting Belgard, supra, p 471.]
Defendants interpret Fitzpatrick as holding plaintiffs’ state law racial and gender discrimination claims to be preempted by the ADA. The trial court in Docket No. 209991 refuted this interpretation and instead ruled that Fitzpatrick was correctly decided under its facts, but that the ada’s preemption provisions do not apply to all claims under the Civil Rights Act. We agree with the trial court.
Gilman is dispositive of the preemption issue presented here. Plaintiffs’ race and gender are wholly unrelated to defendants’ services. This view has also been set forth by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, which recently held that “[n] either air safety nor market efficiency is appreciably hindered by the operation of state laws against racial discrimination.” Wellons v Northwest Airlines, Inc, 165 F3d 493, 496 (CA 6, 1999). The court noted, “An employee’s race, as opposed to his eyesight or physical size, has no arguable connection to safety.” Id. Moreover, unlike the regulation of marketing practices at issue in Morales, supra, or the regulation of the frequent flyer programs at issue in Wolens, supra, “ ‘whether an airline discriminates on the basis of age (or race or sex) has little or nothing to do with competition or efficiency.’ ” Wellons, supra, p 496, quoting Abdu-Brisson v Delta Air Lines, Inc, 128 F3d 77, 84 (CA 2, 1997). Consequently, the court in Wellons held that the ADA did not preempt the plaintiff’s state statutory race discrimination claim and related common-law tort claims. Accord Parise v Delta Airlines, Inc, 141 F3d 1463 (CA 11, 1998) (state statutory age dis*182crimination claim not preempted by the ADA); Aloha Islandair, Inc v Tseu, 128 F3d 1301 (CA 9, 1997) (state statutory physical disability claim not preempted by the ADA); Abdu-Brisson, supra (state statutory age discrimination claim not preempted by the ADA).
Defendants urge this Court to consider that plaintiffs’ claims are preempted because “their terminations arose out of their conduct while delivering packages,” which is the very “service” provided by ups to its customers. Although this may be relevant to whether plaintiffs can survive a motion for summary disposition on the merits of their cases, it is inappropriate for this Court to weigh defendants’ nondiscriminatory justification for discharging its employees as a basis for finding preemption. Parise, supra, p 1466.
Additionally, though not addressed by the trial court, plaintiffs’ defamation claims survive defendants’ preemption challenge. Plaintiffs’ defamation claims are simply “• ‘too tenuous, remote, or peripheral’ ” to be subject to preemption. Taj Mahal Travel, Inc v Delta Airlines, Inc, 164 F3d 186, 195 (CA 3, 1998); Abdu-Brisson, supra, p 81. Moreover, preemption is inappropriate in the tort field for an eminently practical reason:
As Wolens pointed out, the Department of Transportation has neither the authority nor the apparatus required to superintend contract disputes. See Wolens, 513 US at 232, 115 S Ct 817. That observation applies equally to tort disputes. It is significant that Congress retained the savings clause of the predecessor statute, which preserved “the remedies now existing at common law or by statute.” Id. at 232, 115 S Ct 817 Qquoting 49 USC § 1506). [Taj Mahal Travel, supra, p 194.]
*183The saving clause has been amended and recodified, and now states that “[a] remedy under this part is in addition to any other remedies provided by law.” 49 USC 40120(c).
We conclude that plaintiffs’ claims of racial and gender discrimination under the state Civil Rights Act and the common-law defamation claims are not related to the ADA and, therefore, are outside the scope of the federal act’s preemption provision. We reverse in Docket No. 209699, affirm in Docket No. 209991, and remand for further proceedings.
Saad, J., concurred.
This amendment is referred to as the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994. However, the statutory scheme is commonly *176referred to as the Airline Deregulation Act.
This general preemption provision provides:
Preemption. — (1) Except as provided in this subsection, a State, political subdivision of a State, or political authority of at least 2 States may not enact or enforce a law, regulation, or other provision having the force and effect of law related to a price, route, or service of an air carrier that may provide air transportation under this subpart.
The Fitzpatrick decision has been criticized for failing to completely address the Morales prong of the two-pronged inquiry: whether the state statute expressly referred to airline rates, routes, or services, or had a significant economic effect on them. LaRosa, supra.

=== CASE 2211713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:10.605277+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 691 (1960)
7 Cal. Rptr. 170
VERA RIVERS et al., Respondents,
v.
PHILANDER BROOKS BEADLE et al., Appellants.
Docket No. 18805.
Court of Appeals of California, First District, Division One.
August 15, 1960.
*693 John T. Tully for Appellants.
Gladstein, Anderson, Leonard & Sibbett and Norman Leonard for Respondents.
BRAY, P.J.
Defendants appeal from a judgment, without jury trial, in favor of plaintiffs in the sum of $1,800.
*694 QUESTIONS PRESENTED
1. Is the agreement to build "a speculative home" on each of three lots unenforceable because of uncertainty and incompleteness?
2. Applicability of sections 2466 and 2468, Civil Code.
3. Is judgment in favor of plaintiff Jackman supported?
RECORD
In 1955, Vera Rivers, a licensed real estate broker, doing business as Vera Rivers Realty, interested defendants in three lots for sale in San Rafael, the price of which was $16,500. Defendants counteroffered $13,500. The owners refused to accept less than $15,000. In order to consummate the sale, defendants told Vera Rivers that she would have to waive the brokerage commission. Defendants were buying the property to build houses on it for sale. Vera Rivers agreed to waive the commission, provided she was given an exclusive agency to sell the houses to be built. The following agreement was then entered into:
"March 3, 1955
"In consideration of Vera Rivers Realty handling my purchase of 3 lots located at Center Avenue, corner K Street, San Rafael, without brokerage, as evidenced by attached copy of deposit receipt, I hereby agree as follows:
"1) To build on each of said 3 lots a speculative home, which is to be placed on the market immediately for sale on completion of same.
"2) To give to Vera Rivers Realty the exclusive right to sell each of such houses and pay a 3% commission of the selling price, this exclusive right to sell to be effective immediately and to continue in effect for a period of one year from date of completion of each of such houses.
"/s/ Philander B. Beadle
"/s/ Eva May Beadle
"/s/ Vera Rivers"
The court found "That the term `speculative home' means a home built with expectation of selling it for profit, and said meaning of said term was understood by both of the parties hereto; and that in relation to the area of said lots and the type of homes in said area, the said homes, if constructed by said defendants, would have been homes that would sell for approximately $20,000." The court thereupon allowed damages based upon an allowance of 3 per cent of $20,000 *695 for each house, totaling for the three, $1,800. The evidence, if admissible, fully supports the finding.
1. Sufficiency of Agreement.
Defendants contend that the agreement does not meet the requirements of the statute of frauds and that in admitting evidence in interpreting the agreement the parol evidence rule was violated.
[1] "The evidentiary consequences of the statute of frauds (Civ. Code, § 1624) are in many respects similar to those of the parol evidence rule (Code Civ. Proc., § 1856). But both require exclusion of extrinsic evidence which would vary, contradict, or add to the terms of the written agreement under consideration (Craig v. Zelian, 137 Cal. 105 [69 P. 853], statute of frauds; Germain Fruit Co. v. Armsby Co., 153 Cal. 585 [96 P. 319], parol evidence rule), but both permit reception of such evidence to identify the subject matter of the contract from the written description, explain the meaning of ambiguous, abstruse, or technical expressions, and assist in interpreting the expressed intentions of the parties in the light of circumstances existing at the time of execution. [Citations.]" (Ellis v. Klaff, 96 Cal. App.2d 471, 475-476 [216 P.2d 15].)
[2] The parol evidence rule does not require the parties to put their entire understanding in writing. [3] Thus evidence of contemporaneous oral agreements may be admitted, provided they are not inconsistent with the written contract. As will hereafter appear, the oral evidence introduced in no way conflicts with the written contract. The statute of frauds, however, requires that the writing evidence the contract exclusively.
[4] "Vagueness of expression, indefiniteness and uncertainty as to any of the essential terms of an agreement, may prevent the creation of an enforceable contract ... Vagueness, indefiniteness, and uncertainty are matters of degree, with no absolute standard for comparison. It must be remembered that all modes of human expression are defective and inadequate ... [5] In considering expressions of agreement, the court must not hold the parties to some impossible, or ideal, or unusual standard. It must take language as it is and people as they are. All agreements have some degree of indefiniteness and some degree of uncertainty ... [P]eople must be held to the promises they make. The court must not be overly fearful of error; it must not be pedantic or meticulous in interpretation of expressions *696 ... [6] If the parties have concluded a transaction in which it appears that they intend to make a contract, the court should not frustrate their intention, if it is possible to reach a fair and just result, even though this requires a choice among conflicting meanings and the filling of some gaps that the parties have left ... The application of such a rule as this is believed to come nearer to attaining the purpose of the contracting parties than any other, to give more business satisfaction and to make [a] contract a workable instrument." (Corbin on Contracts, vol. 1, § 95, pp. 288-292.)
[7] As to the statute of frauds, "`... To be sufficient, the required writing must be one "which states with reasonable certainty, (a) each party to the contract ... and (b) the land, goods or other subject-matter to which the contract relates, and (c) the terms and conditions of all the promises constituting the contract and by whom and to whom the promises are made." (Rest., Contracts, § 207. Emphasis added.) (Pp. 476-477.)'" (Ferrara v. Silver, 138 Cal. App.2d 616, 618 [292 P.2d 251].)
[8a] With these rules in mind, let us examine the contract. (a) It clearly sets forth each party to the contract. The parties are the defendants on the one hand, and Vera Rivers on the other.
(b) The subject matter is that in consideration of the waiving of a commission by Vera Rivers for her handling defendants' purchase of the described three lots, defendants agree to build on each lot "a speculative home" to be placed on the market for sale immediately on completion. That "speculative home" had a definite meaning to the parties will hereafter appear.
(c) The agreement also clearly shows "the terms and conditions of all the promises constituting the contract and by whom and to whom the promises are made." These are, first, that defendants agree to build the homes (although the time is not stated, such an agreement imports an understanding that it must be built within a reasonable time (see 12 Cal.Jur.2d p. 375)); secondly, that defendants will place the homes for sale on the market immediately upon completion, and that Vera Rivers has the exclusive right until the expiration of one year after the houses are completed to sell them, and defendants agree that on such sale Vera Rivers will receive a commission of 3 per cent of the sale price. While the selling price is not fixed in the agreement (it could not be until the homes were built and their cost obtained), implied in the agreement, *697 and well understood by the parties, is that the defendants would fix the selling price to return a profit to them. Vera Rivers was not concerned with the selling price. She was given the right to sell, if possible, the houses for whatever price defendants might place the houses on the market. There was nothing indefinite in this term of the contract.
"Speculative home" as here used is not indefinite or vague. It had a definite meaning to the parties. The evidence showed that this is a term well known in real estate circles and to defendants, as meaning simply a home built with expectation of selling it at cost plus a profit and of the type and price of homes being then generally being built and sold in the area. Applicable here is Bettancourt v. Gilroy Theatre Co., Inc., 120 Cal. App.2d 364 [261 P.2d 351], where this court held that an agreement "`to erect a First class Theatre'" was sufficiently definite and certain to create and impose a contractual obligation.
All the terms and conditions of the promises are included in the agreement, namely, that defendants are to build three houses to sell. Vera Rivers has the exclusive right to sell them for a period of one year after they are constructed, and to receive a commission on sale of 3 per cent of the selling price. No other terms or conditions are required to make a definite contract; hence there was no violation of the statute of frauds.
It is true that some explanation has to be made of what the parties meant by a "speculative home," just as in Bettancourt, supra, explanation was required as to what the parties had in mind by "`... First class Theatre.'" [9] In considering this question applicable here is the following from Avalon Products, Inc. v. Lentini, 98 Cal. App.2d 177, 179 [219 P.2d 485]: "The law leans against the destruction of contracts because of uncertainty and favors an interpretation which will carry into effect the reasonable intention of the parties if it can be ascertained. [Citations.] [10] The description of the subject matter of an agreement may be indefinite but if it is capable of being identified and rendered definite and certain by evidence aliunde, the contract is enforceable. [Citations.] That is certain which can be made certain. (Civ. Code, § 3538.)" A "speculative home" appears from the evidence to be sufficiently definite and certain to enable the defendants to know what they had undertaken to do.
[8b] The evidence concerning the meaning of the term did not violate the parol evidence rule. It in no way varied *698 the terms of the writing or supplied any terms. It merely served to identify the subject matter and assisted in interpreting the expressed intentions of the parties in the light of the circumstances at the time of the execution of the contract. Parol evidence here "should be, and is admissible, to explain what the parties meant by what they said." (Wells v. Wells, 74 Cal. App.2d 449, 457 [169 P.2d 23].) In Hillman v. Hillman Land Co. (1947), 81 Cal. App.2d 174, 185 [183 P.2d 730], it was contended that an agreement was so indefinite as to be unenforceable which provided that the defendants would construct "about 30 three-bedroom houses" (emphasis added). The court held otherwise, as it was "obvious that the number to be erected would depend upon the building and zoning laws and regulations and upon the portion of the property that would be required to be dedicated for street purposes."
[11] Nor is the fact that the contract does not state the time in which the buildings are to be constructed fatal to the contract. Where time is not stated, the law fixes the time as within a reasonable time after the execution of the contract (Civ. Code, § 1657; see 12 Cal.Jur.2d p. 375, § 159), and the evidence shows that such was the contemplation of the parties.
The facts of our case differ greatly from those in Ferrara v. Silver, supra, 138 Cal. App.2d 616, where the contract provided that a "`banquet room building'" was to be built, and we held that that expression was so vague that the contract could not be enforced. There the parties, at the time of entering into the agreement, did not have in mind any particular type, size or price of building. As the court there said (p. 620), the parties did not have "in mind as a norm or standard" any building, such as the parties in Bettancourt, supra, did. In our case the parties did have in mind a norm or standard. It was the type, materials and range of price of speculative homes in the general area. In determining the sufficiency of the subject matter of the contract, the purpose of the contract must be borne in mind. Its basic purpose was to enable the real estate broker to obtain a commission on the sale of three houses, to make up for the waiver of a commission then due for the purchase by defendants of the lots. While the description might be considered too vague were this a contract of purchase of a house or houses, it is not too vague for the purpose intended. The type, materials and price (within the norm or standard above mentioned) was left to the discretion of defendants, but they were to build the houses and the broker was to be permitted to sell them on commission.
*699 In Ellis v. Klaff, supra, 96 Cal. App.2d 471, there was a situation similar to that in Ferrara, supra; no norm or standard was in the mind of the parties when the agreement was made to construct a "`... building or buildings ...'" which would "`... comply strictly with the Building Code ...'" of Buenaventura (p. 473).
In Colorado Corp., Ltd. v. Smith (1953), 121 Cal. App.2d 374 [263 P.2d 79], the buyer of certain land agreed to construct "`... residences of not less than 1200 square feet each on the parcels facing on Gault Street ...'" Here again no norm or standard had been agreed upon by the parties. Likewise in Ganiats Construction, Inc. v. Hesse, 180 Cal. App.2d 377 [4 Cal. Rptr. 706], the parties did not have in mind the particular 30 acres to which the contract referred.
More applicable to our situation are Hillman v. Hillman Land Co., supra, 81 Cal. App.2d 174, where the court held definite an agreement to construct "about 30 three-bedroom houses," and Bettancourt v. Gilroy Theatre Co., supra, 120 Cal. App.2d 364, where the court upheld an agreement "`to erect a First class Theatre' ..." In Gibson v. De La Salle Institute (1944), 66 Cal. App.2d 609 [152 P.2d 774], it was claimed that a contract to purchase wines was too indefinite to be enforced. In holding that the telegrams evidencing the contract constituted sufficient memoranda under the statute of frauds the court said (p. 632): "In the instant case details such as storage, place of delivery, transportation and the like, mentioned by the trial court, are matters either governed by the usages of the business, or subject to proof by parol evidence. Absence from the memorandum of provision therefor is not fatal to plaintiffs' case."
Guerrieri v. Severini (1955), 132 Cal. App.2d 269 [281 P.2d 879], dealt with a contract to sell wine "partly oral and partly in writing ..." In holding that the written portion was a sufficient "`note or memorandum of the contract'" to satisfy the statute of frauds the court said (p. 274): "A contract to sell, or a sale, may be made in writing or by word of mouth, or partly in writing and partly by word of mouth, or may be inferred from the conduct of the parties, and under the statute of frauds (Civ. Code, § 1724) requiring that the contract `or some note or memorandum thereof' be in writing, the writing essential need not be a formal contract, drawn up with technical exactness or even one intended by the parties to create an obligation. (Gibson v. De La Salle Institute, 66 Cal. App.2d 609, 631 [152 P.2d 774].) [12, 13] In that case it is said, *700 citing Buckner v. A. Leon & Co., 204 Cal. 225, 227 [267 P. 693]:
"`It has long been the rule that when parties have not incorporated into an instrument all of the terms of their contract, evidence is admissible to prove the existence of a separate oral agreement as to any matter on which the document is silent and which is not inconsistent with its terms; and that when there is a known usage of trade, persons carrying on that trade are deemed to have contracted in reference to the usage unless the contrary appears.'"
The evidence in our case shows that the term "speculative home" was one well known in the real estate business and known to the defendants. It should be pointed out that while the writing here was prepared by Vera Rivers, one of the defendants is and for a number of years has been a practicing lawyer. It is unreasonable to assume that he would enter into a contract which appeared indefinite to him, or whose terms he did not understand. He testified that when he signed it, the agreement was perfectly clear to him.
In Buckner v. A. Leon & Co., 204 Cal. 225 [267 P. 693], the agreement provided that grapes were to be delivered "f.o.b." a certain shipping point. The defendant contended that because of this term, the plaintiff was not entitled to prove an oral agreement that the buyer was to furnish the lug boxes. The court held such evidence admissible as it did not vary the terms of the written contract.
In United Truckmen, Inc. v. Lorentz (1952), 114 Cal. App.2d 26, 34 [249 P.2d 352], we pointed out that Ellis v. Klaff, supra, 96 Cal. App.2d 471, 476, "contains a well supported discussion of the requirements of both the parol evidence rule and the statute of frauds." We referred to Craig v. Zelian, 137 Cal. 105 [69 P. 853], and other similar cases which upheld the rule above quoted from the Ellis case. Our case comes within this rule.
The allowance by the court of a commission based upon the lowest price in the price range for homes contemplated by the parties was eminently fair.
2. Failure to Allege and Prove Compliance With Sections 2466 and 2468, Civil Code.
[14a] The complaint is entitled "Vera Rivers and Cole Jackman, Plaintiffs." It alleges that at all times mentioned therein "plaintiffs Cole Jackman and Vera Rivers were, and now are, doing business as ... Vera Rivers Realty." Defendants demurred that the plaintiffs did not have legal *701 capacity to sue as they did not allege compliance with sections 2466 and 2468, Civil Code, the latter of which provides that an action may not be maintained "upon or on account of any contract or contracts made, or transactions had under ... their partnership name" if the partnership is doing business "under a fictitious name, or a designation not showing the names of the persons interested as partners ..." (§ 2466.) The demurrer was overruled. As "Vera Rivers Realty" obviously does not show the names of the partners alleged in the complaint, the demurrer should have been sustained. However, as will hereafter appear, defendants by their conduct at the trial are foreclosed from raising the point here.
[15] Moreover, "An objection to the maintenance of an action on the ground that plaintiff has not complied with the provisions of sections 2466 and 2468 of the Civil Code by filing and publishing the certificate required thereby, is a mere matter of abatement pending the trial, which has the result of suspending the trial until the statute is complied with. It is not jurisdictional." (Kodota Fig Assn. v. Case-Swayne Co., 73 Cal. App.2d 796, 804 [167 P.2d 518].) [14b] Apparently at the pretrial conference plaintiffs satisfied the court and counsel that in spite of the allegation of the complaint, the partnership name at the time of the trial was Rivers-Jackman Realty, a designation showing the names of the partners. The pretrial conference order states that plaintiffs Rivers and Jackman contend that they are now doing business as Rivers-Jackman Realty; that at the time the contract was signed plaintiff Rivers was the sole owner of the business and was operating under the name of Vera Rivers Realty, plaintiff Jackman then being her office manager. Subsequently the parties became partners and are the only persons interested in the business. Defendants have tendered an issue that the action cannot be maintained because of failure to comply with sections 2466 and 2468 of the Civil Code. "However, in view of the foregoing statement of fact it appears that this defense is not well taken and the action may proceed on the basis that the contract was originally entered into with Vera Rivers Realty which has now been succeeded in its interest by Rivers-Jackman Realty. Thus the full names of all the parties in interest are revealed and the victitious [sic] name statute does not apply? [sic]"
At the trial defendants made no objection to the trial proceeding, nor to the introduction of evidence by plaintiffs in support of their claim, nor was any question of plaintiffs' *702 right to maintain the action presented to the trial court. Defendants made no effort to refute the statement in the pretrial conference order that the name under which the plaintiffs are conducting their partnership business is Rivers-Jackman Realty. No mention of the matter appears in defendants' memorandum in support of the motion for new trial. Sections 2466 and 2468 only require compliance therewith if the business is being conducted under a fictitious name or one not showing the names of those interested in it. During the time the name of the business was Vera Rivers Realty, the name was not a fictitious one and showed the name of the only person interested in it. Then when the partnership was formed the name Rivers-Jackman Realty was not a fictitious one, and was one which gave the names of the persons interested in the business. Hence, at neither time was it necessary to comply with sections 2466 and 2468. These facts, coupled with the findings in the pretrial conference order and the failure of defendants to raise any question concerning the matter in the trial court, support the judgment.
3. Judgment in Favor of Plaintiff Jackman.
[16] The situation concerning him is one that frequently occurs in the trial of cases. All parties assume that there is evidence on a certain subject and yet none has been introduced. Here it is apparent from a reading of the transcript that the parties and the court assumed that the new firm of Vera Rivers and Cole Jackman, doing business as Rivers-Jackman Realty, had succeeded to the claim against defendants of Vera Rivers, doing business as Vera Rivers Realty. Apparently no evidence of this fact was introduced. The pretrial conference order states that at the time of the agreement plaintiff Rivers was the sole owner of the business and that Jackman was her office manager. "Subsequently the parties became partners. There are no other parties who either now, at the time the suit was filed, or at the time the agreement was entered into ... have or have had any interest in the said real estate business." In listing the contentions of the parties the order does not show any issue raised by defendants over the ownership of the claim by the new partners.[*] The pretrial order controls the subsequent course of the case in accordance with rule 8.8, Rules of the Superior Court (Fitzsimmons v. Jones, 179 Cal. App.2d 5, 9 [3 Cal. Rptr. 373].)
*703 At the trial counsel for both parties stated the issues. At no time prior to the appeal did defendants' counsel raise any question concerning plaintiff Jackman's interest in the claim. It is too late to do it now. Moreover, it would seem to be of no great concern to defendants whether Jackman shares in the recovery or not, since his doing so in nowise would increase or decrease the extent of defendants' obligation.
The judgment is affirmed.
Tobriner, J., and Duniway, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied September 8, 1960, and appellants' petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 13, 1960.
NOTES
[*]   As hereinbefore stated, defendants did raise an issue over the alleged failure of the new partnership to comply with sections 2466 and 2468, Civil Code.

=== CASE 9737729 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:12.144198+00 ===

GIVAN, Chief Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent to the majority opinion in this case. The majority correctly states the law of conspiracy. The cases cited by the majority wholly support the trial court in this case. Although, as pointed out by the majority opinion, the prosecuting attorney did lead a witness, there was in fact evidence from which the jury could determine that the appellant did in fact conspire with others to travel in an automobile to another location in the town for the express purpose of engaging in a fight with another group of persons.
The fact that the persons travelling in the automobile took instruments; to-wit: An iron rod, a chain with a handle, and a stick or club, is evidence from which the jury could conclude that each of the participants intended to use such weapons and planned with his cohorts that they should do likewise.
For this Court to reverse the trial court in this case, it is necessary that we weigh the evidence and come to a conclusion contrary to facts found by the trial court. This, we have stated on many occasions, we should not do.
I would affirm the trial court in this case.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2211802 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.983965+00 ===

244 Cal.App.2d 308 (1966)
ALINE E. ROWAN, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
THE CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 23070.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 18, 1966.
Thomas M. O'Connor, City Attorney, and R. J. Reynolds, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendant and Appellant.
Marvin E. Lewis, Lewis & Stein and Ronald H. Rouda for Plaintiff and Respondent.
TAYLOR, J.
The City and County of San Francisco (hereafter city) appeals from a judgment rendered on a jury verdict in favor of plaintiff for damages for personal injuries sustained as the result of a fall caused by a defective sidewalk. The city contends that the trial court erred in: (1) the denial of a nonsuit as plaintiff misled the city about the location of the accident; (2) the admission of evidence concerning budgetary requests for additional sidewalk inspectors; (3) the rulings on the examination of a city ambulance driver under section 2055 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and (4) the instructions to the jury.
As no contentions are raised concerning the sufficiency of the evidence, a brief summary of the facts will suffice. About 11:45 p.m. on January 27, 1961, plaintiff, then 54 years old, was returning home from her job as a practical nurse. For about two years she had lived at 2100 North Point Street, about two and one-half blocks beyond the place of her fall near the northeast corner of the intersection of Scott and Alhambra Streets. As was her custom, plaintiff got off the bus at Fillmore and Chestnut Streets and was walking north on Scott toward Alhambra. When she was a little more than half way up the block on the east side of Scott, her foot caught in a hole in the sidewalk. She fell and broke her hip. The sidewalk area was dark. Plaintiff walked home on the east side of Scott Street about half of the time but had never noticed any particular defects in the sidewalk. When she fell, she knew she was near the corner of Scott and Alhambra but did not know the exact location of her fall as she was in intense pain before being picked up by the city ambulance.
On March 2, 1961, plaintiff filed a timely claim against the city indicating the fall had taken place "Approximately in *311 front of 3350 Scott St." The complaint in this action was filed in April 1961.
In April 1961 the city's sidewalk inspector made a detailed investigation of the sidewalk in front of 3348-3350 Scott, as well as the sidewalks in front of the building immediately to the north, 3354-3356, and the building immediately to the south, 3342-3344. This investigation revealed a new sidewalk in front of 3354-3356 which sloped downward to the north of the sidewalk in front of the building at the northeast corner of Scott and Alhambra, 3358-3360; the sidewalk in front of 3342-3344 and 3348-3350 contained various holes, depressions and cracks. The city took several pictures, one of which also showed that the sidewalk in front of the corner building at 3358-3360 Scott contained several sizeable holes  [fn. 1] near the junction of the south property line with the new sidewalk in front of 3354-3356. Near the north property line there was a crushed area 2" X 6" in diameter and a "high joint"--one slope of concrete lower than the abutting adhesive concrete. A subsequent inspection by the city of the sidewalk in front of 3358-3360 showed that some of the holes were patched. In addition, the sidewalk in front of 3358-3360 Scott sloped 3 inches in 3 feet from north to south to one of the above mentioned holes. It was constructed with this slope by the City and County of San Francisco. Before a sidewalk can be constructed with such a slope, permission of the city's director of public works must be obtained. There was no record of any such permission for No. 3358-3360.
At the time of the accident, the city's department of public works employed from six to ten inspectors who inspected streets and sidewalks along with their other duties. The department's requests for an increase in its budget for additional sidewalk inspectors were repeatedly vetoed by the Mayor. No area inspection of the intersection here involved had been made since 1947. However, about nine years before the accident, the city had done some resurfacing work on Scott Street and the sidewalks were inspected at that time. The broken area in the sidewalk in front of 3358-3360 could have been caused by the city's rollers at the time of the resurfacing.
The city first argues that the court erred in denying its motion for nonsuit because plaintiff failed to comply with *312 sections 53052 and 53053 of the Government Code which, so far as pertinent, then required that the claim specify the place of the accident. The claim against the city filed by plaintiff indicated that the fall had taken place "Approximately in front of 3350 Scott St." The complaint likewise placed the fall on the sidewalk at a point 60 to 70 feet south of Alhambra Street on the easterly side of Scott Street, which would be in the vicinity of 3348-3350 Scott. In October 1963 plaintiff filed an amendment to her complaint joining as a defendant one Capovilla, the owner of the property at 3348-3350, alleging that the defects causing her fall and injury existed in a special use driveway constructed across the sidewalk of the Capovilla premises. On January 9, 1964, the city filed a cross-complaint for declaratory relief against Capovilla. In June 1964 Capovilla filed a motion for summary judgment accompanied by an affidavit signed by the city ambulance driver, stating that he had picked up plaintiff immediately in front of the corner property at 3358-3360 Scott Street instead of 3348-3350 Scott Street. Plaintiff joined in the motion for summary judgment and subsequently the court rendered judgment in favor of Capovilla and against the city on the cross-complaint.
[1a] At the close of plaintiff's evidence, the city moved for a nonsuit on the ground that plaintiff had not correctly stated the place of the accident and had for a period of several years misled the city as to its correct location. The motion was denied. The city now argues that the court erred and it was fatally prejudiced in preparing its defense. We cannot agree.
[2] The plain purpose of the notice statutes was to inform the public body of the accident upon which a claim for damages was based, to permit its agents to investigate the facts as to the time, place and condition of the premises and thus decide whether the case should be settled or litigated. The courts have been liberal in requiring nothing more than substantial compliance. In Johnson v. City of Oakland, 188 Cal.App.2d 181, 183 [10 Cal.Rptr. 409], where the fall was caused by a defective sidewalk in front of 1819 34th Avenue, but the verified claim incorrectly indicated 1819 35th Avenue, we held that the substantial compliance requirement had been met and reversed a summary judgment for defendant city. In Parodi v. City & County of San Francisco, 160 Cal.App.2d 577 [325 P.2d 224], this court found substantial compliance although the claim referred to the wrong intersection. The same result was reached in Johnson v. City of Los Angeles, *313 134 Cal.App.2d 600 [285 P.2d 713], where the plaintiff tripped on a hole in the sidewalk on the southwest corner of an intersection but the claim specified the southeast corner. [1b] On authority of these cases, the court properly denied the city's motion for a nonsuit.  [fn. 2]
The circumstances relating to the mistaken notice do not indicate bad faith by plaintiff nor undue prejudice to defendant. The records of the ambulance driver and the emergency hospital, both city agencies, noted the proper location of the accident. The investigation of the city inspector covered the sidewalk for several frontages in each direction from the location specified in the claim, as the inspector was experienced and knew that often claimants could not accurately pinpoint the location of a sidewalk accident. One of the pictures taken by the city during the original investigation showed a portion of the sidewalk in front of 3358-3360 Scott where the injury occurred. Although the city may have been somewhat prejudiced in concentrating its initial investigation and picture taking on the incorrect location, plaintiff was likewise prejudiced. In Johnson v. City of Los Angeles, supra, the court rejected the claim of plaintiff's bad faith although the city did not know of the error in location until the beginning of the trial. Here, the correct location was known to all parties a year before the trial began. We conclude that there was no showing of a deliberate intent to deceive and the prejudice, if any, was slight and applied equally to both parties.
[3] Defendant next contends that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of the 1962-1963 and 1965-1966 budgetary requests made after the accident by the department of public works. These requests sought additional sidewalk inspectors to minimize accidents and resultant litigation. To allow the evidence of such requests and the reasons given therefor might tend to discourage the taking of subsequent precautions and could be considered contrary to sound public policy (Helling v. Schindler, 145 Cal. 303, 313-314 [78 P. 710]). However, the uncontradicted evidence indicated that there had been no inspection of the whole area since 1947 and that the last time the particular sidewalk had been inspected was at the time of resurfacing on Scott Street between October 1952 and February 1953, about nine years before plaintiff was injured. There was also evidence that in 1961 there were not more than ten, *314 and possibly only six, inspectors looking for defects in the sidewalks of San Francisco and this was in connection with their other duties. Furthermore, similar budgetary requests made by the city's public works department prior to the accident were admitted into evidence without objection. In view of such damaging and uncontradicted testimony, we conclude that the admission of the 1962-1963 and 1965-1966 budget requests was not prejudicial to defendant's case.
The city argues that it was error to allow plaintiff to call the city's ambulance driver under section 2055 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The pertinent language of the section, as amended in 1951, allowing an "employee of a municipal corporation which is a party to the action or proceeding" to be called as an adverse witness, has never been construed. The city's argument would require us to limit the application of the statute to matters or transactions within the employee's knowledge and which relate to his duties or services to the employer.
No such purpose appears on the face of the statute or from its legislative history. [4] Rather, it appears that the purpose of the broadening amendments was to make the tactical advantage of the cross-examination under section 2055 available to the adverse party on the rationale that an employee is naturally reluctant to give testimony against his own employer. [5] Where the words of a statute are clear, we cannot add to or alter them to accomplish a purpose that does not appear on the face of the statute or from its legislative history (People v. Knowles, 35 Cal.2d 175 [217 P.2d 1]). [6] In construing a statutory provision, we are not authorized to insert qualifying provisions and we may not rewrite the statute to conform to an assumed intention which does not appear from its language, but are limited to the construction of the plain language of the statute as enacted and the intention therein expressed (Vallerga v. Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 53 Cal.2d 313 at 318 [347 P.2d 909]).
[7] We conclude that the ambulance driver was properly cross- examined under section 2055 about both the location of the accident and his observations concerning the condition of the sidewalk. In any event, neither his testimony at the trial nor the contents of his improperly admitted affidavit  [fn. 3] on the *315 subject were prejudicial as it was merely cumulative of the testimony given by the city's own sidewalk inspector.
[8] All parties agree that the court erred in preventing the city from questioning the ambulance driver at the close of his testimony under 2055. The court acknowledged this error at the trial and thereafter permitted such examination of other witnesses but refused to require plaintiff to produce the driver at the city's request. The city's contention that this constituted prejudicial error is without merit. The city's own employees were readily available to it. Under such circumstances, it would have been unreasonable and unnecessary to cast the duty to produce on plaintiff.
[9] The city next contends that the trial court erred in giving the following instruction: "You are instructed that the fact that an inspection by the City officials responsible for the inspection of City sidewalks had not been made within a particular length of time prior to the plaintiff's accident may warrant an inference that the defective condition existed long enough so that a person exercising reasonable care would have discovered it." The city, citing Nicholson v. City of Los Angeles, 5 Cal.2d 361 [54 P.2d 725], argues that the instruction was not a correct statement of the law since in order to be charged with implied or presumptive notice, it must be shown that had the city exercised reasonable supervision, it would have discovered the condition a sufficient time before the accident to have had a reasonable opportunity to guard against injury from it. This contention is without merit. The record indicates that the jury was fully instructed on the city's liability under the applicable statutes, the doctrine of constructive notice, the fact that the city was not an insurer, and what constitutes a reasonable time after notice within which a city must remedy a defective condition (Johnson v. City of Palo Alto, 199 Cal.App.2d 148 [18 Cal.Rptr. 484]; Rodriguez v. City of Los Angeles, 215 Cal.App.2d 463 [30 Cal.Rptr. 180]).
The instruction complained of was based on a statement in Mackoff v. Biltmore Garages, Inc., 222 Cal.App.2d 486, at pp. 849-850 [35 Cal.Rptr. 462, 4 A.L.R.3d 930], that the existence of a dangerous condition could be proved by circumstantial evidence such as the lack of inspection within a particular period of time prior to an accident. The city attempts to distinguish Mackoff by arguing that there the defendant garage had a constant duty to inspect aisles of its public garage for the accumulation of oil slick. The distinction is of no pertinence *316 here in view of the uncontroverted evidence that the particular sidewalk had not been inspected for nine years--certainly a reasonable time for the city to both discover and remedy any defects. There was also testimony from the city's own inspector that the cracks in the sidewalk in front of 3358-3360 Scott Street could have been caused by the city's rollers at the time of the resurfacing nine years before the accident.  [fn. 4]
We do not agree with the city's contentions that the above instruction unduly emphasized or singled out a portion of the evidence nor did the court err in refusing certain instructions offered by the city even though they appear to be proper statements of the law. The court correctly, fairly and with balance instructed the jury on the rights and duties of the parties and adequately covered the basic questions of ordinary care, proximate cause and contributory negligence.
The judgment is affirmed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The largest of these holes was 9" X 2" X 3" and up to 3/4" deep; another measured 3" X 1" X 1" to 3/8" deep; a third 4" X 3/4" to 3/8" deep; and a fourth 10" X 1" to 1 1/2" deep.
[fn. 2]  2. Authorities such as Hall v. City of Los Angeles, 19 Cal.2d 198 [120 P.2d 13], holding that a claim is fatally defective if it completely omits to designate the place of the accident are clearly not pertinent.
[fn. 3]  3. Affidavits being hearsay may not be used in evidence except where permitted by statute and section 2009 of the Code of Civil Procedure permitting their use on motion has no relevance here (Fewel v. Fewel, 23 Cal.2d 431, 438 [144 P.2d 592]; Lacrabere v. Wise, 141 Cal. 554, 556 [75 P. 185]).
[fn. 4]  4. The cases cited by the city are not pertinent: In Nicholson, supra, the sidewalk defect in question was a minor irregularity which did not fall within the doctrine of constructive notice. The accident here, unlike that in Loewen v. City of Burbank, 124 Cal.App.2d 551 [269 P.2d 121], occurred in the plaintiff's ordinary and usual use of the sidewalk.

=== CASE 2211725 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:10.81058+00 ===

90 Ill. App.3d 449 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 157
THE PEOPLE ex rel. CHERI LEA ST. LOUIS, Petitioner-Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
GERALD F. ST. LOUIS, Respondent-Defendant-Appellant.
No. 79-2051.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
Opinion filed November 14, 1980.
*450 Philip M. Sullivan, of Elmhurst, and Ralph J. Gust, Jr., of Lombard, for appellant.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Paul P. Biebel, Jr., Stuart D. Gordon, and James G. Tansey, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Respondent appeals from the entry of an order requiring him to pay $250 per month child support on the petition of the State of Wisconsin under the provisions of the Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (URESA) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 40, pars. 1201 et seq.)[1]. He asserts that the trial court erred in not dismissing the petition and, alternatively, that the order should have credited him with child support payments made under prior court orders.
In 1975, respondent and his wife Cheri were divorced in the circuit court of Du Page County, Illinois (the Du Page court). The decree, embodying an agreement of the parties, granted custody of their three minor children (ages 2, 4 and 5) to Cheri "subject to reasonable rights of visitation to respondent," who was ordered to pay $70 per week child support to the Waupaca County Social Services in Waupaca County, Wisconsin, where Cheri then resided with the children.
It appears that respondent made the payments, as ordered, until July 21, 1977, when the Du Page court found Cheri in contempt "for failure to *451 obey its lawful orders" and directed the impoundment of future support payments until Cheri purged herself of the contempt. In 1978, on a petition under URESA by the State of Wisconsin in Waupaca County, a court there certified that the petition established defendant owed a duty to support his three children and that "according to the testimony of the spouse seeking support [Cheri] the needs of the children are the sum of $250 per month." The petition and the Waupaca county court certification were then forwarded under the provisions of URESA to the circuit court of Cook County for the entry of the support order.
The Wisconsin petition alleged in pertinent part that Cheri and the children were entitled to support under the provisions of URESA and "[t]hat respondent, on or about November 23, 1977, and subsequent thereto refused and neglected to provide fair and reasonable support for Cheri Lea St. Louis and the other dependents according to his means and earning capacity." In an answer thereto, respondent admitted his duty to support but denied any refusal or neglect to pay and asserted by way of affirmative defense that he has made all child-support payments in the amount and in the manner directed by the Du Page court which, in its order of July 21, 1977, required that all future payments of child support were to be impounded until Cheri purged her contempt of that court.
The record discloses that no witnesses testified at the hearing on the petition, but a stipulated bystander's report of proceedings reveals that the petitioner relied solely on the petition of the State of Wisconsin in asking for the entry of a support order. From the report, it appears that respondent admitted his duty to support the children and presented documents in support of his position that he had continuously made child support payments in the amount of $70 per week since the 1975 decree but that they had been impounded since July 21, 1977, by order of the Du Page court. Included among the documents was a bank passbook, showing that all child support payments up to the date of the hearing had been deposited subject to the further order of the Du Page court.
The trial court ordered respondent to pay $250 per month child support, and this appeal followed.
OPINION
It is the primary contention of respondent that the petition should have been dismissed. In this regard, we initially note our disagreement with one of the positions taken by respondent; namely, that dismissal was the only manner in which the trial court could conform its order to the prior Du Page court orders, as it was required to do by section 30 of URESA (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 40, par. 1230) which, in pertinent part, states:
*452 "If the other action or proceeding [any pending or prior action or proceeding for dissolution of marriage, declaration of invalidity of marriage, legal separation, habeas corpus, adoption, or custody in this or any other state] is concluded before the hearing in the instant proceeding and the judgment therein provides for the support demanded in the petition being heard the court must conform its support order to the amount allowed in the other action or proceeding." (Emphasis added.)
 1 The emphasized language clearly bound the trial court here to conform its support order to the amount allowed in the Du Page action. Section 30, however, does not (nor does any other URESA provision) demand conformance with orders other than those dealing with support and, thus, there was no requirement to conform to the Du Page court contempt and impoundment orders. Moreover, as respondent was paying a greater amount in support under the Du Page court orders ($70 per week as against $250 per month), we view the trial court's order as conforming to the amount allowed in the Du Page proceeding. We do, however, believe that the trial court should have denied the petition for two principal reasons.
First, because URESA was enacted for the purpose of enforcing support orders previously entered and because respondent had fully complied with such orders in the instant case, there was no support obligation enforceable under URESA. Section 1 thereof states that "the purposes of this Act are to improve and extend by reciprocal legislation the enforcement of duties of support." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 40, par. 1201.) As explained in Super v. Armstrong (1980), 83 Ill. App.3d 1062, 1064-65, 404 N.E.2d 1008, 1009-10:
"Both criminal and civil enforcement are provided for, but the Act is clearly intended as a supplementary device to enforce support orders previously entered and is not designed to serve as an independent basis for the imposition or termination of support orders";
and, as stated in Moffat v. Moffat (1980), 27 Cal.3d 645, 658, 612 P.2d 967, 975, 165 Cal. Rptr. 877, 885, URESA "was enacted for the purpose of enforcing existing duties of support against persons present legally liable for such support; it cannot create new support obligations." See People ex rel. Oetjen v. Oetjen (1980), 92 Ill. App.3d 699, ___ N.E.2d ___; State ex rel. Arvayo v. Guerrero (1973), 21 Ariz. App. 173, 517 P.2d 526; and Ray v. Pentlicki (Fla. App. 1979), 375 So.2d 875.
 2 Enforcement is defined in Webster's Third International Dictionary as "the compelling of the fulfillment [as a law or order]." From that *453 definition it necessarily follows that there can be no enforcement of an order or duty fully accomplished and, in the context of this case, that there can be no enforcement of an existing duty to support unless there has been a breach thereof. Here, there was no such breach as respondent's existing duty to support was set forth in the Du Page court orders with which the record shows he has fully complied. Thus, there being no breach by respondent, there was no duty of support to be enforced and therefore no remedy was available under URESA.
The second reason requiring dismissal lies in the fact that an essential element of the petition was not proven. As stated above, where there is no breach of an existing duty to support, there is no remedy under URESA. The State of Wisconsin recognized this, as its petition asserted such a breach in the allegations that the children "were entitled to support from respondent" and that he "refused and neglected to provide fair and reasonable support." The record, however, establishes that there was no such refusal or neglect to provide support. To the contrary, it is clearly established that respondent made all support payments as required by the Du Page court orders. That the payments were fair and reasonable is apparent in that they were and are in an amount greater than the $250 per month ordered by the trial court here. The failure to establish the alleged breach of duty to support required denial of the petition.
We believe this reasoning is supported by decisions holding that URESA proceedings should be dismissed where there is no existing duty of child support. In Oetjen, after an order was entered by a divorce court abating child support payments, the URESA court denied a motion to terminate the support order it entered. This court reversed, holding that the abatement order circumscribed the duty to support and thus, because there was no existing duty at that time, the URESA order should have been terminated. In Guerrero, the divorce court terminated its order requiring child support payments until such time as the mother agreed to honor the father's visitation rights, and a subsequent URESA complaint for support was dismissed on the basis of the termination order. The reviewing court affirmed, reasoning that URESA is a means of enforcing a duty to support and, because the father's obligation to do so was terminated, there was no existing duty to support and, thus, there was no remedy under URESA. As stated by the Guerrero court:
"Appellant fails to distinguish between `rights' and `remedies.' Before she can have a remedy under the Reciprocal Act [URESA] there must be a duty imposed upon appellee which gives appellant a right to a remedy under said act." (21 Ariz. App. 173, 176, 517 P.2d 526, 529.)
*454 In Ray, a judgment of dissolution ordered child-support payments by the father, who thereafter was ordered in a proceeding under URESA to pay child support. Subsequently, an order was entered in the dissolution act suspending the support payments, and the father then moved to suspend the URESA order. The trial court denied the motion on the basis that the support required in the dissolution proceeding was separate and distinct from the duty imposed under URESA. The reviewing court disagreed and, in reversing, held that "URESA creates no duty of support; that statute simply provides a means of enforcing a duty of support as that duty may exist under the law of the responding state." (375 So.2d 875, 877.) Because of the suspension order, the court found that there was no existing duty enforceable in the URESA proceeding.
 3 We see no basic difference between the termination or suspension of a duty to support, as in Oetjen, Guerrero and Ray, and the complete performance of such a duty, as in the instant case. Implicit in each is the holding that there is no remedy under URESA because there is no breach of any existing duty to support.
For the reasons stated, the order appealed from is reversed, and this matter is remanded to the trial court with directions to vacate said order and to dismiss the action.
Reversed and remanded, with directions.
LORENZ and WILSON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  URESA provides for a reciprocal proceeding commenced in the "initiating state" where the "obligee"  usually the mother or child  lives, and tried and enforced in the "responding state" where the "obligor"  usually the father  lives or has property. This two-State concept avoids the expense the dependents would otherwise incur in following the obligor in order to bring suit, as they now may institute proceedings in a court of their residence. At the same time, it permits the obligor to defend in his local court with a minimum loss of time and expense.

=== CASE 2211741 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.022808+00 ===

244 Cal.App.2d 378 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
HERSLEY JONES, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 2408.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 19, 1966.
Hersley Jones, in pro. per., and Alpha L. Montgomery, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Ronald M. George, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
WHELAN, J.
Defendant appeals from the judgment finding him guilty of second degree burglary and of two prior convictions of felony in a nonjury trial.
Facts
[1a] A building maintenance man, upon entering Beebe's Drugstore in the City of Escondido at 4:30 a.m. on Monday, February 22, 1965, observed a hole in the ceiling with a metal object protruding downward through the hole; heard someone walking overhead; locked the building, leaving on the lights; and telephoned the police from a telephone in front of the building.
The police responded to the call within three or four minutes. Upon their arrival, the maintenance man reentered the drugstore and saw that the metal object no longer was protruding through the hole in the ceiling. The police found a stepladder placed up against the rear of a building a few doors away from the drugstore on the roof of which they discovered a broken-off vent which provided a hole into the attic of the drugstore.
Defendant was found in the attic, wearing a glove on one hand and with another glove and flashlight in his hand. After defendant had been removed with assistance from the attic, the floor of which was seven feet lower than the roof of the building, there was found at the place where he had been standing when first seen by the police a screwdriver 14 1/2 inches long with a "bite" 7/10 inch wide. The screwdriver blade fitted into the hole in the ceiling of the drugstore.
The floor of the attic was of beams on the underside of which was plasterboard forming the ceiling of the shop below. The hole was through the plasterboard. Between the beams *380 was loose insulating material which in the area around the hole had been cleared away. Means of access from the shop to attic was afforded by a trap-door and a door, both secured on the salesroom side.
[2a] As defendant came out of the opening from the attic, he said: "Man, I'm glad you caught me. If I'd kept on I was afraid somebody was going to shoot me." No question had yet been put to him by the police.
At 9:30 or 10 that morning at the police station, defendant was questioned by the police. Before any questioning, he had read and signed, as he himself testified, a paper informing him of his rights to counsel and to remain silent, and that anything he said might be used against him in court. He was advised orally to the same effect and told the officer that he was well aware of the Escobedo and Dorado decisions.
During the questioning, defendant stated that he had found the hole in the roof while he was attempting to hide from police in a car and entered the attic for that reason only; but, in answer to a question why he was trying to get into the drugstore, he said if he did get in there: "Well, he didn't know, that in a drugstore there is a lot of things, could have been narcotics or money."; he stated also: "... that actually all there was was an attempt of burglary; nothing had been taken; he hadn't gained access to the inside of the store ... and therefore, it was only an attempted burglary."; and said he needed money to get back to Los Angeles.
Defendant, although he testified that he was on probation from Los Angeles County, had denied his prior felony convictions upon the ground that he had petitions for writs of habeas corpus pending.
Contentions On Appeal
1. That the evidence was insufficient to support the judgment.
2. That the defendant's statements were received in evidence in violation of his right to counsel and to remain silent.
3. That defendant was sentenced in violation of the requirements of Penal Code, section 1203.
Was the Evidence Sufficient to Sustain the Judgment?
[3] Defendant contends that the entry into the attic was not a sufficient entry for burglary, and if it was a sufficient entry there was no evidence of intent to commit larceny or any felony.
He argues that he was not in the building but "he was in *381 the loft of the building." Defendant states that he has "looked diligently for cases squarely in point, and was unable to find a case of entry into an attic." The plaintiff likewise admits its inability to find such a case.
The information charged that defendant entered: "... a building known as Beebe Rexall Drug, located at 249 E. Grand Avenue, in the City of Escondido, County of San Diego, State of California, with the intent then and there and therein unlawfully and feloniously to commit theft. ..."
The gist of defendant's contention must be either that the entry into the attic did not constitute entry into the building, or that the "Beebe Rexall Drug" does not identify the entire building but only the salesroom.
For defendant to say he was not in the building, but in the loft of the building is inconsistent with a claim that the attic is not a part of the building. The claim also is inconsistent with logic. As was said in People v. Young, 65 Cal. 225, 226 [3 P. 813]: "If the room was in the house, and the house was a building, a felonious entry into the room was a felonoious entry into the building."
The claim that the "building known as Beebe Rexall Drug" consists only of the room where sales were made and not of the attic room above is not sustained. The attic room was under the same roof and within the same walls as the shop; there were doorways between the two; the attic did not have an exterior entranceway and did not permit of entrance to or from any other room than the room below. It must be held to have been a part of the building described in the information.
Mobley v. State, 130 Tex.Crim.Rep. 159 [92 S.W.2d 1038], is the sole reported decision discovered by our research in which the same contention was made as defendant here makes. The Court of Criminal Appeals in that case held that entry through the roof into an attic of a store building without entry through the ceiling of the storeroom itself was burglarious. The sound reasoning of the decision is not impaired by the fact that the Texas statutes require both breaking and entering as elements of burglary.
We need not, therefore, discuss the People's contention that the opening of a hole in the ceiling of the shop and the insertion into the shop of the screwdriver for the purpose of making an opening large enough for a man to pass through constituted an entry into the salesroom considered as a separate and distinct building from the attic room above. *382
Were Statements Admitted In Evidence In Violation of the Defendant's Right to Counsel?
[2b] The quoted statements made while defendant was emerging from the attic were not made in response to any questioning but were volunteered.
The admission into evidence of volunteered statements made by a defendant prior to his having been advised of his rights under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to the federal Constitution and before he has been subjected to a course of interrogation does not violate such rights. (Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 478 [86 S.Ct. 1602, 1630, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, 726, 10 A.L.R.3d 974].)
[4] The other statements made by defendant which were received into evidence as the result of police interrogation were made after defendant had been advised as to every right of which it is required that a defendant be advised, except that he was not advised that if he desired counsel and was without funds, counsel would be appointed for him prior to any questioning. Since, however, defendant did not request counsel and the case was tried prior to June 13, 1966, the failure to give that last advice may not be made the basis of reversal. (Johnson v. New Jersey, 384 U.S. 719, 734 [86 S.Ct. 1772, 1781, 16 L.Ed.2d 882, 893].) There was no reversible error in admitting evidence of defendant's statements.
Question of Intent
[1b] Evidence of the intent necessary to prove the corpus delicti may be found in the circumstances that have been detailed. Where, after an unauthorized entry, theft has not been committed, the intent to commit theft may be gathered from circumstances. (People v. Soto, 53 Cal. 415; People v. Daniels, 145 Cal.App.2d 615 [302 P.2d 831]; People v. Johnson, 146 Cal.App.2d 302 [303 P.2d 615]; and People v. Hawkins, 129 Cal.App. 720 [19 P.2d 249] [in none of which was there a theft or the displacement of any personal property].)
Did the Defendant Waive His Right to Probation?
Defendant contends that he was sentenced in violation of Penal Code, section 1203, in that a probation report was not ordered by the trial court.
On Tuesday, August 10, 1965, after announcing that he found defendant guilty as charged, the trial court said: "I don't know whether this man is eligible for probation. The presentence hearing report will be ordered, however." He then set the hearing of defendant's application for probation *383 for August 31. Counsel for defendant then stated: "The defendant tells me he does not wish to make application for probation, and we would waive time and then be ready for sentencing on Monday." Thereupon the court set time for pronouncement of judgment for the following Monday, August 16.
[5] The court earlier had ordered the defendant, who had been free on bail, remanded to custody. Upon the plea of defendant's counsel to enable defendant to arrange his affairs, defendant was continued on bail until the following Monday, August 16, when he was to surrender himself to the custody of the sheriff at 9 a.m.
Notwithstanding the doubt expressed by the court as to defendant's eligibility for probation, it is clear that the court was willing to entertain defendant's application for probation; he set the hearing of that application sufficiently far in advance to permit of investigation and report by the probation officer.
When defendant at that point, through his counsel, informed the court that he waived application for probation and stated he would be ready for sentencing on the following Monday, his action reasonably was interpreted by the court as a waiver of defendant's right to have the court consider an investigation and report of the probation department, and a waiver of defendant's right to be considered for probation. Defendant effectively waived those rights. (People v. Tempelis, 230 Cal.App.2d 596, 599 [41 Cal.Rptr. 253]; People v. Magee, 217 Cal.App.2d 443, 476 [31 Cal.Rptr. 658].)
Defendant's Representation by Counsel
At the time of sentencing, defendant's trial counsel was relieved. Defendant's hand-written notice of appeal in propria persona was filed the same day.
On November 8, 1965, defendant, in propria persona, filed a typewritten motion for extension of time within which to file an opening brief; he was given until January 17, 1966, to file the brief.
On January 21, 1966, still in propria persona, defendant filed his opening brief.
On January 24, defendant signed and on January 26 there was filed defendant's first application for appointment of counsel for his appeal. On January 26, counsel was appointed on the appeal.
At the time set for oral argument, counsel appeared and represented to this court that he had read the brief filed by *384 appellant, and that there was nothing that he could add to it. It is clear that the brief filed reasonably set out the points that might be urged.
The judgment is affirmed.
Coughlin, Acting P. J., and Bray, J.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the District Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9817035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-09-01 03:51:04.908629+00 ===

JORDAN, Circuit Judge,
concurring.
I concur in the opinion and judgment in this case and write separately simply to emphasize what I believe to be implicit in our decision, namely that we are not directing the District Court to address the defendants’ constitutional arguments if the parties’ dispute can be resolved on other grounds. Long-standing and sound jurisprudential practice dictates that decisions be made on the narrowest grounds available and that constitutional issues be avoided whenever possible. Cf. Clark v. Martinez, 543 U.S. 371, 381, 125 S.Ct. 716, 160 L.Ed.2d 734 (2005) (“The canon [of constitutional avoidance in statutory interpretation] is not a method of adjudicating constitutional questions by other means. Indeed, one of the canon’s chief justifications is that it allows courts to avoid the decision of constitutional questions.” (Original emphasis; internal citations omitted.)) While I do not understand our direction to the District Court on remand to be at odds with that practice, I would not want any ambiguity to be perceived on this point.

=== CASE 2211755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.259971+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 686 (1980)
Freeman JOHNSON, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 3-680A186.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 24, 1980.
Rehearing Denied January 26, 1981.
Anthony V. Luber, South Bend, for appellant-defendant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Michael Gene Worden, Asst. Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
CHIPMAN, Judge.
Freeman Johnson was found guilty, by a jury, of possession and dealing of a schedule III controlled substance. The trial court entered judgment on the dealing verdict and Johnson now brings this appeal.
We affirm.
Johnson has raised the following issues:
1. Whether the trial court erred in instructing the jury that Johnson had the burden of proving he possessed the controlled substance pursuant to a valid prescription;
2. Whether the jury verdict on the possession charge was contrary to law and unsupported by the evidence;
3. Whether there was sufficient evidence from which the jury could have found Johnson had a predisposition to deliver the controlled substance; and
4. Whether the trial court erred in not granting Johnson's Motion for Judgment on the Evidence.
*687 FACTS
On September 7, 1977, Johnson was contacted by Bobby Harris, a former high school classmate and a person Johnson "knew from the streets." Harris was a police informant, employed on a "contingency fee basis."[1] Harris was attempting to procure some speed (phendimetrazine) for undercover police officers Jack Galloway and Cheryl DeCleene. The four of them met and the officers told Johnson they wanted to buy 20 hits of speed. DeCleene testified Johnson sold them the 20 hits of speed and offered to get them up to 100 hits but they declined his offer.
On September 10, 1977, Harris again initiated and attended another meeting of the same four parties. This time the officers purchased 12 hits of speed. DeCleene also testified Johnson "told us to come by any time we wanted anything."
Finally, on October 28, 1977, Harris initiated a third meeting, this time between Johnson and Officer Horvath. At this meeting Johnson sold Horvath 55 hits of speed for $50. The two informations filed in this case arose out of the latter transaction and the two former transactions were admitted into evidence on the issue of predisposition to deal in the controlled substance.
The jury found Johnson guilty of Possession of a Controlled Substance in violation of Ind. Code 35-48-4-7[2] and of Dealing in a schedule III controlled substance in violation of Ind. Code 35-48-4-2.[3] At his sentencing the following entry was made by the trial court:
"IT IS, THEREFORE, CONSIDERED, ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED by the Court, on the jury's finding of guilty on Two Counts, that the verdict of guilty of Possession merges in the finding of guilty on the greater offense of Dealing in a Controlled Substance, and the defendant, Freeman Johnson, Jr., be and he hereby is declared guilty of the crime of Dealing in a Controlled Substance and that he be and hereby is sentenced to the Department of Corrections for a period of eight (8) years."
POSSESSION
Johnson challenges the instruction given by the trial court, based on Ind. Code 16-6-8.5-6,[4] that the defendant had the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he possessed the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription of a practitioner acting in the course of his professional practice. He also challenges the *688 sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the possession charge. While counsel for Johnson has presented us with a persuasive argument that IC 16-6-8.5-6 unconstitutionally shifts the burden of proof of an element of the offense of illegal possession to the defendant,[5] we must nonetheless refrain from addressing this issue regarding Johnson's possession charge. Counsel for both Johnson and the State have failed to realize that Johnson is attempting to appeal a conviction that does not exist. Although the jury found Johnson guilty of possession, the trial court clearly entered judgment only on the dealing charge. Accordingly, Johnson may only appeal that judgment.
ENTRAPMENT
On October 28, 1977, Harris telephoned Chief Emery Molnar of the South Bend Police Department and told him he could arrange a controlled buy. Chief Molnar then telephoned Officer Horvath and asked him to meet Harris at a local McDonalds. Harris contacted Johnson and set up a meeting at the McDonalds. The trio met there and they left in a car driven by Johnson. The exchange of the drugs and the money took place in the car.
At trial Johnson contended he was entrapped by the police. The defense of entrapment is set out in IC XX-XX-X-X.
"(a) It is a defense that:
(1) the prohibited conduct of the person was the product of a law enforcement officer, or his agent, using persuasion of other means likely to cause the person to engage in the conduct; and
(2) the person was not predisposed to commit the offense.
(b) Conduct merely affording a person an opportunity to commit an offense does not constitute entrapment."
"When there is evidence that a police officer or his agent has participated in the buying of a controlled substance the State must present evidence showing the accused's predisposition to commit the criminal act in order to show that the act was not solely the idea of the police. The accused cannot rely on the defense of entrapment if the police merely afford him the opportunity to commit the crime. Silva v. State, (1980) Ind. App., 410 N.E.2d 1342. The question of predisposition is one of subjective intent and is for the trier of fact. Stewart v. State, (1979) Ind., 390 N.E.2d 1018; Silva v. State, supra; Stayton v. State, (1980) Ind. App., 400 N.E.2d 784."
Voirol v. State, (1980) Ind. App., 412 N.E.2d 861. In determining whether the conviction was supported by sufficient evidence, we will not weigh the evidence nor resolve questions of witness credibility. We will only consider the evidence that is most favorable to the State, together with all reasonable and logical inferences that may be drawn from it. Where there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the jury's verdict, the conviction will not be set aside. Hutcherson v. State, (1978) Ind., 380 N.E.2d 1219.
Since Johnson admitted he sold the controlled substance to Officer Horvath and since Horvath admitted he participated in the buying of the controlled substance, the sole issue left to the trier of fact was whether Johnson was predisposed to selling the controlled substance. Circumstantial evidence giving rise to inferences of predisposition include the defendant's readiness to participate, his solicitation, or conduct evincing the defendant's willingness or desire to engage in future sales. Payne v. State, (1976) 168 Ind. App. 394, 343 N.E.2d 325 (concurring opinion by Garrard, J. in which Hoffman, J. concurs).
In this case Officer DeCleene testified that during the first drug transaction, Johnson told her he could get her 100 hits of speed when she requested only 20. She also testified he told her to come by any time she wanted anything, although it is unclear from the record whether this was said at the first or the second transaction. We believe these statements manifested *689 Johnson's readiness to participate and his willingness or desire to engage in future sales. There was sufficient evidence from which the jury could have found Johnson was predisposed to dealing the controlled substance.
This same issue, sufficiency of the evidence as to predisposition, was recently addressed by us in Voirol v. State, supra where we found the evidence did not support the conviction. In that case we did not have any statements by the defendant giving rise to inferences of predisposition. The only evidence of predisposition in that case was the quantity of the drug the defendant possessed and we held in the absence of any evidence as to the relative size of the quantity, no logical inference of predisposition could be made.
JUDGMENT ON THE EVIDENCE
Lastly, Johnson contends the trial court erred in failing to grant his Motion for Judgment for acquittal filed pursuant to Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 50. Citing Memorial Hospital of South Bend, Inc. v. Scott, (1973) 261 Ind. 27, 300 N.E.2d 50, Johnson argues:
"even if the jury's verdict were supported by sufficient evidence and were not contrary to law under the appellate review standard (a point not conceded) the trial court is still empowered in his role as a `thirteenth juror' to set aside the jury's verdict to prevent injustice.
For this court to determine if the trial court functioned according to the Bailey v. Kain[6] standard, it is necessary for it to consider not whether there is evidence from which the jury could conclude guilt but whether from the evidence the court would conclude guilt."
We disagree. Memorial Hospital correctly sets out the standard of review employed by us in cases where the trial court, acting as a thirteenth juror, has granted a new trial.
"Appellant frames [his] Trial Rule 50 ... assertion... as if this court on appeal can weigh the sufficiency [of the evidence]. However when such a motion is denied after the jury has rendered a verdict, this court, like the trial court, must view only the evidence and reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom favorable to the verdict in accordance with the standard of raising such an alleged error pursuant to Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 59(A)(4)."
Smith v. Kauffman, (1977) Ind. App., 366 N.E.2d 1195. For a T.R. 50 motion to be successful "there must be a total lack of evidence upon some essential issue, or the evidence must be without conflict, susceptible of only one inference, which is in favor of the accused. Carmon v. State, (1976) 265 Ind. 1, 349 N.E.2d 167.
As discussed above, sufficient evidence was produced at trial to sustain the jury's verdict. The trial court did not err in failing to grant Johnson's T.R. 50 motion.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
YOUNG, P.J., and MILLER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Harris was paid by the police only if his information or activities led to an actual controlled buy.
[2]  "XX-XX-X-X Possession of a controlled substance
A person who, without a valid prescription or order of a practitioner acting in the course of his professional practice, knowingly or intentionally possesses a controlled substance classified in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, except marijuana or hashish, commits possession of a controlled substance, a Class D felony."
[3]  "XX-XX-X-X Dealing in a schedule I, II or III controlled substance
A person who:
(1) knowingly or intentionally manufactures or delivers a controlled substance, pure or adulterated, classified in schedule I, II or III, except marijuana or hashish; or
(2) possesses, with intent to manufacture or deliver, a controlled substance, pure or adulterated, classified in schedule I, II, or III, except marijuana or hashish;
commits dealing in a schedule I, II, or III controlled substance, a Class B felony. However, the offense is a Class A felony if the person delivered the substance to a person under eighteen (18) years of age at least three (3) years his junior."
[4]  Burden of proof.-(a) It is not necessary for the state to negate any exemption or exception in this chapter or in IC 35-48 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-XX] in any complaint, information, indictment, or other pleading or in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding under this chapter or under IC 35-48. The burden of proof of any exemption or exception is on the person claiming it. (b) In the absence of proof that person is the duly authorized holder of an appropriate registration or order form issued under IC 35-48-3 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X], he is presumed not to be the holder of the registration or form.
[5]  See Mullaney v. Wilbur, (1975) 421 U.S. 684, 95 S.Ct. 1881, 44 L.Ed.2d 508, and In re Winship, (1970) 397 U.S. 358, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 25 L.Ed.2d 368.
[6]  Bailey v. Kain, (1963) 135 Ind. App. 657, 192 N.E.2d 486.