=== CASE 2207676 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.245017+00 ===

636 A.2d 956 (1994)
CEDE & CO., Cinerama, Inc.
v.
TECHNICOLOR, INC., et al.
Supreme Court of Delaware.
February 24, 1994.
Arthur L. Dent, Wilmington, DE, for Cede & Co., Cinerama, Inc.
Rodman Ward, Stephen E. Herrmann, Wilmington, DE, for Technicolor, Inc., et al.
Upon Motion for Reargument
Cinerama seeks reargument of this Court's January 18, 1994 decision, 634 A.2d 345, following return from remand to the Court of Chancery. We requested the court to clarify its reasoning for its ruling that the Technicolor directors' failure to inform its shareholders of Director Ryan's self-interest in the merger did not constitute a breach of the directors' duty of disclosure. Because we found the court to have employed the materiality analysis standard of Rosenblatt v. Getty Oil Co., Del.Supr., 493 A.2d 929 (1985), in reaching its finding, we affirmed the court's disclosure ruling as the product of a logical and deductive reasoning process and correct as a matter of law.
On motion for reargument, Cinerama argues that, this Court having found Director Ryan's self-interest to be material, the board's failure to disclose such material interest to its shareholders was a breach of its duty of disclosure as a matter of law. Cinerama asserts that "material self interest amounting to lack of objectivity by a director-fiduciary voting on a merger transaction is legally always a material fact which must be disclosed ... especially in this case where the corporate charter mandated a unanimous vote...."
The premise for Cinerama's argument of legal error is misplaced. Cinerama assumes that this Court has now found Ryan's undisclosed self-interest to be material. The apparent basis for that assumption is the following statement in our January 18, 1994 ruling: "We therefore affirm the court's finding *957 that the defendant directors did not breach their duty of disclosure to the Technicolor shareholders in failing to disclose Ryan's material self-interest in the transaction." In retrospect, we should have said "assumed" material self-interest.
This Court's decision on reargument is not premised on a finding, either by this Court or by the trial court, that Ryan's self-interest was, in fact, material. As the record bears out, the trial court made no such finding. We so indicated in our original decision, see 634 A.2d at 372 and 362 n. 30. There we stated, "... we find that we must remand for further consideration of the Chancellor's purported findings with respect to the lack of materiality of Ryan's apparently undisclosed self-interest."
We did not find any error of law in the trial court's formulation of the first part of the materiality test, id. at 362-64, and we affirmed the Chancellor's ruling that Cinerama had "retained the burden of proof of showing that the alleged nondisclosures [of the director defendants] were material, as defined under Rosenblatt, 493 A.2d at 944-45." 634 A.2d at 372.
Our remand of the disclosure issue with respect to Director Ryan and his undisclosed self-interest was for a limited purpose. We asked the Chancellor to clarify whether Ryan's self-interest "was rendered immaterial by the Technicolor board's unanimous approval of the transaction" or was rendered immaterial "upon a traditional analysis regarding the hypothetical effect of a failure to disclose a material fact upon a reasonable shareholder's `total mix' of information through a Rosenblatt analysis." 634 A.2d at 372. Since we had not previously found Ryan's self-interest to be material, we did not mean to imply in our decision following remand either a contrary finding or that the trial court found Ryan's self-interest to be material.
We must defer to the factfinder on a mixed question of fact and law, as to which reasonable minds may differ on the question of materiality. See TSC Industries, Inc. v. Northway Inc., 426 U.S. 438, 96 S. Ct. 2126, 48 L. Ed. 2d 757 (1976). The Chancellor's reasoning that Ryan's hope or expectation of employment "would certainly not have been thought [to be] very important ... to a shareholder asked to decide whether to accept or reject the MAF offer" must be sustained under Levitt v. Bouvier, Del.Supr., 287 A.2d 671 (1972), and is not erroneous as a matter of law.
However, Cinerama is correct in arguing that any analysis of the disclosure issue requires consideration of the Technicolor charter requirement of director unanimity  for approval of a sale of the company to be ratified by less than 95 percent of the issued and outstanding shares of the corporation. See 634 A.2d at 365-66. We conclude that Technicolor's charter requirement of director unanimity must be taken into consideration in determining whether Ryan's undisclosed self-interest would have been material to a reasonable shareholder. We also conclude that that issue should be addressed in the first instance by the trial court. Therefore, we remand the disclosure issue to the trial court for the limited purpose of addressing the question of the materiality of Ryan's nondisclosure in the context of Technicolor's charter requirement of director unanimity.
In this respect only, we modify our decision dated January 18, 1994, and otherwise deny Cinerama's motion for reargument.
* * *
Remanded, without jurisdiction reserved and with mandate to issue forthwith.

=== CASE 9736855 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:33.983055+00 ===

Boyle, J.
The question before the Court is whether the forfeiture set-aside provision of MCL 765.15(a); MSA 28.902(a) applies in cases where a criminal defendant’s release was secured by the posting of a surety bond with the trial court. We hold, that the set-aside provision applies only where the defendant’s release was obtained by the placement of cash, a check, or certain securities on deposit with the trial court, pursuant to MCL 765.12; MSA 28.899, in lieu of the more typical surety bond.
i
On September 9, 1985, defendant Pearl Evans failed to appear for habitual offender proceedings. At the time, she was free on a $15,000 surety bond posted by defendants Edward and Katherine Kosciuszko, doing business as Kozy Bail Bond. The judge issued an order forfeiting the bond on September 18, 1985.
Plaintiff filed a motion for entry of judgment against the surety. A hearing on the motion was held on February 10, 1986, after two postponements. At the hearing, Kozy’s counsel stated that his client was confident he could locate Evans, and requested a sixty-day extension of the hearing. The trial judge instead agreed to stay execution of the *317judgment of forfeiture for sixty days. It appears from the record that the judge believed he could amend the judgment of forfeiture under MCL 765.28; MSA 28.915, if Kozy eventually produced Evans. The judgment of forfeiture with a sixty-day stay was signed on March 12, 1986.1 Evans was apprehended through the efforts of Kozy and returned to custody on May 7, 1986. Kozy spent $6,500 to locate and apprehend Evans.
Kozy made no effort to secure remission of the forfeited bond until February 17, 1987, when it filed a motion to set aside the forfeiture and judgment. Kozy argued that it was entitled to remission of the forfeited bond because it had *318produced Evans within sixty days of the March 12, 1986, judgment, and, in the alternative, because it had satisfied the requirements for remission of forfeited bonds under MCL 765.15; MSA 28.902. This statute provides:
(a) If such bond or bail be forfeited, the court shall enter an order upon its records directing, within 45 days of the order, the disposition of such cash, check or security, and the treasurer or clerk, upon presentation of a certified copy of such order, shall make disposition thereof. The court shall set aside the forfeiture and discharge the bail or bond, within 1 year from the time of the forfeiture judgment, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section if the person who forfeited bond or bail is apprehended and the ends of justice have not been thwarted and the county has been repaid its costs for apprehending the person.
(b) If such bond or bail be discharged, the court shall enter an order to that effect with a statement of the amount to be returned to the depositor. Upon presentation of a certified copy of such order, the treasurer or clerk having such cash, check or security shall pay or deliver the same to the person named therein or to his order.
(c) In case such cash, check or security shall be in the hands of the sheriff or any officer, other than such treasurer or clerk, at the time it is declared discharged or forfeited, the officer holding the same shall make such disposition thereof as the court shall order, upon presentation of a certified copy of the order of the court. [MCL 765.15; MSA 28.902. Emphasis added.]
In arguing that § 15 applied, Kozy relied on People v Pavlak, 99 Mich App 190; 297 NW2d 878 (1980). The Court in Pavlak disagreed with a decision of another panel of the Court of Appeals which held that § 15 did not apply to commercial surety bonds. People v Johnson, 72 Mich App 702; *319250 NW2d 508 (1976). After considering arguments from counsel on Kozy’s motion of February 23, 1987, the trial court entered an "amended judgment” on March 11, 1987, that stated, in part:
It is hereby ordered pursuant to MCL 765.28 [MSA 28.915] that the Judgment previously entered on March 12, 1986 against Surety is hereby modified such that the surety shall pay to the County of Bay $15,000.00, plus 12% interest from October 8, 1985 but the Surety is hereby entitled to a setoff of $6,500.00 against that sum for its expenses in locating and returning Pearl Lee Evans to custody.
Kozy appealed this amended judgment in the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals agreed with the panel in Pavlak and decided that the trial judge should have remitted Kozy’s bond under § 15. People v Evans, 168 Mich App 654; 425 NW2d 209 (1988). The Court of Appeals certified that its decision conflicted with that of the panel in Johnson, and we granted plaintiff’s application for leave to appeal.2
n
The statutory provision which we construe today, § 15 of chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure, MCL 765.1 et seq.; MSA 28.888 et seq., is one of a number of sections within that chapter which concern the right of a party to deposit cash, a check, or certain negotiable securities with a trial court in order to secure a defendant’s release *320when bail is either required or permitted.3 Sections 12 through 18 of Chapter V were originally enacted together in 1919, in substantially the same form in which they exist today, as a single, comprehensive act entitled:
An act to provide for the furnishing and acceptance of cash, certified checks or certain obligations of the United States government or of municipal corporations in lieu of bonds or bail of other character required or permitted by law. [1919 PA 332.][4]
They are thus considered "in pari materia,” and as such must be read and construed together. Wayne Co v Dep’t of Social Welfare, 343 Mich 475, 480; 72 NW2d 200 (1955); Van Antwerp v State, 334 Mich 593, 605; 55 NW2d 108 (1952).
The first of these sections, § 12, establishes the right of a party to deposit cash, a check, or certain [negotiable] securities with the court, "in lieu” of other forms of bond or bail:
In any criminal cause or proceeding where bond or bail of any character is required or permitted for any purpose, the party or parties required or *321permitted to furnish such bail or bond may deposit, in lieu thereof, in the manner herein provided, cash, certified check on any state or national bank in this state, obligations of the United States government negotiable by delivery or bonds of any municipality of this state negotiable by delivery, equal in amount to the amount of the bond or bail so required or permitted.
Section 13 describes the procedure to be followed in depositing "[s]uch cash, check or security” with the court, which must then, under § 14, treat the deposit as the equivalent of the bond or bail "in lieu” of which it has been deposited.
Section 15, the provision at issue in this case, addresses what happens to the "cash, check or security” in the event of either a forfeiture or a discharge of the "bond or bail.” Section 16 provides that the "[c]ash, check[ ] or securit[y]” deposited with the court shall not be subject to garnishment or attachment, although it may be assignable under certain circumstances. Section 17 provides that the deposit is to be placed in a special fund, the interest on which is to be received by the state or local government "according to the nature of the case,” except that interest coupons attached to the government bonds or securities may not be detached. Lastly, § 18 allows any depositor to redeem the cash, check, or securities deposited with the court by "substituting the bond originally required or permitted.”
The question in this case concerns the applicability of the second sentence in § 15(a), which states that the court "shall set aside the forfeiture and discharge the bail or bond, within 1 year from the time of the forfeiture judgment” if certain conditions are met. This sentence was not a part of the original 1919 legislation; it was added to § 15(a) by 1970 PA 226.
*322The defendant-surety contends, and the Court of Appeals has agreed, that this later-enacted set-aside provision is not limited in application to situations in which cash, checks, or certain securities have been deposited with the court on a defendant’s behalf, but applies even where the defendant’s release was obtained by the execution of a surety bond with the court. In our opinion, to conclude that § 15(a), or any part of it, was ever intended to apply in cases where cash, checks, or certain securities were not actually placed on deposit with the court greatly exalts form over substance and completely fails to recognize the limited application of, and the relationship among, §§ 12 through 18.
A
Prior to the addition in 1970 of the set-aside provision, § 15 plainly was intended to apply only where cash, checks, or securities had been deposited with the court. Nothing makes this conclusion more clear than the fact that all of the other sections with which it was originally enacted were, and still are, exclusively concerned with deposits with the court.
As explained above, § 12 creates the right to deposit such instruments; § 13 describes the procedures for doing so; § 14 makes the deposit the equivalent of bond or bail; § 16 prohibits garnishment or attachment of the deposits, but allows assignment in certain circumstances; § 17 explains who collects interest on the deposits; and § 18 allows a depositor to regain the cash, checks, or securities by substituting the bond originally required. Is it possible, remembering that these provisions are in pari materia and thus to be considered together, Wayne Co, supra, that § 15 is to be *323read as applicable to something different from these others? We think not.
Moreover, the procedures established in that section with respect to forfeiture and discharge clearly contemplated the court’s having to direct the disposition of — i.e., to order the clerk or treasurer to either keep or return — that which has been deposited with it. While a surety bond is executed with the court in exchange for the defendant’s release, it is not "deposited” with the court in the sense that something needs to be "returned” to the surety by the treasurer or clerk, who will "pay or deliver” it to the surety or to its order.5
The question thus becomes whether the set-aside provision itself, which was added to § 15(a) in 1970, was intended to apply both to deposits and surety *324bonds. We reject this contention, however, because we do not believe that the Legislature would have placed a set-aside provision intended to apply to surety bonds, or any other sort of bail, in the midst of a number of sections whose application until then had been limited to deposits of cash, checks, or securities.
Indeed, for us to conclude that the forfeiture set-aside clause alone among these other provisions applied in all bail or bond cases, and not just those involving deposits with the court, would violate well-established rules of statutory construction regarding amendatory language. As explained in 1A Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction (4th ed), §22.35, pp 296-297, "[i]n the absence of express evidence to the contrary, the section as amended is to be construed to have the same scope as the unaltered sections of the original statute. The unchanged sections and the amendment are to be interpreted so that they do not conflict.” Or, as stated by this Court in People ex rel Attorney General v Michigan Central R Co, 145 Mich 140, 150; 108 NW 772 (1905):
[Generally, an] amendment [of a statute] is to be considered as a part of the original act, and the entire act as amended ... be given the construction as if the amendment was a part of the original act.
What this means is that in the absence of any indication to the contrary, we must assume that the amendment of § 15(a), i.e., the set-aside provision, was intended to be as limited in scope as those sections of which it became a part.
It is no answer to say that the Legislature may *325not have realized that the section into which it was placing the forfeiture provision until then had applied only where deposits had been made with the court. In our opinion, the relationship among these seven sections (§§ 12-18), and their "separateness” from the other sections in chapter V, is obvious. One need not be aware of the particular history of these sections to recognize that relationship and limited application.6 Plainly, the set-aside provision itself applies only where there are deposits of cash, checks, or securities with the court.7
*326B
Despite the limited scope of § 15 and its companion sections, the Court of Appeals found it to be "sound policy to allow a [commercial] surety to recoup a forfeited bond.” People v Evans, supra, p 659. It agreed with the decision of the panel in People v Pavlak, supra, pp 196-197, that to refuse to provide such relief to commercial bondsmen would create a disincentive on their part to find and return absconded defendants:
Furthermore, it is our opinion that a rule which denies corporate sureties the relief provided for in MCL 765.15(a) [MSA 28.902(a)] is unsound as a matter of public policy. We have previously noted that "the surety’s function on the bail-bond contract operates to relieve the state from policing court attendance of bailed defendants and thus furthers the state’s interests.” Citizens for Pretrial Justice v Goldfarb, 88 Mich App 519, 567; 278 NW2d 653 (1979) (Brennan, J.). GCR 1963, 790.4(b) also recognizes the necessity of a surety bond to secure the appearance of a criminal accused in some circumstances.
It is well recognized in Michigan that a professional bondsman has the power to arrest an absconding client. Citizens for Pretrial Justice v Goldfarb, supra, 556. It is likely that a surety would spend large amounts of time and capital in locating and apprehending an absconder. If we now preclude the surety from recouping the amount of the forfeited bond, we will, as a practical matter, take away or at least greatly diminish his incentive to pursue such clients. This result would be detrimental to the court system of this state.
We need not resort to considerations of proper public policy in order to interpret § 15(a). While there may be good reasons for extending the pe*327riod for the remission of forfeitures to commercial bail bonds as well as deposits with the court, such reasons are irrelevant for our purposes. The question in this case is not whether the set-aside provision should apply only to deposits of cash, checks, or securities, but rather whether it does. For the reasons explained above, we can answer that question in the affirmative without engaging in a lengthy analysis of the purposes behind its narrow scope.8
We are not persuaded, in any event, that policy considerations in fact support the application of § 15(a) in surety bond cases, as the Court of Appeals concludes. Given the lack of legislative history regarding the forfeiture provision, we are unlikely ever to arrive at the precise reasoning or "policies” behind its enactment. We should observe, however, that it was added to the statute during the bail reform movement of the 1960’s and 70’s, at the heart of which was a growing dissatisfaction with the existing commercial bail bond system. Critics of this system charged, among other things, that the idea of giving private businessmen so significant a role in determining whether an individual is to be released from jail pending trial is fundamentally at odds with our *328system of justice,9 and that the practice results in economic discrimination against those defendants who are financially incapable of raising the fee required by the bondsman, and who must therefore remain in jail pending trial.10
Even the timing of the provision’s enactment, however, cannot fully explain the reasons behind it. We cannot know, for example, whether the Legislature was generally joining the movement against the commercial bail bond business by making full cash deposits more "attractive” than commercial bonds (because of the longer period for remission of deposits in lieu of surety bonds). Nor can we know whether it specifically intended to exclude commercial surety bonds from the longer set-aside period by placing the provision in § 15(a), which, again, deals exclusively with deposits, because it wanted to actually discourage long-term searches for absconded defendants by bondsmen.11
It is also possible that the Legislature was sim*329ply formally extending to depositors the same sort of right to remission or relief from forfeiture that existed, albeit with less formal certainty, for commercial bondsmen.12 The provision’s placement might also merely reflect an intentional, and not unusual, distinction between commercial entities and individuals. The same sort of distinction is found, for example, in our Uniform Commercial Code, MCL 440.1101 et seq.; MSA 19.1101 et seq., which distinguishes between merchants and other buyers and sellers.13
We do not suggest that the legislative history of the amendment points to any of the above as the purpose behind its enactment. Rather, the point is that there are any number of reasons why the Legislature might have chosen to create a set-aside provision that applies only to deposits with the court, and that we should not presume otherwise. If anything, the presumption should be that the Legislature did intend to limit the amendment’s application. In our view, the most persuasive evi*330dence of a legislative intent to limit the right to relief under § 15(a) is our inability to conclude — in light of the historical context in which the amendment was passed — that the Legislature could have intended to so ensure the profitability of the bondsman’s undertaking.
In all cases, whether the defendant appears on time or not, the bondsman is entitled to keep the ten percent fee he charges for his services. In addition, he often secures collateral from the defendant or his family or relatives for as much of the other ninety percent of the bond amount as he can, in the event the defendant does not appear. In essence, the bondsman’s decision to bail a particular defendant is a business decision, reflecting an evaluation of whether the defendant is likely to appear for trial, his recourses in the event the defendant does not appear, and, of course, the fee he will in any event collect. We find it doubtful, given the time and context in which the amendment was passed, that the Legislature intended to remove a good part of this "risk factor” from the bondsman’s decision by ensuring not only his ten percent fee but his freedom from liability even if the defendant fails to appear, so long as he is captured within a year.
c
Finally, it should be noted that the defendant-surety in this case has not been left without a remedy if § 15(a) is found unavailable. Section 28 of chapter V sets forth the procedures for entering a forfeiture judgment against a surety in the event of a default on a recognizance. It includes an opportunity for the surety to appear before the trial court to explain why judgment should not be entered against it, in whole or in part:
*331In addition to any other method available, it is hereby provided that whenever default shall be made in any recognizance in any court of record, the same shall be duly entered of record by the clerk of said court and thereafter said court, upon the motion of the attorney general, prosecuting attorney or city attorney, may give the surety or sureties 20 days’ notice, which notice shall be served upon said surety or sureties in person or left at his or their last known place of residence. Said surety or sureties shall be given an opportunity to appear before the court on a day certain and show cause why judgment should not be entered against him or them for the full amount of such recognizance. If good cause is not shown, the court shall then enter judgment against the surety or sureties on said recognizance for such amount as it may see ñt not exceeding the full amount thereof. Execution shall be awarded and executed upon said judgment in like manner as is provided in personal actions. [MCL 765.28; MSA 28.915. Emphasis added.][14]
In addition, after a judgment has been entered against a surety, it stands as any judgment rendered in a personal action, and, as the Court of Appeals stated in Johnson, supra, p 709, "[i]t is enforceable, reviewable and appealable by way of the same provisions and by other statutes and court rules which may apply to the specific situation . . . .” The most significant of these provisions is MCL 600.4835; MSA 27A.4835, which provides, in pertinent part:
The circuit court for the county in which such court was held, or in which such recognizance was *332taken, may, upon good cause shown, remit any penalty, or any part thereof, upon such terms as appear just and equitable to the court.
For purposes of this statute, the term "penalty” includes forfeited recognizances. MCL 600.4801; MSA 27A.4801. The surety in this case has not been left without a remedy.15
*333CONCLUSION
The forfeiture set-aside provision of § 15(a) does not apply in cases where a surety bond has been posted for a defendant’s release; rather, its application is limited to cases in which the defendant’s release was procured by depositing with the court cash, checks, or certain securities in the amount set as bail. Where a surety bond has been posted, no such deposit exists.
The decision of the Court of Appeals is therefore reversed, and the decision of the trial court is reinstated.
Riley, C.J., and Brickley, Cavanagh, Archer, and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Boyle, J.
The judgment read, in part:
[T]he recognizance having been forfeited by the Court for failure of the Defendant to appear as ordered by the Court; the Surety having appeared by counsel to respond to the Motion [for Entry of Judgment Against Surety at] a hearing in open Court on February 10, 1986; the Surety having offered no reason at that time to deny the Motion of the People for Judgment, but rather requesting a Stay of Execution of Judgment for sixty (60) days from the date of Entry of Judgment in order to permit the Surety to continue its efforts to locate the Defendant and return her to custody; the People having not objected to the Entry of Judgment in that manner, although the People reserved comment on whether the Judgment should be reduced by the Court pursuant to MCL 765.28 [MSA 28.915] if the Defendant is returned to custody by the Surety within said sixty (60) days; and the Court at this time having given counsel the opportunity to submit legal authority on the issue of whether or not a remittitur is appropriate under MCL 765.28 [MSA 28.915] where a surety returns a defendant to custody prior to execution of judgment; and the Court being otherwise fully advised in the premises;
It is hereby ordered that Judgment in the amount of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00) is hereby entered against the Surety and in favor of the People of the State of Michigan, payable to the County of Bay.
It is further ordered that execution of this Judgment is hereby stayed for sixty (60) days from the date hereof, after which the People may take any and all necessary proceedings to enforce and collect this Judgment, plus the interest thereon.
Following our decision to review this case, another panel of the Court of Appeals decided to follow the Johnson decision. People v Munley, 175 Mich App 399; 438 NW2d 292 (1989) (§ 15 does not afford relief to a commercial surety who has returned an errant defendant to custody after the appearance date has passed, but remission was nevertheless proper under § 4835 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.4835; MSA 27A.4835).
As explained below, such a deposit, made in the full amount set as bail, must be distinguished from other more common methods of securing the defendant’s release, such as depositing only ten percent of the bail amount with the court, MCR 6.106(D)(3)(b), or posting a "surety bond.” Surety bonds may be posted by a commercial "bondsman,” who collects a fee for this service from the defendant or other party interested in securing his release, see, e.g., Citizens for Pretrial Justice v Goldfarb, 415 Mich 255; 327 NW2d 910 (1982); MCL 750.167b; MSA 28.364(2), or by a private individual, who generally pledges real property to the court in exchange for the defendant’s release. See MCL 765.20 et seq.; MSA 28.907 et seq. In this case, defendant Kozy Bail Bond, a commercial "bondsman,” executed a surety bond with the court in order to secure defendant’s release.
Chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which concerns the subject of bail generally, was "created” by 1927 PA 175. This new statute comprised both original sections and provisions already in existence elsewhere, such as 1919 PA 332.
We are not at all troubled, in reaching this conclusion, by the fact that § 15 speaks generally of "bond or bail” being forfeited, and of "bail or bond” being discharged, rather than of "cash, checks, or securities” being forfeited or discharged. While the Legislature’s use of the terms in this manner is somewhat inartful, it is hardly surprising. This Court itself has referred to the deposit of cash, checks, or securities under this statute as the posting of both "cash bail,” Bingham v Montcalm Co, 251 Mich 651, 652; 232 NW 348 (1930), and "cash bond,” People v Faculak, 325 Mich 56, 59; 37 NW2d 709 (1949). In People v Benmore, 298 Mich 701, 704, 706; 299 NW 773 (1941), which involved a deposit of cash to secure the defendant’s release, this Court used both of those terms interchangeably, and spoke as well of the defendant’s "bond” being "ordered forfeited.”
The best evidence, however, that the terms "bail” and "bond” are used in a general rather than specific sense in § 15 is their obvious use in the same manner in the following section, § 16, which concerns the extent to which such deposits are subject to legal process. That section cannot be concerned with anything but deposits with the court. Surety bonds are not subject to garnishment or attachment even in the absence of a statute such as this. Nor can they be assigned. Section 16 must, therefore, be limited in application to deposits of cash, checks, or securities. Yet, that section, too, speaks of a court having jurisdiction to "discharge the bond or bail,” and refers to the court’s function as that of discharging "such bail or bond . . . .” This use of these same terms in § 16, which clearly is addressed only to deposits with the court, seems to preclude any argument that their use in § 15, with which it is in pari materia, implies a broader scope.
We are somewhat surprised by the dissent’s suggestion that the Legislative Service Bureau was unaware, in 1970, that § 15(a) until then had applied only to deposits with the court (as Justice Levin’s own opinion acknowledges, post, p 335, n 9), and that no member of the Legislature could have known this either. In People v Harrison, 194 Mich 363, 369; 160 NW 623 (1916), this Court long ago acknowledged the general rule of statutory construction that the Legislature is
presumed to know of and legislate in harmony with existing laws, and the language of every enactment is, so far as possible, to be construed consistent with other laws which it does not in plain and unequivocal terms modify or repeal.
We recently reaffirmed this rule in Endykiewicz v State Hwy Comm, 414 Mich 377, 385; 324 NW2d 755 (1982), an opinion signed by Justice Levin.
In our view, this presumption that the Legislature acts with knowledge of, and in harmony with, existing legislation necessarily extends not only to "other” laws, but also to the very piece of legislation the Legislature acts to amend. Indeed, we think the presumption should apply with even greater force in such cases, as explained above. To conclude otherwise is to take a rather dim view of the legislative process. Unlike Justice Levin, we refuse to believe that the Legislature either cannot or does not read its own statutes.
We do not disagree that, given that the forfeited cash, checks, or securities are unlikely to be in the same form up to a year after the forfeiture as when deposited, the Legislature may have unnecessarily confused matters by indicating that the set aside should be pursuant to § 15(b). We do not believe that this imprecision is fatal, however, since even as originally enacted, § 15(b) did not admit of a literal interpretation. In our view, that section cannot be read literally to require the court to return the same cash or the same uncashed check, regardless of whether the bail provisions were complied with and the bail or bond was discharged or whether it was forfeited.
We are not presented with a claim that it is somehow improper for the Legislature to treat deposits with the court differently than surety bonds. The defendant does not argue, for example, that this difference in treatment constitutes a violation of its constitutional guarantee of equal protection, although one of the cases it cites in support of its interpretation of § 15, People v Pavlak, supra, does conclude that there is "no rational basis” for such unequal treatment. Id., p 196. The question in this case is simply whether the statute as written does treat deposits differently from surety bonds.
Moreover, the distinction made by the Court of Appeals in this case and Pavlak between "commercial” and "individual” sureties for purposes of interpreting § 15(a) is in any case improper. In our view, it is unimportant who posts the surety bond. What is important for purposes of § 15 is whether there has been a deposit of cash, check, or securities rather than an execution of a surety bond.
See, e.g., Pannell v United States, 115 US App DC 379, 380; 320 F2d 698 (1963) (Wright, J., concurring):
The effect of such a system is that the professional bondsmen hold the keys to the jail in their pockets. They determine for whom they will act as surety — who in their judgment is a good risk. The bad risks, in the bondsmen’s judgment, and the ones who are unable to pay the bondsmen’s fees, remain in jail. The court and the commissioner are relegated to the relatively unimportant chore of fixing the amount of bail.
This bail reform “movement” began with the creation of the Vera Foundation in 1961, and its establishment of the Manhattan Bail Project that same year. It was the result of this undertaking that "awoke” courts and others to the inequities and waste of the bail system. For a general history of the bail reform movement, see Thomas, Bail Reform in America (Berkeley: Univ of Cal Press, 1976); Wice, Freedom for Sale: A National Study of Pretrial Release (Lexington: DC Heath & Co., 1974); Goldfarb, Ransom: A Critique of the American Bail System (New York: Harper & Row, 1965).
See, e.g., New York Senate Research Service Task Force on Critical Problems, Accused and Unconvicted: A Brief on Bail Practices (1978), p 14.
Consider, for example, this passage from Ransom, n 10 supra, at pp 112-113:
When a defendant who is free on bail fails to appear at trial, the very essence of our money-based bail system is that the bond shall be forfeited. This inevitability should be the very inducement that underlies the system. Yet, in practice, it is rare that bail money is in fact forfeited. Judges will often give the surety some time to make good on his assurance by finding the defendant and presenting him for later trial. Failing that, courts will often remit forfeitures on one ground or another even though the bondsman has failed to fulfill his role if the defendant disappears. Often judges will remit forfeitures even in cases where the defendant does not appear, late or ever. Where the bondsman shows due diligence in pursuing the disappearing defendant or pleads extenuating circumstances to account for his failure to produce a defendant, courts will often excuse his failure.
Section 2-509 of the UCC, MCL 440.2509; MSA 19.2509, which governs risk of loss, is a particularly appropriate example of this distinction. See also § 2-205 (firm offers); § 2-314 (implied warranty of merchantability); § 2-609 (adequate assurance of performance).
It was under this provision that the trial court in this case awarded the defendant surety a $6,500 "set-off” against the $15,000 forfeiture. The prosecution has not appealed the trial court’s action in this Court, and has in fact requested that this Court affirm the decision of the trial court. We therefore decline to comment on the applicability of that provision in this case.
We note, lastly, the defendant surety’s argument that the term "security” in the phrase "cash, check or security” is broad enough to encompass a commercial surety bond. On this point, however, we find Judge Gillis’ discussion in People v Johnson, supra, persuasive:
Within chapter 5 there are seven statutes (§§ 12-18) which deal with the same subject matter, that is, the "deposit of cash, certified check or certain securities in lieu of bond or bail.” Accordingly, we interpret the statutes in connection with each other. Section 12 sets out the types of securities included within the heading "certain securities” which may be deposited. These are, "obligations of the United States Government negotiable by delivery or bonds of any municipality of this state negotiable by delivery.” The phrase "cash, check or security” is found in §§ 13 and 16 in addition to § 15. Sections 17 and 18 contain the phrase "any cash or securities.” It is apparent to us that the phrases "such cash, check or security,” "the cash, check or security” and "any cash or securities” all refer to the items deposited in lieu of hail or bond. In order to be remitted in accordance with § 15, the bail or bond must first be deposited as provided in § 13, and in order to be so deposited the item must be one that is acceptable under § 12. Surety bonds are not listed within § 12 as a type of "certain security.” [Id., p 707.]
To this explanation, we add only a brief reference to § 18, which states:
Any person, firm or corporation availing himself or itself of the provisions of this chapter may, at any time before forfeiture of the same, redeem any cash or securities so deposited by substituting the bond originally required or permitted. [Emphasis added.]
This provision, which allows a party to retrieve from the court any "cash, [checks] or securities” deposited with it by "substituting the bond originally required or permitted” — e.g., by executing a surety bond in the same amount — ¡demonstrates the clear distinction between the negotiable securities referred to initially in § 12 and the kind of "security” with which a court is provided when it accepts a surety bond.

=== CASE 9736856 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:33.98933+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). Twenty years ago, in 1970, the Legislature added a sentence to § 151 of the bail chapter (chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure) concerning forfeiture of bond or bail, providing that the court shall set aside a forfeiture if the person released on bail is apprehended within one year, the ends of justice have not been thwarted, and the county has been repaid the cost of apprehending the person.
The majority today holds that the forfeiture set-aside provision, applies only where the release of *334the defendant from custody was obtained by the deposit of cash, a certified check, or certain securities2 with the trial court3 and does not apply where, to use language in the title of 1919 PA 332, "bonds or bail of other character required or permitted by law” are furnished.4 I would hold that the forfeiture set-aside provision applies to all bonds or bail.
i
Pearl Evans failed to appear. An order was entered forfeiting a $15,000 surety bond posted by Kozy Bail Bond. Kozy apprehended Evans within the one-year period.5 The Court of Appeals, agreeing with one panel6 and disagreeing with another,7 held that the trial judge should have set aside the forfeiture.8
The majority holds that because Evans was not released as a result of a deposit of cash, a certified check, or government securities with the clerk, but rather as a result of Kozy’s furnishing a surety *335bond, that the forfeiture set-aside provision does not apply. The majority reaches its conclusion on two bases:
(1) the forfeiture set-aside provision was added to a section of the statute which, as originally enacted in 1919 — over fifty years before the 1970 amendment — provided for deposit of cash, certified checks, or government securities in lieu of a surety bond.9 The majority reasons that the Legislature, aware of this history, intended to limit the forfeiture set-aside provision to forfeitures of cash, certified checks, or government securities;
(2) a contrary construction would "ensure the profitability of the bondsman’s undertaking.”10
I would hold, absent evidence of a legislative intent to place a gloss on the literal language of the statute — applicable in terms to any forfeiture of "bail or bond” — so that the forfeiture set-aside provision applies only to bail or bond provided by the deposit of cash, certified checks, or government securities, that the forfeiture set-aside provision also applies where the bail or bond is provided by a commercial surety or an individual surety, such as a friend or relative of the defendant.
n
The majority states that it "need not resort to *336considerations of proper public policy in order to interpret § 15(a),”11 but, curiously, appears to rest its decision on its perception of public policy:
In our view, the most persuasive evidence of a legislative intent to limit the right to relief under § 15(a) is our inability to conclude — in light of the historical context in which the amendment was passed — that the Legislature could have intended to so ensure the profitability of the bondsman’s undertaking.
In all cases, whether the defendant appears on time or not, the bondsman is entitled to keep the ten percent fee he charges for his services. In addition, he often secures collateral from the defendant or his family or relatives for as much of the other ninety percent of the bond amount as he can, in the event the defendant does not appear. In essence, the bondsman’s decision to bail a particular defendant is a business decision, reflecting an evaluation of whether the defendant is likely to appear for trial, his recourses in the event the defendant does not appear, and, of course, the fee he will in any event collect. We find it doubtful, given the time and context in which the amendment was passed, that the Legislature intended to remove a good part of this "risk factor” from the bondsman’s decision by ensuring not only his ten percent fee but his freedom from liability even if the defendant fails to appear, so long as he is captured within a year.[12]
The majority’s explanation for its result is imaginative. There is no legislative history indicating that a single legislator expressed the concept set forth in the majority opinion.
The majority’s analysis is contradictory. The majority recognizes that the surety "often secures collateral from the defendant or his family or *337relatives”13 for the entire amount of its exposure. Thus, the result of the majority’s decision may not be to reduce the profitability of the bondsman’s undertaking, but rather to cause loss to family, relatives, or friends who provide the collateral without which the surety would not have furnished the bond.
I suggest that before proceeding on the hypothesis that the result of its narrow reading of the forfeiture set-aside provision will be a reduction in the profitability of the business of commercial suretyship that the Court should remand for the taking of evidence. The trial court could invite commercial sureties and others to introduce evidence concerning the extent commercial sureties act with or without collateral, whether limiting the applicability of the forfeiture set-aside provision will result in an increase in premium costs to defendants, and in general who will defray any added cost: commercial sureties, family, relatives or friends of defendants, or taxpayers who, because of increased costs in obtaining a surety bond, may be called upon to pay the cost of housing defendants who otherwise might be released on bond.
I do not wish to be understood as suggesting that the correct disposition of this case is a remand for that purpose. I would hold that the forfeiture set-aside provision applies to all forfeitures of bail or bond, and suggest a remand only because I believe the majority’s construction is premised on assumptions regarding the facts relevant to the underwriting of commercial surety bonds that have little or no reality.
hi
Chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure *338applies generally to bail without regard to whether the "security” for the defendant’s appearance is a surety bond or other collateral. The sentence added in 1970 might have been located in § 15(a) simply because the first sentence of § 15(a) speaks of the entry of an order where "bond or bail” is forfeited, and the added language concerns setting aside such a forfeiture. The Legislative Service Bureau may have advised putting the language in this subsection because it appeared to the bureau to be the appropriate place for the language without anyone having been aware of the possible construction, now placed on such choice of location, stemming from the original form of the language in 1919, fifty-one years earlier, or the procedural code revision in 1927, forty-three years earlier.
While enlightening, the forty-three-/fifty-one-year "prehistory,” long before the 1970 enactment, has little bearing on the question at hand. What should be determinative is what the Legislature intended in 1970. One can be sure that no member of the 1970 Legislature was aware of the forty-three-/fifty-one-year "prehistory” related in the majority opinion.
While the Legislature could have been clearer, and the "in accordance with subsection (b) of this section” clause lends support to the majority’s conclusions, since the first clause of subsection (b), providing for the entry of an order of discharge, gives life to the language added in 1970 in all cases without regard to the form of the "bail or bond,” the conclusion that the 1970 Legislature intended that the added language apply only to bail or bond provided by the deposit of cash, checks, or government securities, and not to a *339surety or other bond, or to so distinguish between such forms of collateral, has not been justified.14
The emphasized words were added:
If such bond or bail be forfeited, the court shall enter an order upon its records directing, within 45 days of the order, the disposition of such cash, check or security, and the treasurer or clerk, upon presentation of a certified copy of such order, shall make disposition thereof. The court shall set aside the forfeiture and discharge the bail or bond, within 1 year from the time of the forfeiture judgment, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section if the person who forfeited bond or bail is apprehended and the ends of justice have not been thwarted and the county has been repaid its costs for apprehending the person. [MCL 765.15(a); MSA 28.902(a).]
The opinion continues: "in lieu of the more typical surety bond.” Ante, p 316.
Today, typically, release is on personal recognizance. It appears that the second most typical or common means of securing a defendant’s release is the posting of ten percent of the amount of bail 'set by the magistrate.
The majority states that the forfeiture/set-aside provision applies where cash, certified check, or government securities are deposited with the clerk of the court. The deposit may be with "the clerk of the court, if under bond, or with the treasurer of the county, city, village or township within which the bail or bond is to be furnished or, in any case, with the state treasurer.” MCL 765.13; MSA 28.900.
"[Bjonds or bail of other character required or permitted by law” were developed at common law before the enactment of 1919 PA 332, with little structure in the statutes until the enactment in 1927 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Then, it appears, for the first time the common law and such statutory provisions as had been enacted were, for the most part, pulled together and enacted as chapter V.
It expended $6,500 in doing so.
People v Pavlak, 99 Mich App 190; 297 NW2d 878 (1980).
People v Johnson, 72 Mich App 702; 250 NW2d 508 (1976).
People v Evans, 168 Mich App 654; 425 NW2d 209 (1988).
Section 15, as originally enacted as part of 1919 PA 332, was concerned only with, again referring to the language of the title of that act, the "furnishing and acceptance of cash, certified checks or certain obligations of the United States government or of municipal corporations in lieu of bonds or bail of other character required or permitted by law.” (Emphasis added.)
Section 15(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure continues that concept, stating that "[i]f such bond or bail be forfeited, the court shall enter an order upon its records directing . . . the disposition of such cash, [certified] check or security [i.e., the United States government or municipal bonds].” Section 15(b) continues the concept, speaking of the return of the cash, check, or security "[i]f such bond or bail be discharged.”
Ante, p 330.
Ante, p 326.
Ante, pp 329-330.
Ante, p 330.
The first clause of the language added in 1970 states that the court shall set aside the forfeiture reflected in the forfeiture judgment "and discharge the bail or bond” (emphasis added) if within one year from the date of the forfeiture judgment "the person who forfeited bond or bail” is apprehended, the ends of justice have not been thwarted, and the county has been repaid its costs for apprehending the person.
The added language also states that the setting aside shall be "in accordance with subsection (b) of this section,” which provides: "If such bond or bail be discharged, the court shall enter an order to that effect with a statement of the amount to be returned to the depositor. Upon presentation of a certified copy of such order, the treasurer or clerk having such cash, check or security shall pay or deliver the same to the person named therein or to his order.” MCL 765.15(b); MSA 28.902(b).
To be sure subsection (b) provides for a statement "of the amount to be returned to the depositor” (emphasis added), and that the treasurer or clerk "having such cash, check or security shall pay or deliver the same to the person named therein or to his order.” (Emphasis added.)
Subsection (b) does literally appear to contemplate the return of the very check or security (cash being fungible) deposited. But that would not be possible if, after the forfeiture judgment and before a set-aside order is entered, the check or security has been turned into cash. Thus, that portion of subsection (b) cannot literally be applied where the check or security has been turned into cash.
And clearly subsection (b) cannot be applied if the county had collected on a personal recognizance or from a surety on the forfeiture judgment. (In the instant case, the county had not collected on the forfeiture judgment before the defendant was apprehended.)
That portion of subsection (b) which provides that "[i]f such bond or bail be discharged” (emphasis added), the court shall "enter an order to that effect,” can be applied to any set-aside order whether the defendant’s release from custody was obtained by the furnishing of a personal recognizance, a surety or other bond, cash, a certified check, or government securities.

=== CASE 2207683 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.325273+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 457 (2004)
Mildred RAWLS, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
MARSH SUPERMARKET, INC., and First National Bank & Trust, Appellee-Defendant.
No. 34A05-0306-CV-274.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
January 28, 2004.
*458 Brant J. Parry, Scott Sullivan, Noel & Noel, Kokomo, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Ty M. Craver, Hill Fulwider McDowell Funk & Matthews, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
FRIEDLANDER, Judge.
Mildred Rawls appeal the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of First National Bank & Trust (First National), in her negligence claim against First National and Marsh Supermarket, Inc. (Marsh). She presents the following restated issue for review: Did the trial court improperly grant summary judgment in favor of First National?
We reverse and remand.
The facts most favorable to Rawls, the nonmoving party, reveal that First National owned and managed an Automated Teller Machine (ATM) at the Marsh supermarket formerly located at 200 Southway Boulevard East in Kokomo, Indiana. First National installed the ATM pursuant to a lease agreement with Marsh, signed in May 1979. First National relocated the ATM, with Marsh's approval, in 1986 or 1987. At that time, First National chose to mount the ATM on an exterior wall of the building near the east entrance of the supermarket. The ATM was situated on property owned exclusively by Marsh, and First National leased from Marsh a small area (approximately eight by ten feet) directly behind the ATM, in the interior of the store.
On February 5, 1999, Rawls stepped onto a narrow sidewalk in front of the ATM and withdrew cash from First National's ATM. After completing her transaction, Rawls turned to leave and her foot hit the curb, causing her to fall forward to the ground. Thereafter, on November 28, 2000, Rawls filed a negligence complaint against Marsh and First National. The basis of her claim is that the sidewalk in front of the ATM was not wide enough for her to safely turn around and leave the area.
On January 9, 2003, First National filed a motion for summary judgment, alleging that it did not owe a duty to Rawls. Following a hearing on said motion, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of First National. Rawls now appeals from that ruling, arguing that First National *459 clearly owed a duty of care to its customer, Rawls.
Our standard of review in this regard is well settled:
In an appeal involving summary judgment, the appealing party bears the burden of persuasion, and we assess the trial court's decision to ensure that the parties were not improperly denied their day in court. We analyze the issues, however, in the same way as a trial court would. A party seeking summary judgment must show "that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). The movant must designate sufficient evidence to eliminate any genuine factual issues, and once the movant has done so, the burden shifts to the nonmovant to come forth with contrary evidence. The court must accept as true those facts alleged by the nonmoving party, construe the evidence in favor of the non-movant, and resolve all doubts against the moving party.
Shambaugh & Son, Inc. v. Carlisle, 763 N.E.2d 459, 460-61 (Ind.2002) (some citations omitted). Additionally, when the material facts are not in dispute, our review is limited to the determination of whether the trial court correctly applied the law to the undisputed facts. Burkett v. Am. Family Ins. Group, 737 N.E.2d 447 (Ind. Ct.App.2000).
To recover under a theory of negligence, a plaintiff must establish the following three elements: (1) A duty owed by the defendant to conform its conduct to a standard of care arising from its relationship with the plaintiff; (2) a breach of that duty; and (3) an injury proximately caused by the breach of that duty. City of Indianapolis v. Johnson, 736 N.E.2d 295 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). The only element at issue here is whether First National owed Rawls a duty. "Absent a duty, there can be no breach and, therefore, no recovery in negligence." Merchants Nat'l Bank v. Simrell's Sports Bar & Grill, Inc., 741 N.E.2d 383, 386 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). The existence of a duty is a question of law for the court to determine. Baker v. Fenneman & Brown Properties, LLC, 793 N.E.2d 1203 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). "Courts will generally find a duty where reasonable persons would recognize and agree that it exists." Estate of Heck ex rel. Heck v. Stoffer, 786 N.E.2d 265, 268 (Ind.2003). To determine whether a common law duty exists, we balance three factors: "(1) the relationship between the parties; (2) the reasonable foreseeability of harm to the person injured; and (3) public policy concerns." Id.
First National contends that these factors weigh in favor of finding no duty, especially where the lease agreement did not place it in the position of possessor or occupier of the premises where Rawls fell. First National notes that it was in possession of only a very limited area directly behind the exterior wall where the ATM was mounted. Moreover, First National observes that pursuant to the lease agreement, it was Marsh's duty to keep the premises where Rawls fell clean and in a good state of repair. First National argues further that the fall was not reasonably foreseeable because there were no prior reports of customers falling in that location. Finally, with regard to public policy considerations, First National argues that it was not in the best position to protect Rawls against injury because it had no control over the premises where she fell. First National, therefore, asserts that it would amount to an unreasonable burden were we to impose a duty on it to keep Marsh's property in a reasonably safe condition.
*460 Under the concept of premises liability, a landowner or possessor/occupier of land[1] must exercise reasonable care for the protection of its invitees. See Sowers v. Tri-County Tel. Co., Inc., 546 N.E.2d 836 (Ind.1989). In the instant case, First National did not own or occupy the land where Rawls fell under the traditional legal meaning of the words "own" or "occupy." It can be said, however, that First National retained an easement over said land so that its customers (i.e., invitees) could stand on the sidewalk while conducting transactions at the ATM.
In Sowers, our supreme court faced a similar, nontraditional, premises liability case. In that case, a telephone company hired a contractor to clear brush around its poles. One of the contractor's employees fell into an abandoned manhole located near one of the poles and brought suit against the telephone company, as well as the actual landowner, for negligence. Sowers claimed that the telephone company failed to use ordinary care to maintain its prescriptive easement in a reasonably safe condition. The telephone company responded that although Sowers was an invitee, it owed him no duty because it did not control the land where the manhole was located. The Court was not persuaded by this argument and concluded that the telephone company met the definition of a possessor/occupier of land, explaining:
After all, Tri-County's poles and lines physically occupied a part of the property, and its right of entry arose from an easement necessary for maintenance of those poles and lines.
Because Tri-County is not a traditional landowner or occupier, however, it is necessary to ask what legal duty should flow from the company to its business invitees. That question involves consideration of more than just foreseeability of possible harm; it involves consideration of legal and social policies which include the foreseeability and likelihood of the injury, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against the injury and the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant.
Sowers v. Tri-County Tel. Co., Inc., 546 N.E.2d at 838. The Court then noted that these easements generally went unused for years and that it would place a great burden on the telephone company to require it to conduct regular inspections of all its easements for the sole purpose of discovering possible hazards. In defining the duty owed, the Court explained:
We conclude that the duty of inspection and warning that the Court of Appeals imposed upon Tri-County cannot be justified. The boundaries of the duty of reasonable care that a utility such as Tri-County owes to its business invitees must be defined from the utility's own use of the easement. Tri-County exercised no dominion at all over the Bodkins' land most of the time except for the existence of its poles. Other than occasional entries to effect repairs, its only occupation arose through sending people like Sowers to trim vegetation. To the extent that Tri-County learned of dangerous conditions near its poles through these visits, of course, it had a duty to warn future invitees.
Id. at 839. Despite finding that a duty existed, the Court concluded as a matter of law that the telephone company had not *461 breached its duty of reasonable care to Sowers.
In light of Sowers, it is evident that First National owed Rawls a duty of reasonable care under the theory of premises liability.[2] Rawls entered the land as an invitee of First National to conduct a transaction at the ATM, which necessarily required her to utilize the sidewalk. The likelihood of an invitee such as Rawls entering the area near the ATM is obviously significant. Moreover, if the sidewalk was actually too narrow (a question for the finder of fact), then we cannot say that an accident similar to Rawls's was not foreseeable.
For the purposes of this case, we need not determine whether First National's duty of reasonable care as a nontraditional possessor/occupier includes a continuing duty to inspect the areas surrounding each of its ATMs to ensure that they are reasonably safe for customers. Here, there is no claim that Rawls fell as the result of recent or temporary conditions upon the land (e.g., debris or ice),[3] conditions that Marsh would arguably be in the best position to protect against. Rather, the allegedly dangerous condition existed at the time of the ATM's placement in 1986 or 1987, at a location specifically chosen by First National.[4] Under these circumstances, it is sufficient for us to conclude that First National owed Rawls a duty of reasonable care in selecting the location of its ATM. Therefore, we remand for a determination by the trier of fact as to whether First National breached its duty of care and, if so, whether such breach proximately caused Rawls's injuries.
Judgment reversed and cause remanded.
SULLIVAN, J., and RILEY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  "The Restatement (Second) of Torts, Section 328E defines a possessor/occupier of land as: `a person who is or has been in occupation of land with the intent to control it, or a person who is entitled to immediate occupation of the land, if no other person is or has been in occupation of land with the intent to control it.'" Duffy v. Ben Dee, Inc., 651 N.E.2d 320, 323 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied.
[2]  Lutheran Hosp. of Indiana, Inc. v. Blaser, 634 N.E.2d 864 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), also supports the applicability of premises liability, despite the fact that First National leased only a small area behind the ATM and not the area upon which Rawls fell. In that case, we recognized that "[a] duty of reasonable care may be extended beyond the business premises when it is reasonable for invitees to believe that the invitor controls premises adjacent to his own or where the invitor knows his invitees customarily use such adjacent premises in connection with the invitation." Id. at 870 (emphasis supplied).
[3]  To the extent that First National learns of dangerous conditions near its ATMs, of course, it has a duty to remedy the conditions or warn future invitees. See Sowers v. Tri-County Tel. Co., Inc., 546 N.E.2d 836.
[4]  There is no evidence that the width of the sidewalk has changed since the relocation of the ATM.

=== CASE 9736857 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:36.016644+00 ===

DEL SOLE, Judge:
Through this appeal, the Commonwealth asks us to determine whether Appellee’s judgment of sentence is illegal because it violates the mandates of 18 Pa.C.S:A. § 7508(a)(3)® (Supp.1992), of the Crimes Code, entitled, “Drug trafficking sentencing and penalties”1.
*169The facts of this case reveal that Appellee was charged with three drug trafficking offenses. The first offense took place on November 2, 1988, when Appellee was found in possession of 4.3 grams of cocaine. Thereafter, on May 21, 1991, Appellee was arrested for possessing another 6.14 grams of cocaine and on May 26, 1991, he committed his third drug trafficking offense which involved less than 2 grams of the substance. On August 14,1991, Appellee entered a guilty plea with regard to his third offense and on October 11, 1991, he pleaded guilty to the first and second offenses. The three cases were then consolidated for sentencing and on November 26, 1991, Appellee was sentenced. For his second offense, Appellee received a sentence of a minimum term of imprisonment of two to five years and was ordered to pay a fine of five thousand dollars. The trial court then imposed the same sentence, to run concurrent, for Appellee’s first offense.2
*170The Commonwealth urges this court to vacate Appellee’s judgment of sentence, which was imposed in relation to his second offense. It claims that the sentence is illegal because the trial court, in determining the sentence, erred in failing to apply the mandatory minimum sentencing provision contained in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i).
Appellee counters the Commonwealth’s argument by stating that because he had not been adjudicated guilty of any one of his offenses, prior to the commission of any subsequent offense(s), the section is wholly inapplicable. Appellee sets forth various arguments to support his position. First, Appellee directs our attention to the fact that 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i) was amended in December, 1990, after the date of the commission of his first offense. Appellee argues that under the pre-amendment version of the statute, his first offense could not have served to enhance his second offense because he had not been convicted and sentenced for the first offense at the time of the commission of his second offense. Ultimately, Appellee asks us to adopt the position that, “a preamendment case may not form the basis for enhancement of a post-amendment case.” (Appellee’s brief at 8). By advancing these arguments, however, Appellee ignores the express language of the statute.
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)® is a mandatory sentencing provision which specifically states that, “if at the time of sentencing the defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense [emphasis added]”, a mandatory minimum sentence of three years is appropriate. This language clearly directs the sentencing court to determine, at the time of sentencing, whether the defendant has a previous conviction under the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act3, and if so, to impose the mandatory minimum sentence. We also direct Appellee’s attention to the fact that the legislature has *171specifically defined the term, “previous conviction”, as it is used throughout Section 7508.
(a.l) Previous conviction. — For purposes of this section, it shall be deemed that a defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense when the defendant has been convicted of another offense under section 13(a)(14), (30) or (37) of the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, or of a similar offense under any statute of any state or the United States, whether or not judgment of sentence has been imposed concerning that offense.
As amended December 19, 1990, P.L. 1451, No. 219, § 4, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a.l). [emphasis added].
With this language in mind, we turn to the facts of the present case. At the time of sentencing for Appellee’s second offense, which involved 6.1 grams of cocaine, Appellee had been previously convicted, as defined in Section 7508(a.l), of violating the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, (i.e. for the possession of 4.3 grams of cocaine). Therefore, in accordance with the express language of the statute, we find that the trial court erred in failing to impose upon Appellee, the mandatory minimum sentence.
In addition, we cannot adopt Appellee’s position that a pre-amendment offense cannot serve as an enhancer for a post-amendment offense. The focus in the present case is on Appellee’s record as it appeared at the time of sentencing for his second offense. At that time, the conviction that resulted from the commission of Appellee’s first offense, clearly fit within the definition of “previous conviction”. While it is true that the sentencing court could not have applied the post-amendment version of the statute in sentencing Appellee for his first offense, which occurred prior to the effective date of the amendment, it is also true that that is not the issue here. Appellee’s first offense was on record as another conviction that existed at the time of Appellee’s sentencing on the second offense and, under the amended statute, could properly be considered as a factor requiring sentencing enhancement for his second offense.
*172We also note that, as part of this argument, Appellee makes a passing reference that application of Section 7508(a)(3)(i) may deprive defendants of equal protection under the law. Appellee does not develop this theory and therefore, we can only state that we fail to see how application of the amended version of the statute would cause the result suggested by Appellee. It is clear that the provision is to be uniformly applied to all defendants subject to it at the time of sentencing.
Accordingly, we vacate Appellee’s judgment of sentence for his second offense at Bill No. 927, June Term 1991, and remand this matter to the trial court for the purposes of re-sentencing Appellee with respect to that charge.
Jurisdiction relinquished.
CIRILLO, J. files a concurring & dissenting Opinion.
JOHNSON, J. files a dissenting Opinion which KELLY, J. joins.
. The subsection reads as follows:
A person who is convicted of violating section 13(a)(14), (30), or (37) of the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act where *169the controlled substance is cocoa leaves or is any salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca leaves or is any salt, compound, derivative or preparation which is chemically equivalent or identical with any of these substances or is any mixture containing any of these substances except decocainized coca leaves or extracts of coca leaves which (extracts) do not contain cocaine or ecogine shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment and a fine as set forth in this subsection:
(i) when the aggregate weight of the compound or mixture containing the substance involved is at least 2.0 grams and less than ten grams; one year in prison and a fine of $5,000.00 or such larger amount as is sufficient to exhaust the assets utilized in and the proceeds from the illegal activity; however, if at the time of sentencing the defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense: three years in prison and $10,000.00 or such larger amount as is sufficient to exhaust the assets utilized in and the proceeds from the illegal activity;
As amended December 19, 1990, P.L. 1451, No. 219, § 4, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(f) (Supp.1992).
. We note that there is a discrepancy between the sentence reflected, for Appellee’s first offense, in the Sentencing Transcript and as written in the trial court’s Opinion and Order. For purposes of the discussion of the facts of this case, we have relied, as have both parties, on the trial court’s two to five year judgment of sentence which appears in its written Order. This endorsement appears on the back of the Information and is dated the same date as the sentencing hearing. Commonwealth v. Isabell, 503 Pa. 2, 467 A.2d 1287 (1983), Commonwealth v. Fleming, 332 Pa.Super. 118, 480 A.2d 1214 (1984).
*170In addition, we note that Appellee also received a sentence of one to two years for his third offense. This sentence, however, is not the subject of the present appeal.
. The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780-113(a)(14), (30), (37).

=== CASE 9736858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:36.021356+00 ===

CIRILLO, Judge,
concurring and dissenting:
I do not dispute the majority’s interpretation of the language set forth in the recently amended 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i). Clearly, the 1990 version of this statute compels a mandatory minimum sentence of three years “if at the time of sentencing the defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense.” 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i). I note my opposition, however, to the effect this amendment has on the result of this case and future enhanced penalty cases, as I believe such language has eroded the spirit of the recidivist philosophy.
I submit, instead, that we adhere to the following reasoning in determining whether or not to apply the enhancement provision found in section 7508(a):
It was not intended that the heavier penalty prescribed for the commission of a second offense should descend upon anyone except the incorrigible one, who after being reproved, “still hardeneth his neck.” If the heavier penalty *173prescribed for the second violation ... is visited upon the one who has not had the benefit of the reproof of a first conviction, then the purpose of the statute is lost.
Commonwealth v. Kane, 430 Pa.Super. 203, 204, 633 A.2d 1210, 1211 (1993) (en banc) (quoting Commonwealth v. Sutton, 125 Pa.Super. 407, 413, 189 A. 556, 558 (1937)); see also Commonwealth v. Tobin, 411 Pa.Super. 460, 463-464, 601 A.2d 1258, 1260 (1992), aff'd, 533 Pa. 322, 623 A.2d 814 (1993); Commonwealth v. Dickerson, 404 Pa.Super. 249, 590 A.2d 766 (1991), aff'd, 533 Pa. 294, 621 A.2d 990 (1993). This longstanding notion underlying habitual criminal legislation suggests that a prior conviction shall precede the date of the offense for which the increased punishment is sought to be imposed. In other words,
[l]egislation authorizing the imposition of increased punishment on recidivists is directed at those who persist in criminality after once having been convicted of an offense. It is thus generally essential that the alleged conviction shall have preceded the date of the offense for which the increased punishment is sought to be imposed.
Dickerson, 404 Pa.Super. at 259, 590 A.2d at 771 (quoting 39 Am.Jur.2d Habitual Criminals § 6).
While I recognize that the reasoning behind the recidivist philosophy has been borrowed from cases interpreting statutes different than the one at issue here, it is essential, in my opinion, that we remain consistent in our interpretation of penalty enhancement provisions. See Kane, supra (applying the pre-amendment section 7508, a defendant must be convicted of the prior offense before the commission of the subsequent offense for an enhanced sentence to attach); Commonwealth v. Beatty, 411 Pa.Super. 450, 601 A.2d 1253 (1992) (en banc), aff'd, 533 Pa. 322, 623 A.2d 814 (1993) (when determining penalty enhancement under 75 Pa.C.S. § 3731(e)(1), the sentencing court must utilize the date of the offense for which defendant is to be sentenced and determine the number of prior convictions as of that date); Tobin, supra (same); Commonwealth v. Eck, 411 Pa.Super. 465, 601 A.2d 1261 (1992) (en banc), alloc. denied, 533 Pa. 607, 618 A.2d 398 (1992) (same); *174Dickerson, supra (for prior conviction to serve as an enhancer under 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9714, the conviction must precede the commission of a later offense); Commonwealth v. Eyster, 401 Pa.Super. 477, 585 A.2d 1027 (1991) (en banc), appeal denied, 529 Pa. 646, 602 A.2d 857 (1992) (pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 2154, in order for a prior conviction to apply to the prior record score for sentencing purposes, one must have been previously convicted for a crime committed before the current offense, whether or not a sentence has been imposed on the prior offense).
The clear spirit of the recidivist philosophy, as evidenced by the foregoing authority, dictates that the new section 7508(a) be applied in the same fashion. The uniform application of recidivist provisions would undoubtedly serve to ensure continuity, efficiency, and stability in our judicial decision-making. Surely this.is a goal which would benefit both the judiciary and society as a whole.
Thus, in adhering to the underlying purpose of the recidivist philosophy as interpreted by the appellate courts of Pennsylvania, I would affirm Williams’ judgment of sentence, which does not include an enhanced penalty.

=== CASE 9736859 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:36.025233+00 ===

JOHNSON, Judge,
dissenting:
The defendant, Tyrone Williams, had pled guilty to other offenses committed by him within Philadelphia County, and he was sentenced on all the offenses at one time. I believe the Commonwealth’s attempt to increase the aggregate minimum sentence from two years’ to three years’ incarceration on this appeal does absolutely nothing to increase the protection of the public and, indeed, flies in the face of the clear spirit of Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 1402.
Moreover, Williams was not found guilty, that is to say: convicted, of the prior offense until well after the commission of the subsequent offense. All three offenses were committed well before Williams entered his guilty plea to even the first offense. The recidivist enhancement provisions of 18 Pa.C.S. § 7508(a)(3)(i) may not, therefore, be applied. Commonwealth *175v. Kane, 430 Pa.Super. 203, 633 A.2d 1210 (1993). See and compare Commonwealth v. Dickerson, 404 Pa.Super. 249, 590 A.2d 766 (1991), affirmed 533 Pa. 294, 621 A.2d 990 (1993).
I would affirm the judgment of sentence on the well-reasoned Opinion of the Honorable Arnold L. New. Hence, this dissent.
KELLY, J., joins.

=== CASE 9736860 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:41.499591+00 ===

JUSTICE SLATER delivered the opinion of the court: On November 2, 1988, defendant Nancy Rish was convicted by a jury of first-degree murder and aggravated kidnaping. She was sentenced to a term of natural life imprisonment for murder and a concurrent 30-year term for kidnaping. This court affirmed defendant’s convictions and sentences on direct appeal. People v. Risk, 208 Ill. App. 3d 751, 566 N.E.2d 919 (1991). Defendant then filed a postconviction petition which, along with a subsequent amended petition and two supplemental petitions, raised 16 separate claims. Twelve of the claims were dismissed at the second, pleading, stage. The remaining four claims proceeded to the third stage for an evidentiary hearing and, ultimately, were also dismissed. Defendant appeals from the denial of eight of her claims, seven of which were dismissed without an evidentiary hearing. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand. FACTS A detailed recitation of the evidence was set forth in our decision on direct appeal of this case. See Risk, 208 Ill. App. 3d at 754-67, 566 N.E.2d at 921-30. We therefore relate only those facts necessary to a general understanding of the case and the issues presented. On September 2, 1987, Stephen B. Small was kidnaped and a ransom demand was sent to his home. Small’s sister called the police, who immediately initiated an investigation. The investigation focused on Danny Edwards and the defendant, who lived together in a townhouse in Bourbonnais. On September 4, a search warrant was executed for the townhouse. That evening, Edwards led the police to a rural area where Small’s body was recovered. It appeared that Small had been placed in a wooden box which had been fitted with a PVC pipe designed to give him air for 24 to 48 hours. The box also contained a light connected to an automobile battery, a one-gallon jug of water, candy bars, gum, and a flashlight. Small’s wrists were handcuffed and the box was buried. The coroner later determined that his death was caused by “asphyxia due to suffocation.” That same night, the police arrested defendant and held her at the station for questioning. Defendant requested a specific attorney, J. Scott Swaim, who had previously represented her, and she was given an opportunity to obtain his counsel. The defendant did not know that Swaim was friends with the victim. The two had socialized at dinner parties and entertained together on several occasions. However, Swaim did not inform defendant of his friendship with Small prior to or at any time after undertaking representation. For the next four days, between September 4 and September 8, the police questioned defendant with counsel present. Eight statements were elicited concerning her knowledge and actions in the early days of September. None of the statements was totally consistent with any other. On October 1, defendant was charged by indictment with first-degree murder and aggravated kidnaping for her alleged role in Small’s death. On November 2, 1988, defendant was tried by a jury. No direct evidence was presented linking her to the kidnaping or death of Small. However, the State was able to enter defendant’s eight inconsistent statements into evidence. Witnesses were also presented who testified that they had seen her at various times with Edwards when he was purchasing some items that were ultimately found with Small’s body. Other witnesses reported that they had observed her at various related locations during the course of the kidnaping and ransom calls. Lastly, the State submitted evidence that Edwards had used their garage to build the box in which Small’s body was found. The jury found defendant guilty on both counts, and the trial court sentenced her to a term of natural life imprisonment and a concurrent 30-year term. After this court affirmed defendant’s convictions and sentences and her petition for leave to appeal to the supreme court was denied, defendant filed a postconviction petition. Following a substitution of counsel, a 12-claim amended petition was submitted. A separate supplemental petition was also filed, adding two additional claims. The circuit court held an evidentiary hearing on four of the claims. Ultimately, all 14 of the claims were dismissed. Defendant then filed a second supplemental petition, raising two more claims, but these were also dismissed without an evidentiary hearing. Defendant’s motion for reconsideration was denied. On appeal, defendant challenges the dismissal of eight of her post-conviction claims, arguing them as four issues: (1) whether she was denied due process because the prosecutor presented allegedly false contentions to the jury; (2) whether the trial court erred in finding that two discovery violations were not material within the meaning of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215, 83 S. Ct. 1194 (1963); (3) whether claims of ineffective assistance of counsel at custodial interrogation were inappropriately dismissed at the pleading stage; and (4) whether defendant is entitled to sentencing relief pursuant to Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000). ANALYSIS  The Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Act) (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 2000)) provides a three-step process for adjudication of petitions for postconviction relief. At the first stage, the circuit court does not decide the petition on the merits; instead, without input from the State or further pleadings from the defendant, the court determines if the petition presents the gist of a claim for relief, that is, whether the petition contains sufficient facts upon which a meritorious constitutional claim could be based. See People v. Gaultney, 174 Ill. 2d 410, 675 N.E.2d 102 (1996). At this first stage, “all well-pleaded facts that are not positively rebutted by the original trial record are to be taken as true.” People v. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d 366, 385, 701 N.E.2d 1063, 1073 (1998). If the court does not dismiss the petition at the first stage, it will, in the second stage, appoint counsel to represent an indigent defendant who requests legal assistance, and counsel will have an opportunity to amend defendant’s postconviction petition. See 725 ILCS 5/122 — 4 (West 2000). The State may then file a motion to dismiss, and the court will determine whether an evidentiary hearing on the merits of the defendant’s petition is warranted. See 725 ILCS 5/122 — 5 (West 2000). A defendant is not entitled to an evidentiary hearing as a matter of course; it is required only when the allegations of the petition, supported where necessary by the trial record and affidavits, make a substantial showing of a constitutional violation. People v. Ward, 187 Ill. 2d 249, 255, 718 N.E.2d 117, 123 (1999); People v. Henderson, 171 Ill. 2d 124, 140, 662 N.E.2d 1287, 1296 (1996). In making this determination, all well-pleaded facts in the defendant’s petition and any accompanying affidavits are taken as true. People v. Caballero, 126 Ill. 2d 248, 259, 533 N.E.2d 1089, 1091 (1989). Mere conclusions, however, are insufficient to require a hearing under the Act. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d at 381, 701 N.E.2d at 1072. The evidentiary hearing and a determination on the merits is the third and final stage of postconviction proceedings. See 725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 through 122 — 8 (West 2000); see also People v. Patton, 315 Ill. App. 3d 968, 735 N.E.2d 185 (2000). In considering plaintiffs appeal, we have divided our analysis of defendant’s postconviction claims into two separate sections, according to the appropriate standards of review. Claim Subject to Deferential Review Brady Violation  We first consider the denial of count III, alleging a violation of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215, 83 S. Ct. 1194 (1963). Since this count survived to the third stage for an evidentiary hearing, we will not disturb the circuit court’s ruling unless it is manifestly erroneous. See Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d at 385, 701 N.E.2d at 1074. Defendant asserts that the prosecution committed a Brady violation when it presented James Witvoet as an identification witness, but failed to disclose that criminal proceedings were pending against him. At the time he testified, two charges of illegal operation of a migrant labor camp were pending against Witvoet in Kankakee County. Each count was a petty offense, with a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine of $500. Defendant maintains that the State’s omission was prejudicial to her case because the criminal charges could have been used to impeach Witvoet’s testimony. We do not find defendant’s assertion tenable. Although the government is obligated to turn over evidence in its possession that is favorable to the accused, the evidence must be material to guilt or punishment. See Brady, 373 U.S. at 87, 10 L. Ed. 2d at 218, 83 S. Ct. at 1196-97. Evidence is material only if there is a reasonable probability that, had it been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A “reasonable probability” is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome. Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 57, 94 L. Ed. 2d 40, 57, 107 S. Ct. 989, 1001 (1987). In this case, the prosecutor’s failure to disclose Witvoet’s pending criminal charges was not a Brady violation because the criminal charges were not material to defendant’s guilt. Witvoet testified that he was driving with another person in an area near the crime scene when he saw a van similar to one owned by Edwards. Witvoet saw two people in the van: a male with dark hair and another individual with dishwater blonde hair, similar to defendant’s. However, Witvoet was unable to say whether the blonde passenger was a man or a woman. As the circuit court noted, when a witness has a pending criminal charge, the concern is that he may testify falsely in return for leniency. Witvoet first reported his observations to the police in September of 1987; he was not charged criminally until 10 months later, in July of 1988. His testimony at trial was consistent with his earlier report to the police. There is no indication that Witvoet altered his testimony to gain favor with the State. Indeed, Witvoet testified at the postconviction hearing that the charges did not affect his testimony because he knew that the State had mistakenly charged him instead of his father, James Witvoet, Sr. Witvoet believed that the charges would ultimately be dismissed, and they were, in January of 1989, for that reason. There were no plea negotiations with the State’s Attorney prior to dismissal. Of course, the relevant question is not whether Witvoet’s testimony was affected by the criminal charge, but whether the result of the trial was undermined by defendant’s inability to impeach Witvoet with those charges. Given the lack of gravity of the charges, their timing, Witvoet’s professed lack of concern, and the absence of any plea bargain, we believe the impeachment value of the charges was extremely low. Accordingly, we find that the circuit court’s ruling that the State’s discovery violation was not material was not manifestly erroneous. The denial of count III of defendant’s postconviction petition is affirmed. Claims Subject to De Novo Review  The following seven claims will be reviewed de novo, since no deference is extended to the trial court when no evidentiary hearing has been held. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d at 388-89, 701 N.E.2d at 1075. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Defendant challenges the dismissal of count I of her petition, which alleged that her right to counsel was violated during custodial interrogation. She complains that her attorney at the interrogation, J. Scott Swaim, had an interest in the case that was adverse to her own. Specifically, she claims that Swaim was a close friend of the victim, Stephen Small. In addition, Swaim had been the attorney for a Kankakee police officer involved in the case, Detective Robert Anderson. These two conflicts, the defendant argues, motivated Swaim to allow her to give eight inconsistent statements over the course of the four-day interrogation, statements that were later used by the prosecution at trial. The defendant argues that both the fifth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. V) and article I, section 10, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 10) entitle her to conflict-free counsel during custodial interrogation. The circuit court, noting the limited nature of counsel’s function under the fifth amendment, found no violation, stating: “The point of the [flifth amendment, including the Miranda warnings, is to prevent police coercion of criminal suspects. It is clear to the [c]ourt on the record before it, that Ms. Rish was advised of her Miranda warnings, including her right to remain silent and her right to stop the questioning at any time. Swaim was with her throughout, police questioning, stopping it occasionally and instructing her not to answer some questions. This would fulfill the purpose of the [flifth amendment — to insure the [defendant knew her rights, and to insure that any statements she made were the product of her voluntary choice and not the product of police coercion. The [c]ourt therefore finds that there was no [flifth amendment violation here.”  We agree that a defendant’s right to counsel under the fifth amendment does not include the same guarantee of effective assistance of counsel contained in the sixth amendment but, rather, only protects a defendant from coerced confession. However, we believe that the Illinois Constitution entitles those subject to custodial interrogation the right to conflict-free counsel. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §§ 2, 10. In Illinois, the right to the assistance of counsel has historically been afforded a certain degree of judicial solicitude and due process protection. People v. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 414, 441, 645 N.E.2d 923, 937 (1994). “The State’s due process guarantee [citation] provides the general basis for an accused’s right to the assistance as well as presence of counsel during any custodial interrogation.” (Emphasis added.) McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d at 441, 645 N.E.2d at 937. This right has not been found satisfied by the mere formality of the appointment of an attorney, but has required effective representation. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d at 442, 645 N.E.2d at 937. “[D]ue process of law requires that an accused shall be given the benefit of counsel.” (Emphasis in original.) McCauley 163 Ill. 2d at 441, 645 N.E.2d at 937. Effective assistance of counsel has long been recognized to include the right to the undivided loyalty of counsel, free from conflicting interests or inconsistent obligations. People v. Walker, 253 Ill. App. 3d 93, 107, 624 N.E.2d 1353, 1363 (1993). Although this right can be waived, it is well settled that a defendant must first be adequately informed of a conflict’s significance before the right will be deemed to have been waived. See People v. Coleman, 301 Ill. App. 3d 290, 301, 703 N.E.2d 137, 145 (1998). In this case, the defendant alleges she was denied information material to a knowing and intelligent decision to waive her right to the presence of an attorney wholly committed to her interests. She claims that her attorney offered no explanation to ensure her understanding of the potential significance of his personal relationship with Small and that, in fact, defense counsel did not disclose this relationship at all during the four days defendant was subject to police interrogation.  “Due process essentially requires ‘fairness, integrity, and honor in the operation of the criminal justice system ***.’ ” McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d at 441, 645 N.E.2d at 937, quoting Moran v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412, 467, 89 L. Ed. 2d 410, 450, 106 S. Ct. 1135, 1165 (1986) (Stevens, J., dissenting, joined by Brennan and Marshall, JJ.). In a situation such as this one, where counsel for a criminal suspect possibly labors under a serious conflict of interest, one which potentially places him in a position adverse to that of his client, the fairness that is fundamental to our system of justice is suspect. The defendant had a right to expect that her requested counsel was acting completely in her interests. Such was not necessarily the case here. The allegations raised on the pleadings are sufficient to state a claim for ineffective assistance under Illinois due process guarantees. It was improper for the trial court to dismiss the claim without first holding an evidentiary hearing. The trial court must hold a hearing on the claim raised by the defendant and should apply the test for ineffective assistance developed in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052 (1984). In that test, the defendant first must establish that her counsel’s performance was so deficient that the representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064. She also must demonstrate that there is “a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068. We adopt this test for ineffective assistance claims under the Illinois Constitution since many courts have substantial experience applying it, from its wide use as the standard for ineffective assistance under the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution. We find that the circuit court erred in its dismissal of count I of defendant’s postconviction petition. Accordingly, we reverse and remand for an evidentiary hearing and for the application of the Strickland test. We do so despite the fact that, in dismissing count I, the circuit court made an alternative finding that if Strickland was applicable, attorney Swaim was not ineffective. That determination was made without benefit of an evidentiary hearing. Defendant is entitled to such a hearing because her attorney’s undisclosed conflict of interest constitutes a substantial showing of a constitutional violation under the Act.  Defendant also challenges the circuit court’s dismissal of counts II and XIII of her postconviction petition. Those counts involved allegations of ineffective assistance because of her trial counsel’s failure to raise a sixth amendment claim of custodial, preindictment ineffective assistance of counsel at trial and again on direct appeal. The circuit court dismissed both counts, finding the absence of a sixth amendment right to counsel at that time. Defendant claims error, asserting that adverse judicial proceedings had begun because of the State’s decision to prosecute her shortly after she was taken into custody. We reject this challenge. The sixth amendment states in relevant part that “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to *** have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.” U.S. Const., amend. VI. However, the sixth amendment does not attach until at or after the initiation of adversarial judicial proceedings, whether by way of a formal charge, prehminary hearing, indictment, information, or arraignment. People v. Garrett, 179 Ill. 2d 239, 247, 688 N.E.2d 614, 618 (1997). In this case, the circuit court appropriately dismissed defendant’s sixth amendment claim, because the right had not yet attached. None of the identified adversarial judicial proceedings had yet begun. We also reject defendant’s argument that adverse judicial proceedings had already begun due to the State’s implementation of a decision to prosecute her. We acknowledge that the level of prosecutorial involvement may be considered in determining whether a defendant’s sixth amendment right to counsel has attached. See Garrett, 179 Ill. 2d at 248, 688 N.E.2d at 618. However, we do not find this argument meritorious, because defendant has not cited to any portion of the record which supports her allegation that the prosecution had reached a decision to prosecute her shortly after she was taken into custody. Although she directs our attention to a transcript of Sergeant William Willis in which he stated that the State’s Attorney’s office was involved in the preparation of the search warrant affidavit, defendant provides no authority to support the proposition that this conduct would constitute a level of prosecutorial involvement justifying the attachment of the sixth amendment right to counsel. We affirm the dismissal of counts II and XIII of defendant’s postconviction petition. Due Process  Defendant also challenges the dismissal of her claim (count IV) that prosecutorial misconduct resulted in a violation of due process. At trial, the prosecutor asserted during his closing arguments that defendant had lied in her testimony. She had testified that Detective Erickson threatened her at the police station immediately following her arrest by asserting that she could potentially receive the electric chair if convicted. The prosecutor claimed that defendant’s story about the incident was a perjured fabrication, because Erickson was not at the police station on the day of her arrest, and he denied having had such a conversation with defendant at any other time or place. However, one year after trial, Illinois State Police Sergeant William Willis stated in a television appearance that he was the officer who had made the “threat” against her while at the station. Defendant contends that the prosecution’s argument constituted a knowingly false allegation of perjury that violated her due process rights. In support, she asserts that, as a matter of law, any information known by the police is automatically imputed to the prosecution. Contrary to defendant’s contention, knowledge by police officers is not automatically imputed to the prosecution in a per se manner. Rather, the imputation requires an individualized focus on the factual circumstances. Among the factors to be considered would be the reasonableness of such imputation, whether the failure to transmit such knowledge up the informational chain was inadvertent or intentional, and whether any real prejudice occurred. People v. Robinson, 157 Ill. 2d 68, 80, 623 N.E.2d 352, 358 (1993). In this case we are uncertain whether Willis’s knowledge should be imputed to the prosecution. One factor weighing against such attribution is that defendant helped to create the problem by misidentifying the maker of the statement as Detective Erickson. As the circuit court noted: “If [defendant] had correctly identified Sergeant Willis, the State would have confronted him, and the truth would have come out. If she had not identified any one at all, and merely said it was a policeman, the State could then have inquired of everyone involved in the investigation. But when she says it was Detective Erickson and Erickson denies it, there is no obligation on the State to then conduct a further investigation of anybody involved in her questioning. This Court has seen Sergeant Willis testify in court. He is nowhere near the size of Detective Erickson. There is no explanation in the record how the Defendant came to identify the maker of the alleged threat as Detective Erickson.” On the other hand, because no evidentiary hearing was held, we do not know whether Willis intentionally hid his knowledge from the prosecution, nor do we know whether he told any other officers or investigators about the incident. Under the circumstances, we believe that an evidentiary hearing is necessary. We therefore reverse the dismissal of count IV of defendant’s postconviction petition and remand for such a hearing. Brady Violation  We next consider defendant’s challenge to the dismissals of counts IX and X of her postconviction petition. Count IX argued that a Brady violation occurred when the State knowingly made a false argument to the jury in its closing arguments regarding her alleged purchase of distilled water. Count X also averred a Brady violation in closing arguments because of the State’s failure to disclose a laboratory report relating to the distilled water. One week prior to trial, the Illinois State Police forensic science laboratory returned a report to the State’s Attorney’s office that no analysis of the liquid found in the jug next to Small’s body could be done because of possible contamination of the sample by the forensic science laboratory equipment. Defendant asserts that the report would have enabled the defense to impeach the connection between herself and the liquid found in the box where Small had been buried. We believe the State committed a discovery violation when it failed to hand over the laboratory report to the defendant. Defendant requested the results of any testing pertinent to the case, and the attending forensic scientist was disclosed by the State as a possible witness. However, we find that the State’s failure to divulge the report was not material within the meaning of Brady, because even had the report been divulged, there is no reasonable probability that it would have affected the outcome of the proceedings. See Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 57, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 57, 107 S. Ct. at 1001 (evidence is material only if there is reasonable probability that results of proceeding would have been different). Three witnesses testified concerning the issue of distilled or bottled water. Linda Forestier, a hardware store clerk, testified that a man and woman similar in appearance to Edwards and the defendant entered the store together on or about August 31, 1987. The woman asked if the store sold distilled water. Forestier replied that it did not and directed the couple to a grocery store. On cross-examination, Forestier was unable to identify the defendant as the woman in the store that day. Donna Jordan, an employee of Convenience Food Mart in Bourbonnais, testified that defendant, who was a regular customer, came into the store with a man who asked for bottled water. This occurred between August 29 and September 1, 1987. On cross-examination, Jordan stated that she was not sure that the defendant was in the store on the same night that the man came in to buy the water. Arlene Bires, a clerk at Ruffin’s Super Value in Aroma Park, testified that on September 3, 1987, Edwards came into the store and bought a few gallons of water and five or six candy bars. The defendant was not with Edwards. The jug found with Small’s body was not placed into evidence at trial by either party. Although the State informed the jury that some water was found with Small, no connection was ever established between the water the codefendant purchased and the water found in the box. Neither party focused on the water in closing arguments. Given the extremely low probative value of the testimony concerning the water, we do not believe that the State’s failure to disclose the laboratory report had any impact on the trial. Accordingly, we affirm the dismissal of counts IX and X of defendant’s postconviction petition. Apprendi  Finally, defendant contends that the trial court erred in dismiss’ ing count XVI of her postconviction petition, which argued that her extended-term sentence based on the aggravating factor of exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty violated Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000). The circuit court declined to address the merits of her claim, reasoning that Apprendi should not be applied retroactively to cases on collateral review. We agree. Our supreme court recently held in People v. De La Paz, 204 Ill. 2d 426, 791 N.E.2d 489 (2003), that Apprendi does not apply retroactively. We therefore affirm the dismissal of count XVI. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated above, we affirm the denial of count III of defendant’s postconviction petition and the dismissal of counts II, IX, X, XIII and XVI. We reverse the dismissal of count I, alleging ineffective assistance, and count iy alleging prosecutorial misconduct, and remand for an evidentiary hearing. Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9736861 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:41.504987+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McDADE, concurring in part, specially concurring in part and dissenting in part: I agree with all but one part of the majority’s decision. 1. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel I concur with the analysis of defendant’s claim of ineffective assistance of counsel based on the Illinois Constitution, but write separately to indicate my belief that the assistance was also ineffective based on the fifth amendment to the United States Constitution. The majority notes that defendant’s fifth amendment right to counsel does not include the same guarantee of effective or competent assistance contained in the sixth amendment, because the former protects defendant only from a coerced confession. I do not deny that the general consensus of the cases is supportive of that conclusion. I do not, however, believe that the conclusion adequately addresses the challenge raised by defendant because it relates only to the boundaries of the attorney’s functions under the two amendments. When a person who has been given Miranda warnings but has not yet been charged asks for legal representation, inherent in that request is an expectation that the attorney will be competent to render advice consistent with defendant’s best interest and untainted by any competing or conflicting interests. This expectation is reasonable and is fully justified by the attorney’s ethical obligation, imposed in all 50 states, not to undertake representation when a conflict exists. It is my understanding that an attorney has the ethical duty, regardless of the nature or parameters of the representation, to advise anyone who is relying on his/her skill or judgment that there is an actual or potential conflict of interest. With specific regard to this case, I do not believe that that obligation, or the corresponding right of the defendant to rely on it, is dependent on whether representation was undertaken pursuant to the fifth or sixth amendment to the United States Constitution. For this reason, I would find that counsel’s failure to advise defendant of his relationship with the victim and allow her to decide whether or not to waive any conflict and put her fate in his hands was a violation of the United States Constitution’s fifth amendment as well as of the Illinois Constitution. 2. Apprendi Issue I also specially concur with the majority’s decision on defendant’s Apprendi claim. It is clear, as our opinion recites, that the decision in this matter is dictated by the Illinois Supreme Court’s ruling in People v. De La Paz, 204 Ill. 2d 426, 791 N.E.2d 489 (2003), and I concur for that reason. I write separately to express my hope that that decision will be revisited at some point and my belief that it should be. Certainly decisions limiting the potentially overwhelming impact of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000), are practical (and perhaps even necessary) to contain its reach and limit the number of new reviews of cases long since decided. Most recently, in De La Paz, our supreme court has prohibited any claims by persons whose direct appeals were completed before Apprendi was decided in 2000, finding that neither prong of the test set out in Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 103 L. Ed. 2d 334, 109 S. Ct. 1060 (1989), warrants its retroactive application. In my view, it is unfortunate that, in arriving at that decision, the court has found that Apprendi’s rule does not “require[ ] the observance of ‘those procedures that. . .are “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.” ’ [Citations.]” Teague, 489 U.S. at 307, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 353, 109 S. Ct. at 1073 (plurality op.). In arriving at its conclusion, our supreme court stated: “An error which does not seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings in one or more cases cannot be such a bedrock procedural element essential to the fairness of a proceeding as to fall within the second Teague exception, requiring retroactive application in all cases.” De La Paz, 204 Ill. 2d at 438. Clearly, a sentencing hearing is a “judicial proceeding,” and in the Third District alone, the same “brutal and heinous” issue as that raised in the instant case has been challenged in 24 cases. The Apprendí court found that enhanced sentencing without the proof beyond a reasonable doubt implicated “constitutional protections of surpassing importance.” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 476, 147 L. Ed. 2d at 447, 120 S. Ct. at 2355. Similarly, the Illinois Supreme Court held that a finding that defendant’s crime was brutal and heinous made by the circuit court by a preponderance of the evidence rather than by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt, as was the case in the matter at bar, violated the due process requirement articulated in Apprendi and could not stand. People v. Swift, 202 Ill. 2d 378, 392, 781 N.E.2d 292, 300 (2002). These holdings appear to me to stand for the proposition that violation of this principle inherently affects the fairness, integrity and public reputation of the judicial proceeding involved. Therefore, I believe Teague, Apprendi, and Swift compel a finding of retroactivity and consideration of this case where defendant’s sentence was increased beyond the statutory maximum because of the brutal and heinous factor. 3. Brady Violation The majority finds that the failure of the State to disclose the laboratory report confirming the lab’s inability to analyze the water found with the victim was a discovery violation pursuant to Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215, 83 S. Ct. 1194 (1963). But, it says, the violation is harmless because even if the report had been divulged, there was no reasonable probability that it would have affected the outcome of the trial. I cannot agree with that conclusion and, therefore, dissent from it. The State’s case against this defendant was purely circumstantial. Success in prosecuting her was dependent on the State being able to put together enough evidentiary pieces, none of which was dispositive standing alone, that cumulatively made a case for defendant’s guilt. To this end, and knowing that there was no way of tying any water to this defendant, the State produced three witnesses in an apparent attempt to associate defendant with Danny Edwards and the two of them with the purchase of bottled water of some kind. As is shown in the majority opinion, not one of the three provided any evidence that defendant, either alone or in concert with Edwards, had purchased any water of any kind. The majority acknowledges that the testimony had “extremely low probative value.” 344 Ill. App. 3d at 1117. In point of fact, it had no probative value at all — a fact that leaves me wondering why the witnesses were produced at all if not to bolster the State’s case by innuendo, and why the State has battled in the circuit court and before this court to keep the evidence in. I have to wonder if the jury, too, strove, possibly successfully, to find some significance in this testimony which, although admittedly without legal probity, had acquired some worth or utility simply by virtue of having been presented. For that reason, I cannot agree with the majority that the failure to provide the defense with a way to keep that testimony out is immaterial. I believe the Brady violation was material and I would reverse the dismissal of counts IX and X of the postconviction petition and require a hearing on this issue on remand.

=== CASE 9736862 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:41.509079+00 ===

JUSTICE HOLDRIDGE, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur in the majority’s opinion except for its treatment of counts I and IV of Rish’s postconviction petition. I would affirm the circuit court’s dismissal of those counts. Count I: Ineffective Assistance of Counsel I agree that during precharge custodial interrogation a person can invoke article I, sections 2 (due process) and 10 (right against self-incrimination), of the Illinois Constitution to secure the presence of an attorney. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §§ 2, 10; see also People v. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 414 (1994). I also have no objection to adopting the standard prescribed in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052 (1984), for judging such an attorney’s performance. In applying that standard, however, we must account for the necessities of context. The strictures of representation at the precharge stage are considerably lower than those at the prosecution stage (where the Strickland standard originated). This principle flows naturally from the fact that jeopardy has not attached during precharge proceedings. Thus counsel’s role is limited to protecting the suspect’s right against self-incrimination. As the United States Supreme Court has noted in the fifth amendment context, the purpose of requiring counsel is to preserve Miranda rights, not to vindicate the sixth amendment right to the assistance of counsel. See United States v. Gouveia, 467 U.S. 180, 188 n.5, 81 L. Ed. 2d 146, 154 n.5, 104 S. Ct. 2292, 2297 n.5 (1984). I believe this observation applies equally under the Illinois Constitution. In fact, the sixth amendment’s counterpart in the Illinois Constitution carries the heading, “Rights after Indictment.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 8. With this understanding of precharge counsel’s role, the inquiry under the first prong of Strickland is whether counsel provided objectively reasonable protection of the suspect’s right against self-incrimination. In the instant case, the record contains considerable evidence that attorney Swaim met this requirement. He explicitly informed Rish that she had a constitutional right to remain silent. When Rish chose to continue speaking with the police, Swaim informed her that she could terminate the discussions at any time. He also advised that he would remain in the room in case “anything got to be a problem.” He subsequently accompanied Rish during 35 hours of interrogation — periodically stopping the questions and asking the police to leave the room so he could discuss certain matters with her. Swaim testified that he did not observe any coercion or mistreatment of Rish by the police. Based on the information Rish gave him about her knowledge of the crime, Swaim did not see a problem with her cooperation in the investigation. During the interrogation, Swaim called State’s Attorney William Herzog on the telephone twice to assert Rish’s innocence. When Herzog advised that Rish could not go home, Swaim became furious and threatened to sue the State on her behalf. Rish does not dispute these facts; rather, she speculates about Swaim’s loyalty because of his acquaintance with the victim and a police officer. But the facts illustrate that Swaim fulfilled his limited precharge responsibilities in an objectively reasonable manner. Thus, Rish cannot carry her burden under the first prong of Strickland, and the circuit court properly dismissed count one of her postconviction petition. Count IV: Prosecutorial Misconduct Our supreme court has aptly observed that “[i]f *** the knowledge of every State employee who is involved in a criminal case is imputed to the prosecution, the control over criminal cases would be placed in the hands, and at the mercy, of every employee who touches the case.” People v. Robinson, 157 Ill. 2d 68, 80 (1993). Accordingly, imputation depends on factors like reasonableness, whether the failure to transmit knowledge up the informational chain was inadvertent or intentional, and whether real prejudice occurred. Robinson, 157 Ill. 2d 68. The evidence indicates that Officer Willis did not intend to conceal his “electric chair” comment to Rish; after all, he repeated the comment to millions of people on national television. Furthermore, I do not believe Rish suffered real prejudice as a result of the comment. Even if the jury believed she told the truth about Detective Erickson threatening her with the electric chair, the State still presented compelling circumstantial evidence of her guilt. For instance, she was involved in purchasing materials to construct the burial box, purchasing the water left inside the box with the victim, and casing the victim’s house. Additionally, her fingerprints were discovered on a tape recorder used during one of the ransom calls. Such facts support a reasonable inference that Rish gave inconsistent statements because she wanted to conceal her guilt, not because she was frightened by a single comment about the electric chair. Under these circumstances, it would be unreasonable to impute Willis’s knowledge about the “electric chair” comment to the prosecution. The court properly dismissed count IV of Rish’s postconviction petition. For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent from those portions of the majority’s opinion dealing with counts I and IV

=== CASE 9736863 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:42.901007+00 ===

OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
Appellant, an officer and twenty-five year veteran of the Winona Police Department, sought to enjoin enforcement of his chief's order that he submit to a current psychological examination. The chief acted on his statement of concerns about appellant’s behavior, but the city refused to permit grievance procedures on the chiefs action. Although the trial court ordered grievance process after this appeal was commenced, we have before us its earlier decision to require grievance procedures only on the issue of selecting an evaluating clinician. On the appeal from the prior decision, we require modification to provide for grievance process on singling out appellant to undergo the exam.
FACTS
In April 1988, the Winona police chief asked agents of the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension to investigate reports that appellant’s kindnesses to three young male offenders had involved overly-close relationships that prompted concern of a social worker and some others. The agents interviewed appellant and his wife, all three boys, mothers of two of the boys, and two people who had done police work with appellant in the past.
On May 16,1988, the state agents reported having found no evidence that appellant had inappropriately touched the three boys. The two - mothers believed appellant had never sexually abused their children. One former officer reported that she had suspected for many years that appellant had sexual contacts with young boys, but she knew of no real incidents of abuse. Another officer remembered rumors over the years about appellant’s relationships with boys, and he recalled a report about fifteen years earlier that appellant had kissed one or two boys. Appellant admitted his activities raised red flags suggesting potential sexual abuse, but he said he had not had sexual involvement with any children.
The chief discussed the investigation with appellant on May 19. He concluded only that appellant’s favors for the boys and their families had violated several rules on handling information and on use of an official position.
Three weeks later, on June 10, 1988, the chief told appellant he continued to have concerns about appellant’s relationship with young boys, and he ordered appellant to undergo a psychological examination. The chief told appellant he would be suspended if he refused to be examined. The chief’s policy requires that information gathered in the exam be reported to the employer. Appellant refused the examination.
The trial court issued its first order in appellant’s injunction suit in July 1988. As clarified in a September 1989 order, the court issued an injunction, but required grievance procedures only on the question of selecting a psychologist to conduct the ordered examination. This appeal was commenced after the court failed to order grievance procedures concerning the decision that appellant’s present fitness was suspect such that he should be ordered to undergo a current psychological exam. Based on appellant’s concurrent motion for further clarification of the trial court’s order, the court acted again after its jurisdiction on the subject matter was lost; on January 20, 1990, the court ordered the city to act on appellant’s grievance of his selection for testing.
ISSUE
Is grievance process required by law on the public employer’s determination of cause to question an individual employee’s fitness, and the employer’s resulting order for a current psychological examination?
ANALYSIS
We do not have before us the usual exercise of trial court discretion on multiple factors governing the request for an injunction. Rather, the issue on appeal goes singularly to one of those factors, the trial *661court’s conclusion on the merits of appellant’s claim for rights under public employment labor law. Appellate review under the Public Employee Labor Relations Act, Minn.Stat. §§ 179A.01 — 179A.30 (1988), is not bound by the trial court’s conclusions. Minneapolis Fed’n of Teachers, Local 59 v. Minneapolis Special School Dist. No. 1, 258 N.W.2d 802, 804 (Minn.1977).
Appellant contends that the trial court’s initial error in restricting the scope of a grievance procedure was enlarged by the court’s failure to directly decide whether the Winona police department actually had a policy for investigative exams, and the court’s failure to identify the details of the policy. Respondent correctly observes, however, that the court's order implies acceptance of the city’s claim that the issue was governed by an unwritten policy, and its further claim that the policy was reasonably applied in selecting appellant for an examination. The city does not claim the prerogative to select an individual to be psychologically examined for no reason at all.1 As argued in the city’s brief to this court, the trial court impliedly found the city had a policy for testing and “reason” to order appellant to submit to an exam. The issue at hand is whether the soundness of this reason is to be tested in grievance proceedings or only in judicial attacks typified by the process employed here.2
1. Policy impact on working conditions. Fundamentally, the issue here is shaped by the legislative determination that public employee grievances on “terms and conditions of employment,” including “all disciplinary actions,” are to be resolved by binding arbitration. Minn.Stat. § 179A.20, subd. 4 (Supp.1989).3 See Minn.Stat. § 179A.03, subd. 19 (1988) (“terms and conditions of employment” includes all personnel policies affecting working conditions of employees); see also Minn.Stat. § 179A.06, subd. 5 (1988), and § 179A.07, subd. 2 (1988) (obligation of public employers to negotiate terms and conditions of employments); University Educ. Ass’n v. Regents of the Univ. of Minnesota, 353 N.W.2d 534, 538 (Minn.1984) (scope of mandatory bargaining to be broadly construed to promote “resolving labor disputes through negotiation”). We find little room to doubt that appellant’s working conditions are materially affected by the mandate that he undergo an investigative psychological examination.
Respondent contends that its policy has no impact on conditions of employment until a disciplinary sanction is imposed. The city similarly argued to the trial court that a grievance procedure on the disciplinary sanction would permit appellant an adequate remedy without prior grievance procedure on the order for an examination. The trial court rejected these contentions, and its rationale has merit. Later disciplinary proceedings based on results of a completed exam may not deal with reasons for compelling the examination. In addition, as the trial court observed, the city has conceded the psychological examination *662may lead to discharge of appellant; thus, as the court concluded, it is evident that the exam itself could have “profound impact” on appellant’s employment. Moreover, the city’s contention requires the untenable judgment that an investigative psychological examination is itself only an innocuous experience for public employees, or at least for those occupying law enforcement positions. We cannot overlook the intrusive characteristics of the examination, along with the impact of disclosure of information gathered in the exam. See Law Enforcement Labor Serv. v. County of Hennepin, 449 N.W.2d 725, 728-29 (Minn.1990) (policy on personal grooming has impact on working conditions).
As to the prospect to grieve future' disciplinary action for refusal to be examined, even if the issues were to encompass cause for the examination order, there is no reason to postpone review of the issue. The city’s present order was accompanied by the express promise of suspension if appellant refused to be psychologically examined, and appellant’s refusal is inherent in his pursuit of these proceedings. Nothing is gained by briefly suspending review of the issue to permit making record of an express refusal.
2. Parameters of managerial policymak-ing.
The issue of grievability of the dispute over singling out appellant for an examination is rendered more complex because Minnesota’s statute requires, in addition to the mandate for negotiation and grievance on conditions of employment, the protection of a public employer’s prerogative to determine inherent managerial policy. Minn.Stat. § 179A.07, subd. 1 (1988). See Minn.Stat. § 179A.03, subd. 19 (1988) (concept of terms and conditions of employment subject to section 179A.07); Minn. Stat. § 179A.20, subd. 4 (Supp.1989) (no grievance mandate on matters other than terms and conditions of employment); Law Enforcement Labor Serv., 449 N.W.2d at 730 (citing “narrowly defined exceptions” to public labor law premise that mandatory bargaining “provides a reasonable resolution of most labor management disputes”). The exception for inherent managerial policy extends to policy implementation, even when it creates conditions of employment, where implementation is “so interwoven and inseparable” with policymaking that negotiation on implementation issues would risk concessions by management of its protected prerogatives. Id. at 729-30; University Educ. Ass’n, 353 N.W.2d at 539, 541.
It is error, we conclude, to classify as part of policymaking the implementation of respondent’s selective, investigative examination policy by applying it to an individual employee.
First, we observe that this individual application contrasts with the more certain policymaking characteristics of some general policies applied to all employees. See St. Paul Fire Fighters, Local 21 v. City of St. Paul, 336 N.W.2d 301, 302-03 (Minn.1983) (observing that training for all members of an employee class is a policy decision); Minneapolis Fed’n of Teachers, Local 59, 258 N.W.2d at 805-06 (criteria for transfer of individual teachers separate from managerial decision to transfer a number of employees, and “each individual transfer is a proper subject of grievance arbitration”).4 The Minneapolis Federation case is especially persuasive in determining the need for grievance process on the order applying to appellant the city policy to mandate investigative examinations.
Second, issuance of an examination order to appellant is collateral to the basic policy initiative to investigate lapses in fitness; grievance procedures on the action do not impinge on formulation of the policy. The city desires to act, it says, where there is reason to question fitness for employment due to an officer’s behavior or current physical condition. Thus, the elements of a reasonable fitness concern include incidents of misconduct or deterioration of perform-*663anee. These matters can be objectively evaluated without hampering the city’s policy initiative. See St. Paul Fire Fighters, 336 N.W.2d at 302-03 (negotiation appropriate on various aspects of implementing city’s policy to involve all fire captains in a training program). This is in contrast to more subjective dealings with staff, such as a full evaluation of attributes for academic tenure, where each decision is itself a policy initiative aimed generally at achieving a better program of the employing institution. See University Educ. Ass’n, 353 N.W.2d at 541; see also Law Enforcement Labor Serv., 449 N.W.2d at 729-30 (specific grooming standards are integral to the general policy initiative for well-groomed police officers).
Finally, we are mindful, as already observed, that the investigative psychological examination together with disclosure of information obtained in the exam, is unusually intrusive. It is also important, we conclude, that the individual application here is a part of disciplinary steps aimed at appellant, both as a stated consequence of declining to be examined and as the prospective result of discoveries made in the investigative exam. See International Bhd. of Teamsters v. City of Minneapolis, 302 Minn. 410, 415-16, 225 N.W.2d 254, 257-58 (1975) (suspension steps a sure part of conditions of employment). The existing labor management agreement between the parties calls for grievance process on the employee’s challenge to disciplinary actions.5
For these several reasons, we conclude that the city’s order to appellant was outside the parameters of managerial policy-making.
DECISION
The trial court’s injunction must compel grievance procedures on the reason for questioning appellant’s fitness and selecting him for a mandatory psychological examination, not alone on identification of the clinician who might administer the exam. The trial court’s order will be modified accordingly.
Affirmed as modified.
GARDEBRING, J., concurs specially, with opinion.
KALITOWSKI, J., dissents, with opinion.
. The remainder of our analysis of the case is shaped by this characterization of the city's position. In subsequent grievance proceedings, should the city alter its position, claiming a prerogative to order a psychological examination for no reason at all, such a tactic would lend no support to the city’s position. Selective demand for psychological examinations, based solely on the will and not the reason of the public employer, would constitute an arbitrary and unlawful imposition of terms and conditions of public employment. Moreover, as the city acknowledges, the trial court’s orders constitute a decision that a policy of reason exists; this decision has not been appealed by the city, and the holding cannot now be disregarded.
. Although it is only a pragmatic consideration, not determinative of the law of the case, the process here unavoidably attracts attention. This appeal follows intense litigation over a two-year period, involving three trial court orders and a voluminous pattern of pleadings, arguments and submission of memoranda. Litigation in court is a cumbersome alternative to grievance process to examine the merits of the city’s decision.
.Article 23 of the 1987 labor-management contract between respondent and the Winona Police Department Supervisor’s Association implements the legislative mandate for grievance procedures on disputes under the agreement. Article 22 governs all efforts to discipline employees, which in each instance must be premised on reasons stated by the employer.
. Pre-licensing psychological examinations are required of all prospective Minnesota police officers. Minn.R. 6700.0700, subpt. 1. H. (1989).
. See supra note 3.

=== CASE 9736864 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:42.905006+00 ===

GARDEBRING, Judge
(concurring specially).
I concur in the majority opinion, but would emphasize the need for grievance procedures because of two unusual circumstances in this case. First, prior to the commencement of this litigation there was apparently no written policy relative to additional psychological or physical examinations based on a concern for the officer’s fitness for duty. There are no Minnesota PELRA cases which deal with the issue of the way in which a matter of “inherent managerial policy” must be articulated pri- or to its application to a specific individual. While I would not go so far as to require that such a policy be formally promulgated, certainly fundamental fairness requires that, where the policy exists only in inchoate, unwritten form, its application to an individual should be subject to review through the grievance procedure.
Second, the nature of the testing in this instance also suggests the need for a third party review by way of the arbitration or grievance process. If the requested testing involved investigation of an officer’s pistol accuracy by means of testing at a pistol range, perhaps a grievance procedure would not be as appropriate; but here, because of the highly intrusive nature of psychiatric testing, the protection of the grievance process seems necessary.
Further, I believe the dissent wholly misses the mark by relying on a previous PELRA case which analyzes management’s duty to negotiate the terms and conditions of employment. See Law Enforcement Labor Services v. County of Hennepin, 449 N.W.2d 725 (Minn.1989). Neither County of Hennepin nor other recent PELRA cases, St. Paul Fire Fighters, Local 21 v. City of St. Paul, 336 N.W.2d 301 (Minn.1983), and University Education Association v. Regents of University of *664Minnesota, 353 N.W.2d 534 (Minn.1984), provide guidance in this situation. Respondent in this matter is not seeking additional bargaining or negotiation of the contract; rather, he is merely attempting to exercise the right to grieve, already guaranteed to him by a previously negotiated provision of the contract between the City of Winona and his union.
It may indeed be the case, as the dissent argues, that negotiation over a method to implement a policy of psychiatric testing is an inappropriate interference with managerial authority, but that is not the issue before us today. We are only asked to decide whether respondent may grieve an order, which, if disobeyed, will result in disciplinary action. The contract plainly so provides, and therefore the trial court must be affirmed, with the modification noted in the majority opinion.

=== CASE 9736865 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:42.908122+00 ===

KALITOWSKI, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I would affirm the trial court without modification. The decision by the chief of police requiring appellant to undergo psychological testing to determine his fitness to serve as a police officer is not subject to grievance procedures. There is no specific provision in the applicable labor contract which allows a police officer to grieve such a decision. In addition, testing for fitness is clearly not a disciplinary action subject to grievance as defined under the contract.
Although appellant has no specific right to grieve the chief’s decision under the contract, he argues that the testing affects the terms or conditions of employment and is therefore subject to both negotiation and grievance. However, the trial court correctly held that the establishment of a policy concerning psychological testing is within the employer’s prerogative to determine inherent managerial policy and is therefore outside the statutory mandate for negotiation under PELRA. Likewise, the decision by the chief to implement the policy by requiring appellant to undergo psychological testing is not subject to bargaining because it is interwoven with and inseparable from the policy itself. Implementation of the policy relates directly to the police chief’s obligation to maintain the basic fitness of the police force. Bargaining on policy implementation could impinge on the chief’s protected prerogatives and frustrate the efforts of the police to protect the safety and welfare of citizens. See Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc. v. County of Hennepin, 449 N.W.2d 725, 730 (Minn.1990).
Because the decision to require testing for fitness is not a subject for which a grievance is allowed under the contract, is not a disciplinary action under the contract, and is not subject to bargaining as a term or condition of employment, appellant has no right to grievance procedures.
Finally, I appreciate and share the trial court’s concern about the intrusive nature of psychological testing and its possible impact on appellant’s employment. However, concern for public safety has led to a requirement that all applicants for law enforcement positions in Minnesota undergo psychological testing to determine that they are free from “any emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect the performance of peace officer duties.” See Minn.R. 6700-0700 subpt. 1 H (1989). Although the rule does not specifically provide for re-testing, the policy behind the testing requirement supports the conclusion that it is within the managerial authority of the chief to require additional tests where necessary.

=== CASE 9736866 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:43.138845+00 ===

PER CURIAM:
This is an appeal from appellant’s conviction following a non-jury trial for possession with intent to distribute heroin, in violation of D.C.Code § 33-541(a)(l) (1993 Supp.), and from the denial of his motion for a new trial. Although appellant presents us with numerous issues on appeal, only one issue requires plenary discussion, namely, whether the trial court committed reversible error by considering appellant’s potential punishment in concluding that he was not a credible witness.1 We hold that the court did not and accordingly affirm.
I.
The government’s evidence at trial showed that Detective Gary O’Neal was on duty at approximately 7:00 p.m. on August 22, 1989, in an alley behind 146 “L” Street, Southeast, an area described as an “open air drug distribution center.” Detective O’Neal observed appellant standing in a walkway holding several blue ziplock packets of white powder in the palm of his outstretched hand while a female, later identified as Ms. Robin Lyles, reached within one inch of appellant’s hand. Suspecting a drug transaction, although he could not determine whether Lyles was moving her hand toward or away from appellant’s hand, Detective O’Neal identified himself and demanded that appellant and Lyles emerge from the walkway. Lyles fled and appellant dropped his hand to his side. Detective O’Neal struggled with appellant and eventually recovered from appellant’s hand nine packets of powder which field-tested positive for heroin. Officer Kemper Agee then searched appellant and found one packet of a white substance that tested positive for crack cocaine and $74.00 in cash in a bicycle pouch which was strapped around appellant’s waist.
Officer David Stroud was qualified as an expert in street trafficking and packaging of illicit drugs. He testified that the nine packets of heroin had a street value of $180.00 as packaged, but the same quantity of heroin could be purchased in bulk for $60.00. He also testified that the quantity, variety, and value of the drugs were more consistent with distribution than with personal use. Further, Officer Stroud opined that the maximum amount of heroin an addict would use in a day would be six packets; and that a *980heroin addict would buy no more than two bags of heroin at one time.
Appellant was the sole defense witness. He testified that he was a heroin addict and that he had purchased the drugs from Ms. Lyles in exchange for his girlfriend’s camcorder; further, he said that he intended to use all of the drugs within twenty-four hours. Moreover, he testified that he had two prior convictions for distribution of drugs, had been sentenced under the addict exception,2 had previously participated in drug programs, and had been hospitalized because of his long-standing drug addiction.
In rendering its decision finding appellant guilty of possession with intent to distribute heroin, the trial court stated:
I have been sitting here wondering why Mr. Johnson would go to trial in this case and the minute I hear about his prior record I say, uh-huh, he wants to avoid a mandatory minimum.
[[Image here]]
I don’t believe we’ve got any real doubt. I think I am entitled to take into account the defendant’s desire to avoid the mandatory minimum sentence in evaluating his credibility. That does not substitute evidence but it does give him a very powerful motivation not to tell the truth on this specific narrow point of intent to distribute.
Following appellant’s conviction and the trial court’s imposition of the mandatory-minimum sentence, this appeal ensued.
II.
Appellant contends that the trial court, sitting as the trier of fact, was bound by the same prohibition as a jury not to consider potential punishment in assessing his credibility as a witness. It is, of course, true that as a general principle, “the jury is to determine guilt or innocence on the evidence before it and should not consider the possibilities of punishment in its deliberations ...” Brown v. United States, 554 A.2d 1157, 1160 (D.C.1989) and cases cited therein; see also Criminal Jury Instructions for the District of Columbia, No. 2.74 (4th ed. 1993).3 The reason for such a general principle is, at bottom, one of relevance. The jury’s role is that of the determiner of guilt or innocence, an issue upon which the possible punishment for the crime casts no light whatever. As the court said in United States v. Patrick, 161 U.S.App.D.C. 231, 234, 494 F.2d 1150, 1153 (1974): “[T]he jury’s only function is to assess guilt or innocence on the basis of their independent view of the evidence. Sentencing decisions, on the other hand, are within the exclusive province of the court....” The court then went on to quote from Miller v. United States, 37 App.D.C. 138, 143 (1911):
it is error for the court to put before the jury any considerations outside the evidence that may influence them, and lead to a verdict not otherwise possible of attainment. The deliberations of the jury should revolve around the evidence before them, and should be uninfluenced by other considerations or suggestions.
But the situation in the case before us was different. The defendant had taken the stand and testified. His credibility was at issue, to be determined by the finder of fact. Plainly, anything that might sway the truthfulness of his testimony was a relevant *981fact, including the prospect of incarceration. As has been well-established for many years, the bias of a witness is “always relevant.” Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308, 316, 94 S.Ct. 1105, 1110, 39 L.Ed.2d 347 (1974); Springer v. United States, 388 A.2d 846, 855 (D.C.1978) (“The exposure of bias or partiality as a motivational factor may be ... a crucial determinant in the jury’s assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness. Thus, ‘bias is always a proper subject of cross-examination,’ ” quoting Hyman v. United States, 342 A.2d 43, 44 (D.C.1975)).4 Cf. Criminal Jury Instructions for the District of Columbia, No. 2.28 (4th ed. 1993) (in weighing defendant’s testimony, jury “may consider the fact that the defendant has a vital interest in the outcome of this trial”). The nature of the punishment faced by the defendant is thus a relevant fact in assessing his motive to lie: a potential $10 fine is different from the prospect of a death penalty.
Therefore, if a jury were not to be told of the precise punishment potentially faced by the defendant, the reason would not be that of the general proscription against such evidence. Bather, it would presumably be based on a determination that, although relevant, its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, under the principle that applies to any evi-dentiary decision in jury trials. See, e.g., District of Columbia v. Cooper, 483 A.2d 317, 323 (D.C.1984); Fed.R.Evid. 403.
However, here we are dealing with a bench trial. It is standard doctrine that in such circumstances, a trial judge is presumed to know of the proper use of evidence. See, e.g., Moore v. United States, 609 A.2d 1133, 1136 (D.C.1992) (acknowledging “the well-recognized ‘presumption that a trial judge, in deciding a case without a jury, will disregard any inadmissible evidence and any improper argument,’ ” citing Singletary v. United States, 519 A.2d 701, 702 (D.C.1987)). There can be no real concern that a trial judge will use the evidence of the length of punishment to which a defendant is subject in any improper way in his deliberations. Here, it is plain that the trial judge considered it only as to the defendant’s credibility.5
In this posture, we see no need to determine whether the evidence would, of necessity, be excludable in a jury trial as unduly prejudicial.6 It would be a feckless procedure, on some principle of total equivalency, to require a trial court upon each proffer of clearly relevant and otherwise admissible evidence in a bench trial to engage in the hypothetical process of determining whether, in a jury trial, that evidence would *982be excluded under the principle of outweighing prejudice or any of the other doctrines controlling the presentation of evidence to juries, such as confusion of the issues, misleading nature, undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence, and to require an appellate court to review this hypothetical determination.7 We know of no authority to this effect and none is cited to us. We decline to adopt such a rule here.
Accordingly, the judgment appealed from is
Affirmed.
. Appellant’s claims of insufficient evidence to sustain his conviction, ineffective assistance of counsel, and error on the part of the trial court in admitting expert testimony are without merit.
. The addict exception is codified at D.C.Code § 33 — 541(c)(2) (1993 Supp.) which provides in pertinent part as follows:
[T|he court may, in its discretion, waive the mandatory-minimum sentencing provisions ... when sentencing a person who has not been previously convicted ... for knowingly or intentionally ... distributing, or possessing with intent to ... distribute a controlled substance ... if the court determines that the person was an addict at the time of the violation ..., and that such person ... distributed or possessed with intent to ... distribute a controlled substance ... for the primary purpose of enabling the offender to obtain a narcotic drag or abusive drug which he required for his personal use because of his addiction to a narcotic drag or an abusive drag.
. Instruction 2.74 states:
The question of possible punishment of the defendant in the event of conviction is no concern of [the jury] and should not enter into or influence your deliberations in any way. The duty of imposing sentence in the event of conviction rests exclusively with me. You should weigh the evidence in the case and determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant solely upon the basis of such evidence, without any consideration of the matter of punishment.
. A portion of Springer not pertinent here has been overruled. See Bassil v. United States, 517 A.2d 714, 717 n. 5 (D.C.1986).
. The following colloquy during closing argument shows the trial court’s awareness of the proscription against a factfinder’s indiscriminate consideration of punishment.
THE COURT: Let me ask you this question, Mr. Klingenstein, before I hear from Ms. Bo-recki. If this case were tried to a jury would you be free to argue to the jury that they should disbelieve the defendant because of his motivation to avoid [a] mandatory minimum, having been disqualified by his prior record from the addict exception? Would you be permitted to argue that to the jury in light of the fact that we tell the jury not to take punishment into account?
MR. KLINGENSTEIN: Your Honor, I might be able to argue that but I would not. I’m not confident enough standing here that I could argue that and I would not.
[[Image here]]
THE COURT: I don't know. I mean, it’s an obvious factor that leaps to mind for the Court but I don't know that I should consider it if the jury couldn’t consider it and I’m not at all sure that you would be free to make that argument to a jury.
* * * * * *
MS. BORECKI: With regard to the last point, Your Honor, I would simply note that the Court is the trier of facts in this case, as obviously, with a jury. And it would appear to me in answering your question that it would be improper for the Court to take all that into consideration with regard — that is the potential punishment.
Thus, we do not understand the trial judge to have operated from any firm conclusion that in a jury trial, the evidence of the mandatory minimum would necessarily have been excluded by him, despite the government’s contrary premise in its scanty discussion of the issue in its brief.
.More precisely, the inquiry would be whether, on the specific facts here, a trial court would abuse its discretion in determining that the probative value of the information was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
. The hypothetical nature of such an inquiry is further highlighted by the realistic situation that a bench trial may well involve a different dynamic and process from a jury trial of the same offense. A defendant opting for a bench trial simply must take these differences into account. We do not deal here with a question of the use in a bench trial of evidence that would clearly be prohibited by some inflexible evidentiary rule in a jury trial.

=== CASE 9736867 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:43.143934+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Associate Judge,
dissenting:
I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the court. I would hold that the trial court erred in considering potential punishment in assessing appellant’s credibility as a witness and that the error was not harmless under the circumstances. Accordingly, I would reverse appellant’s conviction for possession with intent to distribute heroin and remand for a new trial.
In rendering its decision finding appellant guilty of possession with intent to distribute heroin, the trial court, sua sponte, stated:
I have been sitting here wondering why Mr. Johnson would go to trial in this case and the minute I hear about his prior record I say, uh-huh, he wants to avoid a mandatory minimum.
[[Image here]]
I don’t believe we’ve got any real doubt. I think I am entitled to take into account the defendant’s desire to avoid the mandatory minimum sentence in evaluating his credibility. That does not substitute evidence but it does give him a very powerful motivation not to tell the truth on this specific narrow point of intent to distribute.
The government concedes, as it must, that as a general principle, “the jury is to determine guilt or innocence on the evidence before it and should not consider the possibilities of punishment [including mandatory penalties ] in its deliberations.... ” See Brown v. United States, 554 A.2d 1157, 1160-61 & n. 3 (D.C.1989), and cases cited therein; see also Criminal Jury Instruction for the District of Columbia, No. 2.74 (4th ed. 1993).1 The government attempts to rationalize and justify the trial court’s use of appellant’s potential punishment, however, by arguing that because the trial court is knowledgeable about the sentencing laws, it is capable of refraining from any improper use of that information. This argument, however, is belied by the trial court’s statements to the contrary: that the prospect of serving a mandatory-minimum sentence provided appellant with a “powerful motivation not to tell the truth,” and that the trial court “was entitled” to take that fact “into account” in assessing appellant’s credibility notwithstanding the fact that the government never asked the trial court to do so. I am aware of no authority and, indeed, neither my colleagues nor the government has cited any authority, to support this position.2
To the contrary, the Supreme Court has held that trial judges are presumed to “follow their own instructions when they are acting as factfinders.” Harris v. Rivera, 454 *983U.S. 339, 346, 102 S.Ct. 460, 464, 70 L.Ed.2d 530 (1981). For a trial court to consider evidence which a jury could not consider is repugnant to the long-standing principle of law that a trial court, sitting as the finder of fact, and a jury, are bound by the same evidentiary and legal standards. See Turman v. United States, 555 A.2d 1037, 1038 (D.C.1989) (“[Jjust as a jury may only decide a ease based on the facts properly presented to it during trial, so too must a judge, sitting as the trier-of-faet, base his or her determinations solely on the evidence presented in the case at bar.” (citations omitted)); J.D. Hedin Constr. Co. v. F.S. Bowen Elec. Co., 106 U.S.App.D.C. 386, 388, 273 F.2d 511, 513 (1959) (“The jury must, after all, act only on proper instructions. The judge sitting as trier of the facts must act on a sound legal and evidentiary basis....”); cf. United States v. Palermo, 259 F.2d 872, 882 (3d Cir.1958) (“there is no difference between a trial judge formally instructing the jury as to what he thinks the applicable law to be and, in effect, instructing himself similarly in a non-jury ease”); Wilson v. United States, 250 F.2d 312, 324 (9th Cir.1957) (same), reh’g denied, 254 F.2d 391 (9th Cir.1958).
Having served as a trial judge for a number of years, I am acutely aware that a judge may become aware of inadmissible evidence during the course of a trial. See Moore v. United States, 609 A.2d 1133, 1136 (D.C. 1992). In such circumstances, however, the judge is not at liberty to base rulings on such evidence. Id. (the trial court repeatedly stated that it would not consider hearsay evidence in finding appellants guilty). Rather, the presumption is that a “‘trial judge in deciding a case without a jury, will disregard any inadmissible evidence and any improper argument.’ ” Id. (quoting Singletary v. United States, 519 A.2d 701, 702 (D.C.1987)); see also Harris, supra, 454 U.S. at 346, 102 S.Ct. at 465 (“In bench trials, judges routinely hear inadmissible evidence that they are presumed to ignore when making decisions”). Regrettably, this did not occur here.
Appellant’s testimony on direct examination that he had two prior convictions for distribution of drugs, and had been sentenced previously under the addict exception, alerted the trial court that he was subject to a mandatory-minimum sentence if convicted. Unquestionably, prior convictions of a defendant can be used by the trier of fact to assess credibility. See D.C.Code § 14-305(b)(1) (1981 and 1992 supp.);3 Jones v. United States, 579 A.2d 250, 254 (D.C.1990). Moreover, a trier of fact may take into account a defendant’s interest in the outcome of a trial. See White v. United States, 582 A.2d 774, 780 (D.C.1990), rev’d in part on other grounds, 613 A.2d 869 (1992) (en banc).4 A trier of fact — judge or jury — may not, however, use the potential punishment of a defendant for the purpose of assessing that person’s credibility. See Criminal Jury Instruction for the District of Columbia, No. 2.74, supra note 1; Anderson v. United States, 326 A.2d 807, 811 (D.C.1974) (the “question of possible punishment ... is no concern of the jury”) (quoting Criminal Jury Instruction for the District of Columbia, No. 2.71 (2d ed. 1972)), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 978, 95 S.Ct. 1405, 43 L.Ed.2d 659 (1975). In the present case, because “[I] cannot presume that [the trial judge followed the correct legal standard] when the record affirmatively indicates the contrary,” Hightower v. United States, 117 U.S.App.D.C. 43, 50, 325 F.2d 616, 623 (Fahy, J., dissenting), I would hold that the trial court erred by considering appellant’s potential punishment in concluding that he was not a credible witness.
“[I]t is clear that a judge sitting without a jury must be reversed if he shows a fundamental misunderstanding of the evidence or of the governing law.” Hightower, supra, 117 U.S.App.D.C. at 46, 325 F.2d at 619. “[W]here the record shows a prejudicial error of law by the court in reaching the finding, it may be set aside.” Hedin, supra, 106 *984U.S.App.D.C. at 388 n. 2, 273 F.2d at 513 n. 2. If a trial judge’s “statements and actions indicate that he did not [act on a sound legal and evidentiary basis], correction must follow.” Id. at 388, 273 F.2d at 513.
In Hill v. United States, 612 A.2d 269, 278 (D.C.1986), we held that the trial court’s error was harmless and did not require reversal where the trial court’s sua sponte reference to the defendant’s prior convictions did not prejudice the defendant because his credibility was not material to the suppression issue. In the present case, however, credibility was a critical issue. Appellant testified that he was purchasing heroin to support his heroin addiction and claimed that the quantity of drugs seized from him woüld satisfy his addiction for only twenty-four hours. Detective O’Neal testified that appellant was selling drugs, and Officer Stroud testified that the amount, variety, and packaging of the drugs indicated that appellant was a distributor. The trial court candidly acknowledged that the evidence was not “literally clear” whether appellant was buying or selling drugs. In this regard, the trial court stated:
Well, I find this to be a somewhat more troubling case than I expected it to be. For one thing, Mr. Johnson has given a rather plausible explanation as to why he "would be using that kind of pouch and he has come up with an explanation] ] which, if accepted at face value, do[es] explain away a major portion of the Government’s evidence with respect to matters that would support an inference of intent to distribute.
In view of the close call on the question of credibility, the use of the incorrect standard by the trial court in assessing appellant’s credibility “tainted the trial process,” in my view, and constituted reversible error. See Turman, supra, 665 A.2d at 1039. In Tur-man, this court reversed appellant’s conviction because the trial court partially relied on an improper consideration in assessing a witness’s credibility. The trial judge in Tur-man, likewise presiding over a non-jury trial, stated during the trial that he knew a witness to be credible from prior appearances before him in other cases. Id. at 1038. In reversing the conviction, this court held that “it was inappropriate for the court to base its determination on its evaluation of the [witness’] credibility in other eases.” Id. We stated:
It is apparent that the trial court did not rely solely on the officer’s prior court appearances when it determined her to be a credible witness. Nevertheless, a trial court must always be cautious in its language and conduct. To announce to the parties that the court' had previously gained a good impression of a witness’ credibility, and then to proceed to weigh that witness’ credibility in the case at bar without assuring the parties that the previous assessment would play no role in judging the pending case, created an appearance of partiality, if not an implication of actual partiality, which tainted the trial process.
Id. at 1039 (citation omitted) (emphasis added). The persuasive rationale of Turman is applicable in the present case.
Accordingly, I would hold that the trial court’s express use of an incorrect legal standard, i.e., appellant’s potential punishment in assessing his credibility, was not harmless and, thus, appellant’s conviction should be reversed. See id.; but cf. Moore, supra, 609 A.2d at 1136 (no error where judge states on record that he would not consider inadmissible evidence against defendant). In reaching my conclusion, I merely acknowledge precedent of long-standing that a trial judge presiding as factfinder is bound by the same evidentiary and legal standards as a jury. See Turman, supra, 555 A.2d at 1038; Hedin, supra, 106 U.S.App.D.C. at 388, 273 F.2d at 513; see also Harris, supra, 454 U.S. at 346, 102 S.Ct. at 464; Hightower, supra, 117 U.S.App.D.C. at 46, 325 F.2d at 619. If a judge sitting as factfinder were allowed to consider information that a jury could not consider, and then factor that forbidden information into the decision-making process, there would hardly exist any incentive for a litigant in pursuit of justice to opt for a non-jury trial.
One additional point made by the majority prompts one last comment by me. In the majority opinion, ante at 981, my colleagues state that “[t]he nature of the punishment *985faced by the defendant is thus a relevant fact in assessing his motive to he; a potential $10 fine is different from the prospect of a death penalty.” At what measuring point, and under what circumstances, I wonder, will the dollar amount of the fine or the length of a potential sentence determine when a defendant has a motive to he? appellant’s conviction for possession with intent to distribute heroin and remand for a new trial.
Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the court. I would reverse
. Instruction 2.74 states:
The question of possible punishment of the defendant in the event of conviction is no concern of the jury and should not enter into or influence your deliberations in any way. The duty of imposing sentence in the event of conviction rests exclusively upon the Court Land the Court has wide latitude in such matters]. You should weigh the evidence in the case and determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant solely upon the basis of such evidence, without any consideration of the matter of punishment.
. The colloquy during closing argument between the court and counsel showed the trial court’s keen awareness of the proscription against a factfinder’s consideration of punishment. Nevertheless, the trial court proceeded to consider appellant's potential punishment in assessing his credibility. Ante at 981, note 5.
. Section 14 — 305(b)(1) states, in pertinent part:
Except as provided in paragraph (2), for the purpose of attacking the credibility of a witness, evidence that the witness has been convicted of a criminal offense shall be admitted if offered[]....
. The record is clear that the trial court did not expressly consider the defendant’s convictions in assessing his credibility as a witness. Nor did the trial court state that it considered appellant's interest in the outcome of the case as a factor affecting his credibility.

=== CASE 9736868 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:43.545501+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
CIPARICK, J.
In 1959, plaintiff Maureen O’Connell and now-deceased John J. O’Connell were married in New York.1 Eight children were born of the marriage, all currently emancipated. In 1982, plaintiff moved out of the marital residence and commenced a New York divorce action based on cruel and inhuman treatment. After trial, Supreme Court dismissed the action for failure of proof and the Appellate Division affirmed (116 AD2d 823 [3d Dept 1986]). Thereafter, plaintiff and decedent continued to reside separately. The children lived with plaintiff, and decedent paid child support.
In 1993, plaintiff established residence in Vermont. Thereafter, in 1994, she commenced a divorce action in the Family Court of Vermont pursuant to Vermont’s no-fault divorce law, which permits divorce when “a married person has lived apart from his or her spouse for six consecutive months and the court finds that the resumption of marital relations is not reasonably probable” (Vt Stat Ann, tit 15, § 551 [7]). Decedent was served with a complaint seeking divorce, and by letter answer opposed the *182divorce. A final hearing was scheduled for December 21, 1994. Decedent received notice from the Vermont court, requesting that he appear at the hearing on the divorce and motion for property division. Decedent appeared pro se, although New York counsel accompanied him and was available in the courtroom.
During the hearing, plaintiffs counsel informed the Vermont court that plaintiff was seeking only a divorce. When the court inquired about property division, counsel explained that all of the parties’ marital assets were located in New York State and the Vermont court lacked jurisdiction to distribute the property. Neither the trial judge nor decedent contested plaintiffs statement. Decedent argued only that plaintiffs previous divorce action in New York barred her from maintaining a divorce action in Vermont. At the close of the hearing, the court rejected decedent’s argument and granted plaintiff a final judgment of divorce. It made no property distribution.
In 1995, plaintiff commenced this New York action against decedent seeking equitable distribution of the marital property, pursuant to Domestic Relations Law § 236 (B) (5) (a), which authorizes New York courts to distribute marital property subsequent to a foreign judgment of divorce. Decedent moved for dismissal on the ground that the complaint was barred by res judicata. He argued that, because Vermont Family Court had personal jurisdiction over both parties, the court could have rendered a judgment directing equitable distribution of their marital assets. He contended that plaintiffs failure to seek equitable distribution in the Vermont divorce action barred her from seeking subsequent equitable distribution in Vermont and, therefore, under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the United States Constitution, New York was required to dismiss plaintiffs complaint.
Supreme Court denied decedent’s motion and the Appellate Division affirmed (226 AD2d 950 [3d Dept 1996], Iv dismissed 88 NY2d 963 [1996]). Noting that Domestic Relations Law § 236 (B) (5) (a) expressly permits parties to obtain equitable distribution following a foreign judgment of divorce, the Appellate Division concluded that the statute entitled plaintiff to proceed in this action. Additionally, the Court concluded that the Vermont divorce decree did not have res judicata effect in New York because the issue of equitable distribution was not resolved, addressed or litigated in the Vermont divorce proceeding, and it remitted the matter to Supreme Court for trial.
*183Following a bench trial, Supreme Court awarded plaintiff a distributive award of $186,670, representing approximately half of the marital estate, and directed decedent to pay $5,000 toward plaintiffs counsel fees. The Appellate Division affirmed (290 AD2d 774 [3d Dept 2002]) and this Court granted defendant leave to appeal, bringing up for review the prior Appellate Division order that denied defendant’s motion to dismiss the complaint. We now reverse.
Domestic Relations Law § 236 permits a New York proceeding to obtain the distribution of marital property following a foreign judgment of divorce.2 Lower courts differ as to whether a bilateral sister state divorce decree—one in which the sister state could have, but did not, distribute marital property—precludes a subsequent New York proceeding to obtain equitable distribution pursuant to section 236 (B) (2) and (5) (a) (compare 226 AD2d 950 [3d Dept 1996], Iv dismissed 88 NY2d 963 [1996], with Erhart v Erhart, 226 AD2d 26 [4th Dept 1996]; see also Scheinkman, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 14, Domestic Relations Law C236B:3, at 247-248). Er-hart held that the Full Faith and Credit Clause requires the courts of this state to give the same effect to a properly obtained sister state divorce decree that the sister state would give the decree. Therefore, where a divorced spouse would be precluded from commencing a separate action for distribution of marital property within the sister state granting the divorce decree, New York must also preclude a subsequent action for equitable distribution of marital property (see Erhart, 226 AD2d at 31). This approach is consistent with the requirements of full faith and credit and our own application of res judicata in matrimonial actions.
While section 236 (B) (2) and (5) (a) are broadly worded to permit parties to obtain postdivorce equitable distribution fol*184lowing a foreign divorce—with no mention of whether such a divorce results from either an ex parte or bilateral divorce proceeding—the statute should be interpreted to extend only as far as the Constitution permits. In accordance with the Full Faith and Credit Clause, a “judgment of a state court should have the same credit, validity, and effect, in every other court of the United States, which it had in the state where it was pronounced” (Underwriters Natl. Assur. Co. v North Carolina Life & Acc. & Health Ins. Guar. Assn., 455 US 691, 704 [1982], quoting Hampton v McConnel, 3 Wheat [16 US] 234, 235 [1818]; see also Vanderbilt v Vanderbilt, 354 US 416, 418 [1957]; Matter of Luna v Dobson, 97 NY2d 178, 183 [2001]). Thus, where a foreign divorce decree would serve as a bar to a subsequent action for equitable distribution brought in the courts of the decree-rendering state, the decree also has that effect in New York.
Giving a foreign divorce decree the same conclusive effect in New York as it would have in the decree-rendering state is consistent with our own application of res judicata in matrimonial actions (see Boronow v Boronow, 71 NY2d 284 [1988]). The decree-rendering state here being Vermont, we now turn to a review of its law.
Vermont Statutes Annotated, title 15, § 751 (a) provides that,
“[u]pon motion of either party to a [divorce] proceeding . . . the court shall settle the rights of the parties to their property, by including in its judgment provisions which equitably divide and assign the property. All property owned by either or both of the parties, however and whenever acquired, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the court” (emphasis supplied).
Here, despite the erroneous statement of plaintiffs Vermont counsel, there is no question that the Vermont court had personal jurisdiction over both plaintiff and decedent and could have distributed the marital property, wherever situated. We reject plaintiffs contention and the dissent’s conclusion that decedent’s appearance was limited only to contesting the divorce and that the Vermont court had rendered itself powerless to decide the property issue (see dissenting op at 190).
In Vermont, as in New York, the common-law doctrine of res judicata “bars the litigation of a claim or defense if there exists a final judgment in former litigation in which the ‘parties, *185subject matter and causes of action are identical or substantially identical’ ” (Berlin Convalescent Ctr., Inc. v Stoneman, 159 Vt 53, 56, 615 A2d 141, 143 [1992]). This “doctrine covers claims that were actually litigated, as well as those which could have been litigated” in a previous action (Roddy v Roddy, 168 Vt 343, 347 n 2, 721 A2d 124, 127 n 2 [1998]).
Applying the principles of full faith and credit, plaintiff’s divorce action has the same conclusive effect in New York as it does in Vermont. We, therefore, hold that, notwithstanding Domestic Relations Law § 236 (B) (2) and (5) (a), this action is barred in New York. Public policy in New York and Vermont frowns upon forum shopping and the bifurcation of divorce and equitable distribution proceedings. In Boronow, this Court held that a party in a divorce action, who had a full and fair opportunity to contest title to the former marital home, was barred from raising the issue of title in a subsequent action (see 71 NY2d at 286). Applying a transactional analysis, we explained that, in a divorce action,
“questions pertaining to important ancillary issues like title to marital property are certainly intertwined and constitute issues which generally can be fairly and efficiently resolved with the core issue. The courts and the parties should ordinarily be able to plan for the resolution of all issues relating to the marriage relationship in the single action” (id. at 290).
The Vermont Supreme Court similarly has recognized a preference for a single action. As the court noted in Roddy v Roddy, “[n]o one is entitled to break a case down into a myriad of single issue actions to obtain the desired judgment. Judicial time schedules and fairness to one’s opponent prohibit this practice” (Roddy, 168 Vt at 347, 721 A2d at 127, quoting B & E Corp. v Bessery, 130 Vt 597, 601, 298 A2d 544, 546 [1972]).3 Thus, a party—who had a full and fair opportunity to litigate property issues in another state—would be precluded from litigating such issues in New York.
Finally, we do not agree with the dissent that the Vermont court “expressly declined to adjudicate the issue of equitable *186distribution” (dissenting op at 186). There is no language severing issues of property distribution, and nothing in the court’s order to indicate an intention to do so. The dissent rests entirely on a colloquy with counsel (quoted at 187-188), when counsel erroneously advised that the court lacked jurisdiction to divide New York assets. The court responded “All right. Mr. O’Connell, is there anything that you wish to put to the Court at this time?” This in no way constitutes a severance. Indeed, in a 12-page transcript of the Vermont hearing, the court used the words “All right” eight times, clearly as a means of moving the parties along.
Nor can we, as a court of law, agree with the dissent’s closing observation that, if equitable distribution is denied, plaintiff will receive nothing from a long term marriage. In fact, we do not know the true equities here, and must be guided by the law and the parties’ arguments to us.4
Having determined that plaintiffs action for equitable distribution is barred, we need not address defendant’s remaining contentions as they are academic.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, the motion granted and the complaint dismissed with costs.
. During the pendency of his motion for leave to appeal to this Court, John O’Connell died. Ellen Corcoran, as executrix of his estate, was substituted as the party defendant in this action.
. Section 236 (B) provides in relevant part:
“2. Matrimonial actions. Except as provided in subdivision five of this part, the provisions of this part shall be applicable to . . . proceedings to obtain maintenance or a distribution of marital property following a foreign judgment of divorce, commenced on and after the effective date of this part [July 19, 1980]. . . .
“5. Disposition of property in certain matrimonial actions, a. Except where the parties have provided in an agreement for the disposition of their property . . . the court, ... in proceedings to obtain a distribution of marital property following a foreign judgment of divorce, shall determine the respective rights of the parties in their separate or marital property, and shall provide for the disposition thereof in the final judgment.”
. The dissent’s reliance on Ford v Franklin (129 Vt 114, 118, 274 A2d 461, 463 [1971]) is misplaced as the plaintiff in that case had obtained an ex parte Nevada divorce decree, defendant having defaulted and “being neither present in person nor by attorney.” (Id.)
. It bears noting that the dissent is predicated on an argument that is not being asserted by plaintiff.

=== CASE 2207682 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.322247+00 ===

636 A.2d 340 (1993)
Donna PETERS, et al.
v.
STATE of Vermont.
No. 93-004.
Supreme Court of Vermont.
November 19, 1993.
Before GIBSON, DOOLEY, MORSE and JOHNSON, JJ.
ENTRY ORDER
Lawrence Peters died as the result of an accident on Route 125 in East Middlebury, Vermont, on February 3, 1988. His widow, on behalf of herself, the estate, and the minor children, brought a wrongful death action against the State of Vermont, alleging that the State was negligent in the placement of warning signs on the highway. She claimed that the State waived immunity for the negligence under 12 V.S.A. § 5601(a)[*] of the Vermont Tort Claims Act.
The State moved for summary judgment on the ground that placement of warning signs on state highways is a uniquely governmental function for which no private analog exists, and therefore, there was no waiver of sovereign immunity. The trial court agreed and granted summary judgment for the State. Plaintiff moved for reconsideration, which the court denied, and this appeal followed. We reverse.
In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, we use the same standard as that used by the trial court. Summary judgment is appropriate where there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. V.R.C.P. 56(c); State v. Delaney, 157 Vt. 247, 252, 598 A.2d 138, 141 (1991). Here, the State conceded, for purposes of its motion, that it was negligent in the placement of warning signs on Route 125 and that this negligence caused the death of Lawrence Peters. The issue on appeal, therefore, is whether the State was entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Plaintiff contends that the facts conceded by the State are comparable to situations where a private citizen may be sued, and therefore, a private analog does exist. We agree. In LaShay v. Department of *341 Social & Rehabilitation Services, 160 Vt. ___, ___, 625 A.2d 224, 229 (1993), we held that the Department of Social and Rehabilitation Services (SRS) was not immune from liability for negligently placing and supervising a child in foster care. We found that private individuals or entities may also place and supervise children in foster care, and may be liable for negligence "comparable" to that asserted by the plaintiff; therefore, a "comparable" cause of action could be brought against SRS. Id.; see also Denis Bail Bonds, Inc. v. State, 159 Vt. ___, ___, 622 A.2d 495, 498 (1993) ("threshold issue [under 12 V.S.A. § 5601(a)] is whether plaintiff's factual allegations . . . satisfy the necessary elements of a cause of action against the State comparable to one that may be maintained against a private person").
In the present case, too, a private analog exists where plaintiff's claim against the State is comparable to recognized causes of action that may be brought against private persons who own or control roads. See Department of Hwys. & Pub. Transp. v. Bacon, 754 S.W.2d 279, 281 (Tex.Ct.App.1988) (in plaintiff's action against state for failing to warn of icy conditions, "[t]he duty owed by the State is the same as the duty owed by a private person to a licensee on private property"); cf. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 342 comment d, illustration 2 (1965) (where A owns road and invites B to drive on that road, A liable for failure to warn B of dangerous condition); id. § 367 (private liability for dangerous condition on land appearing to be highway); Reider v. City of Spring Lake Park, 480 N.W.2d 662, 667 (Minn.Ct.App. 1992) (church liable for motorcyclist's injuries suffered in striking unmarked barricade because of inadequate signage on private road); Ridge v. Grimes, 53 N.C.App. 619, 281 S.E.2d 448, 450 (1981) (jury could find that developer, by undertaking to construct road in subdivision knowing public would use it as public road, incurred duty to plaintiff to maintain road in safe condition "and to give adequate warning of any contrary condition"); Wolfe v. Union Pacific R.R., 230 Or. 119, 368 P.2d 622, 625 (1962) (where plaintiff mistook private road for public road and drove down steep embankment after unmarked sharp left turn, jury could conclude failure to erect warning sign or barricade at curve was negligent conduct); Baran v. Pagnotti Enterprises, Inc., 402 Pa.Super. 298, 586 A.2d 978, 983 (1991) (jury question whether owner of private road and stripmine pit exercised reasonable care to warn public of danger, where decedent drove off road into pit).
The State contends that its immunity is waived only if a private individual would be liable under the "same circumstances," pointing out that the use of the word "same" in Vermont's statute constitutes a "critical distinction" from the Federal Tort Claims Act. Compare 12 V.S.A. § 5601(a) with 28 U.S.C.A. § 2674 ("The United States shall be liable . . . in the same manner and to the same extent as a private individual under like circumstances . . . ." (emphasis added)). In this case, according to the State, the "same circumstances" would require that a private individual negligently place a warning sign on a state road. Since the duty to erect appropriate signs on state roads is conferred on the Agency of Transportation only, 19 V.S.A. § 10(7), private individuals have no authority to place signs thereon and may not be held liable for failing to place them properly. See 23 V.S.A. § 1027 (prohibiting unauthorized signs, signals, or markings on highways).
In support of its argument, the State cites Indian Towing Co. v. United States, 350 U.S. 61, 63-64, 76 S. Ct. 122, 123-24, 100 L. Ed. 48 (1955), wherein the federal government was sued for damages to a barge because of alleged negligent operation of a light-house. The government contended that the statutory term "like circumstances" should be construed as "same circumstances," and that there could be no liability for activities that private persons do not perform. The United States Supreme Court held, however, that even though the Coast Guard was the only possible operator of a lighthouse, making the operation a "uniquely governmental function," the government was not immune from liability for failing to operate the lighthouse "in a careful manner." Id. at 64-65, 76 S. Ct. at 124-25. Thus, Indian Towing is of little help to the State's cause. See Sterling v. Bloom, 111 Idaho 211, 218, 723 P.2d 755, 762 *342 (1986) ("Indian Towing . . . full well comprehended that the language here concerned created government liability for the same causes of action for which private persons would be held liable.") (emphasis in original).
There are, of course, governmental functions for which no private analog exists, and for these the waiver under 12 V.S.A. § 5601(a) will not apply. See Akutowicz v. United States, 859 F.2d 1122, 1125 (2d Cir. 1988) ("Without doubt, no private citizen is empowered to certify the loss of American nationality."); C.P. Chemical Co. v. United States, 810 F.2d 34, 38 (2d Cir.1987) (complaint dismissed because government regulation banning particular type of insulation "was a quasi-legislative activity for which we find no private counterpart").
Because we find that the 12 V.S.A. § 5601(a) waiver applies to this case, we need not address plaintiff's argument that the State waived its sovereign immunity under 29 V.S.A. § 1403 as it existed at the time of the accident.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[*]  12 V.S.A. § 5601(a) states, in pertinent part:
(a) The state of Vermont shall be liable for injury to persons or property or loss of life caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of an employee of the state while acting within the scope of employment, under the same circumstances, in the same manner and to the same extent as a private person would be liable. . . .

=== CASE 9736891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:07.132493+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
The majority opinion carefully recites the four requirements for the application of the doctrine of comity, but fails to explain how the federal judgment in this case satisfies the requirements. Instead, the majority merely offers a cursory conclusion that the requirements were met: “We conclude that the federal court’s criminal sentencing of Daly meets all of the foregoing conditions.” Careful analysis demonstrates that the jurisdiction requirement is not met.
As we explained in Mexican v. Circle Bear, 370 N.W.2d 737 (S.D.1985), the doctrine of comity will not be applied to the judgment of a foreign court unless that court actually had jurisdiction over both the subject matter and the parties. Here, the federal court clearly was lacking in jurisdiction. The federal court can obtain subject-matter jurisdiction over Daly’s burglary charge only if 18 U.S.C. § 1153 applies. That statute applies when an Indian commits a major crime within Indian country. However, the Lumbee Indian Act specifies that: “None of the statutes of the United States which affect Indians because of their status as Indians shall be applicable to the Lumbee Indians.” 70 Stat. 255 (1956). Daly is a Lumbee Indian. 18 U.S.C. § 1153 affects Indians because of their status as Indians. Therefore, 18 U.S.C. § 1153 is not applicable to Daly, and the federal court lacks jurisdiction. Since the federal court does not have jurisdiction, only the state court has jurisdiction to prosecute this crime.

=== CASE 2207783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.368897+00 ===

271 Cal.App.2d 420 (1969)
CHARLES EDWIN ROMIG et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER COMPANY et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 32857.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Apr. 3, 1969.
Mietus & Kartzinel for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, John H. Sharer, Robert E. Cooper and Andrew E. Bogen for Defendants and Respondents. *421
MOSS, J.
This appeal is presented to us on a settled statement in lieu of both transcripts, pursuant to rule 7(b), California Rules of Court. The appeal is from a judgment entered upon a jury verdict in favor of defendants following trial on the issue of defendants' liability for injuries suffered by plaintiffs in a motor vehicle accident.plaintiffs alleged that the accident was caused by a defect in one of the tires which had come as original equipment with the van owned and driven by them when the accident occurred. Defendants are the manufacturer of the tire (Goodyear), the manufacturer of the vehicle (Chrysler), and the retail seller of the vehicle (Earle Ike).
According to the settled statement the parties stipulated at trial that the issues in the case were strict liability and breach of express and implied warranty. At oral argument, counsel for plaintiffs and defendants stated to this court that the settled statement erroneously omitted the fact that this stipulation was later withdrawn and that the negligence of defendants was also an issue in the trial. We have caused the superior court file to be transmitted to this court pursuant to rule 12(a), California Rules of Court.
[1] Plaintiffs' sole contention on appeal is that the trial court erred in refusing to submit to the jury certain instructions requested by plaintiffs on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur. We deem it unnecessary to discuss the merits of that contention because in view of the verdict of the jury the failure to give the instructions could not have been prejudicial to plaintiffs.
On the theory of manufacturer's strict liability the jury was given the following instruction: "The manufacturer of an article who places it on the market for use under circumstances where he knows that such article will be used without inspection for defects, is liable for injuries proximately caused by defects in the manufacture or design of the article of which the user was not aware, provided the article was being used for the purpose for which it was designed and intended to be used. ... You are instructed that a requirement precedent to the application of the doctrine of strict liability in tort is that the article which is the asserted cause of the injury was defective when manufactured or sold. ... The plaintiffs in this action had the burden of proving that, under the doctrine of strict liability in tort, the tire was defective when manufactured or sold and that the defect, if any, was the proximate cause of the accident." (See Greenman *422 v. Yuba Power Products, Inc., 59 Cal.2d 57, 62 [27 Cal.Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897, 13 A.L.R.3d 1049]; see also Vandermark v. Ford Motor Co., 61 Cal.2d 256, 260-261 [37 Cal.Rptr. 896, 391 P.2d 168]; Preston v. Up-Right, Inc., 243 Cal.App.2d 636, 639 [52 Cal.Rptr. 679]; BAJI No. 218-A; Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (1967 Supp.)  388B- 388D, pp. 609-612; 13 A.L.R.3d 1057.)
Under the evidence as it was presented to the jury, the verdict for defendants must have meant that the jury found either that there was no defect in the tires when sold, or that such a defect was not the cause of the accident, or that plaintiffs were aware of the defect and its attendant risks. (See Witkin (1967 Supp.) supra,  388L-388N, pp. 615- 616; Rest. 2d, Torts,  402A.)
Any one of these findings, however, would have been equally as fatal to a claim based upon negligence as it was to the claim based upon strict liability because to establish defendants' liability on the theory of negligence plaintiffs were required to prove that there was a defect in the tire when the van was sold, that the defect was the proximate cause of the accident (2 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law, Torts,  212, p. 1401) and that plaintiffs were unaware of the defect (see Erickson v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 240 Cal.App.2d 793, 798 [50 Cal.Rptr. 143]; Gallegos v. Nash, San Francisco, 137 Cal.App.2d 14, 19-20 [289 P.2d 835]; 2 Witkin, Summary of Cal.Law, supra, Torts,  329, pp. 1526-1528,  349-352, pp. 1551-1555).
[2] The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is applied to permit the jury to infer a defendant's negligence from the fact of a defect under appropriate circumstances. (See Zentz v. Coca Cola Bottling Co., 39 Cal.2d 436, 440-447 [247 P.2d 344]; Erickson v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., supra, 240 Cal.App.2d 793, 797-798; Shain, Res Ipsa Loquitur:presumptions and Burdens of Proof (1945) 432-433.) The doctrine has no relevance to proof of the other elements of a cause of action based upon negligence.plaintiffs' inability to prove that defendants were negligent, with or without the aid of an instruction on res ipsa loquitur, could not have affected the ultimate verdict.
The judgment is affirmed.
Cobey, J., and Schweitzer, Acting P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736892 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:10.563633+00 ===

DAY, J.
This is a review of that part of the decision of the court of appeals, Ehlinger v. Sipes, 148 Wis. 2d 260, 434 N.W.2d 825 (Ct. App. 1988), which reversed the judgment of the circuit court for Oconto county, the Honorable Robert O. Weisel, Reserve Judge, presiding, dismissing the Ehlingers' action against Dr. Sipes and Bay West Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ltd., for insufficiency of the evidence at the close of Plaintiffs' case. The Ehlingers' action against Dr. Vogel was also dismissed by the circuit court and on the same basis. The court of appeals affirmed that part of the circuit court's decision and that ruling is not challenged in this court. The question is whether the Ehlingers produced sufficient evidence from which the trier of fact could determine that Dr. Sipes' alleged negligence in failing to diagnose Mrs. Ehlinger's multiple pregnancy was a substantial factor in causing the injuries her twin children, Kurt and Cory, subsequently suffered as a result of being born prematurely. At trial, an expert witness called by the Ehlingers testified that Dr. Sipes' failure to diagnose that Mrs. Ehlinger was carrying twins constituted negligence and was a "substantial contributing factor" in causing the twins' injuries. The expert further testified that Dr. Sipes' negligence deprived Mrs. Ehlinger of the opportunity to receive treatment to prolong her pregnancy and *6thus deprived her of the chance that the children could have been healthier. We conclude the expert's testimony was sufficient to present the causation question to the trier of fact.
Mrs. Ehlinger gave birth to Kurt and Cory on June 12, 1978. The twins were born prematurely after only thirty-two weeks of gestation. As a result of their premature births, Kurt suffers from spastic quadriplegia and Cory suffers from a severe hearing loss with related speech difficulties. The Ehlingers allege the injuries to Kurt and Cory were the result of Dr. Sipes' negligent failure to diagnose the twin pregnancy and to take measures to prevent premature delivery, allegedly a common complication in cases of multiple pregnancy.
Mrs. Ehlinger had previously been under Dr. Sipes' care while pregnant in 1975. The earlier pregnancy was carried full-term and Mrs. Ehlinger gave birth to a normal, healthy child. Mrs. Ehlinger testified at trial that during the course of her second pregnancy, several factors led her to suspect she might be carrying twins. Mrs. Ehlinger stated that she felt more fatigued, suffered from back pains, felt "life" earlier, and was noticeably larger and heavier than during her first pregnancy. Mrs. Ehlin-ger testified that she related these symptoms to Dr. Sipes and even directly asked him if it was possible she was carrying twins. Mrs. Ehlinger stated that Dr. Sipes "did not take her seriously" and told her not to worry. Nor did Dr. Sipes perform an ultrasound examination which, the Ehlingers allege, would have revealed the multiple pregnancy. It was not realized that Mrs. Ehlin-ger was carrying twins until she gave birth to the two children.
Dr. Sipes denies that his failure to diagnose Mrs. Ehlinger's multiple pregnancy constituted negligence or was a cause of Kurt's and Cory's injuries. Dr. Sipes was *7called as an adverse witness at trial and he acknowledged the importance of properly diagnosing a multiple pregnancy and that a multiple pregnancy is by definition high risk. Dr. Sipes conceded that in a multiple pregnancy the likelihood of premature birth is increased and that as a result a different course of treatment is instituted towards preventing premature delivery, including warning the patient of the possibility of premature delivery, more frequent examinations, being certain of adequate nutrition, use of prophylactics, decreasing physical and emotional stress, bedrest, decreasing intercourse, and bringing the patient to the hospital earlier. Dr. Sipes further conceded that the injuries to Kurt and Cory were the result of their being born prematurely.
On the issue of causation, Dr. Bernard M. Nathan-son, M.D., testified on the Ehlingers' behalf in part as follows:
Q Doctor, let me ask you this: Do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether or not the failure of Dr. Sipes to diagnose twins in this case was a substantial contributing factor in causing the premature labor and delivery that ultimately ensued?
A Yes, I do.
Q What is that opinion?
A My opinion is that it was.
Q Could you explain that to the Court and jury, please.
A Yes. Had Dr. Sipes made the diagnosis of twins in a timely manner that should have been made, then certain measures could have been taken to prevent the premature labor and delivery, as the Williams textbook stated as one of the aims of care in multiple pregnancy.
*8And I conclude here such things as bedrest, putting the patient to bed by at least the 30th week, reducing her activity accordingly. And these measures would at least have given her a chance at prolonging this pregnancy. Of course, with each day, with each week a pregnancy is prolonged in the premature area, the chances of the baby being healthier, [sic] surviving are increased.
At the close of Plaintiffs' case, Dr. Sipes moved to dismiss on the basis the Ehlingers failed to produce sufficient evidence from which the trier of fact could determine that Dr. Sipes' alleged negligence caused Kurt's and Cory's injuries. The circuit court granted the motion, concluding the Ehlingers failed to produce any evidence that had the multiple pregnancy been diagnosed by Dr. Sipes and proper treatment rendered, the injuries the twins suffered more probably than not would have been lessened or avoided. Dr. Nathanson's testimony was insufficient to establish causation, the circuit court reasoned, because Wisconsin law does not compensate for a mere "lost chance."
The Ehlingers appealed. The court of appeals, on the basis of sec. 323(a) Restatement (Second) of Torts, reversed and remanded the case for a new trial. Section 323(a) provides:
Negligent Performance of Undertaking to Render Services. One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other's person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if
(a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm . . ..
*9The court of appeals concluded that Dr. Nathan-son's testimony provided sufficient evidence from which the trier of fact could determine that Dr. Sipes' alleged negligence had "increased the risk" that the premature births and resulting injuries would occur. Ehlinger, 148 Wis. 2d at 268-69. The court of appeals held that the question of whether the increased risk was a substantial factor in causing Kurt's and Cory's injuries was then for the trier of fact to resolve. Id. at 269.
Dr. Sipes petitioned this court for review, which was granted. We conclude that the Ehlingers produced sufficient evidence to present to the trier of fact the question of whether Dr. Sipes' alleged negligence was a substantial factor in causing Kurt's and Cory's injuries. We disagree, however, with the court of appeals' interpretation of sec. 323(a). Thus, on the issue reviewed, we reach the same conclusion as the court of appeals, though on a different basis, and accordingly we affirm.
The "increased risk" theory the court of appeals followed in this case is one of several approaches jurisdictions have taken in attempting to address the causation problem presented here. See generally Perdue, Recovery for a Lost Chance of Survival: When the Doctor Gambles, Who Puts Up the Stakes?, 28 South Texas Law Review 37, 45-46 (1987); Andel, Medical Malpractice: The Right to Recover for the Loss of a Chance of Survival, 12 Pepperdine Law Review 973, 978 (1985).
Several jurisdictions have taken the approach that in order to present the causation question to the trier of fact, the plaintiff need only introduce evidence that the defendant's negligence deprived the plaintiff of a "substantial possibility" of avoiding or lessening the harm. See, e.g., Roberson v. Counselman, 235 Kan. 1006, 686 P.2d 149 (Kan. 1984); Daniels v. Hadley Memorial Hospital, 566 F.2d 749 (D.C. Cir. 1977); Jeanes v. Milner, *10428 F.2d 598 (8th Cir. 1970); Hicks v. United States, 368 F.2d 626 (4th Cir. 1966). In Roberson, the court stated:
The question of causation in cases involving negligent treatment of a potentially fatal condition ... is generally a matter to be determined by the finder of fact where the evidence has established the patient had an appreciable chance to survive if given proper treatment. In making the determination, the finder of fact should take into account both the patient's chances of survival if properly treated and the extent to which the patient's chances of survival have been reduced by the claimed negligence.
Roberson, 686 P.2d at 159. In Hicks, the court stated the rationale for the "substantial possibility'1 approach as follows:
If there was any substantial possibility of survival and the defendant has destroyed it, he is answerable. Rarely is it possible to demonstrate to an absolute certainty what would have happened in circumstances that the wrongdoer did not allow to come to pass. The law does not in the existing circumstances require the plaintiff to show to a certainty that the patient would have lived had she been hospitalized and operated on promptly.
Hicks, 368 F.2d at 632 (emphasis in original).
Other jurisdictions have viewed the loss of an opportunity for treatment as creating a new cause of action. See, e.g., James v. United States, 483 F. Supp. 581 (N.D. Cal. 1980). Damages are awarded in proportion to the likelihood of success that proper treatment would have had. This approach is supported by an oft-quoted commentator in the field. See King, Causation, Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involv*11ing Preexisting Conditions and Future Consequences, 90 Yale L.J. 1353 (1981).
A diminishing number of jurisdictions have taken an "all or nothing" approach. See, e.g., Pillsbury-Flood v. Portsmouth Hospital, 128 N.H. 299, 512 A.2d 1126 (1986); Sherer v. James, 290 S.C. 404, 351 S.E.2d 148 (1986); Curry v. Summer, 136 Ill. App. 3d 468, 483 N.E.2d 711 (Ill. App. 4 Dist. 1985); Gooding v. University Hosp. Bldg., Inc., 445 So. 2d 1015 (Fla. 1984); Cooper v. Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, Inc., 27 Ohio St. 2d 242, 272 N.E.2d 97 (1971). Under the "all or nothing" approach, to establish causation the plaintiff must show that it is more probable than not that proper care by the defendant would have been successful in avoiding or lessening the plaintiffs harm. This was the approach followed by the circuit court in this case.
A number of jurisdictions have, like the court of appeals, applied sec. 323(a), but these jurisdictions have differed in their interpretations of how the "increased risk" theory applies to a case such as this. A minority of jurisdictions have interpreted sec. 323(a) as compensating for the lost opportunity for treatment itself. See, e.g., McKellips v. Saint Francis Hosp., Inc., 741 P.2d 467 (Okla. 1987). Damages are awarded similar to the separate cause of action approach. The majority of jurisdictions, however, have interpreted sec. 323(a) as lessening the plaintiffs burden of proof on causation. See, e.g., Evers v. Dollinger, 95 N.J. 399, 471 A.2d 405 (1984); Herskovits v. Group Health Co-op., 99 Wash. 2d 609, 664 P.2d 474 (1983); Thompson v. Sun City Community Hosp., Inc., 141 Ariz. 597, 688 P.2d 605 (1984); Jones v. Montefiore Hospital, 494 Pa. 410, 431 A.2d 920 (1981); Hamil v. Bashline, 481 Pa. 256, 392 A.2d 1280 (1978). Once the plaintiff shows that the defendant's negligence increased the risk that the plaintiffs injury would occur, *12sec. 323(a) allows the trier of fact to determine whether the negligence was a substantial factor in causing the injury. This was the interpretation followed by the court of appeals here.
This court has previously approved of sec. 323(a). See Sanem v. Home Ins. Co., 119 Wis. 2d 530, 350 N.W.2d 89 (1984). Even prior to Sanem, the duty described in sec. 323(a) had long been the common-law rule in Wisconsin. See Johnson v. Misericordia Hosp., 97 Wis. 2d 521, 561, 294 N.W.2d 501 (Ct. App. 1980), aff'd., 99 Wis. 2d 708, 301 N.W.2d 156 (1981). We disagree, however, with the court of appeals' interpretation of how sec. 323(a) applies to the circumstances in this case. Section 323(a) is generally viewed as relating only to the duty element of a negligence action. See, Perdue, 28 South Texas Law Review at 51 n.85; see also Sherer, 351 S.E.2d at 150-51; Curry, 483 N.E.2d at 717. Section 323(a) does not, as the court of appeals construed it to, lessen a plaintiffs burden of production on the issue of causation. The issue was unaddressed in Sanem.
We conclude that the evidence in this case was sufficient under current Wisconsin law to present the causation question to the trier of fact. To establish causation in Wisconsin, the plaintiff bears the burden of proving that the defendant's negligence was a substantial factor in causing the plaintiffs harm. Merco Distg. Corp. v. Com'l. Police Alarm Co., 84 Wis. 2d 455, 458, 267 N.W.2d 652 (1978). "The phrase 'substantial factor' denotes that the defendant's conduct has such an effect in producing the harm as to lead the trier of fact, as a reasonable person, to regard it as a cause, using that word in the popular sense." Id. at 458-59. The test has been described as one of significance rather than quan-*13turn. See Prosser, Law of Torts, sec. 41, at 240 n.29. " 'All that is required in negligence cases is for the plaintiff to present probable facts from which negligence and causal relations may be reasonably inferred.' " Johnson, 97 Wis. 2d at 564 (quoting Purcell v. Zimbelman, 18 Ariz. App. 75, 500 P.2d 335, 342 (1972)). One who negligently creates a dangerous condition may be held liable even though another cause is also a substantial factor in contributing to the result. Johnson, 97 Wis. 2d at 561. "There may be more than one substantial causative factor in any given case." Merco, 84 Wis. 2d at 459. The defendant's negligent conduct need not be the sole or primary factor in causing the plaintiffs harm. Sumnicht v. Toyota Motor Sales, 121 Wis. 2d 338, 351, 360 N.W.2d 2 (1984).
Dr. Sipes contends that in order to satisfy their burden of production on the issue of causation, the Ehlingers must show that had a proper diagnosis been made and appropriate treatment rendered, it is more probable than not Kurt and Cory would not have suffered their injuries or their injuries would have been less severe. To require anything less, Dr. Sipes asserts, would allow the issue of causation to be decided on mere speculation and conjecture. We disagree that to establish causation the Ehlingers must show that proper diagnosis and treatment would have been successful. We conclude that in a case of this nature, where the causal relationship between the defendant's alleged negligence and the plaintiffs harm can only be inferred by surmising as to what the plaintiffs condition would have been had the defendant exercised ordinary care, to satisfy his or her burden of production on causation, the plaintiff need only show that the omitted treatment was intended to prevent the very type of harm which resulted, that the *14plaintiff would have submitted to the treatment, and that it is more probable than not the treatment could have lessened or avoided the plaintiffs injury had it been rendered. It then is for the trier of fact to determine whether the defendant's negligence was a substantial factor in causing the plaintiffs harm.
A physician is not an insurer or guarantor of the correctness of a diagnosis, but he or she must exercise proper care and skill. Id. at 338; see also Francois v. Mokrohisky, 67 Wis. 2d 196, 201, 226 N.W.2d 470 (1975); DeSham v. Taugher, 183 Wis. 446, 449, 198 N.W. 268 (1924). A negligent diagnosis followed by improper treatment is actionable where it is a substantial factor in causing the plaintiffs injury. Carson v. Beloit, 32 Wis. 2d 282, 291, 145 N.W.2d 112 (1966). Improper treatment includes the failure to warn a patient of the risks associated with a condition and the failure to advise the patient as to appropriate conduct. Schuster v. Altenberg, 144 Wis. 2d 223, 230, 424 N.W.2d 159 (1988).
Causation is a question of fact. Merco, 84 Wis. 2d at 459. A motion to dismiss for insufficiency of the evidence should not be granted "unless there is no credible evidence to support a finding for the plaintiff when all credible evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom are considered in the light most favorable to the plaintiff." Christianson v. Downs, 90 Wis. 2d 332, 334-35, 279 N.W.2d 918 (1979). Although this court has often considered cases involving a physician's allegedly negligent misdiagnosis, it has seldom addressed the issue of the sufficiency of the evidence necessary to establish causation in such circumstances.
*15In several decisions, this court affirmed dismissal of the plaintiffs action on the basis the plaintiff made no showing that the defendant failed to conform to the appropriate standard of care. See, e.g., Christianson, 90 Wis. 2d at 337; Carson, 32 Wis. 2d at 291-93.
In Bailey v. Sturm, 59 Wis. 2d 87, 207 N.W.2d 653 (1973), and Dettmann v. Flanary, 86 Wis. 2d 728, 273 N.W.2d 348 (1979), this court considered the sufficiency of the evidence on causation, but affirmed dismissal of the plaintiffs cases on grounds other than that at issue here.
In Bailey, the plaintiff alleged Dr. Pitts' failure to timely operate upon her eye condition resulted in her losing sight in one eye. The plaintiffs expert testified that had an operation been performed on December 10, 1966, there was "a good chance that her eyesight may have been saved," although there was "no guarantee that that would [have] save[d] the eye ..." This court did not reach the issue of the sufficiency of the evidence on the causation, however, because it had been established at trial that the plaintiffs sight had been irretrievably lost before she first consulted with Dr. Pitts on December 11, 1966. Id. at 97.
In Dettmann, the plaintiff suffered from cancer and brought suit alleging the defendant had negligently failed to diagnose a mass in the upper and outer area of her right breast, away from the areola. In a subsequent examination, a cancerous mass was diagnosed in the are-ola area of the same breast. Despite the plaintiffs claim that the masses were the same, all of the medical experts who testified were in agreement that there existed two separate masses. This court held the plaintiff failed to establish a causal relationship between the defendant's alleged negligence in the first examination and her injury because the plaintiff failed to produce any credible evi*16dence that the mass in the upper right of her breast was the same as that which proved cancerous. Id. at 741. Thus, there was no evidence that the defendant's alleged negligence had any causal relationship whatsoever to the plaintiffs harm. Compare Merco, 84 Wis. 2d at 460-61.
In only two failure to diagnose cases, Schuster and Dumer v. St. Michael's Hosp., 69 Wis. 2d 766, 233 N.W.2d 372 (1975), did this court address the specific causation question at issue here.
In Schuster, Mrs. Schuster was under the psychiatric care of the defendant. During the course of her care, Mrs. Schuster was fatally injured in an automobile accident in which she was the driver. Mrs. Schuster's daughter, one of the plaintiffs, was a passenger in the automobile and as a result of the accident was paralyzed. The plaintiffs alleged the defendant negligently failed to diagnose Mrs. Schuster's psychotic condition and take appropriate action, including seeking commitment, administering proper medication, and warning the Schuster family of the risks associated with Mrs. Schuster's condition. The plaintiffs farther alleged that the defendant's negligence was a substantial factor in causing the automobile accident. The circuit court dismissed the complaint. This court reversed and held the plaintiffs' complaint stated a cause of action for negligent diagnosis and treatment, stating:
The only distinction between the allegations of negligent treatment and diagnosis in the present case and those which constitute most malpractice claims is the type of harm which resulted. However, a negligent failure to diagnose or properly treat a psychiatric condition may constitute the cause-in-fact of harm to the patient and third parties if it can be established that with proper diagnosis and treatment the *17patient's condition and behavior could have been corrected or controlled.
Id. at 230 (emphasis added). This court held that whether the defendant was negligent in diagnosing and treating Mrs. Schuster's condition and whether the alleged negligence was a substantial factor in causing the plaintiffs' injuries were questions for the trier of fact to resolve. Id. at 231.
More closely analogous is Dumer. In Dumer, Mrs. Dumer sought treatment from the defendants for a rash. The defendants misdiagnosed the condition as an allergic reaction. At the time Mrs. Dumer was approximately one month pregnant. The condition later proved to be rubella and when born, Mrs. Dumer's child suffered from rubella syndrome. Mrs. Dumer brought suit seeking damages for the costs sustained because of the deformity and defects of the child. Mrs. Dumer alleged the defendants had negligently failed to diagnose the rubella and warn her of the disease's possible effects upon her pregnancy. In her complaint, Mrs. Dumer stated that had she been so informed, she would have sought an abortion to prevent the birth. The circuit court dismissed the complaint. This court reversed, reasoning that sufficient facts had been alleged to conclude the defendants were negligent in not diagnosing the rubella, inquiring as to whether Mrs. Dumer was pregnant, and warning her of the possible effects of the disease upon a pregnancy. Id. at 776. This court further stated that "[t]o complete a cause of action the plaintiffs must then convince the trier of fact that they would have sought and submitted to an abortion of the wife and that the abortion [would have been] legally available to them.'' Id.
Schuster and Dumer are distinguishable from the case here in one respect. In each case, part of the omitted treatment, psychiatric commitment in Schuster and an *18abortion in Dumer, was of such a nature that its success, if instituted, was a matter of reasonable certainty. But in neither case was the success of the omitted treatment considered necessary to the plaintiffs' burden of production on causation. In a case such as presented here, where given the natures of the malady and omitted treatment the success of the treatment if instituted is not a matter of reasonable certainty, we refuse to place upon an injured plaintiff the burden of proving what more probably than not would have happened had the defendant not been negligent. While the plaintiffs burden to present the causation question to the trier of fact is less than otherwise required, and to that extent does involve some measure of uncertainty, the courts have generally been liberal in allowing the trier of fact to determine whether the defendant's negligence caused the plaintiffs injury in such circumstances. See Prosser, sec, 41, at 242-43; see also Hicks, 368 F.2d at 632 n.3 (". . . if the victim might have been saved by a precaution which the defendant negligently omitted, the omission is deemed to have caused the harm, even though it is not possible to demonstrate conclusively that the precaution would in fact have saved the victim."). Greater uncertainty would be involved if an expert were required to testify as to what more probably than not would have happened had the defendant rendered appropriate care. See Herskovits, 664 P.2d at 478. We find the rule previously stated in the products liability context that "[t]he law of this state has never required a plaintiff to prove the negative fact of what the injuries would have been had there been no defect" equally applicable here. Sumnicht, 121 Wis. 2d at 357.
'A rule of law which requires a plaintiff to prove what portion of indivisible harm was caused by each party and what might have happened in lieu of what did *19happen requires obvious speculation and proof of the impossible. This approach converts the common law rules governing principles of legal causation into a morass of confusion and uncertainty.'
Id. at 356 (quoting Mitchell v. Volkswagenwerk, 669 F.2d 1199, 1204-05 (8th Cir. 1982). The difficulties involved in proving a negative fact are especially prevalent in a medical malpractice case involving a physician's misdiagnosis. The medical profession is not an exact science and its members are not subject to liability for mere unfavorable results. See Francois, 67 Wis. 2d at 201-02. Physicians are not insurers or guarantors of their work. See id. Yet to require a plaintiff in a case of this type to prove what more probably than not would have happened had the defendant not been negligent would require just that, expert testimony by a physician speculating as to the success of a particular treatment, a fact which inherently is incapable of proof to a reasonable certainty. "When a defendant's negligent action or inaction has effectively terminated a person's chance of survival, it does not lie in the defendant's mouth to raise conjectures as to the measure of the chances that he has put beyond the possibility of realization.” Hicks, 368 F.2d at 632; see also McKellips, 741 P.2d at 474.
Dr. Sipes contends that the evidence here fails for the same reason as the plaintiffs evidence in Merco. We do not find Merco a bar to the Ehlingers' case. In Merco, the plaintiffs case was dismissed for insufficiency of the evidence because the plaintiff failed to prove when the burglary occurred, a positive fact. Merco, 84 Wis. 2d at 460. Here, the alleged failure in proof is the Ehlingers' inability to prove a negative fact. More importantly, in Merco, absent proof of when the burglary occurred, there was no basis from which the trier of fact could *20infer that it was more probable than not that the defendant's negligence had any causal relationship whatsoever to the plaintiffs harm. Id. at 460-61. In a case such as presented here, we conclude that by showing that the omitted treatment was intended to prevent the very harm which resulted, that the plaintiff would have submitted to the treatment, and that the treatment could have lessened or avoided the harm, the plaintiff establishes a sufficient nexus between the alleged negligence and harm to allow the trier of fact to determine whether the alleged negligence was a substantial factor in causing the harm.
The court of appeals has twice considered cases addressing the sufficiency of the evidence on causation in circumstances similar to that presented here.
In Gegan v. Backwinkel, 141 Wis. 2d 893, 417 N.W.2d 44 (Ct. App. 1987), the plaintiffs brought suit alleging the defendants had negligently failed to diagnose and treat Mr. Gegan's perforated bowel, a condition which resulted in his death. Two physicians testified on the plaintiffs' behalf that the defendants' negligence was a substantial factor in causing Mr. Gegan's death. The jury found the defendants causally negligent. The defendants appealed, contending there was no evidence to a reasonable degree of medical, certainty that the defendants' negligence caused Mr. Gegan's death. The court of appeals affirmed on the basis there was credible evidence which supported the jury's verdict. Id. at 899. The court of appeals was not required to address the precise question here, however, what measure of evidence is required for the plaintiff to satisfy his or her burden of production on causation in order to present the issue to the trier of fact, because there was expert testimony that had Mr. Gegan received proper care the *21likelihood that he would have survived was better than ninety percent.
In Finn v. Schammel, 140 Wis. 2d 763, 412 N.W.2d 147 (Ct. App. 1987), the plaintiff alleged the defendant negligently failed to do certain acts necessary for the reimplantation of several fingers the plaintiff severed in a work accident. The defendant contended that the fingers had been so badly damaged that whether the defendant had been negligent was irrelevant. A special instruction asked the jury whether they believed to a reasonable certainty that reimplantation of one or more of the plaintiffs fingers would have been successful. The jury found the defendant negligent but answered the special instruction "No." The circuit court struck the special instruction answer and directed a verdict for the plaintiff, reasoning the plaintiff was entitled to damages irrespective of whether reimplantation would have been successful. The court of appeals reversed, stating that the "loss of a chance" alone is not compensable in Wisconsin. The court of appeals viewed Wisconsin law as adhering to the "all or nothing" approach. Id. at 771-74. The court of appeals interpreted this court's decisions in Bailey and Lobermeier v. General Tel. Co. of Wisconsin, 119 Wis. 2d 129, 349 N.W.2d 466 (1984), as establishing that "if the plaintiff cannot prove to a reasonable certainty that success would have resulted but for the defendant's negligence, the plaintiff recovers nothing rather than recovering the value of the lost chance, whether [it be] a 10% chance or a 95% chance." Finn, 140 Wis. 2d at 771-72.
We disagree with the court of appeals' interpretations of Bailey and Lobermeier, and over-rule Finn. Neither Bailey nor Lobermeier stand for the rule that in a case of this nature a plaintiff must establish that the omitted treatment more probably than not would have *22been successful in avoiding or lessening the plaintiffs injuries. In Bailey, the plaintiff was denied recovery because it was uncontroverted that the plaintiff had already irretrievably lost the sight in her eye before she was allegedly negligently treated by the defendant. Bailey, 59 Wis. 2d at 97-98. Thus, proper care by the defendant could not have been successful. Lobermeier is distinguishable because there the plaintiff sought recovery for harm other than that which proper care by the defendant was intended to prevent. In Lobermeier, the plaintiff sustained a hearing loss as a result of the defendant's negligence. The plaintiff further alleged that the defendant's negligence deprived him of the opportunity to pursue a career in journalism and he sought to recover future earnings. This court denied recovery on the basis the damages were wholly speculative, holding that recovery could only be had if the plaintiff proved a career in journalism was reasonably certain. Lobermeier, 119 Wis. 2d at 152.
We disagree with the court of appeals' conclusion in Finn that in a case of this nature Wisconsin law follows the "all or nothing" approach. In a case such as this, the plaintiff need not show that proper treatment more probably than not would have been successful in lessening or avoiding the plaintiffs injuries as a prerequisite to satisfying his or her burden of production on the issue of causation. In addition to the other requirements previously noted, all that is required is that the plaintiff establish that proper treatment could have lessened or avoided the plaintiffs harm. Compare Hicks, 368 F.2d at 632. The trier of fact may consider evidence of the likelihood of success of proper treatment in determining whether the negligence was a substantial factor in causing the harm, and may yet conclude that it was not *23because the injuries would have occurred irrespective of the negligence. See Restatement (Second) of Torts, sec. 432 and comment b to that section. If the defendant's negligence is found to have been a substantial factor in causing the harm, the trier of fact may also consider evidence of the likelihood of success of proper treatment in determining the amount of damages to be awarded.
By the Court — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed; and cause remanded for a new trial.

=== CASE 9736893 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:10.568421+00 ===

STEINMETZ, J.
(concurring). I agree with the majority that the case should be remanded for a new trial. I write to clarify the law as I interpret it.
The trial court was in error to hold that the plaintiff, Carol Ehlinger, had to prove that proper treatment and care, which was not given to her as a result of Dr. Sipes' conceded failure to diagnose she was pregnant with twins, would have worked to avoid the children's conditions. The plaintiff does not have to prove the result would have been different if non-negligent care had been provided.
Under the substantial factor test, a showing that proper medical care was not provided is sufficient proof that the negligent conduct increased the risk and deprived the patient of the opportunity for continuing the pregnancy.
The issue is one of a normal substantial factor. The plaintiff does not have to prove the ratio of success of the absent care. The lost opportunity line of proof should be considered as constituting sufficient proof to create a jury issue under the substantial factor theory of causation.
I concur with the majority.

=== CASE 2207792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.460377+00 ===

161 Pa. Commonwealth Ct. 314 (1994)
636 A.2d 1270
COMMONWEALTH of Pennsylvania, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, BUREAU OF DRIVER LICENSING, Appellant,
v.
Eugene S. SHEPLEY.
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania.
Submitted on Briefs July 2, 1993.
Decided January 12, 1994.
*316 Eugene S. Shepley, pro se.
Timothy P. Wile, Asst. Counsel In-Charge of Appellate Section, for appellant.
Before McGINLEY, PELLEGRINI and KELLEY, JJ.
KELLEY, Judge.
The Department of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing (DOT) appeals from an order of the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County (trial court) which sustained an appeal by Eugene S. Shepley from a three-month registration suspension for lack of financial responsibility imposed pursuant to section 1786(d) of the Vehicle Code (Code), 75 Pa.C.S. § 1786(d). We affirm.
On August 24, 1992, DOT was notified by State Farm Mutual Auto Insurance Company (State Farm) that its policy of liability insurance covering Shepley's 1987 Dodge automobile had been cancelled as of July 26, 1992, for nonpayment of premiums. By official notice dated and mailed September 18, 1992, DOT informed Shepley that pursuant to section 1786(d) of the Code, his registration privileges for the Dodge were *317 scheduled to be suspended for three months, effective October 26, 1992, as a result of a lapse in financial responsibility coverage for the automobile.
On October 16, 1992, Shepley appealed the notice of suspension to the trial court, which held a de novo hearing on November 23, 1992. Shepley testified that in late July, 1992, he mailed his monthly insurance payment to State Farm. Inexplicably, the check was never paid by Shepley's bank, according to his checking account statements introduced as evidence.
Additionally, Shepley testified that he never received notification of the termination of his insurance from State Farm. He was therefore unaware of any problem until he received a letter from DOT dated August 25, 1992 notifying him of the lapse in insurance coverage. Upon receiving the notice from DOT, Shepley immediately contacted his State Farm agent who informed Shepley that he would have to reapply for insurance coverage. Shepley entered into a new insurance policy with State Farm whereby coverage recommenced August 31, 1992.[1]
DOT presented evidence of the lapse in insurance coverage in the form of a packet of documents containing copies of the official notice of suspension mailed to Shepley on September 18, 1992, and correspondence between DOT and State Farm showing that the policy covering Shepley was cancelled on July 26, 1992 for nonpayment of premiums.
The trial court did not issue a written opinion; however, at the conclusion of the hearing the trial judge stated the following:
Well, I'm sure, also, that it's not the purpose of the Department to be unnecessarily vindictive on somebody here. Here's a case where a person had insurance and for what I consider to be a justifiable reason it lapsed. And he didn't sit around and do nothing.
*318 Now, he's got insurance. He got it within a month. And the Department proposes to impose a pretty harsh penalty,
I would think. I'm going to sustain the appeal.
Later, the trial court issued an order sustaining the appeal on November 23, 1992. It is from that order that DOT now appeals.
Initially, we note that our scope of review of an appeal from a trial court is limited to determining whether the findings of fact are supported by competent evidence of record, an error of law was committed, or whether the trial court manifestly abused its discretion. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing v. Rapp, 139 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 144, 589 A.2d 805 (1991).
On appeal, DOT argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law in sustaining Shepley's appeal of the suspension, and erred when it entertained a collateral attack on the cancellation of Shepley's insurance policy, since this action was exclusively in the nature of a statutory appeal from a registration privilege suspension.
Section 1786 of the Code provides in pertinent part:
§ 1786. Required financial responsibility.
(a) General rule.  Every motor vehicle of the type required to be registered under this title which is operated or currently registered shall be covered by financial responsibility.
. . . .
(d) Suspension of registration and operating privilege.  The Department of Transportation shall suspend the registration of a vehicle if it determines that the required financial responsibility was not secured as required by this chapter and shall suspend the operating privilege of the owner or registrant for a period of three months if the department determines that the owner or registrant has operated or permitted the operation of the vehicle without the required financial responsibility. . . . Whenever the department revokes or suspends the registration of any vehicle under this chapter, the department shall not restore *319 the registration until the vehicle owner furnishes proof of financial responsibility in a manner determined by the department and submits an application for registration to the department, accompanied by the fee for restoration of registration provided by section 1960. This subsection shall not apply in the following circumstances:
(1) The owner or registrant proves to the satisfaction of the department that the lapse in financial responsibility coverage was for a period of less than 31 days and that the owner or registrant did not operate or permit the operation of the vehicle during the period of lapse in financial responsibility.
(2) The owner or registrant is a member of the armed services of the United States, the owner or registrant has previously had the responsibility required by this chapter, financial responsibility had lapsed while the owner or registrant was on temporary, emergency duty and the vehicle was not operated during the period of lapse in financial responsibility. . . .
To sustain a registration suspension under section 1786(d), DOT must prove that: (1) the vehicle in question is of a type required to be registered in the Commonwealth; and (2) that the required automobile liability insurance had been cancelled or otherwise terminated such that a lapse occurred in the required financial responsibility. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor Vehicles v. Andrews, 143 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 601, 600 A.2d 622 (1991).
Once DOT has met its burden of showing a lapse in coverage, the burden shifts to the registrant to establish that he or she qualifies for one of the exceptions set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of section 1786(d). Andrews. The registrant may show that the lapse was for less than thirty-one days and that the vehicle in question was not operated during the lapse period.
DOT asserts that through the introduction of the pertinent certified documentation, DOT met its burden of proving that Shepley failed to maintain financial responsibility for his vehicle *320 from July 26, 1992 to August 31, 1992, a period of more than thirty-one days. Further, the evidence indicated that Shepley continued to operate the vehicle during the period of lapse in violation of the statute. Moreover, because Shepley failed to identify himself with one of the specific exceptions made available by section 1786(d), DOT argues that a prima facie case against Shepley was presented before the trial court.
However, the trial court sustained Shepley's appeal of the suspension on the basis that he had a "justifiable reason" for the lapse. DOT maintains that the trial court erred in incorporating an element of intent into section 1786 which does not appear in the plain language of the statute.
DOT directs our attention principally to this court's consideration of a similar issue in Department of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing v. Riley, 150 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 259, 615 A.2d 905 (1992). There we held that the trial court lacked the authority to sustain an automobile owner's appeal from a suspension of her vehicle registration for allowing her insurance coverage to lapse. The automobile owner alleged that she lacked knowledge of her insurance cancellation until she was notified by the lien holder on her vehicle over one month after her insurance coverage had lapsed. The insured acknowledged receipt of the notice that her premium was due, but denied receiving notice that her policy had lapsed after she failed to pay the premium before the due date. The trial court sustained insured's appeal on the basis that she was unaware of the cancellation and that she acted "reasonably and promptly" to obtain other coverage. Id. at 262, 615 A.2d at 907. On appeal, this court reversed the trial court on the basis that section 1786 does not contain a scienter requirement. We therefore concluded that DOT effectively met its burden of establishing that a lapse in insured's coverage as a result of the cancellation of her policy had occurred. The case sub judice is distinguishable from Riley because of Shepley's lack of knowledge of the cancellation of insurance coverage.
With respect to the question of what constitutes an effective cancellation of insurance coverage under Pennsylvania law, the *321 Riley court found instructive our Supreme Court's analysis in Federal Kemper Insurance Co. v. Insurance Department, 509 Pa. 1, 500 A.2d 796 (1985), a case which concerned the statutory construction and interpretation of the insurance statute, 40 P.S. § 1008.6(2). Relying in part on Federal Kemper, we noted in Riley that the insured's failure to pay the policy premium by the cancellation date or within the grace period afforded her constituted an "overt act" by the insured which cancels that policy. Such a cancellation then satisfied the first element of DOT's burden of proof in its suspension action.
Therefore our analysis in the instant appeal must logically examine the principle set forth in Federal Kemper to determine whether State Farm's cancellation of Shepley's policy was the result of an "overt act" on his part. That principle holds that in order for a policy cancellation to be effective, an insurer is required to show that the insured has knowledge that a premium was due but still refuses to pay it. The "overt act" contemplated is thus a knowing refusal to pay premiums due the insurer. If no such overt act is present here, then the cancellation is erroneous and DOT has failed to meet its burden.
The facts in Federal Kemper may be summarized as follows. An insured failed to respond to premium notices with respect to his automobile coverage until after the policy period and the grace period expired and he was involved in an accident. The Insurance Commissioner held for the insured, ignoring the evidence of insurer's three notices because they were not in the precise form required by the governing insurance regulations. This court affirmed the Commissioner.
In reversing the Commonwealth Court, the Supreme Court stated that although the insurer can cancel a policy at the end of its term only by using the prescribed notice, "cancellation of policy coverage for nonpayment of premium before the anniversary date is nevertheless effective if the insurer can show that the insured knowingly refused to pay a properly charged premium, thus manifesting by overt acts his own intent to *322 cancel the policy." The court continued, "[a]n insurer who does not use the prescribed notice must prove that the insured knew his premium was due and refused to pay it". Federal Kemper, 509 Pa. at 4, 500 A.2d at 797 (emphasis added).
The Supreme Court considered the question of what objective conduct should be required by an insured to manifest an intent to cancel a policy. The court turned to an Insurance Department regulation for guidance. It provides in relevant part:
(b) Mere nonpayment of the premium by the insured will not be considered "such action" as to come within the purview of section 6(2) of act of June 5, 1968, (P.L. 140 No. 78) (40 P.S. § 1008.6(2)).[[2]] Some more affirmative act on the part of the insured shall be necessary, such as a statement by the insured to his agent that he does not want his policy to be renewed or an obtaining by the insured of another policy which he intends shall supersede his current policy.
31 Pa.Code § 61.10(b) (footnote added).
In light of its analysis, the Supreme Court in Federal Kemper concluded that the insured's conduct involved more than just "mere nonpayment of premiums", but rather knowing nonpayment. The insured knew that his policy had expired for nonpayment before his accident. Payment was made after the accident in an effort to reinstate the policy retroactively. Such a knowing refusal to pay, the court concluded, is an overt act on the part of the insured to cancel his policy.
*323 Here, Shepley testified that he never received notification from State Farm that his coverage had been terminated. This testimony went uncontroverted by DOT. Absent such notification, it cannot be said that Shepley's policy was properly cancelled. There was no overt act on the part of Shepley to manifest his intent to cancel the policy as there was in Riley. The registrants in both Riley and Federal Kemper refused to pay their premiums until it was too late, thus manifesting the required overt action. Shepley engaged in no such action. Unlike the registrants in Riley or Federal Kemper, Shepley testified that he sent his payment in on time, which payment was never received by State Farm through no apparent error of his own. Further, upon learning of the cancellation by letter dated Tuesday, August 25, 1992, Shepley diligently secured new coverage commencing the following Monday, August 31, 1992.
Having concluded that Shepley did not manifest his intention to cancel his insurance coverage with an overt act, we hold that the cancellation of Shepley's coverage was not proper. As a consequence, DOT has failed to meet its burden of establishing that a lapse in coverage occurred as a result of a proper cancellation.
In addition, we note our recent decision in Department of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing v. Marpoe, 157 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 603, 630 A.2d 561 (1993), where we held that section 1786(d) authorizes only an indefinite suspension of registration upon a mere lapse in financial responsibility until insurance for the vehicle is obtained. The issue in Marpoe concerned whether section 1786(d) authorized DOT to impose a registration suspension until new insurance is obtained or, as DOT asserted, for a set period of ninety days. DOT argued that the statute is ambiguous as to the length of the suspension as a result of a lapse in financial responsibility; however, statutory construction principles would result in the imposition of a three-month suspension.
Concluding that the provisions of section 1786(d) are unambiguous on its face, we stated:
*324 The General Assembly has only made it a violation to operate a vehicle which is not registered, not for not having the money to pay insurance premiums or forgetting to renew an automotive insurance policy. Under this provision, when proof of financial responsibility is submitted to PennDOT (and the required fees paid), registration will be reissued. We cannot ignore this plain expression of the General Assembly to envisage a penalty where none exists.
Id. at 609, 630 A.2d at 564 (emphasis added).
Thus, we acknowledge the possibility that DOT's appeal may be moot given our new analysis of the statute in Marpoe. See also our recent decision in Department of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing v. Hafele, 158 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 493, 631 A.2d 1114 (1993), where we cited Marpoe in support of our similar conclusion that under section 1786(d) DOT is authorized to suspend a vehicle registration for lapse in coverage only until financial responsibility is restored.
Accordingly, based on our discussion above concerning the absence of an overt act, in addition to our holdings in Marpoe and Hafele, we affirm the order of the trial court.
ORDER
NOW, this 11th day of January, 1994, the order of the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County, dated November 23, 1992, at No. 4863-92, is hereby affirmed.
PELLEGRINI, J., concurs in the result only.
NOTES
[1]  August 25, 1992, the date of mailing, was a Tuesday. We assume the letter was received by Shepley on Thursday, August 27, 1992. August 31, 1992, was a Monday.
[2]  40 P.S. §§ 1008.1-1008.11 of the Insurance Act concern the reasons for which coverage under automobile policies may be terminated. Section 1008.6 expressly renders the statute inapplicable to the actions of an insured which evidence his intent to cancel as specified in subsection 6(2). That subsection states:
Nothing in this act shall apply:
. . . . .
(2) If the named insured has demonstrated by some overt action to the insurer or its agent that he wishes the policy to be cancelled or that he does not wish the policy to be renewed.
40 P.S. § 1008.6(2).

=== CASE 2207794 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.474808+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 573 (1990)
R.K. RICHARDS, Appellant,
v.
IOWA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE AND FINANCE, Appellee.
No. 89-988.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
April 18, 1990.
*574 R.K. Richards, Ames, pro se.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., and Harry M. Griger, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and SCHULTZ, CARTER, SNELL, and ANDREASEN, JJ.
ANDREASEN, Justice.
Northcrest, Inc., owns and operates a nonprofit community for elderly people in Ames, Iowa. Northcrest was allowed an exemption from property taxes because it qualified as a charitable institution. R.K. Richards has attempted for several years to get the Iowa Department of Revenue and Finance to revoke Northcrest's exemption. See Richards v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue & Fin., 414 N.W.2d 344 (Iowa 1987); Richards v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue & Fin., 362 N.W.2d 486 (Iowa 1985).
Richards brought the present suit pursuant to Iowa Code section 427.1(26)(1987). This section allows any taxpayer to apply to the director of revenue and finance for revocation of any property tax exemption. Richards alleged that Northcrest should not be allowed a charitable exemption for tax year 1982 because it was not being run for charitable purposes. The director held a hearing on Richards' claims and sustained the exemption.
Richards filed a petition for judicial review and challenged the department's standing in district court. The department of revenue filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that Richards lacked standing. The district court agreed and dismissed the petition. Richards appealed.
Because we are reviewing a district court ruling sustaining a motion to dismiss, we view the allegations of the petition in the light most favorable to the petitioner, resolve doubts in his favor, and will uphold the ruling only if he could not establish his right to judicial review under any state of facts provable under the allegations of the petition. Lundy v. Iowa Dep't of Human Servs., 376 N.W.2d 893, 894 (Iowa 1985). At issue is petitioner's right of access to the district court, not the merits of his allegations. Id.
I. Reviewability of Orders Upholding Property Tax Exemptions.
Although identified as a question of standing, the question presented also involves reviewability of agency action. We begin with the strong presumption of reviewability of agency action contained in Iowa Code section 17A.19(1): "A person or party who has exhausted all adequate administrative remedies and who is aggrieved or adversely affected by any final agency action is entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter." Agency action is reviewable "[e]xcept as expressly provided otherwise by another statute referring to this chapter by name." Iowa Code § 17A.19.
The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act (IAPA) is referred to by name in Iowa Code section 427.1(26): "[A]ny order made by the director of revenue and finance revoking or modifying an exemption is subject to judicial review in accordance with the Iowa administrative procedure Act." (Emphasis added). No expressed provision is made for the review of orders upholding an exemption.
Ordinarily the express mention of one thing implies a legislative intent to *575 exclude other things. However this maxim of statutory construction applies only where legislative intent may be inferred or implied. By statute, persons aggrieved by agency action are entitled to judicial review unless "expressly provided otherwise." Iowa Code § 17A.19. This provision leaves no room for implication. Since the statute fails to expressly preclude judicial review of orders upholding an exemption, the presumption of reviewability of agency action controls. A person or party aggrieved or adversely affected by agency action upholding a tax exemption is entitled to judicial review upon exhausting administrative remedies.
II. Richards' Standing to Obtain Judicial Review.
To show aggrievement entitling one to judicial review, a party must demonstrate "(1) a specific personal and legal interest in the subject matter of the agency decision and (2) a specific and injurious effect on this interest by the decision." Iowa Power & Light Co. v. Iowa State Commerce Comm'n, 410 N.W.2d 236, 239 (Iowa 1987). The party only needs to show some injury to an interest which is distinguishable from that of the general public. Id. A party may have standing without being the primary object of the agency action. Id.
We recognize a person may be a proper party to agency proceedings and not have standing to obtain judicial review. This is evident from the language of the statute allowing only a "party ... who is aggrieved or adversely affected" by agency action to obtain review. Iowa Code § 17A.19(1). Cf. Model State Admin.Procedure Act (1981) § 5-106(a)(2), 14 U.L.A. 146 (Supp. 1990) (a person who was a party to the agency proceedings has standing to obtain judicial review). Richards was a proper party to the agency proceedings under Iowa Code section 427.1(26): "Any taxpayer... may make application to the director of revenue and finance for revocation for any exemption, based upon alleged violations of this chapter." Of itself, this provision does not give Richards standing to obtain judicial review. However, the provision does evidence a legislative intent to allow concerned taxpayers to challenge the tax exemption granted another's property.
Richards alleges two distinct interests in seeking revocation of Northcrest's tax exemption. First, he alleges a general interest in proper application of the property tax exemption statute to the Northcrest real estate. This general interest cannot support standing to obtain judicial review. Second, he alleges a taxpayer's pecuniary interest as an owner of taxable property in the city of Ames. Richards states the following in his resistance to the department's motion to dismiss:
[T]he petitioner is aggrieved and adversely affected by the exemption from property tax of any property in the petitioner's taxing district, namely the City of Ames and Story County, in that taxpayers (other than the owners of tax-exempt property) are then obliged to pay larger amounts of taxes than would be necessary in the absence of tax exemption, and the petitioner is one of said taxpayers.
Since Richards may yet prove this state of facts under the allegations of his petition, we next consider whether his pecuniary interest would support standing to obtain judicial review.
At the outset, we distinguish the cases of Barz v. Board of Equalization, 133 Iowa 563, 111 N.W. 41 (1907), and In re Appeal of Des Moines Water Co., 48 Iowa 324 (1878). In those cases we addressed the availability of specific legal remedies and not the sufficiency of a taxpayer's interest to confer standing.
The department argues that Richards' interest is no greater than that of the public as a whole. We have distinguished those cases which hold that the fact of owning taxable property does not distinguish an individual's interest from that of every other resident and does not give the complaining party standing in court. Collins v. Davis, 57 Iowa 256, 258, 10 N.W. 643, 644 (1881). We recognized a different rule has been adopted in this state. Id. In Burnham v. Barber, 70 Iowa 87, 30 N.W. *576 20 (1886), we held the taxpayer's pecuniary interest was sufficient to maintain a cause of action:
Now, how is the plaintiff aggrieved? Clearly, we think, in assessing his [unimproved] property at a greater valuation than it should be when the valuation fixed upon improved lands is fixed at the same as his. Because of such assessment the burden of taxation cast upon the plaintiff is greater than it would be if the improved lands had been fixed at their true value.
70 Iowa at 90, 30 N.W. at 22.
In Pierce v. Green, 229 Iowa 22, 294 N.W. 237, 131 A.L.R. 335 (1940), we considered whether a taxpayer had sufficient interest to maintain a mandamus action to compel the State Tax Commission to assess all property at its actual value instead of a fraction of its value. We stated:
One does not need a pencil to calculate that such conduct on the part of the defendants was an unjust and unfair discrimination against the plaintiff and those in like situation, causing them to pay a larger share of the tax burden in proportion to the valuation of their property, than those assessed and taxed on a less percentage evaluation, thereby causing damage and injury to the plaintiff and those in like situation which will continue under the expressed intention of the defendants. We think the record clearly shows that the plaintiff has alleged and shown such interest as to entitle him ... to bring this action.
229 Iowa at 39, 294 N.W. at 248, 131 A.L.R. at 350. See Annot., Standing of One Taxpayer to Complain of Underassessment or Nonassessment of Property of Another for State and Local Taxation, 9 A.L.R.4th 428 (1981 & Supp.1989).
Although these cases dealt with underassessment of another's property, the taxpayer's pecuniary interest in this case is substantially the same. Whether the property of another is entirely exempted or merely underassessed, the taxpayer's tax burden is greater because of the exemption or underassessment. We hold that Richards' pecuniary interest as a taxpayer entitles him to judicial review of the order upholding the tax exemption granted Northcrest's property.
III. Agency Standing on Judicial Review.
The department clearly has standing to appear and to respond to a petition for judicial review of agency action filed in district court. The IAPA requires the petition for review to name the agency as respondent. Iowa Code § 17A.19(4). Once named as a respondent, the agency is a proper party and, as such, may exercise all the rights and responsibilities of a party to a judicial review proceeding.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

=== CASE 9736894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:11.704386+00 ===

BROSKY, Judge.
This is an appeal from the final order entered by the lower court which denied appellant’s petition to reinstate its appeal *350from the judgment entered by the district justice.1 Appellant presents the following issues for review: (1) whether appellant’s failure to technically comply with the requirements of Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005B, 42 Pa.C.S.A. should be disregarded; (2) whether' appellant substantially complied with the requirements of Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005B, 42 Pa.C.S.A.; and (3) whether appellant’s procedural noncompliance prejudiced appellee. For the reasons set forth below, we affirm.
Before proceeding to consider appellant’s allegations of error, we will briefly recount the pertinent facts and procedural history giving rise to this appeal. Appellant, Allied Heating, contracted with Melvin Slaughter, Jr. to install a furnace in his residence. Mr. Slaughter was apparently dissatisfied with the performance of the furnace and the installation completed by appellant. For reasons which do not appear of record, Mr. Slaughter’s sister, Emma Slaughter, filed a complaint against appellant with the district magistrate in which she sought to recover $4,000.00 plus costs. Appellant did not attend the hearing and a judgment in the sum of $4,037.00 was entered in favor of Miss Slaughter on November 4, 1992.
Appellant thereafter filed a timely notice of appeal from the judgment with the trial court. According to appellant, notices of the appeal were allegedly sent via regular mail to appellee, Emma Slaughter, and to the district justice.2 No proofs of service were filed by appellant within the ten-day period specified by Rule 1005B of the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure for District Justices, 42 Pa.C.S.A. Although appellant had been unrepresented during the proceedings before *351the district justice, appellant retained counsel in January, 1993. Counsel discovered that the proofs of service were absent from the record and promptly served appellee and the district justice with the notice of appeal on January 15, 1993. Proofs of service were then filed with the trial court. On January 19,1993 appellee filed a praecipe to strike the appeal because of appellant’s failure to comply with Rule 1005B. As a result, the prothonotary struck the appeal. Appellant filed an emergency petition to reinstate the appeal on January 28, 1993. Appellant’s petition was denied by the lower court. Appellant thereafter initiated this timely appeal.3
As all of the issues raised by appellant are inextricably intertwined, they will be addressed together.4 Appellant essentially challenges the trial court’s refusal to reinstate the appeal from the judgment entered by the district justice. Pursuant to Rule 1006, the trial court may reinstate an appeal which has been stricken “upon good cause shown.” Pa. R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1006, 42 Pa.C.S.A. While the phrase “good cause shown” has not been precisely defined, this court has interpreted it to require an appealing party to proffer some legally sufficient reason for reinstating the appeal. Anderson v. Centennial Homes, Inc., 406 Pa.Super. 513, 517, 594 A.2d 737, 739 (1991). “[T]he determination of whether good cause has been demonstrated is trusted to the trial court’s sound discretion.” Id.
As applied here, appellant admits that the proofs of service were not filed within the time period specified by Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005B, 42 Pa.C.S.A., but nevertheless argues that its noncompliance should be disregarded pursuant to Pa.R.C.P., Rule 126, 42 Pa.C.S.A. Appellant refers us to several decisions issued by this court as well as the courts of common pleas which have found sufficient good cause to *352reinstate stricken appeals even though the technical requirements of the rules were not fully satisfied.5 See, e.g., DelVerme v. Pavlinsky, 405 Pa.Super. 443, 450, 592 A.2d 746, 749 (1991) (plaintiffs failure to comply with Rule 1004A was disregarded where the notice of appeal was timely filed and served on the defendants and the district justice, and no prejudice resulted to the defendants); Quarato v. Facelifters, Ltd., 305 Pa.Super. 536, 538-539, 451 A.2d 777, 778 (1982) (defendant’s failure to comply with Rule 1005B was disregarded where the defendant failed to timely file the proofs of service but there was evidence that the plaintiff had received actual notice of the appeal within the requisite time period); Katsantonis v. Freels, 277 Pa.Super. 294, 295-296, 419 A.2d 778, 779-780 (1980) (per curiam) (good.cause for reinstating the appeal was shown where the defendant’s counsel promptly mailed the proofs of service to the prothonotary as soon as they were received and the proofs were filed on the sixth rather than the fifth day after the notice of appeal was filed); Beck v. Weitzenhoffer, 49 Pa. D. & C.3d 112, 114 (C.C.P. Dauphin County 1988) (failure to timely file proofs of service was disregarded where the notice of appeal was timely filed and served upon the opposing party and good cause for the noncompliance was shown); Felker v. Seashock, 47 Pa. D. & C.3d 126, 127-129 (C.C.P. Monroe County 1987) (failure to serve the notice of appeal on the adverse party and the district justice until seventeen days after the notice of appeal was filed was disregarded where good cause for the noncompliance was shown); Seiple v. Pitterich, 35 Pa. D. & C.3d 592, 596-597 (C.C.P. Mercer County 1984) (failure to timely file the proofs of service was disregarded where the notice of appeal was timely filed and served and good cause for the noncompHance was shown). While appellant’s interpretation of the above *353authorities is indeed correct, we find these decisions to be factually distinguishable from the case sub judice.
Nearly all of the cases cited by appellant indicate that the appealing party timely served the notice of appeal upon both the opposing party and the district justice and had merely failed to timely file their proofs of service or their complaint. See, e.g., DelVerme v. Pavlinsky, 405 Pa.Super. at 445 and 450, 592 A.2d at 747 and 749; Quarato v. Facelifters, Ltd., 305 Pa.Super. at 537-539, 451 A.2d at 778; Katsantonis v. Freels, 277 Pa.Super. at 295-296, 419 A.2d at 779; Beck v. Weitzenhoffer, 49 Pa.D. & C.3d at 114; Seiple v. Pitterich, 35 Pa.D. & C.3d at 593, supra. But see Felker v. Seashock, 47 Pa.D. & C.3d at 127 (in which the notice of appeal was not served upon the opposing party until seventeen days after it had been filed). This distinction is significant when it is considered in light of the essential purposes of Rule 1005, which is to prevent parties from appealing from an adverse judgment of a district justice and then delaying the case by failing to timely notify the non-appealing party. Berry v. Sheaffer, 42 Pa.D. & C.3d 480, 483 (C.C.P. Cumberland County 1987). The rule also ensures that the district justice will be notified as the notice of appeal may act as a supersedeas, and thus, may affect the prevailing party’s attempt to execute on the judgment. See Note, Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005, 42 Pa.C.S.A. and Berry v. Sheaffer, supra. The requirements of Rule 1005 further promote the speedy, orderly and just determination of the appeal and eliminate any dispute as to whether service was actually made. Hyde v. Crigler, 133 Pittsburgh Legal Journal 270, 271, 10 Pa.D. & C.3d 769, 773 (C.C.P. Allegheny County 1979). Accord Wander v. National Development Corp., 139 Pittsburgh Legal Journal 369, 370, 12 Pa.D. & C.4th 627, 628-629 (C.C.P. Allegheny 1991). Where the notice of appeal is timely filed and served upon the non-appealing party and the district justice, the intent underlying the rule has been fulfilled and no further purpose remains to be served by penalizing the appealing party for failing to timely file the proofs of service. See Wander v. National Development Corp., 139 Pittsburgh Legal Journal at 370, 12 Pa.D. & C.4th *354at 628-629; Berry v. Sheaffer, 42 Pa.D. & C.3d at 484; Hyde v. Crigler, 133 Pittsburgh Legal Journal at 271-272, 10 Pa.D. & C.3d at 774. Consequently, the mere failure to file the proofs of service in a timely manner will be disregarded where it is clear that the opposing party has received notice of the appeal and that the purpose of the rules has been satisfied. See Wander v. National Development Corp., Beck v. Weitzenhoffer, Berry v. Sheaffer, Seiple v. Pitterich and Hyde v. Crigler, supra.
Unlike the situations presented in the authorities cited by appellant, the record in this case is devoid of any evidence, aside from appellant’s own unsupported allegations, that appellee and the district justice were actually served with the notice of appeal prior to January 15, 1993 when they were served with the notice by appellant’s counsel. In fact, both appellee and the district justice deny receiving the notice of appeal before January 15.6 See Trial Court Opinion, dated 2/12/93 at 2-3 n. 1. Under these circumstances, the decisions which disregard a technical failure to timely file the proofs of service are distinguishable from this case.7
*355Appellant acknowledges the distinction between the facts presented here and the decisions upon which it relies. Appellant nevertheless contends that Pa.R.C.P., Rule 126, 42 Pa.C.S.A. compelled the trial court to disregard the procedural defects. Notwithstanding appellant’s assessment, Rule 126 does not require the trial court to disregard procedural defects; rather, it permits the trial court, in the exercise of its discretion, to do so where the substantive rights of the opposing party have not been prejudiced. Anderson v. Centennial Homes, Inc., 406 Pa.Super. at 518, 594 A.2d at 739. In the context of this particular case, however, the trial court must additionally consider whether appellant has demonstrated good cause for reinstating the appeal in determining whether to disregard appellant’s failure to comply with the rules. See id., 406 Pa.Super. at 516-517, 594 A.2d at 739-740 and Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1006, 42 Pa.C.S.A. and Note thereto (providing that the trial court may reinstate an appeal upon good cause shown; the note further indicates that this rule was intended to provide sanctions for failing to act within the prescribed time limits). Appellant has not satisfied the good cause requirement here.
In its petition to reinstate the appeal, the sole reason offered by appellant to explain its noncompliance was that it neglected to file the proofs of service due to inadvertent error.8 Appellant’s Emergency Petition to Reinstate Appeal, *356dated 1/28/93 at paragraph 5. However, an unspecific allegation that the failure to comply with Rule 1005B was attributable to “inadvertent error” is insufficient to show good cause. See Wander v. National Development Corp., 139 Pittsburgh Legal Journal at 369, 12 Pa.D. & C.4th at 628. Appellant does not pursue its assertion of inadvertent error on appeal. Instead, appellant provides us with no explanation for its noncompliance aside from a vague reference to the fact that it was unrepresented by counsel at the time the notice of appeal was filed. It is well settled that an individual who chooses to proceed pro se is not entitled to any particular advantage because of his or her lack of legal training. O’Neill v. Checker Motors Corp., 389 Pa.Super. 430, 434, 567 A.2d 680, 682 (1989). As our Supreme Court has explained, an individual choosing to represent him- or her-self must, to some reasonable extent, assume the risk that the lack of expertise and legal training will prove his or her undoing. Vann v. Commonwealth, Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 508 Pa. 139, 149, 494 A.2d 1081, 1086 (1985). Accord O’Neill v. Checker Motors Corp. Appellant’s pro se status, without more, thus does not establish good cause.
Although appellant offers no justification for its failure to comply with the rules, appellant asserts that the noncompliance nonetheless should be disregarded because appellee has suffered no prejudice. As recognized by this court, “simply stating that the ... noncompliance did not substantially affect the rights of the [adverse party] is not alone sufficient to demonstrate good cause to reinstate the appeal.” Anderson v. Centennial Homes, Inc., 406 Pa.Super. at 518, 594 A.2d at 740. Because appellant has substantially failed to comply with the procedural rules for perfecting an appeal from a judgment entered by a district justice and because appellant has failed to show good cause for its procedural noncompliance, we are *357unable to conclude that the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to reinstate the appeal in this case. We therefore affirm the order entered by the trial court.
Order affirmed.
POPOVICH, J., files a dissenting opinion.
. An order denying a motion to reinstate an appeal is a final order for purposes of appeal. Anderson v. Centennial Homes, Inc., 406 Pa.Super. 513, 516 n. 2, 594 A.2d 737, 739 n. 2 (1991).
. The rules governing appeals to the trial court do not provide for service by regular mail. Rather, Rule 1005A requires an appellant to serve a copy of the notice of appeal by personal service or by certified or registered mail. Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005A, 42 Pa.C.S.A. There is nothing in the record indicating that appellant actually served the notice of appeal on appellee and the district; both appellee and the district justice informed the trial court that they did not receive the November notices allegedly mailed by appellant. Trial Court Opinion, dated 2/12/93, at 2-3 n. 1.
. Appellee has neither filed a brief nor otherwise advised us of her position in these proceedings.
. The three claims raised by appellant do not actually represent three distinct questions for review. Rather, appellant has presented us with three arguments as to why its appeal from the district justice’s judgment should be reinstated.
. Appellant, represented by the same counsel, previously appeared before this court in Allied Heating & Cooling, Inc. v. Reeves, 413 Pa.Super. 650, 596 A.2d 248 (1991), No. 1180 Pittsburgh 1990 (filed June 11, 1991). Although Allied v. Reeves presented essentially the same issue as that raised in the instant appeal, we note that Allied took the opposite position in that case and argued that the rules of procedure should be strictly construed and that the failure to comply with the rules should not be disregarded. Id., unpublished memorandum at 4.
. Appellee’s lack of notice of the appeal prior to January 15 is further supported by the fact that she did not file a praecipe to strike the appeal until January 19, 1993.
. In reaching this conclusion, we are not unmindful of the holdings in Felker v. Seashock, supra as well as this court’s decision in Allied v. Reeves, ante at n. 5 in which the appealing party’s failure to comply with Rule 1005 was disregarded even though the notice of appeal was not served upon the opposing party within the five-day period after the notice was filed with the court. See Felker v. Seashock and Allied v. Reeves, supra. However, neither of these decisions constitute binding precedent. See NPW Medical Center of N.E. Pennsylvania v. LS Design Group, P.C., 353 Pa.Super. 341, 347 n. 4, 509 A.2d 1306, 1309 n. 4 (1986) and Turner v. May Corp., 285 Pa.Super. 241, 252 n. 7, 427 A.2d 203, 208 n. 7 (1981). More importantly, both Felker and Allied are distinguishable from this case in that both involved the service of the notice of appeal within a relatively short period of time after the notice of appeal was filed. See Felker v. Seashock, 47 Pa.D. & C.3d at 127 (notice of appeal was served seventeen (17) days after it was filed with the court) and Allied v. Reeves, unpublished memorandum at 5-6 (notice of appeal was served twenty-eight (28) days after it was filed with the court). By way of contrast, fifty-eight (58) days elapsed between the filing of the notice of appeal and actual service of the notice in this case. Although the ten-day rule is flexible and is to be liberally construed, we do not believe that an appealing party should be *355permitted to indefinitely extend the time for serving the notice of appeal so as to frustrate the purposes of the rule. Felker is further distinguishable because the appealing party in that case demonstrated good cause for reinstating the appeal. Unlike the appealing party in Felker, the appellant here has not offered sufficient explanation for its noncompliance. We are also unpersuaded by the reasoning set forth in Allied since the court therein focused exclusively upon the question of whether the non-appealing party’s rights would be prejudiced and failed to consider whether the appealing party had established good cause for reinstating the appeal as required by Pa.R.C.P.DJ., Rule 1006, 42 Pa.C.S.A.
. Appellant’s claim of “inadvertent error” is puzzling as it implies that appellant possessed the proofs of service and simply failed to timely file them with the trial court. However, such an inference is negated by the fact that appellant has not presented any sender’s receipts demonstrating that copies of the notice of appeal were mailed to appellee and *356the district justice on or about November 18, 1992. See Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1001(9) and Note to Rule 1005, 42 Pa.C.S.A. (defining proof of service and requiring a sender’s receipt to be attached to the proof of service where service is made by mail). In the absence of such evidence, we áre unable to ascertain how the failure to file the proofs of service was inadvertent since there is no indication that appellant had obtained the proofs of service at the time the notice of appeal was filed.

=== CASE 9736895 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:11.70854+00 ===

POPOVICH, Judge,
dissenting:
While I recognize the majority’s resolution of this case complies with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure for District Justices, I write separately to express concern over the draconian penalty which appellant must endure for its relatively minor violation of the Pa.R.C.P.D.J., Rule 1005B. I believe that striking appellant’s appeal is a harsh result where the brief delay in service of the notice of appeal has not prejudiced appellee. Accordingly, I dissent and would reinstate the appeal.
I note that civil actions before the district justice are routinely litigated by lay citizens of this Commonwealth who are not learned in the law and the applicable rules of civil procedure. Thus, I believe that when ruling upon violations of the rules of civil procedure of our own “people’s court”, we should liberally construe the rules and “disregard any error or defect or procedure which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties.” See, Pa.R.C.P. Rule 126.
Instantly, appellant timely filed its notice of appeal with the prothonotary of Allegheny County on November 11, 1992. Pa.R.C.P.D.J. Rule 1002. Although it claims to have served appellee and the district justice by first class mail in a timely manner, both appellee and the district justice deny receiving notice until January of 1993, well after the ten-day time limit imposed by Rule 1005B. Rule 1005A requires the appellant to serve the appellee and district justice via personal service or certified or registered mail which appellant did on January 15, 1993, when legal counsel was retained.
If an appellant demonstrates “good cause” why it neglected to comply with Rule 1005B, the lower court may reinstate appellant’s appeal. Pa.R.C.P.D.J. Rule 1006. It is my opinion *358that the definition of “good cause” should be liberally construed, and encompass appellant’s “inadvertent error” in allegedly attempting to serve the proofs via first class mail rather than certified mail or personal service, especially where the delay in actual service of less than two months has not resulted in prejudice to appellee.
I am aware that such an interpretation of “good cause” would greatly expand its definition. However, I believe it is necessary to insure that ordinary citizens without the assistance of lawyers are able to secure adjudication of their disputes, despite insignificant, non-prejudicial deviations from the procedural rules.

=== CASE 9736896 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:13.552482+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
Bonnie Belcourt, Newton Dick, and Stanley Kruger appealed from summary judgments dismissing their claims against Fort Totten Public School District No. 30 [Board] for wrongful nonrenewal of their teaching contracts. We affirm.
Belcourt, Dick, and Kruger were employed by the Board during the 1985-86 school year. Dick and Kruger had been employed by the Board as junior and senior high school mathematics teachers since the 1981-82 school year. Belcourt had been employed by the Board as a learning disabilities tutor-in-training since the 1984-85 school year. During spring 1986, the Board voted to not renew the teaching contracts of Dick and Kruger because of “[cjause due to incompetence.” Belcourt’s contract was not renewed because of “[l]ack of funds.”
Belcourt, Dick, Kruger, and two other teachers sued the Board, seeking damages for violation of civil rights, libel and slander, and wrongful nonrenewal. By a third-party action, the Board sought indemnity from its former superintendent, Leonard Bear King. The Board prevailed in its third-party action against Bear King. The Board then moved for partial summary judgments dismissing the wrongful nonre-newal claims of Belcourt, Dick, and Kruger. The trial court determined that the Board had not abused its discretion in the nonrenewal decisions and granted summary judgments. The remaining claims were eventually settled and a final judgment was entered dismissing all claims of the plaintiffs subject only to the rights of Bel-court, Dick, and Kruger to appeal the partial summary judgments dismissing their wrongful nonrenewal claims. This appeal followed.
The teachers’ major argument on appeal was that the trial court used an incorrect standard in reviewing the Board’s nonrenewal of their teaching contracts.
In Dobervich v. Central Cass Public School District, 302 N.W.2d 745, 751-752 (N.D.1981), we stated the standard for judi*705cial review of a school board’s decisions to nonrenew teachers’ contracts:
Because there is no statute providing for an appeal from a decision of the board to not renew a teacher’s contract nor any statutory standard by which the evidence submitted at the nonrenewal hearing is to be measured, and because the trial court may not substitute its judgment for that of the board, we conclude that, except for procedural matters, the trial court’s review of the reasons given for nonrenewal of the teacher’s contract and the evidence submitted at the hearing pertaining thereto is limited to: (1) determining whether or not the reasons given are in accordance with the statutory provisions, i.e., they are not frivolous or arbitrary but, rather, are related to the ability, competence, or qualifications of the teacher as a teacher, or the necessities of the district such as lack of funds calling for a reduction in teaching staff; and (2) determining — if those reasons are legally sufficient — whether or not under the facts of the case the school board has abused its discretion in reaching the non-renewal decision. Such a review will, in our estimation, permit the teacher his day in court and, at the same time, will not unduly involve the courts in the administration of the school system. [Footnotes omitted].
The teachers did not propose that procedural requirements were not met or that “incompetence” and “lack of funds” were legally insufficient reasons for nonrenewal. Rather, they argued that the trial court erred in applying the abuse-of-discretion standard from Dobervich because 1983 legislative amendments to NDCC 15-47-38(5)1 now require the court to use a preponderance-of-the-evidence standard “as is the case in other administrative decisions.” We disagree.
The 1983 amendment to NDCC 15-47-38(5) replaced the language, “The school *706board shall give an explanation and shall discuss and confirm at the meeting its reasons for the contemplated nonrenewal of the contract,” with the following:
The administrator shall substantiate the reasons with written or oral evidence presented at the meeting. All witnesses are subject to questioning for the purposes of clarification. At the meeting, the board shall discuss the reasons and determine whether or not the administrator has, in fact, substantiated the reasons. If the board finds that the reasons have not been substantiated, the nonre-newal proceedings will be dismissed.
1983 N.D.Sess.Laws Ch. 232, § 1. The school board function was somewhat altered.
The amendment now requires the school administrator to substantiate the reasons with evidence and the school board to discuss and determine whether the administrator has substantiated the reasons. However, it does not naturally flow from the Legislature’s redefinition of the duties of the board that the Legislature designated a different standard of judicial review. A comparison of the bill introduced in the 1983 legislative session with the eventual enactment contradicts the suggestion that the Legislature intended an expanded role for the judiciary in teacher nonrenewal proceedings. As introduced, the bill proposed major and extensive revisions to the teacher nonrenewal law, including extension of a teacher’s right to appeal a school board nonrenewal decision to the district court and to have the case “triable to a jury” unless a jury was waived. These proposed revisions were not enacted.
The Legislature is capable of unequivocally enacting its intention that the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard apply to proceedings involving teachers. For example, it has specifically incorporated parts of the Administrative Agencies Practices Act, NDCC 28-32, including the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard at NDCC 28-32-19, into the law on discharging teachers. See NDCC 15-47-38(2). It has not done so for nonrenewal of teachers. We decline to hold that the 1983 amendment to NDCC 15-47-38(5) implicitly incorporated the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard which is generally used for review of administrative agency decisions. We conclude that the 1983 amendment did not overrule Do-bervich and that the abuse-of-discretion standard remains applicable to review of nonrenewal of teachers’ contracts.
The teachers asserted that, for several reasons, genuine issues of material fact existed which made summary judgment inappropriate. First, they argued that the trial court did not have a complete record of the nonrenewal meetings before the Board. With its motion for summary judgment, the Board submitted the exhibits, the Board minutes, and the transcripts prepared from tape recordings of all three meetings. The transcript from the Dick hearing contained several blank spaces representing inaudible testimony. The transcript of the Kruger hearing also contained blank spaces and ended before the hearing did. The Belcourt hearing was set forth in narrative form and was presumably prepared by the Board’s secretary. The teachers did not contend that the materials submitted by the Board with the summary judgment motion were inaccurate. Instead, the teachers urged that summary judgment was improper because the Board made no allegation “that the exhibits or the fragmented transcripts constitute the entire body of evidence to show what was presented to the school board.”
The party seeking summary judgment has the burden of showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact. The party resisting the motion may not simply rely upon the pleadings but must present competent evidence by affidavit or other comparable means which raises an issue of material fact. Production Credit Ass’n of Fargo v. Ista, 451 N.W.2d 118, 120 (N.D.1990). We believe that the evidence submitted by the Board with its motion for summary judgment was a sufficient record of what occurred at the nonrenewal hearings to enable the court to apply the Dober-vich test. If the teachers believed this material did not accurately reflect what occurred at the hearings, did not include *707relevant evidence, or was erroneous in any respect, it was their responsibility to submit evidence supporting those assertions to the trial court. Because the teachers did not do so, the trial court was not required to hold a trial to reconstruct what occurred during fragmentary gaps in the transcripts of the nonrenewal meetings. Absent contradictory evidence, the transcripts were adequate.
The teachers also argued that summary judgment was inappropriate because a genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether the administrator substantiated the reasons for the nonrenewals. We disagree. Where the record of the school board proceedings is adequate and uncon-tradicted, and when the only issue before the court is whether the school board abused its discretion in reaching the nonre-newal decision, no material factual dispute remains for resolution. See Reed v. Edgeley Public School Dist. No. 3, 313 N.W.2d 775, 780 (N.D.1981); cf. Pulkrabek, v. Morton County, 389 N.W.2d 609, 613-614 (N.D.1986). “ ‘Abuse of discretion’ is a legal question” for the court. Gere v. Council Bluffs Community School Dist., 384 N.W.2d 307, 311 (Iowa 1983), and cases cited therein; see also Fercho v. Montpelier Public School Dist. No. 14, 312 N.W.2d 337, 340 (N.D.1981). There was no material factual dispute here which forestalled summary judgment.
Belcourt
Belcourt asserted that the Board abused its discretion in not renewing her contract for “lack of funds.” A school board abuses its discretion in determining not to renew a teacher’s contract “when it acts in an arbitrary, unreasonable, or unconscionable manner.” Dobervich, 302 N.W.2d at 752 n. 7. We conclude that the Board did not abuse its discretion.
Bear King presented several exhibits to the Board on the financial condition of the school district. He testified that, because of possible cuts in state foundation aid payments and cuts in federal funding, the school district could face a “budget decrease” of as much as $148,000 in the next school year.
Belcourt was one of three learning disabilities tutors-in-training employed by the Board. No qualified special education director or teacher was employed by the Board at the time. Belcourt asserted that the Board could not refuse to renew her contract, as well as the contracts of the other tutors-in-training, for lack of funds because special education was a mandatory program. However, there was evidence in this record that the school district would receive substantially greater state reimbursement if one qualified special education director or teacher was hired than if its three tutors-in-training were continued, thereby alleviating some strain on the budget while allowing retention of the special education program. Bear King informed the Board of options for providing special education during the following year.
We believe the Board received sufficient information about the finances of the school district to determine, in good faith, that the reason given for Belcourt’s nonre-newal was substantiated. We conclude that the Board did not abuse its discretion in not renewing Belcourt's teaching contract.
Dick and Kruger
Dick and Kruger asserted that the Board abused its discretion in not renewing their contracts for “[cjause due to incompetence” because there was no satisfactory evidence of “incompetence” before the Board. We conclude that the Board did not abuse its discretion.
In the context of a teacher’s contract, “incompetency” has varied meanings.
It is clear that a lack of that knowledge required to be taught to one’s students would constitute incompetency, as would the inability of a teacher to impart such knowledge effectively to his students. But incompetency is not necessarily so confined, and may relate, and not uncommonly does, to other aspects of the teacher’s performance of classroom duties, such as the maintenance of discipline. In addition, matters such as the physical *708mistreatment of students may be held to prove incompetency upon the part of the teacher. And it may be held that a physical inability to perform the duties of a teacher will sustain a finding of incompetency.
Annot., What constitutes “incompetency” or “inefficiency” as a ground for dismissal or demotion of public school teacher, 4 A.L.R.3d 1090, 1094-1095 (1965) [Footnotes omitted]. Although incompetency “does not invoke subjective analysis of standards of morality or professionalism which vary from individual to individual dependent on time, circumstances or custom” [Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence, 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 197 Cal.Rptr. 390, 396 (1983) ], it generally “encompasses deficiencies in personality, composure, judgment and attitude which have a detrimental effect upon a teacher’s effectiveness.” Hamburg v. North Penn School Dist., 86 Pa.Cmwlth. 371, 484 A.2d 867, 870 (1984). “Incompetence” connotes a lack of some requisite ability.
In this case, Superintendent Bear King presented the Board with his evaluations of Dick and Kruger during 1986. Dick and Kruger had used an individualized teaching approach to mathematics which permitted the students to progress at different speeds. Dick and Kruger had taught mathematics at the school for five years and had been “team” teaching the students during the last two years. In his evaluations Bear King noted various deficiencies, including a lack of individualized lesson plans for the students or groups; lack of anticipatory sets and objectives; inadequate communication with and lack of positive reinforcement of the students; and a general lack of organization in the classroom. Classes did not start on time and, according to Bear King, Kruger did not “tend to each” student during the class period. Bear King further testified that, based on his observational visits, Dick “did not demonstrate that he could use his knowledge ... and apply it to the classroom.”
Dick and Kruger introduced SRA test scores of their students in an attempt to show that the students’ achievements in mathematics were greater than their composite score in other areas tested. However, in four of the five classes shown, the results also showed that the students were, on a class average, significantly below grade level in their mathematics achievement. This caused board members to question why their children were receiving A’s and B’s in mathematics, but were functioning well below their grade level. In addition, board members questioned the propriety of the teachers’ revelation of SRA test scores of individual students at the hearing.
This record tells us that the board members discussed the evidence and questioned the participants during relatively lengthy proceedings. We agree with the trial court that the Board had sufficient information before it to determine, in good faith, that the reasons given for the nonrenewal of Dick and Kruger were substantiated. We conclude that the Board did not abuse its discretion in not renewing the teaching contracts of Dick and Kruger.
Accordingly, the summary judgments are affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and GIERKE, J., concur.
. NDCC 15-47-38(5) now reads:
5. The school board of any school district contemplating not renewing a teacher’s contract, as provided in section 15-47-27, shall notify the teacher in writing of such contemplated nonrenewal no later than April fifteenth. The teacher must be informed in writing of the time, which may not be later than April twenty-first, and place of a special school board meeting for the purpose of discussing and acting upon such contemplated nonrenewal. The teacher must also be informed in writing of the reasons for nonre-newal. The reasons given by the school board for its decision not to renew a teacher’s contract must be drawn from specific and documented findings arising from formal reviews conducted by the board with respect to the teacher’s overall performance. Each district shall have an established system through which written evaluations are prepared for every teacher employed by the district as provided in section 15-47-27. The reasons given by the board for not renewing a teacher’s contract must be sufficient to justify the contemplated action of the board and may not be frivolous or arbitrary but must be related to the ability, competence, or qualifications of the teacher as a teacher, or the necessities of the district such as lack of funds calling for a reduction in the teaching staff. At the meeting with the board the teacher may then produce such evidence as may be necessary to evaluate the reasons for nonrenewal, and either party may produce witnesses to confirm or refute the reasons. The administrator shall substantiate the reasons with written or oral evidence presented at the meeting. All witnesses are subject to questioning for the purposes of clarification. At the meeting, the board shall discuss the reasons and determine whether or not the administrator has, in fact, substantiated the reasons. If the board finds that the reasons have not been substantiated, the nonrenewal proceedings will be dismissed. The meeting must be an executive session of the board unless both the school board and the teacher agree that it is to be open to other persons or the public. The teacher may be represented at the meeting by any two representatives of his own choosing; and the teacher's spouse, or one other family member of the teacher’s choice, may also attend the meeting if the teacher so desires. In addition to board members, the business manager of the school district, and the superintendent, the school board may be represented by two other representatives of its own choosing at such executive session. At the meeting, if the teacher so requests, he must be granted a continuance of not to exceed seven days. No claim for relief for libel or slander lies for any statement expressed either orally or in writing at any executive session of the school board held for the purposes provided for in this section. The determination not to renew a contract if made in good faith is final and binding on ail parties. Final notice of the determination not to renew a contract must be given in writing by May first as provided in section 15-47-27.

=== CASE 9736897 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:13.556895+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I concur in the result reached in the majority opinion.
I write separately to observe that the “issue of material fact” which the majority concludes does not exist has reference to the record made before the school board. There is no doubt there is disagreement as to the underlying facts and whether or not those facts entitled the school board to not renew the contracts. The teachers were not prevented from submitting any pertinent evidence to the school board. The board is to determine which evidence it will believe and I agree that whether or not the board abused its discretion in acting on those facts is a legal question for the court. The summary judgment in these cases applies somewhat differently than it does in the ordinary legal action wherein the un*709derlying facts are at issue. In those instances summary judgment is improper. Here, those underlying facts, although in dispute, have already been considered by the school board and the only issue of material fact for the court to consider relates to the record made before the school board. Nevertheless, I am uncomfortable applying the ordinary summary judgment holdings to the issue of the completeness of the record as opposed to the underlying facts.
In many instances there is little or no record made of the proceedings before the school board because the board is not required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings in nonrenewal such as it must with regard to a discharge. See § 15-47-38, NDCC. However, where a record is kept and relied upon for purposes of summary judgment, i.e., that there is no question of fact as to the proceedings before the board and the only issue remaining is an issue of law, it appears to me that the moving party ought to present a total record. Although the majority concludes that it was the teachers’ responsibility to submit evidence showing the record did not accurately reflect what transpired at the nonrenewal hearings, that should only apply where a substantial portion of the record is submitted with the summary judgment motion. In this instance I believe that was done. In those instances in which the only “record” is the minutes of the meeting or a summary prepared by the board clerk, I would not reach such a conclusion.
With the advent of portable recording devices I expect motions for summary judgment will be a common policy in these proceedings. Although today we affirm a procedure whereby that policy is approved, we ought to caution school boards and teachers that a substantial record will be required to sustain a motion for summary judgment if the content of the record is attacked. I would not place all the responsibility on the respondent, be it the teacher or the school board, in every circumstance.
Finally, as to the merits involving Dick and Kruger, it appears some of the concerns arose as a result of a change in the administrator of the school, i.e., the previous administrator approved the “team” teaching concept whereas the new administrator, Mr. Bear King, did not. Although I might question whether or not this would be cause for nonrenewal of the teaching contracts, at least without notice, it appears from the record before us that Mr. Bear King did note certain problems in his evaluations but apparently the teachers continued their approach notwithstanding those evaluations. Had the teachers not been given an opportunity to adjust their teaching approach, I would be hesitant to affirm, for our statute requires evaluations as a basis for nonrenewal. See § 15-47-38(5), NDCC. [“The reasons given by the school board for its decision not to renew a teacher’s contract must be drawn from specific and documented findings arising from formal reviews conducted by the board with respect to the teacher's overall performance. Each district shall have an established system through which written evaluations are prepared for every teacher employed by the district....”] The obvious reason for this requirement is to give notice to a teacher of the deficiencies in performance as found by the administration and an opportunity for the teacher to correct those deficiencies. In those instances in which a previous administration has approved teaching methods, a subsequent administration that disapproves such methods should be particularly careful to assure that the teacher has been given notice of the disapproval and the opportunity to adjust teaching methods. At that stage, at least, this does not appear to be a matter of ineptness; rather it appears to be a difference in philosophy of teaching. Only when the teacher refuses to adjust can it be labeled incompetence.
LEVINE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2207804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.561545+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 899 (1990)
Richard C. SCHULING, Christopher Alan Schuling and Christy Louise Schuling, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Anita Ann TILLEY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 89-753.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
February 22, 1990.
*900 Joseph M. Bauer, Des Moines, for defendant-appellant.
Nolden Gentry of Brick, Seckington, Bowers, Swartz & Gentry, P.C., Des Moines, for plaintiffs-appellees.
Considered by DONIELSON, P.J., and SACKETT and HABHAB, JJ.
SACKETT, Judge.
Plaintiffs-appellees Richard C. Schuling, Christopher Alan Schuling, and Christy Louise Schuling filed this declaratory judgment action seeking a determination that defendant-appellant Anita Ann Tilley had no interest in a parcel of real estate in Polk County. The parcel had been conveyed by a quitclaim deed given to plaintiffs Christopher and Christy by defendant's former husband, Walter Tilley, and Walter's present wife. The trial court granted plaintiffs' summary judgment on their claim and defendant has appealed.
Defendant has an unpaid child support judgment against her former husband Walter as a result of a 1980 dissolution decree in Polk County. On August 17, 1987, the parcel of Polk County real estate was deeded to Walter and his current wife, Lois. On the same day, Walter and Lois gave the quitclaim deed to plaintiffs Christopher and Christy Schuling.
The petition for declaratory judgment alleged that Walter, in accepting the land and subsequently deeding it away, acted as agent for plaintiff Richard Schuling. On summary judgment, plaintiffs claimed Walter held title to the land only as agent or trustee. Affidavits were filed alleging Walter and Lois purchased the property as Richard's agent or trustee. Richard supplied the total $15,000 used to purchase the parcel, and the land was transferred to Christopher and Christy at Richard's direction.
I.
Defendant claims summary judgment should not have been granted because facts were in dispute. When confronted with a motion for summary judgment, the trial court is required to examine, in a light most favorable to the party opposing the motion, the entire record before it, including the pleadings, admissions, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and affidavits, if any, to determine for itself whether any genuine issue of material fact is generated thereby. Sparks v. Metalcraft, Inc., 408 N.W.2d 347, 350 (Iowa 1987); Drainage Dist. No. 119, Clay County v. Incorporated City of Spencer, 268 N.W.2d 493, 499-500 (Iowa 1978).
Defendant admits the offer to purchase the parcel was submitted by Richard Schuling as an undisclosed principal and all consideration was paid by Schuling. Lois contends the affidavits are largely correct but they do not show the complete relationship between Walter and Schuling. She supplies no information from which a fact finder could conclude a different relationship existed. Finding no issue on which reasonable minds could differ, and finding no fact contradicting a finding Walter purchased the land with Richard's money or as Richard's agent or trustee, we reject defendant's argument.
When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported, the adverse party may not rest on mere allegations or denials, but must set forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Colonial Baking Co. v. Dowie, 330 N.W.2d 279, 282 (Iowa 1983).
II.
Defendant's second claim is the court should have found she had a valid lien. She directs us to Iowa Code section 624.23(1) (1989), which states:
Judgments in the appellate or district courts of this state, or in the circuit or district court of the United States within the state, are liens upon the real estate owned by the defendant at the time of such rendition, and also upon all the defendant may subsequently acquire, for the period of ten years from the date of the judgment.
To create a judgment lien there must be a final valid and subsisting judgment, rendered by a duly authorized court, *901 for payment of a defined and certain amount. Slack v. Mullenix, 245 Iowa 1180, 1184, 66 N.W.2d 99,101 (1954). We agree with defendant that her judgment creates a lien under the statute. The lien so established is a general lien on all real estate subject to prior liens or equities. Burns v. Burns, 233 Iowa 1092, 1096, 11 N.W.2d 461, 463 (1943). The problem defendant has in asserting this position is that the undisputed facts are Walter only held the land as an agent, or trustee, for someone else. Walter had no ownership interest in the land.
The statute gives a lien only on the debtor's interest in the land. Stiles v. Bailey, 205 Iowa 1385, 1388, 219 N.W. 537, 540 (1928); Berg v. Shade, 203 Iowa 1352, 1354, 214 N.W. 513, 513 (1927); Hunter v. Citizens' Sav. & Trust Co., 157 Iowa 168, 171, 138 N.W. 475, 477 (1912). The lien attaches only to the judgment debtor's interest. Thomas v. Kennedy, 24 Iowa 397, 405 (1868); Churchill v. Morse, 23 Iowa 229, 231 (1867); Patterson v. Linder, 14 Iowa 414, 416 (1863). The right of a judgment creditor can rise no higher than that of his or her debtor. Johnson v. Smith, 210 Iowa 591, 595, 231 N.W. 470, 473 (1930).
Any lien is subject to equities that might be asserted against debtors. Lefebure v. Henry Lefebure Sons Co., 202 Iowa 1053, 1057, 208 N.W. 853, 855 (1926). Absent fraud, a judgment creditor's right to assert an interest in real estate is not greater than that of his or her debtor. Richardson v. Estle, 214 Iowa 1007, 1016, 243 N.W. 611, 615 (1932). A judgment creditor is not a purchaser without notice, and his or her lien attaches by operation of law only to the interest the debtor owns.
It is without dispute Walter purchased the land for Richard and deeded it to Christopher and Christy at Richard's direction. Since Walter had no interest in the land, there was no interest to which the lien could attach. The trial court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2207811 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.637691+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 858 (2003)
344 Ill. App.3d 1191
280 Ill.Dec. 607
Willie GILES, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GENERAL MOTORS CORPORATION, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 5-02-0709.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
December 18, 2003.
*860 Marvin L. Levinson, East St. Louis, IL, for Appellant.
Annie K. Strobl, Hugh G. McBreen, Dragan Ivetic, McBreen & Kopko, Chicago, IL, for Appellee.
Presiding Justice CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, Willie Giles, is employed by the defendant, General Motors Corp. (GM). GM had been withholding a portion of the plaintiff's wages pursuant to a withholding order entered in St. Clair County under the Income Withholding for Support Act (Act) (750 ILCS 28/1 et seq. (West 2000)). The order set forth a termination date for withholding; nevertheless, GM withheld for 2½ years beyond that date. The plaintiff filed a complaint against GM. The complaint set forth claims for negligence, breach of contract, and conversion and sought the return of the wages that GM had withheld beyond the order's termination date, plus interest and costs. The plaintiff sought punitive damages on his negligence and conversion claims. In response, GM filed a motion for an involuntary dismissal pursuant to section 2-619(a)(9) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-619(a)(9) (West 2002)). GM also filed an offer of a judgment in the amount of $15,113.11, representing the amount it had withheld from the plaintiff's wages after the termination date, plus a $200 fine allowed by section 50 of the Act (750 ILCS 28/50 (West 2000)). On September *861 18, 2002, the trial court entered an order granting GM's section 2-619 motion, dismissing all three counts of the plaintiff's complaint with prejudice and directing GM to tender to the plaintiff $15,113.11 in satisfaction of its offer of a judgment. The plaintiff appeals and we reverse and remand.
I. BACKGROUND
This appeal arises from a withholding order entered in St. Clair County under the Act on February 27, 1996, which required GM to withhold $122.47 per week from the plaintiff's wages for current support and $25 per week on an arrearage. The order, entered in the plaintiff's marriage dissolution proceeding, Willie Giles v. Katherine Giles, cause No. 88-D-213, directed GM to deposit the income it withheld with the clerk of the circuit court in St. Clair County for disbursement to Katherine. The withholding order stated that a support order was being entered on the same day and was to terminate on February 9, 1998.
GM withheld the amounts set forth in the withholding order and deposited the sums with the clerk of court, who then disbursed the money to Katherine. GM, however, withheld income from the plaintiff's wages 2½ years beyond the termination dateup to August 24, 2000. The extra withholding totaled $14,913.11. The plaintiff alleged that during the 2½ years, he had asked GM several times to stop withholding income, to no avail, and, further, that after GM stopped withholding income, his counsel asked GM to reimburse the amount wrongfully withheld, which GM refused to do. This conduct forms the basis of the plaintiff's prayer for punitive damages. (The record does not indicate what prompted GM to finally cease withholding income from his wages on August 24, 2000.) On November 3, 2000, the trial court entered an order in the dissolution proceeding confirming that the support and withholding orders served on GM had terminated on February 9, 1998.
On April 1, 2002, the plaintiff filed a complaint setting forth claims against GM for negligence, breach of contract, and conversion. He sought the return of the income that GM had withheld beyond the court-imposed termination date, plus interest and costs. He also prayed for punitive damages in his negligence and conversion counts, alleging that GM had exhibited a willful and wanton pattern of conduct in complete disregard of his rights by (1) continuing to withhold income from his wages in violation of the withholding order after being asked to stop withholding and (2) refusing to reimburse him after it had stopped withholding.
GM filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2-619(a)(9) of the Code of Civil Procedure. This section provides that a complaint may be dismissed when it is barred by an affirmative matter avoiding the legal effect of or defeating the claim. 735 ILCS 5/2-619(a)(9) (West 2002). The phrase "affirmative matter" in this subsection refers to the type of defense that either negates an alleged cause of action completely or refutes crucial conclusions of law or material fact unsupported by factual allegations in the complaint or inferred therefrom. Krilich v. American National Bank & Trust Co. of Chicago, 334 Ill.App.3d 563, 570, 268 Ill.Dec. 531, 778 N.E.2d 1153, 1160 (2002). GM's motion advanced three reasons for a dismissal: (1) that count I for negligence should be dismissed because punitive damages cannot be recovered for ordinary negligence, (2) that counts II and III for conversion and breach of contract should be dismissed because GM's conduct was mandated by law and because it acted in good-faith *862 reliance on a court order, and (3) that all three counts should be dismissed because the plaintiff's only recourse is under the Act and the Act does not allow for the imposition of punitive damages.
GM filed a motion titled "Offer of a Tender of Settlement[] or[,] in the alternative, Judgment" on the same day it filed its motion to dismiss. The offer was in the amount of $15,113.11, representing the amount of income it had withheld from the plaintiff's wages after the termination date, plus the $200 fine allowed by section 50 of the Act. The motion stated that GM sought an order from the court accepting its offer in satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim and dismissing the plaintiff's complaint as moot or, alternatively, entering a judgment in favor of the plaintiff in the amount of $15,113.11. The plaintiff filed a response to GM's motion and stated that he would accept a partial judgment for the sum of $14,913.11 plus interest at 6% per annum from February 9, 1998, but he requested that the cause be set for further proceedings on the issue of punitive damages.
The trial court entered an order granting GM's section 2-619 motion, dismissing all three counts of the plaintiff's complaint with prejudice. It then directed GM, in accordance with section 50 of the Act (750 ILCS 28/50 (West 2002)), to tender to the plaintiff GM's $15,113.11 offer of a judgment representing the plaintiff's wages GM had withheld after the withholding order had terminated, plus the maximum "fine" authorized by the Act. The plaintiff appeals this order.
Because the material facts are largely undisputed, our review of this matter is limited to whether the dismissal was proper as a matter of law. See Kedzie & 103rd Currency Exchange, Inc. v. Hodge, 156 Ill.2d 112, 116-17, 189 Ill.Dec. 31, 619 N.E.2d 732, 735 (1993). The facts and evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Saxon Mortgage, Inc. v. United Financial Mortgage Corp., 312 Ill.App.3d 1098, 1104, 245 Ill.Dec. 455, 728 N.E.2d 537, 541 (2000). A section 2-619 motion to dismiss should not be granted when it cannot be determined with reasonable certainty that the movant's alleged defense exists. Saxon Mortgage, Inc., 312 Ill.App.3d at 1104, 245 Ill. Dec. 455, 728 N.E.2d at 541.
An involuntary dismissal under section 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure is subject to de novo review on appeal. Our review of the trial court's interpretation of a statute is also de novo. Grams v. Autozone, Inc., 319 Ill.App.3d 567, 569, 253 Ill.Dec. 564, 745 N.E.2d 687, 689 (2001). Where, as in this case, the trial court does not specify the grounds for its order dismissing the plaintiff's complaint, we will presume it was upon one of the grounds properly urged by GM, and we will address the merits of each. Zielinski v. Miller, 277 Ill.App.3d 735, 739, 214 Ill.Dec. 340, 660 N.E.2d 1289, 1293 (1995). Having reviewed the facts and the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we reverse and remand this cause to the trial court for further proceedings.
II. ANALYSIS
A. The Income Withholding for Support Act
The threshold question we must answer is whether the plaintiff's relief is limited by the Act. We find that this question is easily resolved by referring to the language in the statute itself.
The overriding precept of statutory construction is for the court to ascertain and to give effect to the true intent of the legislature. Grams, 319 Ill.App.3d at 569, 253 Ill.Dec. 564, 745 N.E.2d at 690. *863 Our first step in determining the legislature's intent is to consider the language of the statute. We may look beyond the language of the statute only where we find an ambiguity or where a literal interpretation of the statute would lead to an absurd result. When the language is clear and unambiguous, we should give it effect without resorting to other aids for construction. Grams, 319 Ill.App.3d at 570, 253 Ill.Dec. 564, 745 N.E.2d at 690.
Here, the language of the Act, set forth below, is neither ambiguous nor absurd; on the contrary, it clearly states its purpose and scope. Section 15 of the Act defines the parties' roles: under these definitions, Willie is an "obligor", Katherine is an "obligee", and GM is a "payor". 750 ILCS 28/15 (West 2000). Section 35 provides, in relevant part, what the payor's duties are under the Act:
"(a) It shall be the duty of any payor * * * to deduct and pay over income * * * The payor shall deduct the amount designated in the income withholding notice * * *. * * * The payor shall pay the amount withheld to the State Disbursement Unit * * *. * * *
* * *
(d) No payor shall discharge, discipline, refuse to hire[,] or otherwise penalize any obligor because of the duty to withhold income." 750 ILCS 28/35(a), (d) (West 2000).
The Act also regulates the content of the withholding notice. Section 20(c) of the Act states in part:
"(c) The income withholding notice shall:
* * *
(7) state the duties of the payor and the fines and penalties for failure to withhold and pay over income and for discharging, disciplining, refusing to hire, or otherwise penalizing the obligor because of the duty to withhold and pay over income under this Section; and
* * *
(10) include the date that withholding for current support terminates, which shall be the date of termination of the current support obligation set forth in the order for support[.]" 750 ILCS 28/20(c)(7), (c)(10) (West 2000).
Section 50 sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply when the payor fails to comply with duties imposed by the Act. Section 50 states:
"(a) Where a payor wilfully fails to withhold or pay over income pursuant to a properly served income withholding notice[] or wilfully discharges, disciplines, refuses to hire[,] or otherwise penalizes an obligor as prohibited by Section 40[] or otherwise fails to comply with any duties imposed by this Act, the obligee, public office[,] or obligor, as appropriate, may file a complaint with the court against the payor. The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall notify the obligee or public office, as appropriate, and the obligor and payor of the time and place of the hearing on the complaint. The court shall resolve any factual dispute including, but not limited to, a denial that the payor is paying or has paid income to the obligor. Upon a finding in favor of the complaining party, the court:
(1) shall enter judgment and direct the enforcement thereof for the total amount that the payor wilfully failed to withhold or pay over; and
(2) may order employment or reinstatement of or restitution to the obligor, or both, where the obligor has been discharged, disciplined, denied *864 employment[,] or otherwise penalized by the payor and may impose a fine upon the payor not to exceed $200.
(b) Any obligee, public office[,] or obligor who wilfully initiates a false proceeding under this Act or who wilfully fails to comply with the requirements of this Act shall be punished as in cases of contempt of court." 750 ILCS 28/50 (West 2000).
Finally, section 60 of the Act states, in relevant part:
"(a) The rights, remedies, duties[,] and penalties created by this Act are in addition to and not in substitution for any other rights, remedies, duties[,] and penalties created by any other law." 750 ILCS 28/60(a) (West 2000).
GM argued to the trial court that all three counts of the plaintiff's complaint should be dismissed because his only recourse is under the Act, which does not allow for the imposition of punitive damages. According to GM, section 50 sets forth the maximum remedy and penalty that it could anticipate in this casei.e., the return of income withheld beyond the termination date and a $200 fine. On appeal, GM makes the related argument that the Act is triggered because the plaintiff's claims clearly arise from the withholding order. As further support for limiting the remedies and penalties in this case to those in the Act, GM points out that section 20 requires a withholding notice to inform the employer of all of its rights, duties, and obligations under the Act and that this court should not read a remedy into the Act which is not there. We disagree entirely with GM.
The Act imposed two primary duties on GMto withhold income from the plaintiff's wages and to pay the income over to the State Disbursement Unit. 750 ILCS 28/35 (West 2000). The remedies and penalty established by the legislature only remedy and penalize a payor's breach of these specific duties. According to the withholding order, GM's duty to withhold and pay over ended on February 9, 1998. It was GM's conduct subsequent to that date that gave rise to the plaintiff's claims. The plaintiff does not contend that GM breached its duties under the Act, nor does he even cite the Act in his complaint. The Act does not control the issue before us because it does not address the conduct complained of by the plaintiff. Additionally, section 60(a) of the Act clearly states that the rights, remedies, duties, and penalties created by it are in addition to any other rights, remedies, duties, and penalties created by any other law. 750 ILCS 28/60(a) (West 2000). The express unambiguous language of this section reveals that the legislature intended to supplement the remedies and penalties afforded to all parties by other laws, not to restrict them. Consequently, the Act did not afford the trial court a proper basis to dismiss the plaintiff's suit.
Accordingly, we find error in the dismissal of counts I, II, and III of the plaintiff's complaint with prejudice and reverse the trial court's order dismissing the plaintiff's claims. We must now consider what effect our findings have on the trial court's order directing GM to tender $15,113.11 to the plaintiff in satisfaction of its offer of a judgment.
In its motion titled "Offer of a Tender of Settlement[ ] or[,] in the alternative, Judgment", GM stated that because the plaintiff was only entitled to restitution and a $200 fine under the Act, its tender of the same made the plaintiff whole and rendered his claims moot. It appears that the trial court held a similar belief because its order states that the relief it afforded was in accordance with the Act. However, because we find that the Act does not control the relevant issues in this case, the trial *865 court's order directing GM to tender $15,113.11 to the plaintiff in satisfaction of its offer must be vacated. Thus, we need not decide whether a tender offered in accordance with the Act eliminates the legal controversy, nor need we pass on whether the trial court erred in calculating the amount it awarded to the plaintiff under the Act.
B. Other Affirmative Matters Alleged by GM Barring the Plaintiff's Claims
We now turn to consider the merits of GM's arguments not dependent on the Act. GM argued to the trial court in its motion to dismiss that count I of the plaintiff's complaint, which states a claim against GM for negligence, must be dismissed because the law does not permit the imposition of punitive damages for conduct which constitutes ordinary negligence. GM argued that counts II and III, for conversion and breach of contract respectively, must be dismissed because GM withheld income from the plaintiff's wages under the color of law. We disagree with both contentions.
1. Negligence and Punitive Damages
The plaintiff alleged in count I of his complaint that GM was negligent by (1) failing to pay attention to the termination date in the withholding order, (2) refusing to obey the order, and (3) failing to obey the order even after the termination date was brought to its attention. In seven distinct numbered paragraphs count I of the plaintiff's complaint also sets forth the alleged willful and wanton nature of GM's conduct. The allegations, if believed by the fact finder, would demonstrate that GM ignored the plaintiff's requests to terminate withholding income from his wages in violation of the withholding order. Proven allegations would further demonstrate GM's callousness in refusing to reimburse the plaintiff for income it wrongfully withheld, even in the face of a subsequent court order confirming the termination date and after having received two letters from the plaintiff's counsel. More particularly, the plaintiff alleges: "[GM] has exhibited a willful and wanton pattern of behavior, disregarding the rights of the plaintiff. Alternatively, [GM] has shown recklessness and indifference towards the rights of the plaintiff, entitling [the] plaintiff to punitive damages."
GM argued to the trial court that count I should be dismissed because it was labeled "negligence" and because it pleaded only inadvertence, mistake, and errors of judgment. GM believed that count I stated a claim for ordinary negligence, for which punitive damages may not be imposed. GM further argued that even if the plaintiff's allegations of negligence were proven, they do not rise to the level of willful or wanton behavior. We disagree.
It is well-settled in Illinois that punitive damages may be awarded when a defendant acts willfully or with such gross negligence as to indicate a wanton disregard of the rights of others. Kelsay v. Motorola, Inc., 74 Ill.2d 172, 186, 23 Ill. Dec. 559, 384 N.E.2d 353, 359 (1978). Punitive damages act as a punishment for willful or outrageous conduct and as a warning to deter a defendant and others from committing similar offenses in the future. Kelsay, 74 Ill.2d at 186, 23 Ill.Dec. 559, 384 N.E.2d at 359. However, Illinois case law has not been consistent on what kind of tortious behavior beyond ordinary negligence can be construed as willful and wanton conduct. See Ziarko v. Soo Line R.R. Co., 161 Ill.2d 267, 204 Ill.Dec. 178, 641 N.E.2d 402 (1994) (for a discussion of our state's diverse jurisprudence). Decisions in this state have observed the thin line and similar characteristics between ordinary negligence and willful and wanton *866 conduct. Ziarko, 161 Ill.2d at 275, 204 Ill.Dec. 178, 641 N.E.2d at 406. As a result, the Illinois Supreme Court has discouraged an application of a hard-and-fast rule and stated, "Under the facts of one case, willful and wanton misconduct may be only degrees more than ordinary negligence, while under the facts of another case, willful and wanton acts may be only degrees less than intentional wrongdoing." Ziarko, 161 Ill.2d at 275-76, 204 Ill.Dec. 178, 641 N.E.2d at 406. Indeed, this court has stated that punitive damages are recoverable where negligent conduct is accompanied by acts committed with malice or reckless indifference to the rights of others. Doe v. Chand, 335 Ill.App.3d 809, 819, 269 Ill.Dec. 543, 781 N.E.2d 340, 349 (2002).
We are cognizant that in Illinois punitive damages are not awarded for acts of ordinary negligence, but we believe that the plaintiff pleads substantially more than a simple negligence claim. In advancing the argument that the allegations in count I constitute ordinary negligence, GM reads the plaintiff's negligence allegations in a vacuum and completely ignores one-third of the count. No single factual allegation can answer the question of whether punitive damages may be claimed. Viewing the count as a whole, we believe that the plaintiff has pleaded willful and wanton conduct in conjunction with allegations of negligence on the part of GM for which punitive damages may be awarded if supported by the evidence.
It should be noted that had we found that punitive damages were not recoverable on the claim as stated in count I, such a finding would not warrant a dismissal of count I with prejudice. Rather, the appropriate relief would have been either to allow the plaintiff to amend his complaint or to strike his request for punitive damages. A dismissal of the entire count with prejudice would not be proper under these circumstances.
2. Defense of Good-Faith Reliance on the Court Orders and the Act
Nor are we convinced that a dismissal of counts II and III was warranted on the basis that GM's conduct was mandated by law. GM argues that it cannot be held liable on the plaintiff's claims for conversion or breach of contract because it withheld income from his wages pursuant to and in good-faith reliance on a variety of court orders and the Act. In advancing this argument, not only does GM ignore the fact that the withholding order, by its express terms, was subject to termination on February 9, 1998, but it also ignores a subsequent court order of November 3, 2000, confirming the termination date.
GM does not deny that it had a valid withholding order in its possession that spelled out the terms of its duties. All GM had to do was to read the order to know that it was required to stop withholding on February 9, 1998. GM has offered no legal authority or credible facts to support its contention that its withholding of income from the plaintiff's wages beyond the termination date was in accordance with a court order, under color of law, or otherwise mandated by law. We disregard the cases GM cites in its brief on appeal because they are completely irrelevant to the issue before us factually and legally. The cases GM cites in its motion to dismiss are inapposite because the parties in those cases were justified in engaging in the conduct complained of. See Andrews v. Mid-America Bank & Trust Co. of Fairview Heights, 152 Ill.App.3d 139, 141-42, 105 Ill.Dec. 114, 503 N.E.2d 1120, 1122 (1987); Levy v. Johnston & Hunt, 224 Ill.App. 300 (1922). Because GM's argument that it withheld income from the plaintiff's wages in good faith is without any merit, the dismissal of counts II and *867 III of the plaintiff's complaint with prejudice on this basis was in error.
C. The Plaintiff's Claim for Interest and Attorney Fees
The plaintiff requested interest at the rate of 6% per annum and attorney fees in his prayers for relief in all three counts of his complaint. On appeal GM argues that the trial court properly denied the plaintiff's request for interest and fees. However, GM did not brief these matters in its motion to dismiss before the trial court, nor does the order entered by the trial court reflect that it dismissed the plaintiff's claims on these bases. Because these matters are not properly before us, we decline to pass on the propriety of the plaintiff's request for interest and attorney fees.
III. CONCLUSION
Viewing the pleadings in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we find that the trial court erred in dismissing the plaintiff's complaint pursuant to section 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure. We reverse the trial court's order dismissing all three counts of the plaintiff's complaint with prejudice, vacate the trial court's order directing GM to tender $15,113.11 to the plaintiff, and remand this cause for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Costs on appeal shall be awarded to the plaintiff in accordance with Supreme Court Rule 374 (155 Ill.2d R. 374).
Reversed; cause remanded.
WELCH and MAAG, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9736898 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:18.270858+00 ===

OPINION
FRIEDLANDER, Judge.
The trial court entered a Decree of Dissolution (the Decree) on February 14, 2001, dissolving the marriage between Gilbert Randall Augspurger (Husband) and Julie Hudson (Wife). Pursuant to the Decree, Wife was awarded 90% of the marital estate, spousal maintenance in the amount of $421.07 per week, and $21,000 for future medical treatment of her physical and mental incapacity. The court further determined that Husband should pay a portion of Wife's attorney fees, an amount to be determined at a future hearing. Thereafter, Husband filed a Motion to Correct Error, which the trial court granted in part on September 5, 2001. In that order, the trial court granted Husband's motion as to the issue of property division. The trial court concluded that an equal division of the marital estate was proper and ordered the parties to attempt to negotiate an agreed division of property, noting that either party could request a hearing to determine the division should negotiation prove unsuccessful. Additionally, the court ordered spousal maintenance to continue until August 9, 2002 and noted that Wife may petition for additional relief if her condition does not improve. Finally, with regard to Husband's motion to correct error, the trial court reduced Husband's payment for Wife's future medical treatment to $6000. In this order, the trial court also ordered Husband to pay $17,360.60 of Wife's attorney fees.
Thereafter, on September 21, 2001, Husband filed a Motion to Reconsider Order of September 5, 2001, which the trial court does not appear to have ruled upon. On September 28, 2001, Wife filed a Praecipe for Hearing to Determine Division of Property. Prior to a hearing on the division of property, Husband filed the instant appeal on October 4, 2001. The trial court subsequently granted a motion to stay pending appeal. On January 18, 2002, Wife moved to dismiss the appeal because there was no final appealable order. Instead of dismissing the appeal, this court remanded the cause to the trial court with directions to hold a further hearing, if necessary, and to make its determination concerning the division of marital assets and debts. Following various delays, a hearing was held in the trial court on February 26, 2003. The trial court entered its Final Order of Division of Property the following day (Final Order). On appeal, Husband raises the following consolidated and restated issues for our review: ‘
1. Was the trial court empowered to enter the Decree of February 14, 20017
2. Did the 90/10 division of property in the Decree amount to an abuse of discretion?
3. Did the 1tria1 court abuse its discretion in awarding spousal maintenance to Wife?
4. Was the award for Wife's future medical treatment erroneous?
5. Did the trial court err in awarding attorney fees to Wife?
In her cross-appeal, Wife presents the following restated issues for review:
6. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in reducing Wife's share of the marital estate in its September 5, © 2001 order on Husband's motion to correct error?
*5077. Did the trial court erroneously omit certain marital debts in the Final Order that were previously included in the Decree?
-8. In the September 5, 2001 order on Husband's motion to correct error, did the trial court abuse its discretion in reducing the award for Wife's future medical treatment?
We affirm.
Husband and Wife were married on February 14, 1981, and no children were born to their marriage. On November 5, 1996, Wife filed a petition for dissolution of the parties' marriage. The complex procedural landscape of this case has been set forth in relevant part above. In sum, three basic issues were before the trial court: (1) how to divide the marital assets and debts; (2) whether to award spousal maintenance to Wife; and, (3) whether to award attorney fees to Wife. Relevant facts will be provided below where necessary. -
Husband's Appeal
O1.
Husband challenges the authority of the trial court in issuing the Decree on February 14, 2001. The Decree is signed by Robert J. Overton, as Judge of the Marion Superior Court, Civil Division, Room No. 10. Husband claims, "[nlo-where in the transcript, nor in the Record is there any order appointing Robert J. Overton as a judge in any capacity." Appellant's Brief at 24.
Following submission of Husband's appellate brief and upon Wife's motion, the trial court entered an order on May 15, 2003, correcting the clerk's record. The order directed the clerk to "correct the Clerk's Record in the appeal ... to reflect the true state of the Record by supplementing the Record by forwarding a certified copy of the Order appointing Robert J. Overton Judge Pro Tempore on February 14, 2001 ... to the Clerk of the Court of Appeals." Appellee's Supplemental Appendix at 36.
The supplemented . record before us clearly reveals that David J. Dryer, Presiding Judge of the Marion County Superi- or Court, appointed Robert Overton "as Judge Pro Tempore of the Marion Superi- or Court, Civil Division, Court Room 10 on [February 14], 2001." Id. at 38. As a duly appointed judge pro tempore, Judge Over-ton had authority to enter the Decree.1
2.
Husband asserts several arguments with regard to the division of property in the Decree. In particular, Husband contends that the 90/10 division in favor of Wife constitutes an abuse of discretion because the trial court did not state its reasons for deviating from the statutory presumption that an equal division is just and reasonable. See Ind.Code Ann. § 31-15-7-5 (West 1998). Moreover, Husband asserts that in the Decree, the trial court failed. to consider the economic cireum-stances of each spouse at the time the disposition of property was to become effective. |
These arguments are not well taken because the trial court's subsequent order, granting in part Husband's motion to correct error, changed the division of property originally ordered in the Decree. Pursuant to the September 5, 2001 order, the marital estate was to be divided equally between the parties. Therefore, Husband's arguments regarding the original *508division of property in the Decree are moot.
3.
Husband challenges the trial court's award of spousal maintenance to Wife. In this regard, Husband argues that the diagnoses and recommended treatments offered by Wife's expert medical witnesses "are so confusing, commingled and disparate as to be unreliable." Appellant's Brief at 15. Husband further asserts that the trial court failed to make a specific finding that Wife was physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that the ability to support herself was materially affected and failed to articulate any clear diagnosis of Wife's condition.2
Ind.Code Ann. § 31-15-7-2(1) (West 1998) provides for maintenance of an incapacitated spouse as follows:
If the court finds a spouse to be physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that the ability of the incapacitated spouse to support himself or herself is materially affected, the court may find that maintenance for the spouse is necessary during the period of incapacity, subject to further order of the court.
The trial court's power to make an award of maintenance is wholly within its discretion, and we will reverse only when the decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and cireumstances of the case. Fuehrer v. Fuehrer, 651 N.E.2d 1171 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. "The presumption that the trial court correctly applied the law in making an award of spousal maintenance is one of the strongest presumptions applicable to the consideration of a case on appeal." Id. at 1174.
In this case, the trial court entered findings of fact from which it concluded that Wife was entitled to incapacity maintenance.3 When a trial court enters special findings under Ind. Trial Rule 52, "[wle will not set aside such findings unless clearly erroneous and [will] give due regard to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of the witnesses." Cannon v. Cannon, 758 N.E.2d 524, 526 (Ind.2001); see also Fuehrer v. Fuehrer, 651 N.E.2d at 1173 ("[s}pecial findings and *509the judgment which rests upon those findings will be set aside only if they are clearly erroncous in that the record is devoid of facts or inferences to support the findings, or that the judgment is unsupported by the findings"). Thus, when reviewing the trial court's entry of special findings, we neither reweigh the evidence nor reassess the credibility of witnesses. Fuehrer v. Fuehrer, 651 N.E.2d 1171.
In the Decree, the trial court specifically found that "[Wifel's medical condition has negatively and materially affected her ability to support herself financially." Appellant's Appendix at 27. The trial court then proceeded to detail the evidence presented by Wife's experts, C. Norman Shealy, M.D., Ph.D. and Leonard Dale Guyer, M.D.,4 regarding her medical condition. Of these lengthy findings, we recount some of the most relevant below:
14. Dr. Shealy's diagnosis was electromagnetic dysthymia, which meant her body's electrical system was out of balance, causing severe fatigue and mental confusion....
15. According to Dr. Shealy, the chances of totally normal mental brain function were not excellent. She could be improved 50% to 70%, but there was little chance that she will be able control [sic] her life the way normal people do.
16. Dr. Shealy believed [Wife's] ability to support herself financially was materially affected by her medical condition. In his opinion, [Wife] would have an extremely hard time finding and maintaining a regular job-even an entry-level clerical position-because of her confusion, frequent pneumonia and general mental status.
17. According to Dr. Shealy, [Wife] did not seem to be psychologically stable on a day-to-day basis, due to periods of confusion and sleep trouble.
18. Dr. Shealy recommended an intensive, two week treatment program for [Wife] to help reestablish normal electrical function of the brain. The program would cost approximately $6,000.00, and there was an 80% chance of her showing significant improvement.
woh ock
20. ... Following that program, [Dr. Shealy] recommended a six month at-home program of physical and mental exercise and training and a proper diet.
toon ok
24. After a battery of laboratory tests, Dr. Guyer's diagnosis was fibro-myalgia: an unrelenting, generalized body achiness or pain for more than a three months duration which is often accompanied by sleep disturbance and chronic fatigue....
[[Image here]]
26. Along with fibromyalgia, Dr. Guyer diagnosed mineral deficiency, mag*510nesium deficiency, amino acid deficiency, amino acid metabolism disorder, hormone deficiency, chronic viral infection and amine dysfunction.
27. Dr. Guyer felt that, to a reasonable medical certainty, her condition was treatable. He anticipated that she could get to a point of doing better over a period of time.
28. As a course of treatment, Dr. Guy-er suggested physical therapy, massage therapy, and correction and balance of nutritional deficiencies, hormone deficiencies, amino acid deficiencies and metabolism with medication, supplements and a change in her diet.
29. Generally speaking, Dr. Guyer anticipated that a patient with [Wife's] symptoms would have progressive and incremental improvement during the course of treatment, which could meet his goal of an 80% resolution after nine to twelve months. However, the doe-tor's experience with other fibro-myalgia patients was that it could take as long as thirty-six months for maximum resolution of symptoms.
830. Dr. Guyer estimated that a one year course of treatment with him would cost [Wife] $15,000.
31. [Wife's] sleep dysfunction was common to fibromyalgia and to the amino acid deficiencies she had; it could be resolved by correcting those deficiencies.
82. In Dr. Guyer's opinion, it would be impossible for [Wife] to engage in a meaningful vocation and support herself financially. Given her education and motivation, she could be capable of better-than-minimum wage employment if his course of treatment were successful, but all she could do right now is work part-time at an entry level job.
33. Dr. Guyer anticipated that, today, it would be very difficult for [Wife] to maintain any kind of regular employment that has extensive physical demands because of her low degree of endurance, or mental demands because of the forgetfulness and inability to focus clearly.
34. Dr. Guyer held Dr. Shealy in very high regard. He believed [Wife] should continue to treat with Dr. Shealy simultaneously because his expertise as a neurosurgeon would be very helpful in clarifying her medical complications.
Appellant's Appendix at 28-31.5
These findings are sufficient to support the trial court's conclusion that Wife is entitled spousal maintenance due to her incapacity and resulting inability to support herself. To the extent that Husband argues her condition has not been clearly diagnosed and her diagnoses are "so confusing, commingled and disparate as to be unreliable", Appellant's Brief at 15, we observe that these arguments "go to the relative weight and credibility of the evidence and witnesses at trial, matters within the purview of the trial court." Cannon v. Cannon, 758 N.E.2d at 527. Because the trial court's findings in this regard are not clearly erroneous, we sustain its conclusion that Wife is entitled to incapacity maintenance.
4.
Next, Husband challenges the trial court's decision to award $6000 to Wife *511for her future medical treatment with Dr. Shealy. He claims that this prospective medical expense cannot be considered a debt of the marriage and, therefore, is not subject to division between the parties.
Husband correctly observes that debts incurred by a party after the dissolution petition has been filed are not to be included in the marital pot. See Sanjari v. Sanjari, 755 N.E.2d 1186, 1192 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) ("[glenerally, the marital pot closes on the date the dissolution petition is filed"). The award for Wife's future medical treatment, however, cannot fairly be characterized as part of the trial court's distribution of marital assets and debts. While not expressly designated as such,6 it is apparent that the award for Wife's future medical treatment constitutes an award of maintenance. We note that, with regard to incapacity maintenance, Wife requested that the trial court award $421.07 per week as maintenance and order Husband to "pay $6,000.00 so that she can take Dr. Shealy's treatment program, and $15,000.00 so that she can treat with Dr. Guyer." Appellee's Appendix at 47. The trial court ultimately awarded $6000 to Wife for her future medical treatment with Dr. Shealy. Husband has failed to establish that this additional maintenance award constitutes an abuse of the trial court's discretion. See Bizik v. Bizik, 753 N.E.2d 762, 769 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (affirming maintenance award of $400 per week and order that Husband maintain health insurance for Wife and "pay all of Wife's reasonable and necessary non-insurance covered medical, hospital, dental, optical, psychological and prescription pharmaceutical expenses pending further court order"), trans. denied.
5.
Finally, Husband argues that the trial court abused its discretion by ordering him to pay $17,360.60 of Wife's attorney fees despite the significant maintenance award also ordered. Husband's argument in this regard follows:
The best case seenario for distribution of assets for the Husband under the September 5, 2001 order would be approximately $89,000.00. The payments ordered total $55,861.92, leaving Husband with $38,638.08. Wife, on the other hand would have $89,000.00 in assets, *512income of $32,001.32 and all attorney fees paid.
The court could not have considered the resources of the parties in making that order. Wife clearly had more resources available to her and she was perfectly able to pay her own fees.
Appellant's Brief at 28.
When reviewing an award of attorney fees in connection with a dissolution decree, we will reverse the trial court only for an abuse of discretion. Fobar v. Vonderahe, 756 N.E.2d 512 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), aff'd in relevant part, 771 N.E.2d 57 (2002). "In making such an award, courts should consider the parties' relative resources, ability to engage in gainful employment, and ability to earn an adequate income." Id. at 517. Consideration of these factors furthers the legislative purpose behind the award of attorney fees under Ind.Code Ann. § 31-15-10-1 (West 1998), which is "to provide access to an attorney to a party in a dissolution proceeding who would not otherwise be able to afford one." Fobar v. Vonderahe, 756 N.E.2d at 517.
While Husband may be correct that Wife made out better than he in the dissolution, the evidence reveals a large disparity between the parties' earning abilities.7 As detailed above, the trial court found that Wife's self-supportive ability is materially affected by her medical condition. On the other hand, the court found Husband to be "physically fit, vigorous and able-bodied, and actively pursuing his occupation." Appellant's Appendix at 27. The court further found, "There is a disparity in the economic condition of the parties in that [Husband] will continue to earn greater income than [Wife]." Id. at 35. In light of these findings, we cannot say the trial court abused its discretion in awarding attorney fees to Wife.
Wife's Appeal
6.
On cross-appeal, Wife argues that the trial court erred in reducing her share of the marital estate from 90% to 50% following Husband's motion to correct error. In particular, Wife asserts that an equal division is unjust and unreasonable in light of her poor health and disproportionately low earning ability.
Subject to the statutory presumption that an equal distribution of marital property is just and reasonable, the disposition of marital assets is committed to the sound discretion of the trial court. Maloblocki v. Maloblocki, 646 N.E.2d 358 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances, or the reasonable, probable, and actual deductions to be drawn therefrom. In re Marriage of Preston, 704 N.E.2d 1093 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). An abuse of discretion also occurs when the trial court misinterprets the law or disregards evidence of factors listed in the controlling statute. Id. at 1096. "The presumption that a dissolution court correctly followed the law and made all the proper considerations in crafting its property distribution is one of the strongest presumptions applicable to our consideration on appeal." Hyde v. Hyde, 751 N.E.2d 761, 765 (Ind.Ct.App.2001). Thus, we will reverse a property distribution only if there is no rational basis for the award and, "(all-though the cireumstances may have justified a different property distribution, we may not substitute our judgment for that of the dissolution court." Id.
*513Indiana law requires that marital property be divided in a "just and reasonable manner" and provides for the statutory presumption that "an equal division of the marital property between the parties is just and reasonable." Ind.Code Ann. § 31-15-7-5 (West 1998). "This presumption may be rebutted, however, by evidence of each spouse's contribution to the acquisition of the property, the extent to which the property was acquired before the marriage or by inheritance, the economic cireumstances of each spouse, the conduct of the parties relating to the disposition or dissipation of assets, and each spouse's earning ability." Fobar v. Vonderahe, 771 N.E.2d 57, 59 (Ind.2002).
While the trial court's findings of fact in the Decree could support deviation from the presumed equal division of the marital estate, we conclude that such deviation is not mandated. In this case, the trial court could reasonably determine that an equal division is just and reasonable under the cireumstances, despite Wife's poor health and meager earning ability. As noted by Husband, in addition to half of the marital estate, the trial court awarded substantial spousal maintenance and payment of attorney fees to Wife. The maintenance payments, by definition, were ordered to supplement Wife's future income until her earning ability improved with her health. The payment of attorney fees also helped to improve Wife's financial condition upon dissolution. Further, it goes without saying that these significant awards negatively impacted Husband's economic condition upon dissolution. Division of property should not be considered in a vacuum, and the trial court is free to consider other awards (such a spousal maintenance) when determining the proper division. In light of the overall effect of the dissolution on the parties, Wife has not established that the trial court's decision to divide the marital estate equally is unjust or unreasonable.
7.
Wife challenges the omission from the Final Order of six marital debts that had previously been found in the Decree. She claims that the trial court should have equally divided these debts in the Final Order.
In the Decree, the trial court specifically found:
50. With regard to the parties' marital liabilities, the Court finds as follows:
tod ook
(b) The parties owe $4,789.29 to Wooden & McLaughlin, as shown on Wife's Trial Exhibit 12.
(c) [Wife] owes $249.13 to St. John's Regional Health Center, as shown on Wife's Trial Exhibit 13.
(d) [Wife] owes $792.50 to Decatur Medical Center, as shown on Wife's Trial Exhibit 14.
(e) [Wife] owes $488.00 to her mother, as shown on Wife's September 1, 1999 Financial Declaration.
(£) [Wife] owes $3,500.00 to her father, as shown on Wife's September 1, 1999 Financial Declaration.
(g) [Wife] owes $11,000.00 to her parents, as shown on Wife's September 1, 1999 Financial Declaration.
(h) [Wife] owes $350.00 to her eye doctor, Dr. Pierce, as shown on Wife's September 1, 1999 Financial Declaration.
Appellant's Appendix at 34-35. Despite these specific findings, which were not challenged by Husband in his motion to correct error, the trial court entered the following finding in its Final Order:
C. Debis
*514Evidence at final hearing indicates several debts, but the Court now finds only one debt of the parties as shown below. It shall be paid equally between the parties.
Wooden & MeLaughlin $4,789.00 law firm:
Appellee's Supplemental Appendix at 21.
Wife contends that the trial court had no authority to "modify the existing Decree" because "[nleither party filed a Petition for Modification or asserted fraud." Appellee's Brief at 21. She specifically argues:
The Decree, and subsequent amendment by Motion to Correct Error, are currently the law of the case; Husband's appeal has not been ruled upon. See generally, Ind.Code 31-15-2-16(b) (A dissolution decree is final when entered, subject to the right of appeal.) A trial court is required to divide all of the marital property, including assets and debts, in a dissolution proceeding. See Moore v. Moore, 695 N.E.2d 1004, 1010 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). Onee that is done, and an order concerning property distribution is entered, the property disposition may not be revoked or modified unless fraud is asserted. Ind.Code 31-15-7-9.1.[8] See also Pactor v. Pactor, [181 Ind.App. 329,] 391 N.E.2d 1148, 1150 (Ind.Ct.App.1979).
Appellee's Brief at 21.
The authority relied upon by Wife is inapposite, as there was no final division of the marital estate until the trial court's entry of the Final Order on February 27, 2008. Wife's own motions/filings before this court recognize that the trial court's order on Husband's motion to correct error did not constitute a final judgment of the division of the marital estate. For example, in her motion to dismiss the instant appeal, filed on January 18, 2002, Wife asserted: "The trial court has not concluded the case. It still has power and authority to dispose of the outstanding issue of the division of the marital estate."9 Motion to Dismiss at 3. Therefore, Wife's contention that, absent fraud, the trial court did not have authority to "modify" the Decree in the Final Order is without merit. Wife has failed, therefore, to establish error with regard to the trial court's distribution of the marital debt.
8.
Finally, Wife briefly argues, with mo citation to authority, that the trial court abused its discretion in awarding to Wife future medical expenses of $6000, rather than $21,000. As a result, she was awarded payment for only her future *515treatment with Dr. Shealy. Wife asserts that a year of treatment with Dr. Guyer (at a cost of $15,000) was also needed in order "to improve her medical condition to a point where she is no longer reliant upon Husband's spousal maintenance." Appellee's Brief at 26. She further argues that by taking away one of her treatment opportunities, the trial court "may have undermined the advice of Wife's treating physician". Id. at 26-27.
As previously stated, an award of maintenance is wholly within the trial court's discretion, and we will reverse only when the decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances of the case. Fuehrer v. Fuehrer, 651 N.E.2d 1171. In the instant case, the trial court's findings of fact reveal that Dr. Shealy recommended an intensive, two-week treatment program for Wife at a cost of approximately $6000. Following said treatment, Dr. Shealy opined, "there [is] an 80% chance of her showing significant improvement." Appellant's Appendix at 29. On the other hand, Dr. Guyer (who met with Wife on one occasion for about ninety minutes) recommended a general course of treatment over an unspecified period of time, in addition to the treatment with Dr. Shealy. The court's findings reveal, "Generally speaking, Dr. Guyer anticipated that a patient with [Wife's] symptoms would have progressive and incremental improvement during the course of treatment, which could meet his goal of an 80% resolution after nine to twelve months." Id. at 30. Dr. Guyer estimated that a year of treatment with him would cost $15,000.
In light of these findings, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in only awarding payments for Dr. Shealy's treatment program. This intensive program would reportedly provide Wife with an 80% chanee of significant improvement. We are not persuaded that the trial court was required to award additional funds for a year of treatment with Dr. Guyer, especially considering the other substantial maintenance awarded to Wife. Wife has failed to establish error in this regard.
Judgment affirmed.
RILEY, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
. We note that after February 14, 2001, Judge Dreyer assumed responsibility for and authority over the case, including ruling on Husband's motion to correct error and issuing the Final Order.
. Husband asserts in passing that Wife's living expenses were never actually ascertained. In the Decree, however, the trial court specifically found that Wife's net weekly expenses are $421.07, based upon weekly living expenses of $510.29 and gross weekly income of $89.22. While we have not been favored with a complete transcript from the final hearings in this matter, the record before us contains a Verified Financial Declaration of Wife that supports these figures. Husband has failed to establish error.
. We recognize Judge Sullivan's concern, expressed in his separate opinion, with respect to the trial court's findings regarding Wife's medical condition. While, admittedly, the trial court could have better phrased its findings of fact, we cannot agree that the findings are mere recitations of testimony, witness opinion, and diagnosis. A review of the findings reveals that the trial court weighed the evidence and credited Wife's experts over Husband's expert. Specifically, after detailing the evidence presented by Wife's medical experts, the findings address the testimony of Husband's expert and focus on the weaknesses of the doctor's testimony/diagnosis (often using language pregnant in meaning such as "Dr. Unverzagt admitted that ..."). Appellant's Appendix at 31-32 (emphasis supplied). The logic of the trial court's findings clearly leads io and supports its conclusion regarding Wife's incapacity. We conclude that the findings sufficiently reveal the trial court's reasoning and its analysis of the evidence, thus, allowing meaningful appellate review of this issue. See Fobar v. Vonderahe, 756 N.E.2d 512, 518 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) ("[the purpose of findings of fact and conclusions of law is to provide the parties and reviewing courts with the theory upon which the case was decided"), aff'd in relevant part, 771 N.E.2d 57 (Ind.2002).
. In a separate portion of his brief, Husband contends that the trial court "errfed] in not exercising it's 'gatekeeping' function and admitting unscientific evidence and unsubstantiated medical evidence." Appellant's Brief at 25. Citing Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 125 L.Ed.2d 469 (1993), and Ind. Evidence Rule 702(b), Husband challenges the admission into evidence of the depositions of Dr. Shealy and Dr. Guyer. Husband has waived this argument, however, by failing to raise an objection on this ground at trial when the depositions were admitted into evidence. See In re Paternity of V.A.M.C., 768 N.E.2d 990 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), reh'g granted in part on other grounds, 773 N.E.2d 359.
. We note that the trial court also entered findings with regard to the testimony of Husband's medical expert. It is sufficient to observe, without detailing those findings, that the trial court did not appear to give much weight or credit to that expert's testimony.
. Husband incorrectly cites to Coster v. Coster, 452 N.E.2d 397 (Ind.Ct.App.1983), for the proposition that payments may be categorized as maintenance so long as they are specifically designated as support or maintenance. In that case, there was an issue as to whether an award should be construed as a maintenance provision or a portion of the property division paid in installments. We explained:
[Aln award consisting of periodic payments in a Decree of Dissolution will be construed as maintenance only if one of two requisites is met. The trial court may include in the dissolution decree a finding of mental or physical incapacity materially affecting the spouse's ability to be self-supportive. Without such a finding, an award may still be regarded as maintenance if specifically designated as "support'" or "maintenance."
Id. at 403. In the instant case, the trial court entered a specific finding regarding Wife's incapacity and resulting inability to be self-supportive. Therefore, pursuant to Coster, it was not necessary for the award to be specifically designated as support or maintenance. We further observe that Coster is incorrect to the extent that it says an award merely designated as support or maintenance, without more, is sufficient to establish that the award is for maintenance. See Millar v. Millar, 593 N.E.2d 1182, 1183 (Ind.1992) ("In spite of the 'maintenance' terminology used by the trial court, the facts stated by the trial court clearly demonstrate that this in fact was a property division order"); see also Brinkmann v. Brinkmann, 772 N.E.2d 441 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (noting that a designation as maintenance is but one factor in determining whether an award is in the nature of maintenance or a property settlement).
. At the time of the dissolution, Wife had a weekly gross income of less than $90, while Husband had a weekly gross income of over $1700.
. Ind.Code Ann. § 31-15-7-9.1 (West 1998) provides:
(a) The orders concerning property disposition entered under this chapter ... may not be revoked or modified, except in case of fraud.
(b) If fraud is alleged, the fraud must be asserted not later than six (6) years after the order is entered.
. In a subsequent motion, filed with this court on May 13, 2002, Wife states:
2. In particular, ... the trial court had not yet made a final determination as to the division of the parties' marital assets and debts. It remains with the trial court to dispose of the outstanding issue of division of marital assets and debts.
shook ok
6. The issue of division of marital assets and debts ... has not been determined by the trial court. A hearing was scheduled for May 31, 2002.
sok ok
8. This matter will not be ripe for appeal until the trial court makes its final determination as to the division of marital debts at the hearing on May 31, 2002.
Response to Motion to Reconsider at 1-2 (emphasis in original).

=== CASE 2208000 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.563424+00 ===

225 Cal.App.2d 676 (1964)
SANTA CLARA SAND AND GRAVEL COMPANY, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
STATE BOARD OF EQUALIZATION, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 21393.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Mar. 18, 1964.
Fred F. Cooper for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Ernest P. Goodman, Harry W. Low and John J. Klee, Jr., Deputy Attorneys General, for Defendant and Respondent.
DEVINE, J.
The action is one for refund of sales tax which was paid by appellant corporation under protest. From judgment that plaintiff take nothing, plaintiff appeals. Two contracts to which appellant was a party give rise to the dispute between appellant and the State Board of Equalization.
General Facts
The general facts, as well as certain others given under other headings, are agreed upon in a stipulated statement, but more particular facts were testified to. Ball and Simpson Company was engaged in a job on the Bayshore Highway in Santa Clara County. Ball and Simpson made a written contract with appellant to haul Ball and Simpson's borrow (sand and gravel) on the job from a pit owned by Swenson. It is not now disputed that this was simply a hauling contract, and not a sale. Appellant did not own any of the borrow. Ball and Simpson paid Swenson by one check, and by separate check paid appellant 57 cents per ton for the hauling job. Respondent has abandoned a claim that a sales tax is assessable against appellant on this transaction. [1] Mere hauling is not subject to the tax. (Rev. & Tax. Code,  6011, subd. (g); Cal.Admin.Code, tit. 18,  2028.) The action, therefore, does not have to do directly with the Swenson transaction.
After some deliveries, it was found that the Swenson borrow did not meet the state's specifications. Appellant then offered Ball and Simpson dirt from two pits which it had leased and operated. This was accepted. Sales tax on the amount delivered was charged on the basis of 60 cents per ton. *680
The second contract which the court held to produce a sales tax was one of appellant with A. J. Raisch Paving Company, to which appellant delivered borrow for the manufacture of asphalt at its plant on Monterey Road, Santa Clara County. In this transaction, there was no prior contract such as the Swenson contract in the Ball and Simpson transaction.
1. The Ball and Simpson Contract
The question is whether title passed at the pits or plantsite, so that sales tax would be charged on a price at the pits, as claimed by appellant, or at the jobsite, where the price would be about 15 times as great, as claimed by respondent. It must be considered at the beginning whether the contract of appellant with Ball and Simpson relating to borrow taken from the Swenson pit was superseded by an oral contract between the parties. Appellant claims that the contract remained and could not be varied by oral negotiations, and that since it is described by its own terms to be a subcontract to perform work, namely, loading, weighing, hauling and dumping contractor's (Ball and Simpson's) material, title would pass at the plantsite throughout the whole supplying of borrow to Ball and Simpson for the job.
[2] The court found that upon acceptance of the offer of appellant to supply its own borrow instead of the unsatisfactory Swenson borrow, the contract "was changed from a hauling contract to a contract to sell plaintiff's personal property." This we find to be the reasonable conclusion. [3] Under the Swenson arrangement, title never passed from appellant to Ball and Simpson. Appellant never owned the Swenson borrow. The contract had to be one of hauling and not of sale. When title left Swenson, it went to Ball and Simpson.
[4a] The new arrangement was essentially different. Appellant had leased the two pits. It gained title to the dirt by paying royalties to the owners. It passed title to Ball and Simpson, at some point, which was not so before. [5] The parol evidence rule does not invalidate a new oral agreement made after a written contract has been orally abrogated. (McKeon v. Giusto, 44 Cal.2d 152, 156 [280 P.2d 782].) [4b] The change in subject matter described above is sufficient to have caused the court to conclude that the parties intended a new contract.
[6] If, as the court found, title did not pass until delivery, *681 the full delivered price is the basis of the tax. (Rev. & Tax. Code,  6006, subd. (a); Select Base Materials v. Board of Equalization, 51 Cal.2d 640, 646-648 [335 P.2d 672].)
[7a] Evidence supporting this finding is: (1) The seller was obliged to make delivery to the place designated by the buyer. [8] Rule 5 of section 1739 of the Civil Code ( 19 of the Uniform Sales Act) applies, which provides that unless a contrary intention appears, if the contract to sell requires the seller to deliver the goods to the buyer, or at a particular place, the property does not pass until the goods have been delivered to the buyer or reached the place agreed upon. (O'Kelley-Eccles Co. v. State of California, 160 Cal.App.2d 60, 64 [324 P.2d 683].) [7b] Payment for borrow was based on the amount that was delivered to the jobsite, not on a designated amount as loaded at plantsite. The borrow had to meet state specifications, the determination of quality being made at the jobsite. (2) A single payment of 60 cents per ton for qualified borrow was made, not a separate payment for hauling, as had been the case with Swenson's contract, where separate checks were drawn by Ball and Simpson. (3) A deduction was made for moisture in the borrow delivered at the jobsite. (4) There was no designation of pits from which borrow was to be obtained. The cost of obtaining the material which appellant obtained by paying royalties to owners of two pits, and the cost of hauling, were entirely up to appellant to determine and to control. The price paid by Ball and Simpson was the same, 60 cents, for material obtained at a royalty of 4 cents per ton and that obtained at 3 cents per ton at different pits. The delivered product, therefore, appears to have been the only thing the buyer was concerned with. (5) No showing was made, either by stipulated fact or by evidence at the trial, of the intent of the appropriate officers of Ball and Simpson as to the time and place of passage of title. (We observe that it may very well be that Ball and Simpson would not care to take the risk of loss of the material between plantsite and jobsite, by taking title at the plantsite.) (6) Selection of the trucker was left to appellant. A corporation for the purpose of delivery was formed when the appellant's business progressed beyond its original one of manufacturing asphalt, and this corporation, MacDonald and Dorsa Transportation Company, made the deliveries to Ball and Simpson. (7) Appellant's invoices to Ball and Simpson were all "f.o.b. jobsite." [9] The usual *682 meaning of provision for delivery f.o.b. the point of destination is that title does not pass until delivery to the buyer. (Lewis v. Farmer's Grain & Milling Co., 52 Cal.App. 211 [198 P. 426]; 2 Williston on Sales,  280.)
[10] At this point, the parties departed from the stipulated facts and presented testimony to the trial court. It was appellant's contention, and still is, that the billing employees of the company made the invoices "f.o.b jobsite" by mistake. The court heard testimony and found that appellant "did not mistakenly mark 'f.o.b. jobsite' on invoices for dirt supplied Ball and Simpson from the pits which plaintiff leased and operated."
There is substantial evidence to support this finding. It is: (a) All of the elements listed above tend to show that f.o.b. jobsite was a proper designation. (b) Appellant's billing clerks were under the instruction of an office manager. There were changes in personnel, and the new employees would be instructed in billing. But all of the billings to Ball and Simpson over a period of 33 months were f.o.b. jobsite. (c) The staff did bill sales for resale correctly, whereby no tax resulted. (d) On a certain job for supplying and delivering material to Cupertino High School, different billings, f.o.b. jobsite and f.o.b. plantsite, were required for different materials supplied, leading to an inference which the trial judge evidently drew (he mentions the matter in the findings), that appellant's staff was capable of making the distinction.
[11] Appellant argues that mistake is shown by the fact that even as to the Swenson transaction, billing was "jobsite," although the written contract was one of hauling. The court found, indeed, that this was a mistake, but found that there was no mistake in the later invoicing. The trial court had discretion to make this distinction, based on all of the circumstances related above.
[12] Appellant points out that the invoicing set forth a breakdown of the total of 60 cents, namely, one sum for the material and another sum for the transportation of the material to Ball and Simpson. So did some of the invoices of the seller in Select Materials v. Board of Equalization, supra, 51 Cal.2d 643, but the whole price was held to be the tax base. The entire transaction must be looked to in order to find its true nature.
Finally, appellant argues that respondent's position clashes with its own regulation in title 18, California Administrative *683 Code, section 2028, which provides that the sales tax does not apply to separately stated charges for transportation provided the transportation is by "other than facilities of the retailer, i.e., independent contract or common carrier, United States mail," and that it is immaterial in such case where title passes, unless the property was sold for a delivered price.  [fn. 1] But the court found that the cost of delivery was part of the plaintiff's gross receipts and constituted a part of the sales price, and that the purchaser was interested only in buying for a designated delivered price, a finding which we sustain. (It is doubtful, besides, that appellant has shown that the carrier was engaged by an independent contract between it and appellant. The evidence is sketchy here, but it appears that MacDonald and Dorsa was closely associated with appellant.)
2. The A. J. Raisch Paving Company Contract
A written memorandum, in the form of a letter from the A. J. Raisch Paving Company to Steve Dorsa, and signed by the Raisch Company and by Steve Dorsa, is contained in the stipulated facts. (Although Dorsa signed the memorandum, apparently in his personal capacity, and the name of appellant company does not appear, and the only corporation referred to is the "transportation company," both parties treat the agreement as appellant's.) The letter states the agreement to be that: (1) Raisch will pay "your transportation company" 36 cents per ton for materials hauled from Tennant Avenue (the pit owned by appellant) to Raisch's plant No. 85 on Monterey Road; (2) Raisch will rent "your Michigan loader" for 19 cents per ton less cost of labor of the operator; Raisch is to hire the operator; (3) royalty for materials removed to be paid at 30 cents per ton; trucks to be weighed on random basis by Raisch and average load to be struck.
Raisch did not hire the operator of the loader. Appellant employed him. Appellant billed Raisch periodically on a single invoice a total of 85 cents per ton for the materials delivered to A. J. Raisch pursuant to the contract. The board assessed sales tax on the sum of 85 cents per ton gross receipts. The invoice prepared by appellant set forth several *684 items: 30 cents per ton for the material, and handling and equipment rental of 55 cents per ton. All billings were "f.o.b. jobsite" (plant No. 85, Monterey Road, Santa Clara County). Later, the Tennant Avenue pit's material was temporarily exhausted or overburdened, and the source for the materials delivered was changed to appellant's Puppo pit. Because the hauling cost to appellant was greater from the Puppo pit than from the Tennant Avenue pit, the total charge to Raisch was 90 cents per ton "f.o.b. jobsite." The board assessed sales tax on the 90 cents per ton gross receipts shown on those invoices. Later, the supply at the Tennant Avenue pit again became available and the overburden removed. The deliveries were again made to Raisch from that pit at a price of 85 cents per ton. The board then assessed sales tax on the 85 cents per ton gross receipts shown on the invoices prepared by appellant and paid by Raisch.
Appellant's first claim is that this transaction was one having to do with real property; that there was not a sale, but the creation of a profit a prendre from appellant to Raisch and a transportation contract; that, therefore, no sales tax is chargeable.
[13] Although the memorandum refers to "royalty" for materials removed, the nomenclature does not bind the Board of Equalization as a third person, not party to the contract. (Budd v. Hughes, 176 Cal. 687, 689-690 [171 P. 287]; Broder v. Epstein, 101 Cal.App.2d 197 [225 P.2d 10]; People v. Chait, 69 Cal.App.2d 503, 519 [159 P.2d 445]; Witkin, Cal. Evidence,  377, p. 421.) The true nature of the contract must be looked to. [14a] The trial judge found that the sale was not of real property but of tangible personal property. The finding is supported.
[15] Raisch Company did nothing by way of "taking" the material. Taking is of the essence of what is called a profit a prendre. The memorandum does not contain such a description of the land as is proper to a profit a prendre. It refers to the "Tennant Avenue Gravel Deposit," but nothing is said about the amount that may be taken nor about duration of a right conveyed. [16] A profit a prendre is an interest in the land itself and it creates a covenant running with the land as distinguished from a mere personal obligation of the owner of the property. (Richfield Oil Co. v. Hercules Gasoline Co., 112 Cal.App. 431, 434 [297 P. 73].) [17] The substances which may be taken are part of the *685 realty until severed and brought under control, and when this is done, they are personal property and subject to sale as such (id., p. 435). [14b] No part of this transaction brought Raisch into the operation of severing anything from the land. It simply bought personal property which had been severed by appellant. The quantity for which payment was to be made was measured by the amount delivered by the trucks selected by appellant.
[18] Appellant takes a second position about the Raisch contract. It says that in event the court rejects the profit a prendre theory, then only the charge for materials, 30 cents out of 85 cents, is taxable.
As in the Ball and Simpson contract, the trial judge found that title did not pass until delivery was made, that cost of delivery constituted part of the sales price, and that the buyer was interested only in a delivery price. This is supported by several items of direct evidence and fair inferences from them. (1) The fact that an illusory real property element was given to the transaction makes it difficult for appellant to say that there was a true sale of severed personal property at the pits and to insist that a particular portion, 30 cents per ton, of the whole amount paid, 85 cents per ton, is to be allocated to sale of material for tax purposes. (2) No testimony was presented to show the point at which Raisch considered title to pass. In fact, there is no direct evidence as to the point when appellant intended title to pass. Here, as in the Ball and Simpson contract, it seems that Raisch was going to pay for what it got at the place of delivery, and was not concerned with amount of product at plantsite nor of acquiring title before transportation by appellant's allied company. (3) The invoices were "jobsite," as in the Ball and Simpson contract, and the same reasoning applies here as there.
[19] Appellant argues that the fact that Raisch paid an extra five cents per ton when a more distant pit had to be used temporarily shows that a "delivered price" was not contemplated, because Raisch could have refused to pay this extra sum. But the written agreement referred to sales from the Tennant Avenue pit only. The parties were free to agree on a different price for the supplies coming from another pit. The fact that increased cost of transportation may have been considered as giving rise to a higher price during the temporary overburden of Tennant Avenue, does not demonstrate *686 that the sale and transportation were separate transactions under all of the circumstances.
Judgment affirmed.
Draper, P. J., and Salsman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The regulation at the time of the transaction was not quite this, but since it was then somewhat less favorable to appellant, we need not discuss the difference.

=== CASE 9736933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:21.784474+00 ===

CARTER, Justice.
This case comes to us on multiple appeals following entry of judgments in consolidated automobile negbgence actions. The issues raised all relate to the effect of an injured spouse’s fault in the trial of the other spouse’s claim for loss of consortium. For purposes of discussion we will refer to the claimant spouse as the deprived spouse.
Mary E. Abell’s husband, William, was injured when an automobile he was driving collided with another automobile driven by John Karl Schwennen and owned by John’s father, John G. Schwennen, Jr. This accident occurred on August 9, 1982. The elder Schwennen was a passenger in the automobile and was killed in the collision.
John G. Schwennen, Jr.’s estate brought an action against William based on the latter’s alleged negligence in causing the collision. William counterclaimed seeking recovery for the injuries which he sustained in the crash. He alleged that John Karl Schwennen was negligent in causing the collision and that the Schwennen estate was vicariously liable under Iowa Code section 321.493 (1981).
*100On March 3, 1983, Mary brought an independent action against the Schwennen estate, John Karl Schwennen, and Floyd County, Iowa, seeking to recover for loss of aid, services, affection, society, and companionship as a result of injuries sustained by William in the collision. This action was consolidated with the other pending action. Shortly prior to trial of the consolidated actions, Mary amended her petition to include William as an additional defendant against whom her loss of consortium claim was made.
In the trial of Mary’s consortium claim, the jury found that she had been damaged in the amount of $85,000. It apportioned fault among the defendants as follows: William, sixty-three percent; the Schwen-nen defendants, twenty-seven percent;1 and Floyd County, ten percent. Because the fault apportioned to William was more than fifty percent of the aggregate, judgment was entered against him for the full amount of the verdict. The other defendants were adjudged only to be liable in proportion to the share of fault ascribed to them.
I. Liability of Injured Spouse for Loss of Consortium Claim by Deprived Spouse.
The judgment of the district court was entered on October 20, 1986. On December 17, 1986, this court filed its opinion in McIntosh v. Barr, 397 N.W.2d 516 (Iowa 1986). We held that, although the marital consortium interest is legally protected as against third parties, no action lies between the deprived spouse and the injured spouse inter se. William urges that under the McIntosh holding Mary’s judgment against him cannot be permitted to stand. The appellees concede that this issue was properly preserved by William in the district court and suggest no reason why McIntosh does not require a reversal of the judgment. Consequently, we must reverse Mary’s judgment against William on her loss of consortium claim.
II. The Effect of William’s Fault on the Liability to be Assessed Against the Remaining Defendants.
Although Mary virtually concedes that her judgment against William must fall, she has sought to protect herself against that eventuality by cross-appealing from her judgment against the Schwennen defendants and Floyd County.2 On this cross-appeal she argues that if she had no legal claim against William then his fault was improperly included in the apportionment of aggregate fault among the parties. Applying this premise, she would interpolate the fault apportionment made by the jury so as to ascribe twenty-seven thirty-sevenths of the aggregate fault to the Schwennen defendants and ten thirty-sevenths to Floyd County.
The Schwennen defendants urge that Mary did not assert this theory in the district court and may not now make such claim on appeal. They also argue that, in any event, in the trial of a loss of consortium claim involving comparative fault, the deprived spouse’s claim should be reduced by the fault apportioned to the injured spouse.
A. Applicability of Iowa Code chapter 668. At the outset we must consider the extent to which the comparative fault legislation presently contained in Iowa Code chapter 668 applies to the present case. The action was filed before July 1, 1984, but was tried after that date. The effective date of this legislation was established in the bill enacting it which provides as follows:
This Act, except for section 4, applies to all cases filed on or after July 1, 1984. Section 4 of this Act applies to all cases tried on or after July 1, 1984.
1984 Iowa Acts Ch. 1293, § 15.
The legislation in question deals with three primary topics: (1) the effect of con-*101tributary fault in reducing or barring the claimant’s right of recovery against all defendants, (2) the elimination of joint and several liability for certain defendants who bear less than fifty percent of the aggregate fault, and (3) special rules concerning the right of contribution and enforcement of contribution among joint tort-feasors. Only the second topic, i.e., the new joint and several liability rule, was made retroactively applicable. The statute expressly negates any retroactive applicability to the first and third topics.
Because of this selective applicability of chapter 668, the statutory provisions which operate to reduce or bar plaintiffs right of recovery against all defendants do not apply. That aspect of plaintiffs claim is still governed by the common-law rules established in Goetzman v. Wichern, 327 N.W.2d 742, 754 (Iowa 1983). The chapter 668 statutory scheme may indirectly affect the extent of plaintiffs recovery against particular defendants, however, through the application of section 668.4.
B. Effect of injured spouse’s fault on deprived spouse’s claim under Goetzman. Because the common-law concept of comparative negligence recognized in Goetzman is applicable to defendants’ attempt to secure a reduction of Mary’s claim against all defendants based on contributory fault, we must examine the scope of that holding. Such examination reveals that the decision only supplanted prior law in those instances where “contributory negligence has previously been a complete defense.” Goetzman, 327 N.W.2d at 754.
If Mary had been guilty of some negligence which proximately caused William’s injury, this would have constituted a complete defense to her claim under the law which antedated Goetzman. No contention has been made, however, that Mary was personally guilty of such negligence. William’s negligence would not have constituted a complete defense to Mary’s claim under pre-Goetzman law.
In Fuller v. Buhrow, 292 N.W.2d 672, 675-76 (Iowa 1980), we held that the contributory fault of an injured spouse does not provide a defense to a loss of consortium claim brought on behalf of the deprived spouse against a third-party tort-feasor. At that time we fully considered conflicting lines of authority contained in decisions from other jurisdictions and our own prior decision in Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 251 Iowa 714, 717, 102 N.W.2d 152, 153 (1960). We opted for a rule which recognizes “the negligence of another, not the plaintiff, [having] concurred in producing the injury is no defense to any of those whose negligence proximately caused the injury.” Fuller, 292 N.W.2d at 674.
We are unable to discern any persuasive reasons why a departure from the position established in Fuller is indicated from the fact that this jurisdiction has now abandoned the contributory negligence defense in favor of a comparative fault concept. The policy issues underlying the effect of the injured spouse’s fault on the deprived spouse’s loss of consortium claim are, we believe, substantially the same in either situation. The policy issue is a simple one. Why should innocent parties who have suffered loss have their right of recovery diminished as a result of the acts of another party whose fault is not imputed to them under established common-law or statutory rules?
Cases cited by the Schwennen defendants which reach a contrary result have characterized the deprived spouse’s cause of action as derivative of the injured spouse’s claim. See Nelson v. Busby, 246 Ark. 247, 255, 437 S.W.2d 799, 803 (1969); Gates v. Foley, 247 So.2d 40, 45 (Fla.1971); White v. Lunder, 66 Wis.2d 563, 574, 225 N.W.2d 442, 449 (1975). We rejected this characterization of a loss of consortium claim in Fuller and in the more recent decision of Madison v. Colby, 348 N.W.2d 202, 208-09 (Iowa 1984).
Other comparative fault jurisdictions which have refused to characterize a loss of consortium action as derivative include Macon v. Seaward Construction Co., 555 F.2d 1, 2 (1st Cir.1977) (applying New Hampshire law); Lantis v. Condon, 95 Cal.App.3d 152, 157, 157 Cal.Rptr. 22, 24 (1979); *102Feltch v. General Rental Co., 383 Mass. 603, 608, 421 N.E.2d 67, 70-71 (1981); Christie v. Maxwell, 40 Wash.App. 40, 44, 696 P.2d 1256, 1258 (1985). The courts which rendered the latter decisions have refused to reduce the deprived spouse’s recovery as a result of fault attributable to the injured spouse.
The Schwennen defendants suggest there is a potential for unjust enrichment of a single economic unit if the Fuller principles are followed. The Washington court in Christie v. Maxwell considered such an argument and rejected it for the following reasons:
[T]he injury incurred can neither be said to have been “parasitic” upon the [injured spouse’s] cause of action nor can it be properly characterized as an injury to the marital unit as a whole. Rather, it is comprised of [the deprived spouse’s] own physical, psychological and emotional pain and anguish which results when her [spouse] is negligently injured.... From the vantage point of the negligent defendant, [the deprived spouse] is simply a foreseeable plaintiff to whom he owes a separate duty of care.
Christie, 40 Wash.App. at 47, 696 P.2d at 1260.
We, too, find the suggestion of unjust enrichment to be untenable in view of our emphatic confirmation of the deprived spouse’s individual ownership of the loss of consortium claim. See Madison, 348 N.W. 2d at 208-09. It has long been the law of this state that, unless one spouse assigns that party’s separate chose in action to the other spouse, any recovery realized is the separate property of the owner of the chose. King v. Gottschalk, 21 Iowa 512, 513-14 (1866); see also Iowa Code § 597.2, 19 (1983).
In promulgating Iowa Uniform Jury Instruction 3.13 in November 1984, the committee established a position which is consistent with the views which we have expressed. That instruction, which is designed to apply in Goetzman situations, provides that there is no imputation of fault to the deprived spouse as a result of acts by the injured spouse. We conclude this correctly expresses the law applicable to Mary’s claim in the present case.
C. Whether section 6684 permits apportionment of fault to injured spouse so as to reduce liability of third-party tort-feasors. We next consider whether, as ap-pellees suggest, Iowa Code section 668.4 (1985) allows a portion of the aggregate causal fault to be allocated to William thereby reducing the amount of fault to be apportioned among the remaining defendants. Section 668.4 is applicable to this action. We held in Reese v. Werts Corp., 379 N.W.2d 1, 4 (Iowa 1985), that this statutory rule with respect to joint and several liability shall “have the same meaning and effect [in cases filed before July 1, 1984] that it will have in future cases.” In both Reese and Baldwin v. City of Waterloo, 372 N.W.2d 486, 493 (Iowa 1985), we recognized that in such cases it is also necessary to resort to other relevant statutes contained in chapter 668 in order to determine the joint and several liability issues in accordance with the statutory scheme. We are convinced, however, that the statutory scheme does not lead to the result for which the Schwennen defendants contend.
We established in Reese that in determining the apportionment of fault among parties and released parties pursuant to section 668.3(2)(b) only parties “whose fault toward the claimant is an issue” should be included in the total aggregate of causal fault. Reese, 379 N.W.2d at 6. The fault of parties toward the claimant which has not been placed in issue cannot be considered. Peterson v. Pittman, 391 N.W.2d 235, 238 (Iowa 1986). Similarly, fault of parties placed in issue in the pleadings which is ultimately determined to be legally insufficient to support the claim may not be considered in the aggregate fault apportionment. Payne Plumbing & Heating Co. v. Bob McKiness Excavating & Grading, 382 N.W.2d 156, 158-60 (Iowa 1986); Reese, 379 N.W.2d at 6.
Within this statutory scheme, this occurs when the claimant bases his or her claim against that defendant on some aspect of *103fault which falls within the statutory definition and which is legally sufficient to support the claim. With respect to a third-party defendant, this occurs when a defendant bases the third-party claim in whole or in part on some fault of the third-party defendant toward the claimant which would be legally sufficient to render that party liable upon the same indivisible claim for the same injury. See Reese, 379 N.W.2d at 6; Iowa Code § 668.5(1).
In the present case, Mary did place William’s fault toward her in issue by claiming directly against him. As we have determined earlier in this opinion, however, her claim based on such fault is not legally sustainable under the McIntosh holding. The Schwennen defendants also placed William’s fault toward Mary in issue in a third-party claim for contribution. That claim is also lacking in legal efficacy as a result of McIntosh. Because no legally sustainable theory of recovery may be predicated on William’s fault toward Mary, his fault should not have played a role in the apportionment of aggregate fault under section 668.3(2)(b).
The present action involves consolidated claims brought by multiple claimants. If, in actions involving multiple claimants, the fault of one claimant is not a legally viable issue in determining the rights of another claimant, separate verdict forms must be utilized to obtain a proper apportionment of causal fault as to each claimant.3 Obviously, the trial court did not utilize this method in the present case because it believed that Mary’s claim against William was legally sustainable. The consequence of being wrong on that issue, however, is that the percentage of fault apportioned to William has distorted the percentage of fault properly to be ascribed to the Schwennen defendants and Floyd County. The combined fault of the latter defendants should have totaled 100% of the causal fault involved in Mary’s claim.
D. Waiver of right to urge issue on appeal by taking inconsistent position in the trial court. We next consider the Schwennen defendants’ contention that, because Mary claimed in the district court that William should be saddled with a portion of the aggregate fault, she has waived any right to now urge a contrary position on this appeal. We have frequently recognized that ordinarily questions not presented to and not passed on by the trial court cannot be raised or reviewed on appeal; the theory under which a case is tried in the trial court should be the theory upon which the appeal is based. See Kartridg Pak Co. v. Department of Revenue, 362 N.W.2d 557, 561 (Iowa 1985); Shill v. Careage Corp., 353 N.W.2d 416, 420-21 (Iowa 1984).
This rule is not, however, without exceptions. We recognized in Wolfe v. Graether, 389 N.W.2d 643, 659 (Iowa 1986), that a reversal of a judgment on the appeal of one claim may require reversal of the judgments entered on other claims even where no independent error has been established on the latter claims. Quoting from 5B C.J.S. Appeal & Error § 1919 (1958), we stated that this may occur where “the cause of action is of such a nature that the rights and issues are interdependent and injustice might result from a reversal as to less than all the [claims].” Id. at 659. We believe this is a situation where this principle should be applied.
The record reflects that Mary was forced to claim against William as a direct consequence of the decision of the Schwennen defendants to seek contribution from him for their liability to Mary. In the application of section 668.3(2)(b) the presence of a third-party defendant can result in siphoning off a portion of aggregate fault from the defendants against whom the plaintiff is claiming. This can result in a plaintiff who is not personally at fault receiving less than a full recovery.
*104In order to protect one’s self in such situations a plaintiff must, as did Mary, claim directly against the third-party defendant. Mary’s application for leave to amend her petition made it clear that this was her reason for claiming against William. Her legally unsustainable claim against William was, in effect, prompted by the Schwennen defendants’ legally unsustainable third-party claim against him.
As a result of the litigating position into which Mary was forced, she had no avenue for arguing in the alternative. The claims had to be submitted to the jury under a single theory as to whom the responsible parties were. Because this question has only now been determined, Mary should be granted another opportunity to have her claim submitted in the proper manner.
III. Required Disposition.
Finally, we must consider the disposition which is appropriate as a result of William’s fault having been improperly submitted to the jury. Mary argues that the court may correct the verdict by a process of interpolation. She suggests this may be accomplished by disregarding William’s fault and assessing twenty-seven thirty-sevenths of the remaining aggregate fault to the Schwennen defendants and ten thirty-sevenths thereof to Floyd County. For reasons which we discuss we find this suggestion to be untenable.
In Nichols v. Westfield Industries, 380 N.W.2d 392, 401-02 (Iowa 1985), we considered whether the elimination on appeal of claims against some but not all defendants requires a new trial for purposes of rendering a new apportionment of causal fault among the remaining parties. We suggested that the test for deciding this question is not whether the remaining parties might obtain a different result in a new trial, but, rather, whether any injustice befell those parties at the original trial as a result of submitting improper claims against other parties. Id. Judged by this standard, we conclude that the issue of the proper apportionment of aggregate fault between the Schwennen defendants and Floyd County must be retried.
A salient feature of our comparative fault legislation is the provision in section 668.3(5) that the jury must be made aware of the effect of its fault apportionment on the claimant’s right of recovery. In Reese, 379 N.W.2d at 4, we found it to be reversible error for the court to fail to instruct on this matter or to give misleading instructions with respect thereto. The instructions given the jury in the present case were based on the premise that William could be subjected, as he was, to some allocation of causal fault. When William’s fault is disregarded the interpolated verdicts suggested by Mary will have a substantially different effect on the Schwen-nen defendants and Floyd County than the jury would have perceived them to have under the trial court’s instructions. This circumstance, we believe, requires that the apportionment of fault among the remaining parties must be tried anew.
We do not believe, however, that it is necessary to retry the issues concerning the total amount of Mary’s damages. The jury was instructed pursuant to section 668.3(2)(a) that this determination was to be made irrespective of the fault of any of the parties. Under the circumstances it will not be assumed that any error committed on the apportionment of fault would corrupt the jury’s determination as to the total amount of damages suffered by Mary. See, e.g., Rinkleff v. Knox, 375 N.W.2d 262, 269 (Iowa 1985). Upon retrial, the total amount of Mary’s damages will be deemed to be the amount established by the jury at the initial trial.
Mary’s judgment against William is reversed. Her judgment against the Schwennen defendants is reversed and the case is remanded for a retrial of that claim for purposes of establishing the proper apportionment of causal fault between those defendants and Floyd County. Their combined fault should total 100% of the causal fault involved in Mary’s claim against the parties to this action. Because Floyd County is no longer a party to the action its fault shall be treated as that of a released *105party under section 668.2(3).4 Costs of this appeal are assessed fifty percent to Mary E. Abell and fifty percent to the Schwen-nen defendants.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.
All Justices concur except HARRIS, J., and McGIVERIN, C.J., and SNELL, J., who dissent.
. Because the liability of the estate of John G. Schwennen, Jr. was vicarious based on Iowa Code § 321.493 (owner’s liability), the two Schwennen defendants were treated as a single party as permitted by Iowa Code § 668.3(2)(b).
. Floyd County is no longer a party to the appeal having settled Mary’s claims against it. Its fault, however, is still relevant to the issues.
. The current version of Iowa Uniform Jury Instruction 400.4 advises the jury that the court will not reduce one claimant’s recovery for the fault of another claimant except where fault is imputed under common-law or statutory rules otherwise applicable. The jury should also be advised in such situations that the fault of another claimant should not be considered in arriving at the 100% aggregate of causal fault.
. Because this action was filed before July 1, 1984, the fault of Floyd County as a released party may only be considered for purposes of apportioning fault under § 668.4. It cannot be utilized to reduce Mary’s claim as otherwise provided in § 668.7.

=== CASE 9736934 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:21.793194+00 ===

HARRIS, Justice
(dissenting in part).
A judicial opinion draws its importance, not from what it says, but from what it holds. Although the majority opinion reflects exhaustive research and careful scholarship it nevertheless strikes me as flawed because of its practical effect. I dissent from division II C because I believe the holding is out of plumb with the comparative fault act and with our own holdings.
The facts are important because they are extreme and emphasize the incongruity of the majority position. Mary E. Abell’s consortium claim stems from an automobile collision. Mary’s husband, William Abell, was driving a car which collided with one driven by Schwennen. Mary’s loss of consortium claim was brought against her husband, the other driver and, because of its duty to maintain the intersection where the accident occurred, Floyd County. A jury fixed Mary’s damages at $85,000 and assessed fault 63% to William Abell, 27% to the Schwennens, and 10% to Floyd County.
My difference with the majority is on the question of whether Mary’s consortium judgment against the other defendants should be reduced by the percentage of fault assigned to her husband. The majority thinks it should not; I think it should.
In McIntosh v. Barr, 397 N.W.2d 516, 517 (Iowa 1986), we held that a husband is not liable to his wife for loss of consortium when his injuries result in part from his own negligence. If, as I believe, this is sound law, it makes no practical sense to allow recovery against others for the husband’s same fault. Either a husband should be made to pay for consortium loss derived from his own fault, or others should not be made to pay for it. Because I think our holding in McIntosh was right I think the majority holding in this case is wrong.
The majority holding in effect allows for joint and several liability in contravention of Iowa Code section 668.4.1 This is what really happens when other defendants can be made to answer for William Abell’s 63% of the fault.
The majority says, because there is no viable claim against William Abell, he should not be considered a party for purposes of allocating fault. This general rule is indeed supported by the authorities cited, but it should not apply here. None of the cited cases involved a loss of consortium claim. See Peterson v. Pittman, 391 N.W. 2d 235, 238 (Iowa 1986); Reese v. Werts Corp., 379 N.W.2d 1, 4 (Iowa 1985).
The rule may seem reasonable enough for general application but it becomes patently unreasonable when it is injected into a loss of consortium claim. Consortium claims are unique. They involve close family relationships and compensate for voluntary services which, we have said, cannot be legally exacted. McIntosh, 397 N.W.2d at 518.
Although the same legal ratiocinations now employed by the majority would have suggested no liability, we held in McIntosh that a wife cannot recover from her husband when his negligence causes her a loss of consortium. Id. But what the right hand took away in McIntosh, the left hand now restores under the majority holding. Others are made to answer for the husband’s fault, even in a consortium claim.
In the end I am unwilling to extend liability for William’s fault to other defendants because I am persuaded it would be illogi*106cal and wrong. Having refused Mary a consortium recovery against her negligent husband I would not transfer his liability to other defendants who were less at fault than he was.
The trial court’s entry of judgment in favor of Mary and against William must, I agree, be reversed. But consortium awards against those whose negligence contributed to an injury should be reduced by the fault assigned to the injured spouse.
McGIVERIN, C.J., and SNELL, J., join this dissent.
. Section 668.4 states:
In actions brought under this chapter [comparative fault], the rule of joint and several liability shall not apply to defendants who are found to bear less than fifty percent of the total fault assigned to all parties.

=== CASE 9736935 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:24.440359+00 ===

JUSTICE SCHMIDT delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant Dwaine Johns was charged with the felony murders (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(3) (West 2000)) of Michael Douglas and Bertha Diaz. Following a jury trial, defendant whs found guilty of both felony murders. He was subsequently sentenced to natural life imprisonment pursuant to the Unified Code,of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—l(c)(ii) (West 2000)). Defendant’s posttrial motion was denied and he appeals, arguing that (1) he was not proved guilty of Douglas’s murder on a theory of accountability because the State’s evidence failed to prove that he intended to promote or facilitate the armed robbery or attempted armed robbery of Douglas; (2) his conviction for the felony murder of Diaz must be reversed, because the armed robbery or attempted armed robbery of Douglas ended before Diaz was murdered; and (3) the imposition of a sentence of natural life imprisonment was unconstitutional as applied. BACKGROUND At trial, it was undisputed that on March 1, 2000, Jarvis Jackson shot and killed Michael Douglas near Douglas’s mother’s home in Peoria Heights and then shot and killed Bertha Diaz in an apartment at 711 Shipman in Peoria. The issue at trial was whether Dwaine Johns was accountable for the homicides. The events leading up to these murders were recounted by both the defendant, who testified in his own behalf, and Jarvis Jackson, who testified against the defendant as part of a plea bargain in which the State agreed not to seek the death penalty against Jackson. Defendant testified that on the evening in question, he agreed to accompany Jackson and Derrick Echols to “collect some money” from Michael Douglas. The three men rode to 711 North Shipman in Peoria in Jackson’s vehicle. Jackson knocked on the apartment door, kicked it in and entered the apartment. Defendant testified that he never saw a gun until Jackson kicked in the door. At that point, Jackson waved the gun and told defendant and Echols to enter the apartment. Diaz and Douglas were sitting on the couch when the three entered the apartment. Jackson approached Douglas and demanded to know where “the shit” was. Defendant heard Douglas and Jackson argue and Douglas mentioned that “it” was at his mom’s. Jackson then took Douglas upstairs and returned with Douglas and a second gun. He handed the second gun to the defendant and told defendant to stay with Diaz. Defendant remained in the apartment with Diaz for approximately 45 minutes before Jackson returned. During that time, there was a small baby in a playpen on the first floor and another small boy upstairs who came down and sat with Diaz. Diaz allegedly told defendant that Douglas did not keep that kind of “stuff’ in the house because they had been robbed before. Defendant states that he told Diaz that he was not there to get anything and did not even know what was going on. Defendant testified that he did not leave the apartment because he was afraid that Jackson was outside the door. Defendant claims that he kept the gun in his pocket the entire time that he sat with Diaz during Jackson’s absence. According to defendant, when Jackson returned, he told defendant to leave. Defendant gave Jackson the second gun and left the apartment. Ten to fifteen seconds later, defendant heard a gunshot. Jackson left the apartment, shoved defendant into his car, and sped away. While they were driving away from the scene, Jackson mentioned that he had shot Douglas because Douglas had tried to run. Jackson gave the gun to defendant and told him to hide it. Defendant said he buried it in his backyard, but the next day, he dug it up and returned it to Jackson. Defendant did not go to the police until he learned that they were looking for him. He claimed that he initially remained quiet and did not inform police of what happened because he feared Jackson and his brother, who had threatened him if he talked. Jackson threatened to tell the police that defendant was the shooter if he talked. Defendant told a police detective in September of 2000 that he knew who killed Douglas and Diaz. However, he did not give any further details until he gave a voluntary statement on January 6, 2001. Defendant subsequently assisted the police by arranging to meet Jackson at a Wal-Mart store, where Jackson was taken into custody. In rebuttal, Jackson testified that he, defendant and Echols had planned to go to Douglas’s residence to rob him and that defendant saw Jackson’s gun when Jackson came to pick him up. Jackson also said that defendant was standing next to him when he shot Diaz. Jackson admitted that he initially told the police that defendant was the shooter, but in a later statement, he admitted that he shot both Douglas and Diaz. He subsequently pled guilty to both murders and agreed to testify against defendant in exchange for a sentence of natural life imprisonment. ISSUES AND ANALYSIS I. Accountability for Felony Murder a. General Principles Involved First, we consider defendant’s contention that he was not proved guilty on the theory of accountability because the State failed to prove that he intended to promote or facilitate the robbery or attempted robbery of Douglas. The State argues that the defendant knew about the plan to rob Douglas, and the murders would not have occurred but for defendant’s conduct.  Upon the conviction of a defendant, a reviewing court will preserve the role of the trier of fact as weigher of the evidence by viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 478 N.E.2d 267 (1985). Issues of witness credibility are reserved for the trier of fact as well. The relevant question is whether any rational trier of fact could have found the elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Campbell, 146 Ill. 2d 363, 586 N.E.2d 1261 (1992).  A person commits attempted robbery when, with intent to commit robbery, he takes any substantial step toward the commission of a robbery. 720 ILCS 5/8 — 4, 18 — 1(a) (West 2000). He commits a robbery when he takes property from the person or the presence of another by the use of force or by threatening the imminent use of force. 720 ILCS 5/18 — 1(a) (West 2000).  To prove an offense by accountability, the State must prove that, either before or during the commission of an offense, the defendant solicited, aided, abetted, agreed or attempted to aid another in the planning or commission of the offense. 720 ILCS 5/5 — 2(c) (West 2000). While mere presence at the scene of an offense is not culpable, proof that the defendant was present during the commission of a crime without opposing or disapproving it, that he maintained a close affiliation with the principal afterwards, and that he failed to report the crime are all factors that may be considered in determining legal accountability. People v. Grice, 87 Ill. App. 3d 718, 410 N.E.2d 209 (1980).  The “common design rule” provides that, where two or more persons engage in a common criminal design or agreement, any further acts committed by one party are considered to be the acts of all parties to the common design and all are equally accountable for the consequences of such further acts. People v. Jackson, 333 Ill. App. 3d 962, 777 N.E.2d 626 (2002). A common design may be inferred from the circumstances surrounding the commission of a crime. People v. Lee, 247 Ill. App. 3d 505, 617 N.E.2d 431 (1993).  Felony murder derives its mental state from the underlying intended offense. Felony murder seeks to deter persons from committing forceable felonies by holding them responsible for murder if a death results. People v. Viser, 62 Ill. 2d 568, 343 N.E.2d 903 (1975). A defendant may be found guilty of felony murder regardless of a lack of intent to commit murder. People v. Moore, 95 Ill. 2d 404, 447 N.E.2d 1327 (1983). Illinois adheres to a proximate cause approach to felony-murder liability. People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462, 687 N.E.2d 973 (1997). Applying these principles, we discuss below defendant’s convictions for the felony murders of Michael Douglas and Bertha Diaz. b. Accountability for Felony Murder of Douglas  The State’s evidence established that defendant willingly accompanied Jackson and Echols to Douglas’s home with the intent to rob him. Defendant continued to participate in the criminal enterprise by agreeing to remain at Douglas’s apartment, holding Bertha Diaz at gunpoint while Jackson and Echols escorted Douglas to his mother’s house to obtain Douglas’s property. There is no question that defendant was a participant in the attempted armed robbery of Douglas. The only logical presumption is that defendant held Diaz at Douglas’s apartment to keep her from notifying police while Jackson and Echols drove Douglas to his mother’s house. After the robbery or attempted robbery of Douglas, defendant resumed his association with Jackson and did not report the incident to the police when he learned that Douglas had been killed during the attempted robbery. Furthermore, defendant took possession of the murder weapon immediately after the murder, hid it at his house for approximately one day, thought better of that and then, rather than turn the gun over to police, returned it to the shooter. The evidence was thus more than sufficient to prove that defendant was accountable for the felony murder of Douglas. See, i.e., Jackson, 333 Ill. App. 3d 962, 777 N.E.2d 626. c. Accountability for Felony Murder of Bertha Diaz Next, defendant contends that he cannot be held accountable for the murder of Diaz because the attempted robbery or robbery of Douglas ended before Diaz was shot. The State responds that the defendant waived the argument. In his posttrial motion, the defendant argued that the State’s evidence was insufficient to support his convictions. While the argument he presents in this appeal is more focused than the issue presented in the trial court, it nonetheless challenges the sufficiency of the State’s evidence to convict; therefore, we review the issue on its merits. People v. Thomas, 277 Ill. App. 3d 214, 660 N.E.2d 184 (1995). Defendant relies on People v. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 692 N.E.2d 325 (1998), and People v. Shaw, 186 Ill. 2d 301, 713 N.E.2d 1161 (1998), to support his argument that he cannot be guilty of the felony murder of Bertha Diaz. He argues that since the underlying felony was the intended robbery of Michael Douglas, that robbery ended upon the murder of Douglas and, therefore, he cannot be liable under the felony-murder rule for the murder of Bertha Diaz. We disagree. Defendant’s reliance on Dennis and Shaw is misplaced. Dennis is an accountability case in which the supreme court ruled that the defendant could not be accountable for an armed robbery even though he helped the perpetrator escape from the armed robbery. This was so because the armed robbery was complete before defendant’s involvement. It was complete because not only had the property been taken, but the threat of force had ceased before the escape. People v. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 692 N.E.2d 325 (1998). Shaw is a felony-murder case where the supreme cotut held that a defendant could not be held guilty of the felony murder of a police officer killed during an escape from an armed robbery. The supreme court found that there was not sufficient evidence to show that the defendant had anything to do with the armed robbery other than to be in the general vicinity and to transport the perpetrator away from the vicinity. People v. Shaw, 186 Ill. 2d 301, 713 N.E.2d 1161 (1998). That is, in both Shaw and Dennis, the court found that the defendants had nothing to do with the underlying felony of armed robbery. Here, defendant was a participant in the armed robbery. He went to the victim’s home and held Bertha Diaz at gunpoint so that Jackson could take Douglas to look for the money elsewhere. Defendant held Bertha Diaz at gunpoint for approximately 45 minutes until Jackson returned. Defendant’s use of force in this case was no less significant in effectuating the armed robbery than was that of Jackson. Likewise, the use of force against Bertha Diaz was no less significant with respect to the armed robbery of Michael Douglas than was the use of force against Douglas himself. Obviously, this fact was not lost on the armed robbers, otherwise, all three of them would have accompanied Michael Douglas to his mother’s house to leave Bertha Diaz to do as she pleased, which probably would have included notifying the police that an armed robbery was in progress. Defendant then argues that with the death of Michael Douglas, the attempted robbery of Douglas was complete and therefore the subsequent murder of Bertha Diaz, approximately four miles away, could not be a result of the armed robbery of Douglas. Not so. For the felony-murder rule to attach, the act causing the death must both occur during the underlying felony and be the direct and proximate result of the felony. People v. McCarroll, 168 Ill. App. 3d 1020, 523 N.E.2d 150 (1998); People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247, 695 N.E.2d 474 (1998). However, for the purposes of the felony-murder rule, the armed robbery is not complete until the conspirators have won their way to a place of temporary safety. It is important to note that this armed robbery began at the apartment of Bertha Diaz at 711 Shipman in Peoria. Defendant remained at this scene, holding Bertha Diaz at gunpoint, until Jackson returned and executed her. The fact that Bertha Diaz was not the intended victim of the armed robbery is irrelevant. People v. Bongiorno, 358 Ill. 171, 192 N.E. 856 (1934). Defendant argues that upon the murder of Douglas, the armed robbery was complete since Douglas could no longer be forced to part with propérty and since the use of force against Douglas had ceased. This argument ignores the fact that the force being exerted against Bertha Diaz had not ceased. Likewise, one of the co-conspirators, the defendant, remained at the original scene of the armed robbery with Bertha Diaz. People v. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d 62, 302 N.E.2d 20 (1973), is very instructive. In Johnson, at least two robbers entered a tavern and committed an armed robbery at gunpoint. Both had fled the tavern. Approximately two seconds later, one of the robbers reentered the tavern and fatally wounded a patron. It was argued by the defendant that he could not be guilty of the felony murder of the patron because the armed robbery had been completed once the robbers had fled the tavern. Our supreme court, in affirming the felony-murder conviction, stated, “Why [the shooter] returned two seconds after leaving the tavern to kill the woman cannot be certainly determined, but the jury could have concluded that it was because he sensed she had recognized him. By killing her he would improve the defendant’s and his chances for escape, would avoid detection for the crimes, and would eliminate the possibility of [the victim] testifying against him.” People v. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d at 69. This is analogous to the situation at bar. However, this is even a stronger case because, unlike in Johnson, here the threat of force against Bertha Diaz that began the armed robbery did not cease, nor was it even interrupted momentarily, until her execution. As in Johnson, here the jury certainly could have concluded that by killing Bertha Diaz, Jackson improved the defendant’s and his chances for escape, would avoid detection for the crimes and would eliminate the possibility of Bertha Diaz testifying against him. The force used to effectuate the attempted armed robbery of Michael Douglas involved the force used against Bertha Diaz and Michael Douglas. The force used against Bertha Diaz began when Jackson, Echols, and defendant burst into Diaz’s apartment and ended when Diaz was executed. There was more than sufficient evidence to convict defendant of the felony minder of Bertha Diaz. The conviction is affirmed. II. Defendant’s Natural Life Sentence  Defendant’s attack on the imposition of his natural life sentence is threefold. Defendant claims that such a sentence violates both the due process clause (111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2) and the proportionate penalties clause (111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11) of the Illinois Constitution. Furthermore, defendant claims his sentence violates the eighth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. VIII). Defendant’s sentence was imposed pursuant to section 5 — 8— 1(a)(1)(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8— 1(a)(1)(c) (West 2000)). Courts have repeatedly rejected challenges to section 5 — 8— 1(a)(1)(c) on both state and federal constitutional grounds. People v. Taylor, 102 Ill. 2d 201, 464 N.E.2d 1059 (1984); People v. Perry, 230 Ill. App. 3d 720, 595 N.E.2d 736 (1992); People v. Foster, 198 Ill. App. 3d 986, 556 N.E.2d 1214 (1990); People v. Bailey, 164 Ill. App. 3d 555, 517 N.E.2d 570 (1987); People v. Cannon, 150 Ill. App. 3d 1009, 502 N.E.2d 345 (1986); People v. Rodriguez, 134 Ill. App. 3d 582, 480 N.E.2d 1147 (1985); People v. Boswell, 132 Ill. App. 3d 52, 476 N.E.2d 1154 (1985). The Perry court found that a “mandatory natural life sentence for multiple murders specified by section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections [citation] is not limited only to those found guilty as principal offenders. It is also validly applied where guilt is based on accountability [citation], and it has been upheld against State and Federal constitutional challenges even where the defendant’s convictions were based on accountability.” Perry, 230 Ill. App. 3d at 722. The Perry court then held that the imposition of a natural life sentence for multiple murders, even though based on accountability, did not violate the eighth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. VIII) or the proportionate penalties clause of the Illinois Constitution (111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11). We agree. Defendant argues that a sentence of natural life under section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c) as applied to him “violates due process because such a sentence is not reasonably designed to remedy the particular evil that the mandatory natural life sentence statute sought to punish.” Defendant posits that the legislature only intended for a natural life sentence to be imposed under section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c) on “the most dangerous and incorrigible multiple murderers who were eligible for, but did not receive, the death penalty.” However, there is no language in the statute to even suggest that a natural life sentence is only applicable to those who are death penalty eligible. We will not graft such language into section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c). We find the statute does serve to remedy the evil that the legislature intended and the imposition of the natural life sentence as applied to the defendant does not violate his due process rights. CONCLUSION The circuit court of Peoria County is affirmed. Affirmed. LYTTON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9736936 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:24.447324+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McDADE, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur in the affirmance of defendant’s conviction of the felony murder of Michael Douglas based on accountability for the attempted robbery of Douglas. However, I write separately because I do not believe the majority’s analysis of the issue with regard to the murder of Bertha Diaz is legally or factually justifiable. First, I believe it noteworthy that the majority justifies its affirmance of defendant’s conviction for the felony murder of Diaz by relying heavily on the factual assumption that defendant “held Bertha Diaz at gunpoint for approximately 45 minutes until Jackson returned.” 345 Ill. App. 3d at 243. The record contains no evidence that defendant’s role in the attempted robbery of Douglas was to hold Diaz hostage until Jackson and Echols returned to the apartment. Rather, the evidence admitted at trial showed only that Jackson handed defendant a small gun after Jackson and Douglas went upstairs so that Douglas could get dressed. Defendant said he believed the gun belonged to Douglas. He said he put the gun in his pocket and did not remove it until Jackson ordered him to leave the apartment. Defendant’s undisputed testimony also established that on the night of the offenses he was recovering from a gunshot wound to the left thigh, and he was unable to run. The evidence thus gave rise to reasonable inferences other than the “hostage-holding” theory pressed by the majority — i.e., defendant could have been left behind with Diaz because he was disabled, and defendant may have held Douglas’s gun so that Diaz could not retrieve it and use it against defendant. Weaknesses in the State’s evidence of culpability for Diaz’s murder were not lost on the prosecution and readily explain the State’s shift in its theory on appeal. At trial, the prosecutor never attempted to show or argue to the jury that defendant or either of his codefendants intended to rob Diaz. Although the indictment did not name the intended victim of the robbery, the State’s evidence established that Douglas was the only person defendant and his cohorts intended to rob. Contrary to its position at trial, the State now argues that defendant is liable for Diaz’s murder based on accountability for a robbery or attempted robbery of Douglas. Because the State’s primary argument in this appeal represents a new theory, it must be rejected. People v. Crespo, 203 Ill. 2d 335, 788 N.E.2d 1117 (2001). Further, in my opinion, the theory of culpability embraced by the majority based on the “felony-murder escape rule” is equally untenable under the facts proved at trial. To sustain defendant’s conviction of the felony murder of Diaz, the majority opinion declares that “armed robbery is not complete until the conspirators have won their way to a place of temporary safety.” 345 Ill. App. 3d at 244. While this may be true in jurisdictions where asportation is an element of robbery (see, e.g., People v. Cooper, 53 Cal. 3d 1158, 811 P.2d 742, 282 Cal. Rptr. 450 (1991)), it is not the law of this state. People v. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 692 N.E.2d 325 (1998). By declaring otherwise, the majority impermissibly stretches this state’s felony-murder escape rule to include conduct beyond the elements of the underlying felony. To convict a defendant of felony murder, the State must prove that, in performing the acts that caused the decedent’s death, the defendant, or one for whom he is accountable, was attempting or committing a forcible felony other than second degree murder. 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(3) (West 2000). The act causing the death must both occur during the underlying felony and be the direct and proximate result of the felony. People v. McCarroll, 168 Ill. App. 3d 1020, 523 N.E.2d 150 (1988); People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247, 695 N.E.2d 474 (1998). The duration of the underlying felony has been judicially extended by the felony-murder escape rule. Under this rule, if the act causing death did not occur contemporaneously with the commission of the predicate felony, it nevertheless will support a charge of felony murder if it occurred during flight or escape from the immediate scene of the underlying offense. See People v. Jackson, 333 Ill. App. 3d 962, 777 N.E.2d 626 (2002); People v. Burnom, 338 Ill. App. 3d 495, 790 N.E.2d 14 (2003); People v. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d 62, 302 N.E.2d 20 (1973); People v. Bongiorno, 358 Ill. 171, 192 N.E. 856 (1934). Even so, escape is not an element of robbery and, where an escape is accomplished without force, a subsequent murder cannot be said to have occurred during the commission of the robbery. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 692 N.E.2d 325. To illustrate the causal connection that must exist to impose felony-murder liability, Professor LaFave provides the following example: “A robber who, in flight from the scene, shoots a policeman who threatens to capture him may easily be found to have caused a death in the commission of the robbery; but if, during his flight, he should happen to spot his enemy and shoot him, this death, though equal to the policeman’s death in point of time and place, would lack the causal connection which existed in the policeman’s case.” W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law § 14.5(f)(2), at 465-66 (2d ed. 2003). The question presented here is whether the attempted robbery of Douglas continued throughout the period of time it took for Jackson and Echols to drive over four miles from the scene of Douglas’s death on his mother’s front lawn in Peoria Heights to Diaz’s apartment in Peoria. Clearly, all of the elements of the predicate offense were completed before Jackson arrived at the apartment. Nevertheless, we must determine whether, accepting defendant’s liability as an accomplice in the attempted robbery and felony murder of Douglas, the State proved that the murder of Diaz occurred during flight or escape from the scene of the attempted robbery of Douglas. See Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 692 N.E.2d 325. The majority cites no Illinois decisions where the felony-murder escape rule has been applied to impose accomplice liability for a homicide when the predicate offense was committed as remotely in time and distance as here. Johnson, a classic example of the outer limits of accomplice liability for felony murder committed during an “escape” from the predicate offense, is inapposite. In Johnson, Johnson was a principal in armed robberies of a tavern owner and its patrons, and he was an accomplice to codefendant Clay’s felony murder of the tavern owner’s wife, who was an eyewitness to the robberies. Johnson’s culpability for the latter offense was established upon facts that (1) Johnson entered the tavern with a weapon, thereby proving that he participated in a common design to use deadly force if needed to commit the predicate offense; (2) a reasonable inference could be drawn that Johnson anticipated use of deadly force to avoid apprehension and to effect an escape, and (3) the murder occurred “on the premises where the robberies took place.” Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d at 69, 302 N.E.2d at 24. Because the murder was committed by codefendant Clay within seconds of the predicate offense and in the same vicinity, the causal connection between the robberies and the murder was unbroken and justified imposing accomplice liability on Johnson for the felony murder of the tavern owner’s wife. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d 62, 302 N.E.2d 20. By contrast, the evidence of a causal connection between the attempted robbery of Douglas and the shooting of Diaz was too speculative to support defendant’s accomplice liability for her death on a felony murder theory. Unlike in Johnson, the predicate felony began at the Shipman apartment, but ended with Douglas’s murder outside his mother’s house, more than four miles away. There was no indication that Jackson used force to make his escape from the immediate scene of the attempted robbery. Cf. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d 62, 302 N.E.2d 20. Nor was there any evidence that Jackson was pursued by anyone en route to Bertha’s apartment. Cf. Bongiorno, 358 Ill. 171, 192 N.E. 856. The evidence established that Jackson’s escape from the attempted robbery was effectively completed when he entered his vehicle and fled the scene. Thus, for purposes of felony-murder liability, Jackson’s unmolested drive following the murder of Douglas broke the causal connection between the attempted robbery of Douglas and the murder of Diaz. Diaz’s murder unquestionably was a cold-blooded, intentional execution of a witness. However, contrary to the majority, I do not find that the State produced sufficient evidence to prove that Jackson’s shooting of Diaz occurred during the commission of or escape from the attempted robbery of Douglas. The causal connection between Diaz’s murder and the attempted robbery of Douglas, no less than the murder of the robber’s enemy and the robbery in Professor LaFave’s illustration, was too tenuous to prove felony murder. Accordingly, I would reverse defendant’s conviction for the felony murder of Diaz. Finally, I note that the trial court imposed a sentence of life imprisonment under the statute mandating such sentence for multiple murders (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—l(c)(ii) (West 2000)). Based on my foregoing analysis, I would vacate defendant’s sentence and remand the cause for resentencing for the murder of Douglas, thereby obviating any discussion of defendant’s constitutional challenges to his life sentence.

=== CASE 9736899 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:18.276977+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in result.
I respectfully concur in result as to Part 3 concerning the award of spousal maintenance to Wife. In this regard, at the outset, it is necessary to examine the majority's conclusion that the so-called findings of fact "are sufficient to support the trial court's conclusion that Wife is entitled to spousal maintenance. ..." Op. at 510.
First and foremost, the so-called findings are not findings at all. They are mere recitations of testimony, witness opinion and medical diagnosis. At no point does the trial court find such testimony, opinion and diagnosis to be the fact. Moore v. Indiana Family and Social Services Admin., 682 N.E.2d 545 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Such pronouncements are inadequate as a basis for reviewing the judgment of the court and may be considered surplusage. Perez v. United States Steel Corp., 426 N.E.2d 29, 33 (Ind.1981).
Although neither party on appeal has challenged the specificity of the purported findings, it is nevertheless inappropriate for this court to cloak the trial court recitations in the garb of true factual determinations and specific findings as to those facts. Van-Scyoc v. Mid-State Paving, 787 N.E.2d 499, 508-09 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). Accordingly, as directed by our Supreme *516Court in Perez, we should consider the evidentiary recitations as mere surplusage.
The case is thus left in the posture of a general judgment without supporting specific findings of fact as to the issue in question. In other words, the trial court has failed to make findings upon some issues, and therefore the general judgment controls as to those issues. D.A.X., Inc. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau, 659 N.E.2d 1150 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied. If our appellate review were conducted in this posture we would look to the evidence of record which would support the general judgment as to spousal maintenance. As noted, the trial court has set forth that evidence and therefore permits a meaningful review by this court. Accordingly, I conclude that the evidence does support the award of spousal maintenance and for that reason concur in result as to Part 3.
As to whether the maintenance award was improper because it included future medical treatment by Dr. Shealy, I agree with the majority that the award was not improper. I would merely add a parenthetical observation that the award of $6000.00 was for a brief two-week period of treatment. It would appear that Wife received such treatment.
Subject to the above comments and observations, I concur.

=== CASE 9736900 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:21.794417+00 ===

JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the court: At issue in this case is whether defense counsel, by stipulating to the admission of evidence, can waive a defendant’s constitutional right to confront the source of the evidence without the defendant’s knowing consent to the stipulation. The appellate court, with one justice dissenting, held that defense counsel can stipulate to prosecution testimony without a defendant’s knowing consent because the decision to stipulate is a matter of trial strategy within defense counsel’s sound judgment. 332 Ill. App. 3d 808. The dissent believed that the decision whether to stipulate to the testimony of a key witness belongs to the defendant, after consultation with defense counsel. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 815-17 (Cook, J., dissenting). For the following reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court, which affirmed the judgment of the circuit court of Champaign County. FACTS The State charged defendant, Richard D. Campbell, Jr., with residential burglary (720 ILCS 5/19 — 3 (West 2000)), alleging that defendant knowingly and without authority entered the dwelling place of Blake M. Hoerr and Griff E Powell in Champaign, Illinois. Defendant’s trial began on May 14, 2001. After the jury was sworn, the prosecutor moved for a continuance on the ground that Blake Hoerr had not appeared for tried, even though he was under subpoena. Hoerr’s father had informed the prosecutor that Hoerr was in Maryland for a job and would not be able to make it to court. The prosecutor asked for a brief recess to obtain Hoerr’s appearance, stating that Hoerr was a material and critical witness for the State’s case. Defense counsel objected, noting that the State had answered ready at pretrial. The trial court agreed to continue the matter to the following morning, stating that “if the witness is not here at that time, then we’re either going to have to dismiss the case, or proceed with the witness, one or the other.” The prosecutor then elected to proceed with his other witnesses. Griff Powell testified for the State that he was a student at the University of Illinois in Champaign. On March 13, 2001, Powell was hving with Hoerr and some other roommates at 1001 South First Street in Champaign. The residence was a two-story home. Powell testified that there were no signs on the home indicating that there were rooms for rent. The front door to the home was made of wood, and there was a screen door in front of the wood door. Only the wood door had a lock on it. Powell said that March 13 was the Tuesday of spring break week for the University, so that all of his roommates except Hoerr were out of town. Both Powell and Hoerr were in town on March 13, although they both planned to leave Champaign that day. Around 10:15 a.m., Hoerr was sleeping on the couch in the living room and Powell was upstairs in his room watching television when Powell heard a loud knocking on the door. Powell assumed Hoerr would answer the door, but the knocking continued for approximately two minutes. Just as Powell began to wonder why Hoerr was not answering the door, he heard voices talking. Powell could not hear what was going on, so he started walking down the stairs and saw defendant walking out the front door. Powell did not know defendant and had never seen defendant in the house. Powell and Hoerr decided to call the police because they were both leaving town that day and knew that it was easy to break into empty homes. At the time Powell heard the knocking, the wood door was unlocked. Dennis Thomas testified that he is a police officer for the City of Champaign and is assigned to the campus area, south of the University. Thomas explained that winter breaks and spring breaks are significant when working the campus area because all the students leave the area during that time, and the burglary rate increases tremendously. On March 13, 2001, at 10:17 a.m., he was dispatched to 1001 South First Street to check a report of a person that had walked into a house and then left, going in a southerly direction. On his way to 1001 South First Street, Thomas spotted defendant, who fit the description of the suspect, and stopped to talk to him. Thomas asked defendant if he had been in the building at 1001 South First Street. Defendant initially denied that he had been there. When Thomas told defendant that someone fitting defendant’s description had been in 1001 South First Street, defendant then said that he had been there looking for someone. Thomas asked defendant who he was looking for, but defendant could not give him a name. At the close of Thomas’ testimony, the trial was continued until the following day. The next day, the trial court asked the prosecutor whether his witness was present. The prosecutor responded that Hoerr was not present, but that he had a stipulation concerning Hoerr’s testimony. The trial court asked defense counsel whether he objected to the trial court reading the stipulation and explaining the stipulation. Defense counsel responded that he had no objection and “[i]n fact had signed the court’s copy” of the stipulation. The stipulation of facts concerning Hoerr’s testimony provided that on March 13, 2001, at approximately 10:15 a.m., Hoerr was sleeping on a couch in the living room when he was awakened by someone knocking on the front door. After hearing severed knocks, Hoerr heard the interior wooden door open. Hoerr sat up, looked over the back of the couch, and saw defendant in the hallway. When defendant saw Hoerr, defendant asked if Hoerr had a room for rent. Hoerr said no, and defendant left the home. Defendant did not have Hoerr’s permission to enter the residence. After defendant left, Hoerr called 911 and reported that a white male had entered the residence without authority and described defendant to the 911 dispatcher. At 10:30 a.m., Hoerr was taken to the intersection of First Street and Springfield Avenue and positively identified defendant as the person who had entered his residence. After the stipulation concerning Hoerr’s testimony was read to the jury, both sides rested. The trial court then denied defendant’s motion for a directed verdict. Pursuant to defendant’s request, the jury was instructed concerning the lesser-included offense of criminal trespass to a residence (720 ILCS 5/19 — 4 (West 2000)), in addition to the offense of residential burglary. The jury found defendant guilty of criminal trespass to a residence and defendant was sentenced to 364 days in jail. On appeal, defendant argued that he had been denied his constitutional right to confront the witnesses against him because his attorney stipulated to the testimony of Blake Hoerr without defendant’s knowing consent. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 812. The appellate court, with one justice dissenting, held that defense counsel can stipulate to prosecution testimony without a defendant’s knowing consent because the decision to stipulate is a matter of trial strategy within defense counsel’s sound judgment. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 814. The appellate court recognized two exceptions to its holding: (1) when the State’s entire case is to be presented by stipulation; and (2) when the stipulation includes a statement that the evidence is sufficient to convict the defendant. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 814. In those situations, “the stipulation is tantamount to a guilty plea,” so a defendant must be admonished about the stipulation and must agree to the stipulation before the court can accept such a stipulation. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 814. The dissenting justice asserted that the decision whether to stipulate to the testimony of a key witness belonged to the defendant, after consultation with defense counsel. 332 Ill. App. 3d at 817 (Cook, J., dissenting). This court allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). ANALYSIS On appeal, defendant again argues that his constitutional right to be confronted with his accuser was denied when his defense counsel agreed to stipulate to the testimony of Hoerr, the prosecution’s primary witness. Defendant claims that the right to face-to-face confrontation belongs to an accused, and only the accused may waive his right to confrontation. Defendant further argues that there is nothing in the record to suggest that he knowingly waived his right to be confronted with the key witness against him. Finally, the error in failing to obtain defendant’s knowing waiver of his right to confrontation constituted reversible error, because Hoerr’s testimony clearly was necessary in order to sustain the State’s case against defendant. This court has recognized that criminal defendants possess two types of constitutional rights and that a different waiver standard applies to each. In People v. Ramey, 152 Ill. 2d 41 (1992), this court held that there are four decisions that ultimately belong to the defendant in a criminal case after consultation with his attorney: (1) what plea to enter; (2) whether to waive a jury trial; (3) whether to testify in his own behalf; and (4) whether to appeal. Ramey, 152 Ill. 2d at 54. This court then stated that: “Beyond these four decisions, however, trial counsel has the right to make the ultimate decision with respect to matters of tactics and strategy after consulting with his client. Such matters include what witnesses to call, whether and how to conduct cross-examination, what jurors to accept or strike and what trial motions should be made. [Citation.] Such matters also include the defense to be presented at trial.” Ramey, 152 Ill. 2d at 54. This court then held that the defendant’s constitutional right to due process was not violated when his trial counsel presented a defense against defendant’s wishes, because the defense theory to be presented at trial is not one of the matters that a defendant has the ultimate right to decide. Ramey, 152 Ill. 2d at 54. Subsequently, in People v. Brocksmith, 162 Ill. 2d 224 (1994), this court held that in addition to the decisions specified in Ramey, a defendant also had the exclusive right to decide whether to submit an instruction on a lesser included offense at the conclusion of the evidence. Brocksmith, 162 Ill. 2d at 229. We found that “the decision to tender a lesser included offense is analogous to the decision of what plea to enter, and that the two decisions should be treated the same.” Brocksmith, 162 Ill. 2d at 229. Consequently, because defense counsel rather than defendant made the ultimate decision to tender a lesser-included offense instruction, defendant’s conviction on the lesser-included offense was reversed. Brocksmith, 162 Ill. 2d at 230. Defendant asserts that the right to confrontation set forth in the United States and Illinois Constitutions, like the rights specified in Ramey and Brocksmith, belongs solely to a defendant, so that any waiver of the right must be made by the defendant personally. The confrontation clause provides: “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right *** to be confronted with the witnesses against him ***.” U.S. Const., amend. VI; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §8. The right of an accused to confront the witnesses against him is a fundamental right made obligatory on the states through the fourteenth amendment. Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 403, 13 L. Ed. 2d 923, 926, 85 S. Ct. 1065, 1068 (1965). There is a presumption against the waiver of constitutional rights. Brookhart v. Janis, 384 U.S. 1, 4, 16 L. Ed. 2d 314, 317, 86 S. Ct. 1245, 1247 (1966). Nonetheless, it is clear that the right of confrontation may be waived. Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 4, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 317, 86 S. Ct. at 1246-47; Diaz v. United States, 223 U.S. 442, 452, 56 L. Ed. 500, 504, 32 S. Ct. 250, 252-53 (1912). In order for a waiver to be effective, “it must be clearly established that there was an ‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or privilege.’ ” Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 4, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 317, 86 S. Ct. at 1247, quoting Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464, 82 L. Ed. 1461, 1466, 58 S. Ct. 1019, 1023 (1938). Defendant cites People v. McClanahan, 191 Ill. 2d 127 (2000), in support of his claim that any waiver of a defendant’s right to face-to-face confrontation must be made by the defendant personally. We disagree with defendant’s interpretation of our holding in McClanahan. At issue in McClanahan was a statute that allowed the State, in prosecutions under the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. (West 1998)) or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq. (West 1998)), to use lab reports in lieu of actual testimony as prima facie evidence unless the defendant filed a demand for the testimony of the witness who prepared the report within seven days of the defendant’s receipt of the report. McClanahan, 191 Ill. 2d at 129. This court agreed with defendant that the statute at issue impermissibly required a defendant to take an affirmative step to secure his confrontation rights. McClanahan, 191 Ill. 2d at 134. In addition, the statute did not contain sufficient procedural safeguards to ensure that any such waiver was knowing and voluntary because the waiver automatically occurred if the defendant did not respond within seven days of being served with the lab report. McClanahan, 191 Ill. 2d at 137. In so holding, this court stated: “In the absence of this statute, the State would have to secure a knowing waiver of the confrontation right by acquiring a defendant’s stipulation to allow the lab report into evidence without the testimony of the report’s preparer. Unlike section 115 — 15, these stipulations properly require a defendant to make a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent decision whether he wishes to waive his right to confront the preparer of the report.” McClanahan, 191 Ill. 2d at 137-38. Defendant argues that based upon the foregoing language, it is clear that any waiver of the right to confrontation must be a knowing waiver made by the defendant personally. We decline to read McClanahan so broadly. Contrary to defendant’s interpretation of McClanahan, this court has never held that only a defendant can waive his sixth amendment right of confrontation. In fact, this court has never directly addressed the issue of whether defense counsel may waive a defendant’s right of confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence. We note, however, that a majority of the courts that have addressed the issue have held that counsel in a criminal case may waive his client’s sixth amendment right of confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence. For example, in United States v. Plitman, 194 F.3d 59, 63 (2d Cir. 1999), the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit addressed whether and under what circumstances defense counsel could waive a defendant’s right to confrontation. The defendant in Plitman had claimed that his attorney’s stipulation concerning certain testimony was invalid because: (1) the defendant had not waived his sixth amendment right to confront the witnesses against him; (2) the defendant’s attorney never said that his client had waived his right of confrontation and/or knew the risks involved in doing so; and (3) defense counsel’s actions were not justified as matters of trial strategy. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 62. The Plitman court noted that in an earlier decision, it had suggested that defense counsel could make such a waiver where the stipulation involved trial strategy and tactics, even thought the stipulation impacted on a defendant’s constitutional rights. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 63. Similarly, other federal courts of appeals had held that defense counsel in a criminal case could stipulate to the admission of evidence as long as the defendant did not dissent from his attorney’s decision, and as long as it could be said that the attorney’s decision was a legitimate trial tactic or part of a prudent trial strategy. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 63. The court concluded that given the safeguards available to defendants from the constitutionally defective actions of their attorneys: “[W]e reject Plitman’s argument that a defendant in every instance personally must waive the right to confront the witnesses against him. We therefore join the majority of circuit courts of appeals and hold that defense counsel may waive a defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to confrontation where the decision is one of trial tactics or strategy that might be considered sound.” Plitman, 194 F.3d at 64. The court therefore held that the defendant’s waiver of his right of confrontation through counsel was valid because the defendant achieved several tactical advantages as a result of the stipulation, and defendant did not object during the discussion concerning the stipulation or when his attorney made the decision to stipulate. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 64. As the Plitman court observed, a majority of the federal courts of appeals that have considered the issue have held that defense counsel may waive a defendant’s sixth amendment right to confrontation when the decision is a matter of trial tactics or strategy and the defendant does not object to the stipulation. See Hawkins v. Hannigan, 185 F.3d 1146, 1155-56 (10th Cir. 1999) (defense counsel effectively waived defendant’s confrontation rights where counsel’s decision to stipulate to testimony was a matter of prudent trial strategy and there was no evidence that defendant disagreed with or objected to his counsel’s decision); United States v. Stephens, 609 F.2d 230, 232-33 (5th Cir. 1980) (defense counsel may waive defendant’s sixth amendment right to confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence as long as defendant does not dissent from his attorney’s decision and as long as the attorney’s decision was a legitimate trial tactic or part of a prudent trial strategy); Wilson v. Gray, 345 F.2d 282, 287-88 (9th Cir. 1965) (defendant’s right to confrontation was effectively waived by his counsel where stipulation was made in the presence of defendant and without his objection, and the decision to stipulate was a matter of trial tactics and strategy); United States v. Joseph, 333 F.2d 1012, 1013 (6th Cir. 1964) (right to confrontation may be effectively waived by defense counsel in open court in the presence of the defendant where the defendant indicates no dissent to the stipulation); Cruzado v. People of Puerto Rico, 210 F.2d 789, 791 (1st Cir. 1954) (where a defendant is represented by counsel, counsel may waive defendant’s right to confrontation in defendant’s presence, if the defendant manifests no dissent to the waiver and where the stipulation is a matter of trial tactics). In addition to the federal courts, a majority of the state courts that have considered this issue have held that defense counsel may waive a defendant’s right to confrontation if the decision to stipulate is a matter of trial tactics and strategy and the defendant does not object to the decision. For example, in Carr v. State, 829 S.W.2d 101, 102 (Mo. App. 1992), the defendant argued that he had been denied the right to confront a witness against him when his counsel stipulated to portions of a witness’ deposition testimony. The defendant claimed that he had not given his counsel permission to stipulate, and the record reflected that defendant did not personally agree to waive his right of confrontation and was not asked to waive that right. Carr, 829 S.W.2d at 102. The court observed, however, that the defendant voiced no objection when the stipulation was presented to the trial court and listened “patiently” to his counsel read portions of the deposition which were advantageous to defendant. Carr, 829 S.W.2d at 102. The court denied defendant’s claim that he was denied his right to confront the witness against him, noting that in addition to the defendant’s failure to object to the stipulation, there were sound strategic reasons for defense counsel’s decision to stipulate. Carr, 829 S.W.2d at 102. See also Lee v. State, 266 Ark. App. 870, 876-77, 587 S.W.2d 78, 82 (1979) (“it seems to be the universal rule that a defendant in a criminal case may waive his right to confrontation *** and that the waiver of this right may be accomplished by the accused’s counsel as a matter of trial tactics or strategy”); State v. Oyama, 64 Haw. 187, 188, 637 P.2d 778, 779-80 (1981) (defense counsel can waive certain aspects of the right to confrontation where such waiver is a matter of trial tactics and procedure and, in such case, the trial court is not required to determine whether the defendant knowingly and voluntarily waived his right); Waldon v. State, 749 So. 2d 262, 266 (Miss. App. 1999) (defense counsel may waive a defendant’s sixth amendment right of confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence so long as defendant does not dissent and so long as the stipulation is a matter of trial tactics and strategy); State v. Bromwich, 213 Neb. 827, 830, 331 N.W.2d 537, 540 (1983) (counsel in a criminal case may waive his client’s right of confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence if the decision to stipulate is a legitimate trial tactic and the defendant does not dissent from the decision); Ludlow v. State, 761 F.2d 1293 (Okla. Crim. App. 1988) (lack of objection on the part of defense counsel to the admission of evidence will be deemed a waiver of defendant’s sixth amendment right of confrontation where defendant does indicate disagreement with counsel’s decision, and counsel’s decision is a legitimate trial tactic); State v. Harper, 33 Wash. App. 507, 510, 655 P.2d 1199, 1200 (1982) (when a defendant does not object, defense counsel may, as a matter of trial tactics, waive a defendant’s right to confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence as long as the stipulation is not tantamount to a guilty plea); Bilokur v. Commonwealth, 221 Va. 467, 473, 270 S.E.2d 747, 752 (1980) (stipulation into evidence of an incriminating extrajudicial statement was a legitimate trial tactic, and defendant did not object when stipulation was tendered; therefore, counsel properly waived defendant’s right of confrontation). But see Lewis v. State, 647 S.W.2d 753 (Tex. Crim. App. 1983) (defendant must consent in writing to waiver of confrontation and agreement to stipulate and must have court’s approval in writing); People v. Lawson, 124 Mich. App. 371, 376, 335 N.W.2d 43, 46 (1983) (rights of the confrontation clause must be personally waived by the defendant). We find the reasoning of the majority of the federal and state courts to be persuasive and consistent with our decisions in Ramey and Brocksmith setting forth the specific rights that only a defendant himself may waive. We agree that defense counsel may waive a defendant’s right of confrontation as long as the defendant does not object and the decision to stipulate is a matter of trial tactics and strategy. In so holding, we observe that the concerns of the appellate court dissent — that defense counsel may stipulate at trial over a defendant’s objections — are not well founded. We therefore affirm the appellate court’s finding that defense counsel may stipulate to the admission of evidence and thereby waive his client’s constitutional right to confrontation. In so holding, we note that defendant has cited Clemmons v. Delo, 124 F.3d 944 (8th Cir. 1997), in support of his claim that only a defendant may waive his right to confrontation. We do not find Clemmons persuasive. In Clemmons, neither the defendant nor his counsel waived the defendant’s right to confrontation. Clemmons, 124 F.3d at 956. In observing that the right to confrontation was not waived by defendant or his counsel, the Clemmons court stated that “the law seems to be clear that the right of confrontation is personal and fundamental and cannot be waived by counsel.” Clemmons, 124 F.3d at 956. As the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has noted, however, Clemmons' statement that counsel cannot waive a defendant’s right to confrontation was dicta. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 63. In addition, the case cited by the Clemmons court as support for the statement that counsel cannot waive the right of confrontation, Brookhart v. Janis, 384 U.S. 1, 7, 16 L. Ed. 2d 314, 319, 86 S. Ct. 1245, 1248 (1966), was distinguishable. Plitman, 194 F.3d at 63 n.2. In Brookhart, defendant’s counsel agreed to a “prima facie trial,” which was. equivalent to a guilty plea. Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 6-7, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 318, 86 S. Ct. at 1248. Notably, after the trial judge stated that in a prima facie case the defendant in effect admits his guilt, the defendant responded that he wished to point out that in no way was he pleading guilty. Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 7, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 318-19, 86 S. Ct. at 1248. The Court found that the stipulation at issue in Brookhart was not merely a matter of trial tactics or strategy, but instead was “the practical equivalent of a plea of guilty.” Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 7, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 319, 86 S. Ct. at 1248. In fact, in reversing the defendant’s conviction, the Court stated that it was doing so because “petitioner neither personally waived his right nor acquiesced in his lawyer’s attempted waiver.” (Emphasis added.) Brookhart, 384 U.S. at 8, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 319, 86 S. Ct. at 1249. Thus, as the appellate court correctly recognized in this case, when the State’s entire case is to be presented by stipulation and the defendant does not present or preserve a defense (see People v. Horton, 143 Ill. 2d 11, 22 (1991) (“a stipulated bench trial is not tantamount to a guilty plea if the defendant presented and preserved a defense”)), or where the stipulation includes a statement that the evidence is sufficient to convict the defendant, the stipulation implicates fundamental due process concerns and can only be waived by the defendant personally. See 332 Ill. App. 3d at 814. Finally, we find that defense counsel’s decision to stipulate was a matter of trial tactics and strategy. Defendant claims that absent the stipulation, he could not have been convicted of either residential burglary or criminal trespass because both offenses require proof that defendant’s entry into the residence was unauthorized, and Hoerr was the only witness in a position to establish that defendant had entered the premises without authority. In support of this argument, defendant notes that when the State requested a continuance in order to compel Hoerr’s appearance, the trial court granted the continuance but cautioned that the parties would then have to either “dismiss the case, or proceed with the witness, one or the other.” Defendant claims that under the circumstances, the decision to stipulate to the critical evidence of guilt was analogous to the decision to plead guilty to a lesser offense and, accordingly, the decision to stipulate was more than a matter of trial strategy and instead implicated defendant’s fundamental rights. As noted, we agree with defendant that defense counsel cannot stipulate to facts which establish the guilt of the accused because the constitutional right implicated in that situation is the right of a defendant in a criminal case to plead not guilty. See United States v. Stephens, 609 F.2d at 233 n.2. Nonetheless, we are not persuaded by defendant’s characterization of the stipulation in this case as establishing his guilt. Although the trial court stated, in granting the State’s motion for a continuance, that the court then would either dismiss the case or proceed with the witness, we note that this statement was made prior to the testimony of Griff Powell and Officer Thomas. After the trial court granted the State’s motion for a continuance, the State proceeded with the testimony of Powell and Officer Thomas. Powell testified that after the knocking had continued for some time, he started to go downstairs and saw defendant walking out the front door. Powell did not know defendant and had never seen defendant in the house. Powell and Hoerr decided to call the police because they were both leaving town that day and knew that it was easy to break into empty houses. Office Thomas testified that he was called to check a report of a person that had walked into a house and had left. Thomas spotted defendant, who fit the description of the suspect, and stopped to talk to him. Defendant first denied that he had been at Powell’s apartment. When told he fit the description of someone who had been there, defendant said that he had been in there looking for someone, but could not give the name of that person. Following the testimony of Powell and Officer Thomas, defense counsel agreed to stipulate to the testimony of Blake Hoerr and then relied upon that stipulation in moving for a directed verdict and in his closing argument. Defense counsel used the stipulation to establish defendant’s lack of any criminal intent, because the stipulated testimony established that: defendant knocked on the door, then came into the hallway; defendant saw Hoerr and asked if there was a room for rent; when Hoerr said there was no room for rent, defendant left the premises. In moving for a directed verdict, defense counsel argued that the State had to prove intent in order to sustain a charge of residential burglary, and that the best evidence of defendant’s intent was what the defendant told Hoerr: that he was looking for a room to rent. Similarly, in closing argument, defense counsel again argued that the best indication of what defendant was thinking when he entered the residence was what defendant told Hoerr when he entered. Absent the stipulation, defendant had no explanation for his presence at the residence and certainly risked the jury concluding, based upon the testimony of Powell and Officer Thomas, that defendant’s entry was unauthorized. Although the stipulation contained Hoerr’s statement that defendant did not have Hoerr’s permission to enter the residence, the stipulation also allowed defense counsel to present evidence that there was a reasonable and legitimate explanation for defendant’s entry into the premises. Under the circumstances, we find that defense counsel’s agreement to stipulate was a matter of sound trial tactics and strategy. For the foregoing reasons, then, we hold that counsel in a criminal case may waive his client’s sixth amendment right of confrontation by stipulating to the admission of evidence as long as the defendant does not object to or dissent from his attorney’s decision, and where the decision to stipulate is a matter of legitimate trial tactics or prudent trial strategy. Where the stipulation includes a statement that the evidence is sufficient to convict the defendant or where the State’s entire case is to be presented by stipulation, we find that a defendant must be personally admonished about the stipulation and must personally agree to the stipulation. The judgment of the appellate court, which affirmed the judgment of the circuit court, is therefore affirmed. Appellate court judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9736901 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:21.799275+00 ===

JUSTICE KILBRIDE, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur in the portion of the majority opinion holding that criminal defense counsel may waive a client’s right of confrontation by stipulating to evidence when the defendant does not object and when the stipulation constitutes legitimate trial tactics or strategy. I write separately on that portion of the opinion only to emphasize the principle that, pursuant to our decision, a defendant possesses the continuing right to object to or dissent from counsel’s decision to stipulate. See Fay v. Noia, 372 U.S. 391, 439, 9 L. Ed. 2d 837, 869, 83 S. Ct. 822, 849 (1963) (choice to waive made by counsel not participated in by petitioner does not automatically bar relief to the petitioner), overruled in part on other grounds by Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 87-88, 53 L. Ed. 2d 594, 608, 97 S. Ct. 2497, 2507 (1977). Consequently, a defendant’s knowing consent to a stipulation should be found only when the defendant does not object to or dissent from that decision. This contradicts the appellate court’s holding that a defendant need not knowingly consent to counsel’s stipulation of evidence. To uphold such a holding would improperly deprive a defendant of the ability to object to or dissent from counsel’s stipulation. I write separately, in part, to reflect my firm belief that a defendant’s continued right to override counsel’s decision to stipulate to the admission of evidence must be unequivocally maintained. I also write separately because I do not believe defense counsel’s agreement to stipulate in this case can be considered “a matter of sound trial tactics and strategy.” 208 Ill. 2d at 221. The majority opinion concludes that the stipulation was part of defense counsel’s trial strategy because, in addition to showing that defendant entered the house without permission, the statements also established his lack of criminal intent by providing a reason for his entry. 208 Ill. 2d at 220. While establishing these facts may have been helpful in developing a defense to the charges, here no defense was necessary because the State was unable to make a prima facie case without Hoerr’s stipulated statement. Both residential burglary (720 ILCS 5/19 — 3 (West 2000)) and criminal trespass to a residence (720 ILCS 5/19 — 4 (West 2000)) require the State to prove that defendant lacked authority to enter the house. Without Hoerr’s statement that he did not give defendant permission to enter, the only evidence cited by the majority to show that defendant lacked proper authorization is Powell’s testimony that he and Hoerr “decided to call the police because they were both leaving town that day and knew it was easy to break into empty houses” and the investigating officer’s testimony that “he was called to check a report of a person that had walked into a house and had left” and that, when questioned, defendant could not provide the name of the person he was looking for in the house. 208 Ill. 2d at 219. This testimony is entirely consistent with Hoerr’s answering the door after several knocks and letting defendant into the house, only to become concerned later about the events. The cited testimony does not establish that Hoerr did not initially authorize defendant to enter the house. Only Hoerr’s statement, admitted by the inexplicable stipulation of defense counsel, can serve that purpose. Without any evidence establishing the same element of both crimes, defendant had no need to develop a further defense. Defense counsel’s stipulation only served to undermine defendant’s case and provide the State with the critical piece of proof it was missing. 208 Ill. 2d at 219, citing United States v. Stephens, 609 F.2d 230, 233 n.2 (5th Cir. 1980). Under these circumstances, admitting Hoerr’s statement could not have been part of any legitimate trial tactic or strategy. Thus, I respectfully dissent from the portion of the opinion concluding that defense counsel’s stipulation was a matter of sound trial tactics or strategy.

=== CASE 9736902 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:25.722937+00 ===

BERNDT, Circuit Judge.
On the evening of December 31, 1986, a one vehicle accident occurred on a Hughes County road involving a pickup owned by Kenneth Wipf and driven by Tamara Merrill. The four occupants in the pickup were: Kenneth Wipf, Tamara Merrill, Mark Hattum and Nicolle Hageman. Kenneth Wipf died as a result of the accident and Mark Hattum received serious bodily injuries, leaving him a quadriplegic.
Four lawsuits arose out of the accident. Andrew Wipf, Administrator of the Estate of Kenneth Wipf, brought a wrongful death action against Tamara Merrill and against Hughes County and two county employees for failure to properly maintain the road. Mark Hattum brought a personal injury action against Tamara Merrill, Hughes County, two county employees and Andrew Wipf in his capacity as administrator of Kenneth Wipf’s estate. Hattum’s parents and brother brought an action against Tamara Merrill, Hughes County, two county employees and Andrew Wipf, Administrator of Kenneth Wipf’s estate, for loss of society, services, emotional distress and medical expenses. A fourth suit by Nicolle Hageman was settled and she is no longer a party.
Kenneth Wipf s vehicle was insured under a policy issued by All Nation Insurance Company (All Nation). The policy provided the statutory minimum coverage of $25,000 per person and $50,000 per accident for Kenneth Wipf and other persons operating his pickup with permission. All Nation acknowledges primary liability coverage but its limits are insufficient to cover the damages claimed.
Mark Hattum was insured under his parents’ policy with Continental Insurance Company (Continental). The policy included underinsured motorist coverage. Under this coverage, Continental agreed to pay to the insured (up to the stated limits) the amount by which a judgment obtained by the insured exceeded the liability coverage of the party against whom the judgment was taken.
Tamara Merrill claimed coverage under two policies issued to her parents (Larry and Carol Merrill) by American Family Mutual Insurance Company (American Family). Each policy provided liability limits of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident and medical expense coverage of $10,-000 per person. The policies covered family members while operating vehicles not owned by the Merrills or their family as long as the family members were not specifically excluded from American Family’s coverage.
The main controversy in this appeal is a determination of the insurance coverage provided to Tamara Merrill by American Family. If any liability attaches to Tamara for her acts while driving, the outcome of this appeal will determine the order in *557which each insurer will be liable. If coverage is provided by American Family, that insurance applies to Mark Hattum’s claim and Continental’s coverage will be reduced by the $25,000 available under the All Nation policy and the $100,000 available under the American Family policy. If Tamara is not covered under the American Family policy, Continental’s liability will be reduced only by the $25,000 coverage provided by All Nation.
American Family denies any coverage for Tamara. The facts show that the Merrill family has been insured by American Family since the 1970s. In 1983 American Family became aware of the fact that one of the Merrill children had attained driving age. An agent’s secretary contacted Larry Merrill by memo stating that some action was necessary regarding his oldest son because he was of driving age. As a result, the oldest son was included in the Merrills’ policies for an additional charge in the premium. According to American Family, one of the Merrills’ policies lapsed in January of 1985. The policy was reinstated in May 1985, however, the Merrills informed the agent’s secretary that there were no longer any household members of driving age because the oldest son was going to college.
Later in 1985, Larry’s wife, Carol, contacted the agent’s secretary concerning coverage rates for their two oldest children, including Tamara. The rate information was conveyed to Mrs. Merrill and it was decided to include both children in the policies. In December 1985, the premium notice arrived including an additional charge for the two oldest children. Larry Merrill informed American Family, through its agent, that he was not going to pay the premium and wanted the children removed from coverage.
American Family contends that its agent sent the Merrills declaration pages showing the requested exclusion of the children and exclusion forms for Larry Merrill’s signature. Merrill recalls receiving some forms but does not recall what they contained. In any event, no signed, written agreement excluding Tamara from coverage was ever returned to American Family by the Mer-rills.
When the present matter arose, American Family brought a declaratory judgment action seeking a trial court determination that the policies issued to the Merrills provided no liability coverage for Tamara. American Family based its position on Larry Merrill’s requested exclusion of his two oldest children from coverage. Larry Merrill contended that the children were covered under the policies as household members for no additional premium. Continental, which provides underinsured coverage for the Hattums, claimed that the alleged exclusion of the Merrill children was invalid because there was no written agreement signed by the Merrills to support the exclusion. Continental moved for summary judgment on the basis that SDCL 58-11-9.3 requires that a written agreement signed by the insured be obtained by an insurer to support such an exclusion of coverage. The trial court agreed and granted summary judgment against American Family finding that no signed, written exclusion agreement had ever been obtained.
Two issues are raised on appeal:
(1) Whether SDCL 58-11-9.3 requires a signed, written agreement between an insurer and insured in order to exclude from coverage a person who would otherwise be covered under an automobile insurance policy? The trial court held that it does and granted summary judgment. We affirm.
(2) Whether the trial court erroneously refused to award Larry Merrill attorney fees incurred by him as a result of his successful defense of this declaratory judgment action? The trial court held in the negative. We affirm.
Prior to reaching the merits of these issues, it is necessary to determine the scope of review for this case. This is a summary judgment action.
Our scope of review on appeal is not under the ‘clearly erroneous’ doctrine, but rather under the strict standards attendant upon entry of summary judgment as delineated in [Wilson v. Great *558Northern Railway Co., 83 S.D. 207, 157 N.W.2d 19 (1968)]:
(1) Evidence must be viewed most favorable to the nonmoving party;
(2) The burden of proof is on the movant to show clearly that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law;
(3) Summary judgment is not a substitute for a court trial or for trial by jury where any genuine issue of material fact exists;
(4) Surmise that a party will not prevail upon trial is not sufficient basis to grant summary judgment on issues which are not shown to be sham, frivolous or so unsubstantial that it is obvious that it would be futile to try them.
(5) Summary judgment is an extreme remedy which should be awarded only when the truth is clear and reasonable doubts touching the existence of a genuine issue as to material fact should be resolved against the movant;
(6) When no genuine issue of fact exists, summary judgment is looked upon with favor and is particularly adaptable to expose sham claims and defenses.
First Western Bank v. Livestock Yards, 444 N.W.2d 387, 389 (S.D.1989) (quoting Nizielski v. Tvinnereim, 429 N.W.2d 483, 485 (S.D.1988)).
Our resolution of the first issue in this case is dependent upon the proper interpretation of SDCL 58-11-9.3. This court has never had an opportunity to interpret this statute and, therefore, this is a case of first impression. SDCL 58-11-9.3 reads as follows:
An insurance policy covering a private passenger automobile or other motor vehicle registered or principally garaged in this state may by written agreement with the named insured exclude a named individual from coverage or contain a restrictive endorsement reducing the limits of liability or collision coverage when the vehicle is operated by a named person or class of persons, provided, however, that the liability coverage may not be less than the minimum prescribed by chapter 32-35 as amended, (emphasis added).
The trial court interpreted the statute to mean that a written agreement must be signed by the insured in order to exclude an individual otherwise insured from coverage. We agree.
In determining the meaning of a statute, it is necessary to follow the general rules of statutory construction. “The intent of a statute must be derived from the statute as a whole, from its language, and by giving the language its plain, ordinary and popular meaning.” American Rim & Brake, Inc., v. Zoellner, 382 N.W.2d 421, 424 (S.D.1986) (citing Moulton v. State, 363 N.W.2d 405 (S.D.1985)). “Statutory analysis begins with the language of the statute and absent a clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary that language must ordinarily be considered conclusive.” State v. Galati, 365 N.W.2d 575, 577 (S.D.1985) (citing Consumer Product Safety Commission v. GTE Sylvania, 447 U.S. 102, 100 S.Ct. 2051, 64 L.Ed.2d 766 (1980)).
In SDCL 58-11-9.3, the operative language is, “written agreement with the named insured.” The words “written agreement” must be interpreted in their ordinary sense. SDCL 2-14-1. The ordinary meaning of this term is a written document which represents an agreement between the insured and the insurer and signed by the insured. The trial court correctly stated that, “the word ‘written’ would be meaningless and surplusage had the legislature intended to allow other forms of agreements to exclude coverage.” If the insurer is required to obtain the insured’s signature, then the insured is provided with the opportunity to agree or disagree with the provision for exclusion. To interpret the statute in any other way would put the insured at the mercy of the insurer.
This interpretation finds support in the decision of the California Court of Appeals in Kincer v. Reserve Insurance Company, 11 Cal.App.3d 714, 90 Cal.Rptr. 94 (Cal.Ct.App.1970). In Kincer, the California Court *559interpreted a statute similar to SDCL 58-11-9.3 in a manner supporting the position that the insured’s signature is required. The court stated:
Although insurance companies have the right to limit uninsured motorist coverage and, when they have done so, the plain language of the limitations must be respected [citation omitted], uninsured motorist coverage may only be omitted from the policy upon written agreement signed by the insurer and insured. (Mission Ins. Co. v. Brown, 63 Cal.2d 508, 510, 47 Cal.Rptr. 363, 407 P.2d 275; see also Lopez v. State Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 250 Cal.App.2d 210, 212, 58 Cal.Rptr. 243; Utah Home Fire Ins. Co. v. McCarty, 266 Cal.App.2d 892, 895, 72 Cal.Rptr. 460.) (emphasis added).
Kincer, 90 Cal.Rptr. at 96. It is noteworthy that the statute interpreted in Kincer only used terms requiring an “agreement in writing,” but not mentioning any requirement of a signature. Kincer, 90 Cal.Rptr. at 96. It is also noteworthy in the case that no agreement was signed between the insured and insurer. The court held that coverage was not excluded due to the insurer’s failure to obtain a signed, written agreement. Kincer, supra.
American Family argues that a signature on a document is not the only means to imply an agreement. In support of its argument, it cites numerous cases ranging from a parol evidence dispute in a quitclaim deed action to a disputed arbitration settlement clause in an employment case. These cases are not on point. Insurance is a creature heavily regulated by statute to prevent disputes between insurers and insureds. If SDCL 58-11-9.3 had been followed in this case, no dispute would exist. Instead, American Family attacks the language of the statute.
American Family’s construction of SDCL 58-11-9.3 as not requiring a signed, written agreement is also against the public policy of liberal construction of such statutes in favor of coverage. In Clark v. Regent Ins. Co., 270 N.W.2d 26 (S.D.1978), this court set forth the policy behind SDCL 58-11-9, the forerunner of SDCL 58-11-9.-3:
The purpose of the uninsured motorist statutes is to provide the same insurance protection to the insured party who is injured by an uninsured or unknown motorist that would have been available to him had he been injured as a result of the negligence of a motorist covered by the minimum amount of liability insurance. To accomplish that purpose, the provisions of the uninsured motorist statutes are construed liberally in favor of coverage, (emphasis original) (footnotes omitted).
Clark, supra at 29. While Clark discusses the “physical contact” clauses of insurance policies of the past, the same policy holds true today.
Based upon the foregoing analysis, we hold that the trial court correctly concluded as a matter of law that SDCL 58-11-9.3 requires a signed, written agreement to exclude a named person from coverage under an automobile insurance policy. In this case, testimony and deposition exhibits were presented to the trial court concerning Larry Merrill’s requests to exclude his children (including Tamara) from coverage and that his premiums be reduced (requested on at least three occasions) to reflect the exclusions. However, it is clear that no signed, written agreement concerning the exclusions ever came into being. Thus, the trial court properly granted summary judgment against American Family.
The second issue involves the denial of Merrill’s claim against American Family for attorney fees based on an unreasonable denial of coverage. Merrill claimed a right to an award of attorney fees under SDCL 58-12-3 which provides in pertinent part:
In all actions ... if it appears from the evidence that such [insurance] company or exchange has refused to pay the full amount of such loss, and that such refusal is vexatious or without reasonable cause, ... the trial court ... shall ... allow ... a reasonable sum as an attorney’s fee to be recovered and collected....
*560In denying Merrill’s claim, the trial court specifically found that the question raised by American Family was open to interpretation and that there were no cases in' this jurisdiction settling the issue. The trial court further found that American Family was not guilty of unreasonable or vexatious conduct in asserting and relying on its coverage defense and in seeking a determination of the coverage question in this declaratory judgment action. We agree.
This case is very similar to All Nation Ins. Co. v. Brown, 363 N.W.2d 216 (S.D.1985) where the insurer disputed coverage. This court did not find the conduct of the insurer in that case to be vexatious or without reasonable cause. Id. Further, this is a question of fact and it is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. Firemen’s Ins. Co. v. Bauer Dental Studio, Inc., 626 F.Supp. 1365 (D.S.D.1986); Ewalt v. Mereen-Johnson Mach. Co., 414 N.W.2d 28 (S.D.1987); Johnson v. Shelly Oil Co., 359 N.W.2d 130 (S.D.1984). The trial court’s determination must stand if it is based on sound reasoning. Here, the facts support the trial court’s decision and it is not clearly erroneous.
Affirmed.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
SABERS, J., dissents.
BERNDT, Circuit Judge, for MILLER, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 9736903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:25.727098+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).'
The trial court decision interpreting the term “written agreement” in SDCL 58-11-9.3 to mean a written document “signed by the insured ” exceeds the plain, ordinary and popular meaning of the statutory language. (Emphasis added). An agreement is “a coming together of minds.” Black’s Law Dictionary 62 (5th ed. 1979). A written contract “is one which in all its terms is in writing.” Id. at 294. Accordingly, a written agreement is a coming together of minds with the terms of the coming together in writing. Although the writing may normally be signed by the parties, it is not a prerequisite for the existence of a written agreement.
There is a vast difference between statutorily mandated uninsured and underin-sured motorist coverage and the simple requirement that limiting coverage for a named individual be done by written agreement. To omit the former requires a writing signed by the parties. See Kincer v. Reserve Ins. Co., 11 Cal.App.3d 714, 90 Cal.Rptr. 94 (1970). However, to limit coverage, which the contracting parties may freely do, only requires a writing. Furthermore, this statutory interpretation does not put the insured at the mercy of the insurer, as the majority claims, because the insurer must still establish the existence of a written agreement.
The majority opinion notes that:
[tjestimony and deposition exhibits were presented to the trial court concerning Larry Merrill’s requests to exclude his children (including Tamara) from coverage and that his premiums be reduced (requested on at least three occasions) to reflect the exclusions^]
yet fails to note that:
1) Larry Merrill did not pay for coverage for Tamara, and
2) the written endorsements excluding coverage may have become a part of a written agreement, if not when they were received by the insured, then when the policy to which they became attached was reissued or renewed and paid for.
This evidence raises a genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of an agreement about policy coverage. Consequently, summary judgment was clearly improper. State, Dep’t of Revenue v. Thiewes, 448 N.W.2d 1 (S.D.1989); Groseth Int'l, Inc. v. Tenneco, Inc., 410 N.W.2d 159 (S.D.1987); Bego v. Gordon, 407 N.W.2d 801 (S.D.1987).
Therefore, we should reverse and remand to determine whether an agreement exists “in writing.”

=== CASE 2207837 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:23.910949+00 ===

154 Wis. 2d 821 (1990)
454 N.W.2d 51
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Bill SCHLEUSNER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 89-1444-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs December 14, 1989.
Decided February 27, 1990.
*823 For defendant-appellant there were briefs by William E. Schmaal, Madison.
For plaintiff-respondent there was a brief by Donald J. Hanaway, attorney general and David J. Becker, assistant attorney general of the Wisconsin Department of Justice, Madison.
Before Cane, P.J., LaRocque and Myse, JJ.
MYSE, J.
Bill Schleusner appeals his conviction for nonsupport, contrary to sec. 940.27(2), Stats. (1985-86). He argues that the jury instructions unconstitutionally relieved the state of its burden to prove intent and to prove his inability to pay support. Schleusner also argues that there was insufficient evidence to support the guilty verdict. We conclude that the jury instructions did not relieve the state of its burden of proof and that there was sufficient evidence to support the verdict. We affirm the conviction.
After Schleusner's divorce, his former wife retained custody of their three children and he was ordered to pay $145 per month child support. Schleusner made no payments between July 20, 1985, and June 30, 1986. Schleusner's former employer testified that on August 2, 1985, Schleusner voluntarily terminated his job at a dairy farm where he was earning room and board plus $125 per week. The employer testified that a few days after Schleusner learned that the employer was to deduct $145 per month from his wages for payment of his child support obligations, Schleusner chose to quit his job *824 without explanation. The employer testified that she would have continued to employ him.
From November 1985 until May 1986, Schleusner received welfare. In May 1986, he started employment at Wayne's Palletts, Inc., at $3.50 per hour for forty hours per week. Schleusner voluntarily terminated his employment with Wayne's on July 26, 1986, after learning that child support payments were to be withheld from his paycheck. The employer testified that Schleusner left voluntarily and without explanation, but she also would have continued to employ Schleusner had he not quit. After a jury trial, Schleusner was found guilty of nonsupport, pursuant to sec. 940.27(2), Stats. (1985-86).
I
Schleusner first argues that the jury instructions unconstitutionally relieved the state of its burden to prove intent. We conclude that the jury instructions incorporated a permissive inference that was rationally based, and therefore did not relieve the state of its burden to prove intent.
[1, 2]
In order to obtain a conviction, the state is required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt every element of the charged offense. See Muller v. State, 94 Wis. 2d 450, 473-74, 289 N.W.2d 570, 582 (1980). "Intent" is an element of the offense of felony nonsupport under sec. 940.27, Stats. (1985-86). Section 940.27(2), Stats. (1985-86), provides that "any person who intentionally fails for 120 or more consecutive days to provide . . . child support which the person knows or reasonably should know the person is legally obligated to provide is guilty of a Class E Felony."[1]
*825 [3]
Section 940.27(4), Stats. (1985-86), defines prima facie evidence of intentional failure to provide support as failure to pay any child support payment required under a court order.[2] The jury was instructed as follows:
Evidence has been received that the defendant failed to pay support payments required by a court order. If you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant failed to pay support payments required by a court order, you may find that the failure to provide support was intentional but you are not required to do so. You must not find that the failure to support was intentional unless you are so satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt from all the evidence in the case. (Emphasis added.)
Schleusner argues that the incorporation of the presumption created by sec. 940.27(4), Stats. (1985-86), into the jury instructions violated his rights to due process because the jury instruction may have been interpreted as relieving the state of its burden to prove intent beyond a reasonable doubt. We review the validity of a statutory presumption such as the one involved here as applied to the record before this court. We do not review the statutory presumption on its face. See County Court v. Allen, 442 U.S. 140, 161-63 (1979).
*826 [4-6]
The jury instruction here created a permissive inference. A permissive inference allows, but does not require, the trier of fact to find an element of the crime from proof of another fact. It places no burden on the defendant. State v. Vick, 104 Wis. 2d 678, 693, 312 N.W.2d 489, 496 (1981) (citing Allen, 442 U.S. at 157). A permissive inference is invalid only where there is no rational connection between the proven facts and the inferred facts. Id. at 694-95, 312 N.W.2d at 497. In determining whether there is a rational connection, the test is whether the ultimate fact inferred is more likely than not to flow from the basic fact proved. Allen, 442 U.S. at 165. A jury may find a presumed fact based upon the rational inferences from basic facts that themselves must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 548, 370 N.W.2d 222, 234 (1985).
[7]
The connection between the proven fact and the fact to be inferred was rational. Intent may be inferred from one's conduct. State v. Stewart, 143 Wis. 2d 28, 35, 420 N.W.2d 44, 47 (1988). It is more likely than not that one intends what one does. Also, the instructions did not require the jury to reach any specific result. Instead, the jury was directed to assess the evidence independently and to accept or reject the inference based upon the strength of the evidence presented. See sec. 903.03(3), Stats. (1985-86).
[8]
We conclude that no reasonable jury could have misinterpreted the instruction. Because the instructions allowed the jury to independently assess the evidence, and because the connection between the basic fact proved and the fact to be inferred was rational, the *827 instructions did not unconstitutionally relieve the state of its burden to prove intent beyond a reasonable doubt.
II
[9]
Next, Schleusner argues that the jury instructions relieved the state of its burden to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he had the ability to pay after he raised the affirmative defense. We disagree. The jury instruction properly allocated this burden to the state after Schleusner presented evidence that he had received welfare and therefore lacked ability to pay support.
In State v. Duprey, 149 Wis. 2d 655, 439 N.W.2d 837 (Ct. App. 1989), this court held that no constitutional violation resulted from requiring the defendant to demonstrate the existence of the affirmative defense of ability to pay.[3] Accordingly, the state was not required to disprove the existence of the affirmative defense in order to show a prima facie case. Id. at 659-60, 439 N.W.2d at 839.
However, once the defendant demonstrates the existence of an affirmative defense, Wisconsin law, independent of the federal due process requirements, requires the state to bear the burden of disproving the asserted defense beyond a reasonable doubt. Moes v. State, 91 Wis. 2d 756, 765, 284 N.W.2d 66, 70 (1979); sec. 939.70, Stats.
*828 The trial court properly instructed the jury with respect to the state's burden of proof:
Evidence has been received that the defendant lacked abilities to provide support. Before you may find the defendant guilty, the state must prove by evidence which satisfies you beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had the ability to provide support or by working would have had the ability to provide support, but intentionally failed to do so to the extent of his ability. A person may not demonstrate inability to provide child support if the person is employable but without reasonable excuse, either fails to diligently seek employment, terminates employment, or reduces his or her earnings. (Emphasis added.)
The instruction correctly allocated the state's burden of proof and stated the circumstances when the affirmative defense is unavailable. See sec. 940.27(6), Stats. (1985-86). We discern no error.
III
Finally, we address Schleusner's argument that there was insufficient evidence at trial to support his felony nonsupport conviction beyond a reasonable doubt. Schleusner argues that his failure to pay pursuant to the court order was not indicative of his intent. Schleusner further argues that although he quit his farmhand job, the state failed to show the job would have been available for a total of 120 days. He contends that because he qualified for public assistance from November 8, 1985, through March 31, 1986, he demonstrated inability to pay for the entire eleven-month period (July 20, 1985-June 30, 1986) under prosecution. He claims that no 120-consecutive-day period existed during which *829 he had the ability to pay. In addition, he argues that his voluntary termination of the woodworking job was immaterial because he quit after the time period for which he was charged had expired.
[10]
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the verdict, we conclude that a rational trier of fact could find that the state proved the essential elements of the crime of felony nonsupport beyond a reasonable doubt. See Bautista v. State, 53 Wis. 2d 218, 223, 191 N.W.2d 725, 728 (1981). Whether Schleusner's failure to pay was intentional was an issue for the jury. The jury was entitled to consider all the facts and circumstances in determining Schleusner's intent. That Schleusner voluntarily and without reasonable excuse quit two jobs shortly after he learned that child support payments were to be withheld and made no payments for an eleven-month period, despite the court order, is certainly indicative of Schleusner's intent. That Schleusner quit the woodworking job subsequent to July 26, 1986, may not be relevant to the issue of ability to pay before that date, but it is relevant to intent during the time period for which he was charged.
The jury was not required to find that because he received public assistance, he lacked the ability to make the required payments. The record showed that Schleusner was healthy and capable of doing work. The evidence was sufficient for the jury to believe that Schleusner avoided employment for the purpose of intentionally avoiding his support obligations.
Also, the state is not required to demonstrate that Schleusner's job as a farmhand would have been available for 120 consecutive days. The affirmative defense of inability to pay is unavailable to one who is employable but, without reasonable excuse, voluntarily terminates *830 his employment. Sec. 940.27(6), Stats. (1985-86). The statute does not require that the inability to pay exists for any period of time or that voluntary termination of employment involves a job that would exist for some defined period in the future.
Here, there was undisputed evidence that Schleusner voluntarily terminated his dairy farm job without explanation, although he was capable of working. This evidence was sufficient to preclude Schleusner from escaping liability on the basis of the affirmative defense. Without proof that his employment would terminate in the future, the state was not required to show ability to pay for 120 days or any time period whatsoever once it demonstrated that Schleusner voluntarily terminated his employment.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Section 940.27, Stats. (1985-86), has been amended and renumbered sec. 948.22, Stats., effective July 1, 1989, by sec. 33, 1987 Wis. Act 332.
[2]  Section 940.27(4)(a), Stats. (1985-86), provides:
Before January 1, 1990, under this section, the following is prima facie evidence of intentional failure to provide child, grandchild or spousal support:
(a) Before January 1, 1990, for a person subject to a court order requiring child, grandchild or spousal support payments, failure to pay any child, grandchild or spousal support payment required under the order.
[3]  Section 940.27(6), Stats. (1985-86), provides in part:
[A]ffirmative defenses include but are not limited to inability to provide . . . support. A person may not demonstrate inability . . . if the person is employable but, without reasonable excuse, either fails to diligently seek employment, terminates employment or reduces his or her earnings or assets.

=== CASE 9736904 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:09:30.027679+00 ===

BROWN (H. C.), J.
This action was instituted by four minority stockholders in the Tulare Savings & Loan Association (hereafter Association), individually and on behalf of all other minority stockholders similarly situated. The purpose of the first cause of action was to impose a trust on a portion of the funds the defendants1 realized as a result of a sale of their majority stock interest allegedly in violation of their fiduciary obligations to the minority stockholders. The second cause of action was for damages for breach of the fiduciary obligation of defendants in the sale which rendered the stock of the minority stockholders less valuable.
The principal defendant was Edward P. Halbert,2 who was the dominant stockholder (Mr. Halbert and his wife owned 53 percent of the 1,000 shares issued) and also was the president, chairman of the board of directors and manager of the Association.
*254The facts presented to the trial court posed the problems: (1) whether the defendant Halbert, as dominant stockholder, president of the Association and chairman of the board of directors, occupied a fiduciary relationship to the stockholders; and (2) whether he violated such relationship by the manner of selling a controlling block of stock to outside purchasers at a price not made available to the minority group of shareholders.
The trial court at the conclusion of plaintiffs’ submission of evidence dismissed the second cause of action as to the plaintiffs who had not sold their stock and as to those plaintiffs who did not appear either in person or by attorneys. The case was thereafter submitted to the jury who returned a verdict (advisory) recommending that a constructive trust not be imposed and also a verdict under the second cause of action that damages should not be awarded to plaintiffs (hereafter referred to as appellants) for the alleged breach of fiduciary obligations by defendants (hereafter referred to as respondents).
The appellants claim that the trial court erred (1) in permitting the jury to determine whether or not Halbert occupied a fiduciary relationship when they should have been instructed that as dominant shareholder, president of the Association and chairman of the board of directors he was a fiduciary; (2) that there were other errors in the instructions relating to the burden of proof and in the instructions on the “special fact doctrine”; and (3) that the evidence does not support the findings or judgment.
At the outset, it must be noted that the verdict of the jury was only advisory on the equitable issues. We note that 114 instructions were given to the jury, to some of which we will hereafter refer. Appellants’ contentions directed to erroneous instructions need not take our major attention. Their significance lies chiefly in that they reflect the reasoning by which the trial court concluded there was no liability on the first cause of action. Bather, we here concern ourselves with the findings' made by the court in respect to the existence or nonexistence of the fiduciary relationship, upon the evidence before it.
The facts: The Association is a savings and loan association in the City of Tulare. (The only other savings and loan association in Tulare is nationally chartered.) In January of 1963 its authorized issue of 1,000 shares of capital stock was owned by some 24 persons (joint owners not separately counted). Prior to May 15, 1963, Edward E. Halbert indi*255vidnally owned 262 shares of stock of the Association. Prior to May 15, 1963, Vena Halbert individually owned 262 shares of stock in the Association. Prior to May 15, 1963, Edward P. Halbert and Vena Halbert together owned 6 shares of stock of the Association.3 Up to May 31, 1963, Edward Halbert was president of the Association, Neis Christensen was vice-president, Poland Morris was secretary-treasurer and Vena Halbert was assistant secretary-treasurer. Mr. Halbert was the chairman of the board of directors and manager of the corporation ■ other directors were Christensen, Morris H. Brown and W. 0. Willeford. The Halberts were each paid $500 per month as salary. Morris was second in command of the operation of the Association and also was a salaried employee.
In November of 1962 a Mr. Douglas McDonald, president of Lincoln Savings & Loan Association of Los Angeles, and his assistant, David Prince, called on Mr. Halbert at the Association’s business office in Tulare. Mr. McDonald asked Mr. Halbert if the Association was for sale. Halbert stated, “ ‘No, the Association is not for sale. However my wife and I would entertain selling our stock,’ ” and stated a price of two and one-half times book value. There was no evidence produced that the board of directors or stockholders had been consulted as to whether the company was for sale. Other meetings were had between McDonald and Halbert and on January 14, 1963, McDonald by phone offered to purchase the Halberts ’ stock for his asking price of two and one-half times book value. That evening the Halberts received a $20.000 deposit and signed a contract for the sale of their stock. This agreement provided that the Association had issued 1,000 shares of guaranty stock and the Halberts owned a majority (53 percent) . The agreed purchase price was $l,548]Üírper share. The right was given to purchasers to inspect the books. An escrow was to be opened and the closing date was May 15, 1963. The sellers (Halberts) agreed “ ‘That upon the close of this escrow they will submit such resignations as officers and directors ... as may be requested by the Buyer and will hold such director and/or stockholders’ meetings as may be requested by buyer for the purpose of electing new officers and ’ directors of said association.” (Italics added.) It was agreed *256that no dividends were to he paid. The minority stockholders were not informed of the terms of the sale until after it had been negotiated, although it was generally rumored that Halbert wanted to sell his stock.
After the execution of the agreement, McDonald decided he would retain Morris as the manager of the Association and would buy his stock and that owned by a Robert Tienken. These purchases were consummated at the same price paid the Halberts, $1,548.05 per share.
Buyers thereafter, through their attorneys and accountants, made a thorough examination of the company’s books and records. The authorization for this investigation was obtained from Mr. Halbert who also gave them copies of the examination by the Federal Home Loan Bank and the one by the State Savings and Loan Commissioner. Halbert adhered to the agreement and no dividends were paid. No request was made of the board of directors to obtain approval to permit buyers to inspect the Association’s books and records. Likewise no authorization was obtained from the board to refrain from the payment of dividends. Prior to the sale the Association had paid the stockholders regular dividends.
During the two or three months of the escrow the Association suffered a loss of profits and of depositors’ accounts. There is no evidence as to whether this was a normal seasonal loss or whether it was attributable to the activities of the sale.
Upon completion of the purchase of the Halberts’ stock, the purchasers evidenced their desire to buy the stock of the minority stockholders. They offered $300 per share. Mr. Hal-i-bert made no effort to encourage the buyers to pay the minority stockholders for their shares, a price equivalent to the price he received. The evidence indicates that Mr. Halbert assisted the buyers in purchasing the minority stock. There was some testimony on behalf of the respondents that the outside buyers only desired to purchase the control block of stock. Their original action in making inquiry as to whether the Association was for sale and their subsequent activities in the solicitation of the minority stockholders for the purchase of all the stock (which they acquired shortly after gaining control of the Association) implied, however, that they at all times intended to acquire the minority stock as well as the Halberts’ 53 percent of the stock.
After the close of the escrow but while he was still chairman of the board of directors and president, Halbert called on *257Mr. MeCourt, a minority stockholder, and informed him that he, Halbert, had sold his stock. MeCourt said that he had heard rumors that no dividends would be paid. Halbert mentioned something about high salaries to the new owners and that it might be years before dividends would be paid. Halbert informed MeCourt that the buyers were interested in buying his stock also. A meeting was arranged between MeCourt and McDonald, who offered MeCourt $300 for each share.
Halbert also drove the buyers to the ranch home of another stockholder, Harrington Brown, where the buyers also offered Brown $300 per share. The offers were not accepted. The buyers also told Brown that they did not intend to pay dividends for a considerable number of years.
Stockholder William Willeford, who had been director and stockholder for approximately 20 years, was told by Mr. Halbert that the new owners would not be paying dividends and the stock would not be worth much. Willeford also testified that the company lost money during the period the negotiations were going on and that there was a loss of deposits in the sum of $37,919. Halbert advised him that he should sell his stock and that the buyers would pay $300 per share. Willeford thereafter sold his stock because he did not think it would be of value unless dividends would be paid.
Halbert introduced the buyers to other stockholders who also were offered $300 per share for their stock. To stockholder Christensen, Halbert advised that she should take the $300 as she might get nothing.
A part of the statement of Mr. Halbert to Mrs. Christensen is quoted as follows: “. . .1 don’t give a damn whether you or anybody else ever gets a penny of ours or not, in fact, I am going over to the Building and Loan and tell them—and see to it that you don’t get a chance to sell your stock or get a penny out of it.”
At a special directors meeting called by Mr. Halbert, Mr. McDonald, his associate, Mr. Prince, and their attorney, Mr. Steelman, were introduced. Mr. Steelman stated: “This isn’t a short term operation as far as we are concerned. Now we are happy to have any minority stockholders go along with us for the ride if they understand clearly, it would be our idea, I know I am expressing your opinion, that is one reason we’d prefer not to have any more dividends on the Guarantee stock because we like to draw it in, increase the assets of the association, and in time maybe ten or twenty years from now . . . *258If you want to get out and don’t want to go along, I think a figure at three hundred dollars isn’t something to sneer at ...” (Italics added.)
After the offer was made to the minority stockholders for $300 per share, the purchasers proceeded to take over control of the corporation. On May 31, 1963, the new stockholders met at the Association office with employees and proceeded to prepare the necessary notice for a stockholders meeting for the election of new directors and officers and to effectuate new policies. Stockholders Brown, Christensen and Willeford, learning of the meeting, appeared at the office and accepted a new offer of $611 per share for their stock and resigned as directors. Thereafter all but a few shares of stock of the minority stockholders was purchased for $611 to $650 per share.
The evidence produced at the trial relative to the market value of the stock owned by the Halberts and the other stockholders was conflicting.
The appellants’ expert valuation witness Donna Hostetler was of the opinion that the most important factor in determining the value of the Association’s stock was its book value and the Association’s earnings. She believed that majority control stock would be evaluated slightly higher because it carried the right to elect directors and historically majority stock had a nuisance value in addition to its investment value. Mrs. Hostetler placed a value of 2½ times book value on savings and loan association stock that was sold on a stock exchange or ' ‘over the counter” and that small privately controlled companies when there were a limited number of sales that 1.75 times book value was a fair estimate. She set the fair market value of the majority stock at $1,154 per share and the minority at $944 per share.
The respondents’ expert witness Kenet Pearce placed a market value of 2½ times book value, or $1,548.05 per share, for this block of majority control stock. Relative to the minority stock, he stated that his firm was not involved in small minority sales, but he believed that such minority stock would certainly be worth its book value. He failed to give any estimate for a.n increment above book value which would represent value of business good will or for the charter.
There was also evidence that the Association was in excellent financial condition. It had an original capitalization of $100,000 which is a desirable feature for a stockholder because any profits would be apportioned to fewer shares of stock. The *259Association had a steady growth and had paid regular dividends over the years. Its loans were well secured, there being a minimum of scheduled items on its books (scheduled items are defined as poorly secured or high-risk loans). It was the only state-chartered savings and loan association in Tulare (the other association was nationally chartered). It had an almost exclusive franchise to do business in the Tulare area. The difficulty attendant with obtaining a charter from the State Savings and Loan Commissioner to open a new savings and loan association or for an established savings and loan association to obtain a permit to operate in a locality already serviced, is well known in the financial world. Book value was determined to be approximately $625 per share. (Book value is the net assets divided by the number of outstanding shares.) Book value here did not include any of the attributes of this Association, as hereinabove set forth, nor did it include an evaluation of the nature of its charter which gave it almost an exclusive right to do business in the area or for its good will.
There is but little dispute between the parties as to the facts. It is the application of the facts to existing legal principles that gives rise to the respective contentions of the parties.
Appellants specifically contend that respondent Halbert, in his triple fiduciary capacity, owed a duty to all the stockholders; that it existed when the majority stock was sold to an outsider, and that the duty was breached by the failure to act to secure a like advantage to the minority stockholders and in his other actions which aided the outside buyers and caused the minority stockholders to sell their stock at a devaluated price.
Appellants further contend that the court erred in instructing the jury that when a majority stockholder-director sells Ms stock to an outsider, he owes no duty to act in the interest of minority stockholders unless “special facts” exist which give rise to such duty and that the court also erred in other instructions bearing on the question of the burden of proof.
Respondents’ position generally is that they merely sold their stock at the best price they could get for it and that they are not required to account to the other stockholders for any Vprofit they realized.
Respondents’ position is supported by the so-called majority rule found in the earlier cases. In Ryder v. Bamberger, 172 Cal. 791, 806 [158 P. 753], the court held: “ [í]t is mani*260fest that, first, as stockholders the defendants had a perfect right to dispose of their stock . . . without the slightest regard to the wishes and desires or knowledge of the minority stockholders; ...” and also stated “ ‘Though there is a conflict in the decisions as to the right of directors and officers to purchase the shares of other stockholders, it is believed that the weight of authority sustains the right of these persons to deal in shares of the corporation where the transaction is free from fraud. The officers are not bound to acquaint a stockholder willing to sell his stock with facts which would enhance the price of the stock. The officers are trustees for the stockholders only as to the management of the corporation and not in their private dealings.' ’ (P. 807.)
The majority rule is in substance that a director is a fiduciary to the corporation as an entity and not to the stockholders as individuals. The courts, however, recognized that this ‘‘arm’s length” type of operating was unfair to minority interests and was not workable. In American Trust Co. v. California etc. Ins. Co., 15 Cal.2d 42, 56-57 [98 P.2d 497], the court states: ‘‘In sharp contrast with this view is the so-called minority rule, which recognizes the director’s obligation to the stockholders individually as well as collectively, and refuses to permit him to profit at the Iatters’ expense by the use of information obtained as a result of his official position and duties. This view, while generally conceded to be in the numerical minority, is followed by able courts, and text-writers who have examined the subject. [Citations.]
‘‘But this simple statement of the majority and minority rules does not present the true picture, for a number of jurisdictions which are classed in support of the majority view have recognized a major exception in the so-called ‘special facts’ doctrine: Conceding the absence of a fiduciary relationship in the ordinary case, they nevertheless hold that where special circumstances or facts are present which make it inequitable for the director to withhold information from the stockholder, the duty to disclose arises, and concealment is fraud. ...”
The trial court here instructed the jury in detail on the special facts doctrine. The court stated: “ ‘ The mere sale of a controlling stock interest by those who own such an interest does not give rise to any duty of the majority shareholders to secure a sale at the same price for all, even though the sellers hold a managerial office in the corporation.’ ”
“ ‘In the absence of special facts, any director, officer or *261shareholder is entitled to sell his stock to a third person for such price; and on such terms as he may desire. However, officers, directors, and controlling stockholders of a corporation owe a limited fiduciary duty toward minority stockholders in the matter of sales of stock where there are special facts which make it inequitable for them to act without regard to the interests of other shareholders. In determining whether such special facts exist that a fiduciary duty should be imposed, you may consider the following circumstances: (a) The number of stockholders in the corporation; (b) Whether or not a sale of all or almost all corporate stock appeared likely in the immediate future; (c) Whether or not the sale of stock involved a misuse of corporate office or a breach of duties owing to the corporation by the officers, directors, or controlling stockholders in question; (d) whether or not there was a partial disclosure of relevant facts by the officers, directors, or controlling stockholders which disclosure was not the whole truth; (e) Whether or not the corporation possessed a unique asset and whether or not a principal objective of the purchaser of the corporate stock was to acquire that asset; (f) Any other acts by the officers, directors, or controlling stockholders in question which tended to depreciate the value of the minority stock. ...” (Italics added.)
The court then prefaced a number of other instructions (68, 69, 70, and 71) with the words “If you find special facts such as to impose upon an officer or director a fiduciary duty to the stockholders, then ...” (Italics added.) The instructions relative to the special facts doctrine while stating accurate legal principles under certain factual situations, erroneously placed the burden of proof on appellants here and gave the jury the right to determine whether or not a fiduciary relationship existed.
Three California appellate court cases decided between 1940-1945 discuss the special facts doctrine (American Trust Co. v. California etc. Ins. Co., supra, 15 Cal.2d 42; Hobart v. Hobart Estate Co., 26 Cal.2d 412 [159 P.2d 958]; Taylor v. Wright, 69 Cal.App.2d 371 [159 P.2d 980]). In each ease the court recognized that there was a majority rule holding that the fiduciary duty of a majority stockholder or director is to the corporation and not the stockholder, but that a limited fiduciary relationship becomes alive upon the presence of “special facts.” The courts also recognize the existence of a minority rule which holds that the directors occupy a fiduciary relationship to the stockholders individually as well as corpo*262rately. It is important to note that in American Trust, supra, Hobart, supra, and Taylor, supra, the court recognized the inequities of the so-called majority rule and found special facts existed which formed the basis for a judgment for the plaintiffs (minority stockholders). The court in Taylor, supra, added an interesting observation, i.e., ' ' While it is true that a numerical majority of the decided cases have adopted the legalistic view that a director owes no duty at all to the stockholders, a substantial minority have adopted the more realistic view that such a duty exists because the stockholders have placed the directors in a strategic position where they can secure first-hand knowledge of important developments, and where they can make it appear the shares are much less valuable than they really are. The astonishing thing is that practically every legal writer in this field has approved the so-called minority view.” (P. 380; italics added.) (See Berle, Publicity of Accounts and Directors’ Purchases of Stock, 25 Mich.L.Rev. 827; Laylin, The Duly of a Director Purchasing Shares of Stock, 27 Yale L.J. 731; Wilgus, Purchase of Shares of Corporation by a Director from a Shareholder, 8 Mich. L.Rev. 267; 3 Fletcher, Cyclopedia Corporations (Perm. ed.), §§ 848 and 1174; 32 Mich.L.Rev., 678; 14 Minn.L.Rev. 530; 11 Wis.L.Rev. 547; 29 Cal.L.Rev. 67; 54 Harv.L.Rev. 1191, but see Walker, The Duty of Disclosure by a Director Purchasing Stock from his Stockholders, 32 Yale L.J. 637.)
In Taylor v. Wright, supra, 69 Cal.App.2d 371, 381-382, the court said: “The so-called majority rule is predicated on the theory that the corporation—the collective stockholders— is a separate and distinct legal entity, an artificial personality, to whom the director owes his duty. The legal writers above referred to and the more recent cases adopting the minority view, have pointed out the fallacy of this reasoning. These authorities logically point out that the detailed information a director has of corporate affairs is in a very real sense property of the corporation, and that no director should be permitted to use such information for his own benefit at the expense of his stockholders. The so-called majority rule permits a director to secure for himself profits rightfully belonging to all. Such a rule offends the moral sense, and is contrary to our modern concept of the duty of a director towards those he represents. ((
“The exact rule that exists in this state is somewhat uncertain. The cases of Ryder v. Bamberger, 172 Cal. 791 [158 P. *263753]; Robbins v. Pacific Eastern Corp., 8 Cal.2d 241 [65 P.2d 42]; McCord v. Martin, 47 Cal.App. 717 [191 P. 89], and Bacon v. Soule, 19 Cal.App. 428 [126 P. 384], contain some language that supports the advocates of the so-called majority rule. These cases were analyzed at length by the Supreme Court in the American Trust Co. case, supra. It was there held that what was said in these eases on the subject was dictum. At page 61 the court concluded as follows: ‘In this connection we may observe that the question is still open in this state as to whether we shall follow the majority rule, the majority rule as modified by the “special facts” doctrine, or the minority rule; and a decision on this question would be immaterial here. ’
“In the present case the trial court instructed on the so-called ‘special facts’ doctrine, and no challenge is made as to the form of the instruction. Whether this rule, or the so-called minority rule is ultimately to be adopted in this state need not now be decided. No reasonable argument can be advanced against the adoption of at least the ‘special facts’ limitation to the majority rule. A fair reading of the American Trust Co. case, supra, indicates that the Supreme Court, although not directly deciding the point, has indicated a disapproval of the so-called majority rule, and that when the point is directly presented to it, it will adopt either the ‘special facts’ doctrine or the minority rule.” (Italics added.)
More recent cases followed the Supreme Court’s theory of the special facts doctrine (Jaynes v. Jaynes, 98 Cal.App.2d 447 [220 P.2d 598] ; Haussler v. Wilson, 164 Cal.App.2d 421 [330 P.2d 670]; Low v. Wheeler, 207 Cal.App.2d 477 [25 Cal.Rptr. 538]) in imposing a limited fiduciary duty of directors toward stockholders under the existence of special facts. The special facts doctrine has been limited to those eases where the directors or majority shareholders purchase the stock of the minority shareholders by withholding information concerning the value of the stock.
Low v. Wheeler, supra, falls within this classification (the purchase of minority stock by directors), although the directors and majority shareholders did not actually themselves negotiate for, or purchase the minority’s interest. They prevailed upon the outsiders, who were interested in buying only the main asset of the corporation, to buy the stock of the corporation (instead of the desired asset) by first buying the shares held by the minority stockholders and thereafter, by prior arrangement which they concealed from the minority, *264buying the majority interest’s stock at a higher price. Furthermore, in Low v. Wheeler, the court, in answering the director-stockholder’s argument that no fiduciary relationship existed, held only that it was not error to instruct that such a fiduciary duty existed in the presence of special facts. This cannot be considered the equivalent of a holding that special facts are a necessity in order that a fiduciary relationship exists.
We have concluded that the special facts doctrine should not be applied to the case before us, i.e., to factual situations where the majority stockholder-director sells the controlling block of stock to outside purchasers and by doing so causes the minority stock to be devaluated. This doctrine requires a finding that special facts be present before it may be found that a fiduciary relationship exists. Such doctrine was found necessary as an exception to the theory that the majority stockholder-director is a fiduciary to the corporation but not to the stockholders. This theory as expressed in Ryder v. Bamberger, supra, has become so eroded by exceptions and statements of fiduciary obligations in more recent decisions (specifically those involving fraud, concealment, looters and incompetents) that it can be said that it no longer exists.
Here the presence of special facts is unnecessary for a determination of Halbert’s relationship to the corporation and the minority stockholders. In his capacity as president of the Association, chairman of the board of directors and dominant stockholder, Halbert stood in a fiduciary relationship to the corporation and to the minority stockholders as beneficiaries thereof, and the jury should have been so instructed. (Remillard Brick Co. v. Remillard-Dandini Co., 109 Cal.App.2d 405 [241 P.2d 66]; Pepper v. Litton, 308 U.S. 295 [84 L.Ed. 281, 60 S.Ct. 238]; Perlman v. Feldmann, 219 F.2d 173 [50 A.L.R.2d 1134].)
In Remillard Brick Co. v. Remillard-Dandini Co., supra (pp. 419-420), the court said: “It is hornbook law that directors, while not strictly trustees, are fiduciaries, and bear a fiduciary relationship to the corporation, and to all the stockholders. They owe a duty to all stockholders, including the minority stockholders, and must administer their duties for the common benefit. The concept that a corporation is an entity cannot operate so as to lessen the duties owed to all of the stockholders. Directors owe a duty of highest good faith to the corporation and its stockholders. It is a cardinal principle of corporate law that a director cannot, at the expense of the corpora*265tion, make an unfair profit from his position. He is precluded from receiving any personal advantage without fullest disclosure to and consent of all those affected. The law ... in case of unfair dealing to the detriment of minority stockholders, will grant appropriate relief. Where the transaction greatly benefits one corporation at the expense of another, and especially if it personally benefits the majority directors, it will and should be set aside. In other words, while the transaction is not voidable simply because an interested director participated, it will not be upheld if it is unfair to the minority stockholders. These principles are the law in practically all jurisdictions. (3 Fletcher, Cyclopedia of Corps. (Perm. ed.), p. 173, § 838 et seq.; 13 Am.Jur., p. 948, § 997 et seq.) ” (See also Pepper v. Litton, supra, 308 U.S. 295, 306 [84 L.Ed. 281, 289, 60 S.Ct. 238]; Bancroft-Whitney Co. v. Glen, 64 Cal.2d 327, 345, 346 [49 Cal.Rptr. 825, 411 P.2d 921]; Efron v. Kalmanovitz, 226 Cal.App.2d 546 [38 Cal.Rptr. 148]; 9 Hastings L.J. 306.)
Judge Cardozo stated in Mcinhard v. Salmon, 249 N.Y. 458, 464 [164 N.E. 545, 62 A.L.R. 1], as follows: “Many forms of conduct permissible in a workaday world for those acting at arm’s length, are forbidden to those bound by fiduciary ties. A trustee is held to something stricter than the morals of the market place. Not honesty alone, but the punctilio of an honor the most sensitive, is then the standard of behavior. ...”
We recognize that the above-cited cases which consider the majority stockholder-director to be a fiduciary without the necessity of finding special facts do not involve the situation of the sale of majority stock. However, the case of Perlman v. Feldmann, supra, 219 F.2d 173, 175, in the context of a sale of stock to an outsider, finds that a director and dominant stockholder stands “in a fiduciary relationship to the corporation and to the minority stockholders as beneficiaries thereof.” (Citing Pepper v. Litton, supra, 308 U.S. 295, and Southern Pac. Co. v. Bogert, 250 U.S. 483 [63 L.Ed. 1099, 39 S.Ct. 533].)
Since the case before us was tried under the theory that Halbert was not a fiduciary unless special facts existed and since the jury and court found that special facts did not exist under the instructions, the conclusion of the court and jury that Halbert did not have a fiduciary duty is obviously not valid. (See trial court Finding XXV.)4 Moreover, the jury *266was improperly instructed as to the burden of proving breach of fiduciary duty, and therefore, the findings that Halbert did not breach his duty are also not valid.
The court instructed the jury (Instructions 8 and 9) as follows: “In civil actions, the party who asserts the affirmative of an issue must prove that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. . . . i C
“A person occupying a fiduciary relationship with another is required to produce evidence that his actions were not fraudulent and did not breach any fiduciary duty. This requisite does not, however, transfer the burden of proof on the issue of fraud or breach of fiduciary duty, which burden is on the plaintiffs. The evidence required to satisfy this burden of preponderance must be clear and convincing.
“In general, the burden of proving fraud is upon the person charging fraud. Where it is shown that a fiduciary relationship exists, however, and it is further shown that the fiduciary acquired an advantage, he is required to show fairness and good faith to overcome a presumption to the contrary. Whether he has done so is a question of fact, but it should be remembered that the basic burden of proof remains with the person charging fraud. ’ ’
The court by these instructions instructed the jury that a person occupying a fiduciary relationship is required to produce evidence that he did not breach any fiduciary duty where it is shown that the fiduciary acquired an advantage and there is a presumption that the fiduciary did not act in good faith. Yet the court also instructed that the basic burden of proof remains on plaintiff and that the presumption does not change this burden. These instructions are inconsistent.
It is now well established that our courts have placed the burden of proof squarely on the fiduciary when there is evidence that he secured an advantage for himself.
In Efron v. Kalmanovitz, supra, 226 Cal.App.2d 546, 556, the court said: ' ' The basic principle governing the resolution of the problem presented in this case was expressed in Pepper v. Litton, 308 U.S. 295, at page 306 [60 S.Ct. 238, 84 L.Ed. 281, 289], as follows: ‘A director is a fiduciary. [Citation.] So is a dominant or controlling stockholder or group of stockholders. [Citation.] . . . Their dealings with the corporation *267are subjected to rigorous scrutiny and where any of their contracts or engagements with the corporation is challenged the burden is on the director or stockholder not only to prove the good faith of the transaction but also to show its inherent fairness from the viewpoint of the corporation and those interested therein. [Citation.] ...” (Italics added.)
In Chung v. Johnston, 128 Cal.App.2d 157, 164 [274 P.2d 922], the court said: “A presumption of fraud may arise in the case of a fiduciary relationship from which an undue advantage was gained. Here a fiduciary relationship existed, and there was substantial evidence showing that defendants secured an advantage which plaintiff did not intend. This raised a presumption of fraud, and the burden was cast on defendants to show fairness and good faith in all respects. A presumption of fraud is sufficient to support a finding thereof. [Citation.] ”
In Solon v. Lichtenstein, 39 Cal.2d 75, 82 [244 P.2d 907], the court said: “Here a confidential relationship was admitted, and plaintiff presented substantial evidence to show that defendant secured an advantage which was not intended. This raised a presumption of fraud and undue influence, and the burden was east on defendant to show fairness and good faith in all respects. (Nobles v. Hutton, supra, 7 Cal.App. 14, 20-21 [93 P. 289]; Pleasants v. Hanson, supra, 48 Cal.App. 626, 630-631 [192 P. 183]; Johnson v. Clark, supra, 7 Cal.2d. 529, 534 [61 P.2d 767]; Hatch v. Penzner, supra, 44 Cal.App. 2d 874, 879 [113 P.2d 295].)” (See also Trafton v. Youngblood, 69 Cal.2d 17, 27, 28 [69 Cal.Rptr. 568, 442 P.2d 648]; Perlman v. Feldmann, supra, 219 F.2d 173.)
' The trial court here also instructed on the presumption of innocence and instructed on inference of fraud. Instruction No. 88 stated: “If you find a conspiracy, then each defendant whom you find to be a member of the conspiracy is jointly-liable with each other member for all damages caused by the conspiracy.” Instruction No. 89 stated: “The law presumes* that a person is innocent of crime of wrong, that a person' intends the ordinary consequence of his voluntary act, 'that’ money paid by one to another was due to the latter, "that-private- transactions have been fair and regular, that the ordinary course of business has been followed, and that the law has been obeyed. These presumptions are disputable presumptions'and may be controverted by evidence. ” '
These instructions when read with the instructions on the *268burden of proof are obviously confusing and erroneously placed the burden of proving all issues on appellants when that burden should have been cast upon respondents.
We have determined that Halbert occupied a fiduciary position in the Association and that he owed fiduciary obligations .to the stockholders as well as to the Association.  We rhave also found that Halbert obtained for himself and the other respondents a price for their stock not thereafter available to the minority stockholders, and further, that the sale of the block of majority stock and the manner in which it was sold caused the minority stock to be devaluated.5
evidence here does not establish fraud or concealment on the fiduciary, nor is it the ordinary case of the fiduciary withholding information in the purchase of the minority shares. Also, the facts do not involve a sale of the majority block of stock to looters or incompetents for which the fiduciary might be held chargeable. (See Gerdes v. Reynolds, 28 N.Y.S.2d 622.)
The facts do disclose that Halbert sold his stock to purchasers who after acquiring the stock announced that their policy of operation radically changed previous policies of the Association, i.e., there would be no distribution of profits by payment of dividends for a period of 10 to 20 years. The obvious effect of such policy on minority stockholders would be to create a feeling of uncertainty as to the value of their stock, resulting in a susceptibility to pressure to sell.
Every sale of a block of control stock should not per se be subject to attack, but where the amount received by the majority-director seller is so disproportionate to the price available to the minority stockholders, then such fiduciary-seller must show that no advantage was taken if the sale is questioned. This is especially true in the instant ease where Halbert in his triple fiduciary capacity was completely indifferent to his obligations to the minority stockholders. He did not advise the directors or stockholders that he had been approached by persons who desired to acquire the Association. After obtaining an agreement for the price he desired for his own stock and while still an officer-director, he failed to make any effort to obtain for the minority substan*269tially the same price that he received and, in fact, worked actively for the buyers in assisting them to acquire all the stock at a low figure by voicing his recommendation to the minority holders that they sell at below book value. Halbert’s other actions in permitting the buyers access to the books, records and reports of the Association, and his agreement to refrain from the payment of dividends only serve to fortify the conclusion that he worked to obtain an advantage for himself and effectively placed the buyers of his stock in a position to dictate terms to the detriment of the minority holders. Further, in advising the minority stockholders to sell their stock for $300 or they might get nothing, he was using his office, experience and reputation gained in the conduct of their affairs to prevent the minority an opportunity to obtain a higher price for their stock.
The evidence clearly indicates that respondent Halbert had no accurate knowledge or clear conception of his fiduciary duties in his triple capacity as president, chairman of the board and dominant stockholder, and that his complete indifference and affirmative actions took the form of rationalization on his part that such success as attended the Association was due to his efforts alone and that he and a favored few should reap the rewards to the exclusion of the other stockholders.
Because of the errors in the instructions and the clear violation by Halbert of his fiduciary obligations to the minority stockholders, the judgment of the trial court must be reversed.
While the briefs and our own research have failed to reveal any California case which is factually parallel to the case before us, there are established guidelines by decisions relative to the obligations of a fiduciary, by the law review writers and by the considerations by courts in other jurisdictions.
The law review writers, while approaching the problem and remedy on different theories, are unanimous in their “end results” that the majority stockholder-director may not retain an advantage over the minority by reason of his sale of his majority block of stock.
The appellants invite attention to the views expressed by Professors Berle, Andrews, Jennings and others. (See Berle,6 The Price of Power: Sale of Corporate Control (1965) 50 *270Cornell Law Quarterly, 628; Professor William D. Andrews7 (78 Harv.L.Rev. 505); and Professor Richard W. Jennings8 (44 Cal.L.Rev. 1, 39, and others.)
The Berle theory is that the investment value of all stock is the same, and when a majority stockholder receives an amount over the investment value, he is receiving a premium for the control, that control is a corporate asset and the amount received over the investment value belongs to the corporation or its stockholders.
The Andrews-Jennings theory is that whenever a controlling shareholder sells his shares, every other holder of shares of the same class is entitled to have an equal opportunity to sell his shares or a pro rata part of them on substantially the same terms.
The basic theory of these writers, states Jennings, is that control shares in a modern business corporation possess their special value from the strategic position which is enjoyed by them because of the collective powers inherent in the corporate structure. These shares provide a leverage for enabling the corporate insiders to reap profits which in fairness should be shared with the other stockholders.
The Berle-Jennings theories were considered in the decision of the commissioners of the Ontario Securities Commission, entitled “In the Matter of the Securities Act and in the Matter of the Consolidated Manitoba Mines Limited and Great Basin Metal Mines Limited” dated December 1966. The Ontario commission denied a transfer of stock in escrow, on the basis that shareholders having effective control are, when selling their shares, under a legal duty not to prejudice either the company or the remaining shareholders, and that it would question such sale or transfer when either a peculiar benefit is accruing to the vendors or an equal opportunity to share in the purchase price is not given to all shareholders. (See also Securities & Exchange Com. v. Texas Gulf Sulphur Co., 258 F.Supp. 262, 278, 279, re intent of Securities and Exchange Commission in protection of shareholders.)
In Perlman v. Feldmann, supra, 219 F.2d 173, the court in remanding for a determination of damages in a sale by the majority stockholder-director of his block of majority stock used language which is particularly applicable to the case •before us: “But when the sale necessarily results in a sacrifice *271of this element of corporate good will and consequent unusual profit to the fiduciary who has caused the sacrifice, he should account for his gains. So in a time of market shortage, where a call on a corporation’s product commands an unusually large premium, in one form or another, we think it sound law that a fiduciary may not appropriate to himself the value of this premium. Such personal gain at the expense of his coventurers seems particularly reprehensible when made by the trusted president and director of his company. In this case the violation of duty seems to be all the clearer because of this triple role in which Feldmann appears, though we are unwilling to say, and are not to be understood as saying, that we should accept a lesser obligation for any one of his roles alone. (Italics added.)
“Hence to the extent that the price received by Feldmann and his co-defendants included such a bonus, he is accountable to the minority stockholders who sue here.” (P. 178.)
The tremendous growth of the stockholder population in the United States9 and the need for the continuation of the investor ’s dollar in our corporate system of business may in the future require legislative action or the adoption by the courts of one or the other law writer’s recommendations for the investor’s protection. We feel, however, that a remedy is already afforded an aggrieved minority stockholder which is in harmony with established principles, i.e., that the fiduciary obligations of the majority stockholder-director are sufficient protection for all stockholders if those fiduciary obligations are strictly observed and enforced.
In the determination that there was a violation of fiduciary obligation which was actionable by minority stockholders, we have not adopted specific rules of procedure for fiduciaries but have determined that each case must be decided on its merits. In this area it seems that no hard and fast rule is workable. The merits of following specific procedures in order to give the minority stockholders an equal opportunity to share in the proceeds of the sale may be offset by other circumstances making such procedures impossible or unworkable in our economic system.
Although the position of the minority stockholder is sometimes a precarious one, especially in corporations where there *272are but few stockholders, it is now recognized that such minority stockholder needs and is entitled to protection from actions by majorities.  The rule we have adopted here simply is that the duty of the majority stockholder-director, when contemplating the sale of the majority stock at a price not available to other stockholders and which sale may prejudice the minority stockholders, is to act affirmatively and openly with full disclosure so that every opportunity is given to obtain substantially the same advantages that such fiduciary secured and for the full protection of the minority. This duty was violated here.
It is concluded that a review of the record clearly establishes that Halbert failed to perform his obligations as a fiduciary in the protection of the interests of the minority stockholders. The respondents therefore may not retain the advantage realized from Halbert’s actions in the sale of the majority stock at 2% times book value while the minority interests received but book value, and that difference when ascertained must be equitably distributed to all stockholders who sold their stock to the~Buyers.""
No useful purpose could be accomplished by retrial of all issues. There is no reason to believe that evidence could be adduced which would now disclose that the fiduciary obligations of Halbert had been performed.
The difference plus interest between the exact amount received by respondents and that amount received by appellants must be ascertained, however, and computed so that each stockholder, including respondents who sold their stock, will share in proportion to his stock interest. This is generally the formula approved by the court in Low v. Wheeler, supra, 207 Cal.App.2d 477, 487, and which we believe to be equitable.
The relief to those suffering detriment by a proven breach of fiduciary obligation thus does not differ and is consistent with the relief granted when there is a fraud or concealment by a fiduciary, or when the factual situation falls within those eases involving fiduciaries under the special facts doctrine.
As this ease is to be reversed with directions for judgment for appellants on their first cause of action, which is clearly a proper class action and which has not been questioned here, it is unnecessary to determine the question as to the propriety of the trial court’s dismissal of the second cause of action (which was to those plaintiffs who were not represented at the trial and who did not appear). That question has now become moot.
*273The judgment of the trial court as to the first and second causes of action is reversed.
Judgment is directed to be entered on behalf of appellants on the first cause of action with directions to determine, allocate and distribute equally among all shareholders the premium received by the respondents upon sale of their majority interest in the corporation over and above the sum received by the minority shareholders upon sale of their shares. Except that any liability of Vena Halbert as administratrix of the estate of Edward F. Halbert to be paid by said estate in the due course of administration shall not exceed the sum of $120,600.
Appellants shall also be awarded interest.
Upon entry of said judgment thereof, the second cause of action is to be ordered dismissed.
The cause is remanded to the trial court for further proceedings pursuant to this opinion.
Salsman, J., concurred.
Although the complaint named four defendants, Edward P. Halbert, his wife, Vena Halbert; Boland Morris and Bobert Tienken, only Edward P. Halbert was claimed as the principal violator of fiduciary duties. The three other defendants are charged with accountability for their acquiescence in his actions and by reason of their acceptance of the benefits.
Edward P. Halbert died before the suit was filed aud Vena Halbert, his wife and administratrix of Ms estate, was named as the defendant in Ms place.
Mrs. Vena Halbert was an employee of the Association since 1934. Hr. Edward Halbert became an employee in 1940 or 1941. Each separately owned Ms or her stock as separate property.
Finding XXV: ‘ ‘ That in the facta surrounding the defendants ’ sale of their stock, including hut not limited to the facts set forth in the *266Findings above, the court finds that there were not present such special facts as would impose upon the defendants a fiduciary duty to the plaintiffs in connection with the sale of defendants ’ stock. ’ ’
We must point out that the court’s Finding XXIII the minority stock had an approximate value of book value is also lacking in evidentiary support. Respondents’ expert witness, who did not deal in purchase of minority interests, stated the minority stock was worth not less than book value, and appellants’ expert witness gave it a value in excess of book value.
Professor of Law, Columbia University, School of Law, New York, N. Y.
Assistant Professor of Law, Harvard Law School, B.A., Amherst, 1952; LL.B., Harvard, 1955.
Professor of Law, University of California, Berkeley.
The New York Stock Exchange reported in January 1969 that the United States stockholder population has spurted to 26.4 million (persons), an increase of 2.5 million in the last year and 6.5 million since 1965.